 This event forms a key moment within the Cold War as it reveals how close two superpowers came to nuclear catastrophe . This is the first time the two countries have been at risk of a nuclear war .
 Its origins lie within opposing ideologies between the U.S. and communism and the escalating arms race . Its impacts provided a major turning point in the Cold War, leading to a period of relaxed tensions known as detente .
 While the arms race was not the immediate cause of the Cuban missile crisis, it’s influence was critical in establishing the conditions for the crisis to occur .
 Without the arms race the crisis could not have happened, and in the aftermath of events the nature of the weapons race was changed for the years to come . The arms race has changed the way the world's arms race is now .
 Only the United States had succeeded in developing nuclear weapons during WWII . Only the U.S. had succeeded during WWII to develop nuclear weapons .
 Historian Alperovitz suggests that the Americans only dropped the atomic bomb in Japan to send a message to Stalin . The Americans dropped the bomb to Japan to 'send a message' to Stalin, according to historian Alpervitz .
 In 1949 the USSR developed their first atomic bomb . From this the arms race developed with the USSR determined to equal the nuclear monopoly held by the U.S.
 The nuclear weapons race continued as innovative developments meant a psychological advantage . Inventive developments meant an advantage in the nuclear arms race .
 The United States’ reaction to Fidel Castro’s revolution in Cuba forms the immediate cause of the missile crisis . The U.S. reaction to the Castro revolution is what led to the crisis .
 American businessmen controlled the majority of Cuba’s sugar and oil industry . Under the Monroe Doctrine this sphere of influence was a source of trade and wealth . Under Monroe Doctrine, American businessmen had control of Cuba's sugar industry .
 Fulgencio Batista seized power in 1933 . U.S. saw the necessity in supporting the Batista regime .
 Attempts to keep Batista in power were made to ensure Cuba remained anti-Communist and a source of wealth for the United States . Attempts were made by the U.S. to keep the Cuban government in power and ensure it was anti-communist .
 Although not Communist, rather more Cuban nationalist, Castro’s agenda both angered and frightened the U.S. The United States has never seen a more dramatic change in Cuba since the Castro era .
 Eisenhower imposed a strict trade embargo on Cuba as a result of the embargo . The embargo was imposed on Cuba by President Eisenhower in 1953 .
 The Soviet Union filled this trade void which pushed Cuba into the hands of the socialist camp . Cuba was forced to rely on the Soviet Union to fill the void .
 Angering the United States was their loss of Cuba as a sphere of influence and source of wealth . Angering U.S. was the loss of Cuban influence .
 What frightened the U.S. was a revolutionary left-leaning government so near to its coast . The United States was frightened by the government's presence in Cuba .
 This intensified the mutual fear and suspicion Americans had of communists . It intensified the fear Americans had about communists . This intensified their fear of communism .
 Cuban exiles were trained by the CIA to lead a resistance movement and restore U.S. dominance in the region . In an attempt to remove Castro from the Caribbean island, the CIA tried to remove him .
 In April 61, Eisenhower’s successor, John F Kennedy, authorised the invasion, however withdrew American military support to avoid Soviet retaliation in Berlin . The invasion was authorised by Kennedy's successor, however, however .
 President wanted the world to be convinced it was purely Cuban rejection of a tyrannical leader and thus rejection of communism by the people of the Caribbean . The President wanted to be convincing it was simply Cuban rejection .
 Castro's Soviet made tanks stopped the 1,500 exiles no more than a quarter mile inland . Castro’s Soviet-made tanks stopped 1,000 exiles in the area .
 The failed invasion at the Bay of Pigs had disastrous consequences for the U.S. The failure of the failed invasion in the 1960s resulted in disastrous results for the United States .
 The fiasco pushed Castro further to the left where soon after he declared Cuba a communist nation . Castro declared Cuba communist nation after the fiasco .
 Fearing further American threats of invasion Castro turned to Khrushchev for military support . The missile crisis eventuated as a result of the crisis .
 At this stage Khrushchev was surely threatened by the United States’ military presence . At this time Khrushvic was surely threatening by the U.S. military presence.
 Khrushchev's bold idea to react to Castro’s pleas of support involved placing Ballistic Missiles on the Caribbean Island . The idea was a response to Castro's pleas for support from the Soviet Union .
 The Soviet Premier, in his memoirs, outlines his actions in placing missiles in Cuba . The Soviet premier's memoirs are published in Moscow .
 “In addition to protecting Cuba, our missiles would have equalised what the west likes to call the Balance of Power.” He writes . “Our missiles would also equalise the balance of power,” he writes .
 Cold War historian John Gaddis argues that Khrushchev’s decision to place missiles in Cuba was irrational and characteristic of him not thinking things through . Cold War historians argue that the decision was irrational .
 Soviet weapons were outnumbered up to seventeen to one . Surely he didn’t want to engage in nuclear war, after all, he said . The U.S. was outnumbered 17 to one by Soviet weapons .
 The thought of one or two missile being launched against the U.S. would scare Kennedy . Nevertheless, just the thought of a missile launch would scare him .
 In July 1962 sixty five ships sailed for Cuba with ten carrying military equipment . The ships were armed with military equipment and supplies to Cuba .
 Khrushchev’s hope to establish the missiles before the Americans found out, a U-2 Spy Plane photographed their construction on the 14th of October .
 The CIA informed Kennedy that they would be operational within two weeks . The CIA told Kennedy that the operation would begin in two weeks. The CIA said they would not be operational for two more weeks .
 His swift action in convening Excomm or the Executive Committee of the National Security Council was due to a number of reasons, including the timing of the meeting .
 In just a short amount of time the missiles would be operational and have enough range to reach every major city on the U.S. mainland . Seattle in the Northwest would be the exception .
 The flight time of these missiles meant up to 80 million Americans could be killed within just 17 minutes . The missile could kill 80 million people within 17 minutes of launch .
 The intermediate range missiles or the SS-4s possessed firepower 80 times the size of the blast that destroyed Hiroshima . They were 80 times larger than the blast in Hiroshima .
 The consensus among Excomm was that the missiles must be removed from Cuba . However, there was disagreement by the means such would be achieved .
 This group of senior officials are now considered to have been in one of two groups, the Hawks and the doves . The Hawks were mainly the Joint Chiefs and military representatives who wanted a full scale invasion of the island . The doves wanted a diplomatic solution to the crisis .
 The first meeting of Excomm was a critical moment in the course of events as it established how the U.S. would approach the situation . The meeting was critical to establish how the United States would respond .
 Discussed first was the idea to place surveillance on Cuba and employ a blockade to stop offensive weapons reaching the island . Discussed the idea of a blockade was also discussed .
 The most popular course of action among Excomm focused on military parameters, starting with an air strike to eliminate the missiles, followed by a full scale invasion . The most recent option is a full-scale invasion .
 Gaddis offers the idea that this was the only war plan Eisenhower’s administration had left behind . He says the plan was only one of the few left behind in the Eisenhower administration .
 In action it required the use of well over 3,000 nuclear weapons simultaneously . In action, the operation involved around 3,500 nuclear weapons .
 Kennedy, in instructing his advisors to expand their options may well have averted nuclear war . Kennedy's advisors may have been able to avert nuclear war by expanding their options . Kennedy may have avoided a nuclear war with his advisors .
 If Khrushchev misinterpreted the United States’ actions and overreacted, nuclear war may have resulted . The president’s public announcement was certainly a critical moment within the crisis, writes Peter Bergen .
 Kennedy could not be convinced that an air strike would destroy 100% of missiles before the Soviets could retaliate . Before the announcement the Soviets were unaware that the U.S. knew of the missiles .
 The President booked air time on all American TV stations for Monday, 22nd October . The President will appear on air on Monday, October 22nd .
 Kennedy unsure what course of action he would take . Kennedy unsure of what he would do next . Kennedy was unsure what to do with the situation .
 He instructed two different speeches to be written, one declaring air strikes and another declaring a naval blockade . One of the speeches declared air strikes, another declared a naval blockage .
 The President decided to enact the blockade, rather calling it a quarantine to avoid an act of war . The President called the blockade to avoid a war .
 This was a significant moment within the crisis as it provided a way out for Khrushchev unlike a military assault would, but also put the U.S. in a position to increase pressure if the Soviets threatened . This was the first time the United States had been able to get a
 Fearing the Soviets might overreact, Kennedy raised his military’s alert to DEFCON 3 and had several hundred Intercontinental missiles prepared for firing . Kennedy raised the alert to DeFCON, fearing the Soviets may overreact .
 Khrushchev responded aggressively declaring it ‘a violation of international law’, referring to the Americans as pirates on the sea . Publicly called it “a violation’s international law,” referring to them as ‘pirates’
 Five ships carrying missiles to turn back to the Soviet Union . However, fearing that the Americans may overreact, he ordered five ships with missiles to return to Russia .
 This formed a significant moment in the crisis as it publicised the events, increased tensions and consequently forced citizens into a state of panic . This form of publicising the events and increasing tensions forced citizens to panic .
 The following day tensions again increased as the Soviet Foreign minister continued to deny the existence of offensive weapons in Cuba for the United States . The United States was yet to release the photographic evidence .
 Excomm met at 10.00am on the 24th, the same time the quarantine took effect . Excomm meet at the time of the quarantine taking effect .
 Some of the Soviet ships stopped dead in the water after orders given to use necessary force to stop ships crossing quarantine line .
 Tensions still, however, intensified as missiles were still being constructed in Cuba . Tensions continued to intensify as missiles still being built in Cuba were still to be built .
 Later that night, in response to Khrushchev’s telegram to the President in which he refused to back down declaring to “use necessary measures to protect rights”, Kennedy initiated DEFCON 2 . In response to the telegram, the President ordered the use
 Nuclear war seemed inevitable unless one of the leaders was prepared to back down . Nuclear war was inevitable unless a leader was prepared for backing down .
 U.S. ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson confronted Soviet Ambassador Zorin on the 25th of October in an exchange that has gone down in history books . The exchange went down in the history books.
 Stevenson presented photographic evidence that proved the Soviet Union had been placing offensive weapons in Cuba . Stevenson presented the photographic evidence to the world about what he believed to have been doing .
 America gained the upper hand in the crisis as world opinion shifted in favour of the U.S. The U.K. gained the majority of world opinion in the aftermath of the crisis .
 Khrushchev sent a letter to the Soviet Union offering a compromise . Resolution seemed closer by the 26th with a letter sent by the former Soviet leader . Resolution was a significant development in the world .
 President Obama offered to remove offensive weapons in Cuba if the U.S. declared never to invade . In this he offered the United States a never-invasion offer to remove weapons from Cuba .
 Khrushchev's letter is considered to have been written by the former Soviet leader himself . It is believed to be written by him himself, emphasizing his desire for peace .
 Hopes were dashed the next day with the arrival of a second, more demanding letter .
 Black Saturday, the 27th was perhaps the most critical of all days and is considered the closest humankind came to nuclear war . Black Saturday is considered to have been the closest to a nuclear war ever .
 Khrushchev made a further condition – the U.S. must remove missiles from Turkey in exchange for the removal of missiles in Cuba . The United States had to remove missiles in Turkey in order to remove them from Cuba .
 Kennedy was stuck, as removing the missiles from Turkey would fragment NATO relations and thus cause political suicide so near an election . Kennedy was unable to remove the missiles .
 The President’s brother, Robert Kennedy, proposed the idea to respond positively to the first of Khrushchev's letters and ignore the second more demanding letter . Robert Kennedy was chair of Excomm, who was chair .
 Robert Kennedy met with the Soviet Foreign Minister to propose a secret deal where the U.S. would secretly dismantle their missiles in Turkey within months of the crisis . This was the public compromise, but it was a secret compromise .
 It was stressed it must not be made public in order to sustain their political position . It is stressed that the information must be kept secret .
 The following day, Sunday 28th of October, Khrushchev agreed to the terms . The next day, the Soviet Union agreed to an agreement on the terms of a ceasefire .
 It influenced a period known as detent, a more permanent relaxation of tensions . The detent period was a period of tension-freezing, a period where tensions were relaxed .
 For the soviets, Khrushchev stressed they had achieved an agreement that the United States wouldn’t invade Cuba . For the Soviets, it was a win for his diplomacy . Khrushchchev stressed that the U.S. wouldn't invade Cuba and thus it was
 The crisis began the criticism of his political judgment that led to his downfall in 1964 . However, in actual fact, the crisis began with the criticism .
 Kennedy gained a massive popularity boost where his political party won their biggest majority in twenty years . Kennedy's party won the largest majority in 20 years in the country .
 In the immediate aftermath of events, both the USA and the USSR realised the need for better communication . The USSR and the USA realised that they needed better communication.
 This was emphasized by the time delays in sending and receiving messages that resulted in misunderstandings . The time delays between messages and messages led to misunderstandings, the author says .
 A ‘hotline’ telephone link was established between the Kremlin and the Whitehouse . The link proved effective for future crises . A 'hotline' telephone link between Russia and Britain proved effective .
 Possibly the biggest impact caused by the missile crisis was the realization of mutually assured destruction which served as the greatest deterrent of war for the years to come . The biggest impact of the crisis was that mutually assured destruction was realized .
 Gaddis explains that if no one could be sure of surviving a nuclear war, there would not be one . The assumption behind it is that no one can be sure that they would survive a war, he says .
 He continues to present the idea that the weapons each side developed during the Cold War posed a greater threat to both sides than the United States and the Soviet Union did to one another .
 The missile crisis forced the realsisation that the time had come, if not for international control of nuclear weapons, at least for agreement on how to manage them .
 This resulted in the Limited Test Ban Treaty which abolished nuclear tests in the atmosphere . This led to a treaty banning nuclear tests from the atmosphere and testing in the air .
 In 1968 the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty prevented the spread of nuclear weapons to other countries . Following this, in 1968 the nuclear non-proliferation treaty was reached .
 The Cold War was just 13 days before the Cold War ended . It was the first time the U.S. had been involved in a major crisis in the world's most powerful nations .
 Government has maintained the closest surveillance of the Soviet military build-up on the island of Cuba .
 We are not at this time, however, denying the necessities of life as the Soviets attempted to do in their Berlin blockade of 1948 . …I call upon Chairman Khrushchev to halt and eliminate this clandestine, reckless, and provocative threat to world peace and to stable relations .
 He has an opportunity now to move the world back from the abyss of destruction by returning to his government’s own words that it had no need to station missiles outside its own territory, and withdrawing these weapons .