 President and Government of the United States would give assurances that the U.S. would itself not take part in an attack upon Cuba and would restrain others from such action . Then the question of armaments would also be obviated, because when there is not threat, armaments are
 This would also change the approach to the question of destroying not only the armaments which you call offensive, but of every other kind of armament . Let us therefore display statesmanlike wisdom. This would change the way we look at the issue of destroying offensive armaments. Let us
 You will declare that the United States will not invade Cuba with its tropps and will not support any other forces which might intend to invade Cuba . The U.S. will not be supporting any other force which might invade Cuba, the president says .
 The necessity for the presence of our military specialists in Cuba will be obviated, says President Obama . "Then the necessity for ... military specialists to be in Cuba," he says .
 The olive branch was extended but it took almost twelve hours to be translated, transmitted, and reached the President . It took almost 12 hours to reach the President.
 U Thant was not aware of the message from Khrushchev or the information he held regarding potential invasion . Meanwhile, he continued his diplomatic efforts of diplomacy with Castro .
 Cuba represented the unpredictable wild card in the crisis at this point . Cuba represented a wild card for the U.S. President Obama .
 Castro determined that it would be better to martyr Cuba than to back down from the aggressor . Castro decided to martyr himself rather than back down, he says .
 Time had expired and a solution had to be found quickly to ensure war did not break out . At that point, time had expired . Time had been running out .
 Cuban anti-aircraft batteries were authorized to fire on any breaches of Cuban airspace . Castro, further aggravated the situation by issuing orders to his general staff that, effective Saturday, 27 October, issued orders .
 Castro represented the most dangerous participant in this crisis . Castro's action threatened to upset the tenuous balance between the U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 To this point, the Soviets and the Cubans were passively defensive and no shots had been fired . No shots were fired . The Soviets and Cubans are passive defensive .
 Ambassador Hare concurred with Ambassador Finletter’s response that removing the Jupiters from Turkey would damage US-Turkish relations . The Turks placed great confidence in the missiles, Ambassador Hare said .
 In Cuba, Soviet General Pliyev had the authority to arm the tactical nuclear weapons . He reported that by the 26th all strategic weapons systems were operational . By the end of the war, Cuba had all its nuclear weapons operational .
 He did not give the order to arm any of the weapons, but it would only take three and a half hours to arm a missile and fuel it .
 ABC's John Scali received a call from Feklisov asking for an urgent meeting . Friday morning, he received an urgent call from the Russian president .
 Scali told Feklisov that a landing in Cuba was imminent, and an offer was proposed . Scali said he was going to land in Cuba, and a landing landing was imminent .
 By that afternoon, Roger Hilsman was aware of the encounter and assumed that it was a backchannel message to the U.S. He assumed that the encounter was an attempt to communicate with the United States .
 He and Secretary Rusk agreed that if this were a message, then quick response was required to ensure the Soviets knew the United States’ government was considering it seriously .
 Scali and Feklisov met for the second time that day at 7:30m. near the Soviet embassy in Moscow . The two men met for their second time in a row near the embassy in Russia .
 Feklisov added a caveat about the UN watching U.S. troop withdrawals . Scali replied that he was not in a position to comment on this aspect .
 The United States wanted to ensure that the Soviets were convinced that the United States was willing to go to war over this issue, but would not do so recklessly . The U.S. wanted the Soviets to believe that the U.K. would not go recklessly. The United
 Scali relayed to Feklisov that the United States could agree to the Soviet demand that it pledge not to invade Cuba, but the missiles had to be removed . The U.S. agreed to remove the missiles, but it agreed that the missiles must be removed from Cuba .
 This represented the first time the two proposals from opposing sides had been joined . This was first time they had joined together for opposing sides of opposing sides .
 The next morning, the Executive Committee learned of the details of the second meeting . Khrushchev's letter from the Soviet leader arrived at the State Department that morning .