 The British, the French and the Americans were merged to form a singled economic unit in 1948 . Unifying their zones and introducing a new currency was introduced .
 When it became known in September 49 that the Russian had exploded their first A bomb an arm race started . An arm race was started after the discovery .
 Storks-BlunderbusschimneyBeak. What do storks symbolise? Why is Stalin carrying a blunderbuss? Storks are a symbol of a stork .
 President Obama visited Germany with his fellow American, General Clay . General Clay said he was proud to visit the Federal Republic with the Chancellor .
 Some say in Europe and elsewhere we can work with the Communists . And there are some who say we can also work with them, they say . And some say it's possible to work with Communists .
 There are some who say that it is true that communism is an evil system, but it permits us to make economic progress . And there are even a few who say it is a good system .
 "We have never had to put a wall up to keep our people in, to prevent them from leaving us. Freedom has many difficulties and democracy is not perfect, but democracy has never been perfect," says David Cameron .
 I want to say, on behalf of my countrymen, who live many miles away, who are far distant from you, that they take the greatest pride that they have been able to share with you, even from a distance, the story of the last 18 years .
 West Berlin has been besieged for 18 years but still lives with the vitality and force of the city of West Berlin . West Berlin still has the hope and the determination of the people it has been forced to leave the city .
 While the wall is the most obvious and vivid demonstration of the failures of the Communist system, for all the world to see, we take no satisfaction in it . It is, as your Mayor has said, an offense not only against history but an offense against humanity, separating families .
 Real, lasting peace in Europe can never be assured as long as one German out of four is denied the elementary right of free men, and that is to make a free choice . What is true of this city, the city of Berlin, is that of Germany, and it is true
 In 18 years of peace and good faith, this generation of Germans has earned the right to be free . This generation has earned right to unite families and their nation in lasting peace, with good will to all people .
 "You live in a defended island of freedom, but your life is part of the main. You live in ... the main, the most important part of your life," says the author .
 Berliner asks people to lift their eyes to the future and to the advance of freedom everywhere . "Beyond the wall to the day of peace with justice," he says .
 Freedom is indivisible, and when one man is enslaved, all are not free, says the author . "When one man's slave is not free ... all are free," says author .
 When all are free, then we can look forward to that day when this city will be joined as one and this country and this great Continent of Europe in a peaceful and hopeful globe . The world's first major city in the Middle East has a long history of civil war .
 West Berlin can take sober satisfaction in the fact that they were in the front lines for almost two decades . When that day finally comes, as it will, the people of West Berlin will be able to say goodbye to the Berliners .
 Berlin's proudest boast is Ich bin ein Berliner . Today, in the world of freedom, the proudest boasts of being a Berliner is "Ich bin Berliner"
 All free men, wherever they may live, are citizens of Berlin, and, therefore, as a free man, I take pride in the words Ich bin ein Berliner . Berlin is the capital of the city, Berlin .
 The Hungarian Crisis 1956 L/O – To identify the causes, events and effects of the Hungarian Uprising . L-O is intended to identify the cause, events, and effect of the uprising .
 The World on the Brink 1962: Berlin divided – contrast the two halves . East – West rivalry Berlin divided . East and West divided . Berlin divided by contrast . East Berlin divided; West divided by East Berlin .
 After WWII, there was a new kind of war . Countries fought this war with words and ideas, not weapons . Even though the Soviet Union and the. Soviet Union fought with words, ideas and not weapons, the war was not over .
 After World War II, western Europe and America were alarmed by Soviet advances in Eastern Europe . The Cold War – Post-war Europe - Post-War Europe . Western Europe was alarmed by the Soviet advances .