 It was also a personal confrontation between men of different generations and outlooks . "It was also an personal confrontation," says CNN's John Sutter .
 Nikita Sergeyevich Khrushchev, the undisputed strongman of the Soviet Union, was 68 when he went nose to nose with John Fitzgerald Kennedy of the United States over Soviet missile sites in Cuba . Kennedy was 45 when he was a 45-year-old .
 He learned from aerial photographs that the spies were right . Things moved quickly after that, and by Oct. 31, he learned of the truth .
 Kennedy dismissed plans to invade Cuba, or bomb the sites . Kennedy and his military advisors discussed options for the next week .
 The crisis was over six days after President Obama set up a naval blockade to stop the sites’ further development . On Oct. 31, he addressed the nation on TV, and six days later the blockade was over .
 President Kennedy had reluctantly approved the Bay of Pigs operation in April 1961 . The invasion of Cuba was planned by the CIA under President Dwight Eisenhower . In April of 1961, Kennedy reluctantly agreed to the operation .
 The failed attempt by Cuban exiles to overthrow the communist regime of Fidel Castro reduced the president’s stature . The president's stature has been reduced by the failure of the failed attempt .
 Khrushchev sat smugly in the wings, watching Kennedy fumble his way along, or so it seemed . Kennedy was trying to take over the world's most important post-war issues .
 The Soviet leader began in August of that year to build the Berlin Wall to stem the tide of East Germans fleeing to the West . Seizing on what he perceived as Kennedy’s weakness, the Soviet leader built the wall .
 Tanks of the two sides met in Berlin that summer, and war was averted when the Soviets withdrew . The Soviets withdrew when the Soviet Union withdrew .
 In Canada, too, an elder statesman made the mistake of underestimating Kennedy . Kennedy was underestimated in the face of a rising tide of opposition .
 Prime Minister John Diefenbaker was born in the 19th century, while Kennedy first saw the light of day in 1917 .
 Kennedy got along better with Khrushchev than he did with Diefenbaker, then 67, his ally and neighbour . If anything, Kennedy was more likely to get along than with the Soviet leader than with his neighbour .
 Kennedy sent his personal pollster to Canada to help defeat Diefenbaker in the next election . Kennedy even sent his own pollster out to Canada .
 The Soviets, who had lost millions of soldiers and civilians to German armies, occupied Poland, Hungary, and other eastern European states to form a buffer zone . The Soviets occupied Poland and Hungary, as well as eastern Europe, in the early 1950s .
 What Winston Churchill later called an ‘Iron Curtain’ thus separated capitalism from communism, democracy from totalitarian tyranny . Winston Churchill called the Iron Curtain the dividing line between capitalism and totalitarianism . The ‘iron curtain’ separated capitalism and communism .
 U.S. obliterated Hiroshima and Nagasaki with nuclear bombs to end the war with Japan in the summer of 1945 . The Soviets stepped up their efforts to acquire nuclear weapons and tested one in August 1949 .
 The Soviets remained nervous about NATO warheads aimed their way from Europe and Turkey, prompting ideas of putting missiles in Cuba when Castro came to power in 1959 . The Cuban government was worried about the threat of NATO warheads .
 Kennedy, at 43, was elected president in November 1960 . A decorated war vet with an eye for the ladies, Kennedy was 43 when he became president .
 Though married with children, he was friendly with movie star Marilyn Monroe . He was also friendly with actress Marilyn Monroe, who died in 1953 .
 The Bay of Pigs debacle taught him not to fully trust his military advisors, which probably saved the world from war . At work it was all business, and he was always focused on business .
 Instead of invasion or bombing of Cuba he chose the successful naval quarantine or blockade . Instead of invading or bombing, he chose to give Soviet ships more time to turn around . The blockade was successful, and pushed back the line .
 The U.S. agreed not to invade Cuba in exchange for removal of missile sites . In the end, the United States agreed to remove the missile sites from Cuba . The United States was forced to pull the missiles from Cuba in return for removing them .
 NATO’s Jupiter missiles in Turkey and Italy would be removed, says Robert Dallek . It was also agreed that NATO's Jupiter missiles would also be removed .
 The Nuclear Confrontation was installed to enable the U.S. and Soviet leaders to communicate quickly . The nuclear device was installed in the Cold War era .
 In Canada, Diefenbaker’s reluctance to support the blockade led to divisions in his cabinet . The blockade and move Canada to a higher level of military alert at Kennedy's request led to division in cabinet .
 Defence Minister Doug Harkness pointed to Canada’s obligations under NATO and NORAD and raised the alert level . The alert level has been raised to the highest level in the country .
 Diefenbaker lost the federal election on April 8, 1963, to Lester Pearson’s Liberals . Five months later, after winning the biggest majority in Canadian history in 1958, he lost the election in 1963 .
 Kennedy was assassinated on Nov., 1963, by a Soviet sympathizer . Khrushchev was replaced the following year by Leonid Brezhnev . Kennedy was killed by a Russian sympathizer in 1963 .
 High political office attracts exceptional people—often with flaws as visible as their virtues—and a wise populace puts up with the flaws to gain from those virtues .
 Views expressed in this article are the opinions of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of The Epoch Times .
 Brad Bird began his career by freelancing in the 1970s . Brad Bird is the author of a new book, "Brad Bird," on CNN.com .
 He worked for the Winnipeg Free Press in the 1980s and various smaller papers since, as well as abroad in conflict zones and for the Harper government .
 Trump Rally in Greenwood, Nebraskashare, was held on Jan. 9, 2017 .
 How the West’s ‘Destructive Games of Self-Immolation’ Derange Society and Empower Dictators . ExCLUSIVE: New Jan. 2014: New Year's Eve .