 In a world of growing specialization, the Institute emphasized broad topics . The Institute brought together historians and political scientists .
 The Institute did, however, make a point of inviting some of the younger Russian and Chinese scholars to Norway .
 At least they were young when they first came; now they may not be so young now . At least, they may be young now. At least .
 The increasingly global approach of the Nobel Peace Prize should also be reflected in the focus of the Institute's research program . The Institute of Peace Studies is based in London .
 The purpose of the research program was to take away any excuse for not doing good research . The program was designed to stop people from doing bad research, the researchers say . The research program will be available to anyone interested in it .
 Nobel Institute provided them with a sparsely furnished office equipped with modern means of communication, a superb library, interesting colleagues, and a professional staff .
 The only obligation the fellows had was to present a research paper at the biweekly research seminar and to take part in the discussion about the papers of the other fellows .
 For many years virtually all the leading books on the Cold War were produced by scholars who had spent at least some time at the Nobel Institute .
 It was decided to invite a group of them back to discuss what we had learned during that time . It was then decided they would discuss what they had learned .
 About twenty-five of us met in Nyvagar in scenic Lofoten in Northern Norway to present our papers .
 As always, the papers were available in advance so that we could concentrate on spirited discussion . The papers are available in order to encourage discussion .
 The current volume presents the heavily revised papers from this Nobel Symposium . This volume includes heavily revised works from the Nobel Sympospospositions .
 Symposium is Greek for ""drinking together" -- we certainly did that, as well as swimming in the ocean way inside the Arctic Circle . Symposium means "drinking together"
 Most unfortunately both of them were unable, for totally different reasons, to participate in the book project .
 The editor would like to thank Asle Toje and Sigrid Langebrekke for their assistance before and during the symposium . The editor of this article has been in contact with the editor of the book .
 The Evolving Structure of World Politics, 1991-2011 16 Stewart Patrick 2.2.3. 2.4.5.5 . Stewart Patrick: World politics has evolved dramatically since 1991 . Stewart: The world's changing structure of world politics is changing .
 Geir Lundestad: A new world order is created every now and then new international orders are created . The past and future of the world's most powerful nations will be reflected in the future .
 Events take place that have dramatic consequences for the international structure . The events take place in the aftermath of the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 The biggest and most dramatic changes are associated with wars between the major powers . The biggest changes were associated with major wars between major powers.
 The First World War resulted in the defeat of no fewer than four long-lasting empires . Thus, the First World World War ended in defeat of four empires .
 The Austro-Hungarian empire was dissolved; the Ottoman empire was transformed into modern Turkey . The Russian empire became the Soviet Union; the German empire was pronounced the aggressor, cut down in size, and became the Weimar Republic .
 The two leading powers were now, in many ways, the United States and the Soviet Union . The U.S. and Soviet Union were no longer dominant powers in the world .
 Woodrow Wilson was forced to see his U.S. retreat into isolation again . Yet, the U.K. is still in isolation again, says Wilson .
 The country would not join the president's much cherished League of Nations . The president would not have wanted to join the organisation .
 The new communist Soviet Union chose to isolate itself from the capitalist world . In part, the Soviet Union was kept in isolation by the other leading powers .
 The Second World War led to even larger changes in the international structure of the world's most powerful powers .
 Their populations had to be 're-educated' before they could be let loose again . Their populations needed to be re-educated before they were able to be released .
 West Germany, Italy, and Japan all became close allies of the U.S. West Germany and Italy became allies with the United States in WWII .
 Britain and France were among the victors, but had both badly damaged, although in very different ways . France and Britain had both been badly damaged in the war .
 The fall of France in the spring of 1940 had been so sudden and complete that even President Charles de Gaulle could not win back France's traditional place in the international order . The fall was so sudden that President Charles De Gaulle was not able to win back his country's place in
 World War II had turned the old imperial power into the debtor of the United States, not only economically, but also militarily and even culturally . The U.S. is now the world's largest debtor of any nation .
 The promises London made to India could not be held back even from the British colonies in Africa . It turned out, surprisingly quickly, that . London made promises to India that the promises London .
 The other colonial powers also had to adjust to what Britain had conceded . Britain had to adapt to what colonial powers had agreed .
 The United States and the Soviet Union were now prepared to play their full roles in 1917 . The two powers had made such dramatic but rather brief appearances in 1917, but now they were ready to play full roles . U.S. and Soviet Union, the two powers that had made brief
 Western and Eastern Europe were now put under the administration of the two new powers . So complete was the defeat of the Old World that Western and . Eastern Europe was now .
 The United States ruled relatively benignly in the West, while the Soviet Union had to use blunter instruments in the East . The U.S. had a relatively benign approach to the East, but the Soviets had to be blunt .
 Cold War did not result in direct war between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The Cold War was not directly involved in the Cold War .
 The Iron Curtain meant the separation of the Eastern and the Western parts of the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was formed in 1968 after the collapse of the Cold War .
 Outside Europe, the two superpowers fought many wars by proxy, including Korea and Vietnam, to Angola, Ethiopia, and Afghanistan . Outside Europe they fought many proxy wars outside Europe, including Vietnam and Angola .
 Niall Ferguson: While there was no Third World War, there was indeed the Third World's War . Ferguson: "In Niall's phrase, while there were no Third . World's war was indeed a Third World . War."
 The long-term story of the Cold War appeared to be the rise of the Soviet Union to at least military equality with the United States . The U.S. and Russia were at odds with each other in the 1950s and '60s .
 In the 1970s, the agreements about strategic weapons were based on this equality . In the 1980s, it was based on the equality of strategic weapons .
 Like the United States, the Soviet Union had gradually acquired the capability to intervene in the most distant corners of the world . Like the U.S. it had acquired the ability to intervene .
 The sad reality for the Kremlin was that it was simply impossible for the Soviet Union to be the military equal of the United States . The Soviet Union was lagging so far behind in every other respect, particularly economically .
 In the 1970s and 1980s, the economic growth of the Soviet Union came to a screeching halt . The Soviet Union's economic growth came to an end in the 1980s and '90s .
 The United States had been the leading economic power in the world, in terms of the size of its production, since around 1870 . The U.S. has been the world's most powerful economic power since around 1870 .
 Only after the Second World War was the U.S. prepared to play a role fully in accordance with its vast resources . Only after World War II was the United States prepared to .
 Washington's One World visions were always limited by the role of the Soviet Union . Yet, Washington's vision was limited by its role as a World Power .
 During the Cold War there were at least two worlds dominated by the United States, "the free world,"" and that of the Soviet Union, the communist world . The U.S. and the Soviet world were dominated by both sides .
 In the first decades after 1945 the expansion of the Soviet Union did indeed appear to be the most striking phenomenon in 2 Ceir Lundestad international relations .
 In the 1950s, Mao Tse-tung did definitely ""lean to one side,” the Soviet one . In the '50s, he did definitely "lean to the one side," the Chinese said .
 Only in hindsight did we see that the expansion of the U.S. may have been even more dramatic, in Western Europe, Japan and the Pacific, and in many other parts of the world . The United States may have expanded even more in Europe and Japan .
 With the Soviet Union in great trouble, even after Mikhail Gorbachev launched his economic reforms in 1985, the U.S. had a new freedom to act . The United States had the power to act in the wake of the collapse of Soviet Union .
 This was the background for the Gulf War in 1991 and the Iraq War in 2003 . Iraq War was the first Gulf War to take place in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 If the Soviet Union had continued in existence, these wars would both have been too risky . The Soviet Union would not have survived the two wars in Russia .
 The U.S. intervened against Serbia over Bosnia-Herzegovina and Kosovo, in Somalia, in Haiti, and in Afghanistan after September 11,2001 . The United States also intervened over Bosnia and Kosovo .
 The primary restraint on Washington was now its own doubts about what its role should really be . Washington's primary restraint was now itself doubts about its role in the world .
 Bush who had stood so triumphant in 1991 after the victory in the Cold War and the Gulf War . Bush was so triumphant that he had stood victorious in 1991 . Bush's victory in 1991 was the result of the Gulf and Cold War victories .
 Mikhail Gorbachev received Nobel Peace Prize for ending Cold War in 1990 . In power terms, the new situation was the domination of the U.S. and the West, he writes .
 The old structures were all kept; they were simply updated to include the now liberated countries of 1 George W Bush and Brent Scowcroft, A World Transformed , 253.
 Efforts by Gorbachev and French president Francois Mitterrand to create new European institutions were turned down by Washington . Washington turned down the proposals with the strong support of most European governments .
 It took a little longer for these countries to qualify for membership of the European Union . But soon they were members even there .
 Bill Clinton tried to combine this reversal of history with good relations with Russia . Bill Clinton had a good relationship with Russia, but relations with the U.S. have never been good enough .
 Russia entered into a partnership agreement with NATO; credits and loans were given to Moscow . He cultivated his friendship with Boris Yeltsin; he brought Russia into the G7, which then became the G8 .
 Russia is no longer a country of the first order, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Yet nothing could hide the simple fact that Russia was no longer an order . Russia is now no longer the country of first order .
 Many academics in the U.S. warned against the American expansion into former Soviet territory, but even Russia had, to a large extent, collapsed . Even Russia had already collapsed.
 When you ended socialism and planning, you produced chaos, not capitalism, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: "You produced chaos not capitalism. It produced chaos"
 As always, the end of a major conflict produces optimism about the future . The end of the war produces optimism for the U.S. as always, as always .
 Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Colin Powell declared that ""I am running out of enemies. After the fall of the Soviet Union and the American triumph in the Gulf War, Colin Powell had declared that he had run out of all enemies .
 In more general terms, the transition from the Cold War to the post-Cold War was relatively bloody . The transition was relatively quiet, but it was still bloody, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The number of wars after the Second World War actually reached a climax in the early 1990s, as could be illustrated by the numerous wars in the former Yugoslavia and the Caucasus . In the 1990s the number of conflicts in the Caucasus and Yugoslavia reached a peak .
 The highest number, fifty-three wars at the same time, was recorded in 1992 . Highest number of wars recorded was in 1992, when 50 wars were recorded .
 Since then, since then there has been a decline in the number of wars, says historian Stewart Patrick . As Stewart Patrick also makes clear in his contribution in the present volume, since that has been in decline in number of conflicts .
 Since 1999 the number of wars going on has been in the thirties, with the lowest number, thirty, reached in 2010 . The number of conflicts in the Middle East has been at least 30 since 1999 .
 Between the years 2004 and 2010 only one minor interstate conflict was actually recorded . Djibouti and Eritrea in 2008 was the only major interstate conflict between the two countries .
 Of the thirty conflicts in 2010, nine were ""internationalized,"" meaning that there was support from the outside to one or more of the warring parties . Nine of the 30 conflicts in that year were "internationalized" or supported by the outside parties .
 This is actually the highest number of such ""internationalized"" conflicts since the Second World War . Afghanistan and Iraq/ included the major wars in Afghanistan . There are many reasons for the decline in the number of wars, relative as it is .
 Decolonization is over, and virtually all colonies have become independent . Decolonisation is over and virtually every colony has now become independent.
 With the end of the Cold War the interest in intervention from the outside has been reduced . The interest in intervening from outside has also been reduced in the past decade .
 The United Nations has become increasingly interested in, and able to control, war . The U.N. has become more interested in controlling and controlling war .
 The number of democracies in the world has increased, says David Cameron . He says on the whole democracies are more peaceful than authoritarian states .
 A norm against war and territorial expansion has been evolving in many parts of the world . A norm is now evolving against war, territorial expansion in many countries .
 Some economic growth may have improved the situation and even made war less likely . Economic growth may also have made war even less likely.
 "The seeds of a new historical period are always found in the earlier period," says author .
 Elements from the earlier period almost always linger on in the new period . And elements from the previous period always lingers on in a new period.
 This was certainly the case with the years after the Cold War where the changes were less immediately dramatic than in many earlier periods . The Cold War was the most dramatic period in the world's history, with many of the changes being made less immediately .
 Major powers moved up and down in the international power hierarchy . The powers as such remained the same with the exception of the Soviet Union that was transformed into Russia .
 The years since the end of the Cold War are neatly divided into two parts of almost equal length, before and after September 11, 2001 . September 11 is the anniversary of 9/11 attacks .
 The years from 1990 to 2001 are often referred to as the post-Cold War years . The later years have frequently been described as the age of terror .
 In the latter case we are not referring to a completed historical epoch. In the former case, we are referring to an earlier historical epoch . We are also referring to the past .
 "Writing history in the middle of a process presents many different challenges," historian says .
 It related the current to the earlier period; it explicitly stated that something undefined followed something that had been much more clearly defined . The current was related to the previous period, it said . It said that the current followed an undefined followed what had been clearly defined.
 This led to a frantic search for a better definition of the 1990s, both by the Clinton administration and by academic observers . The Clinton administration has been trying to define the '90s .
 Kennan's ""containment"" provided the definition of the heart of the Cold War . Kennan had provided the . definition of . the heart . of the . Cold War. Kennan’s ‘containment’ had provided .
 In the present volume, most of the contributors have maintained the term ""Post-Cold War years"" for the 1990s—or even for the entire period from 1989 until the present . The present volume of this volume is the first edition of this book .
 All of the alternative terms did, however, tell us something important about the 1990s and even the later decades . The alternative terms tell us about the nature of the '90s and '80s .
 America was to be to be the assertive country; as always, the United States would provide the leadership . America would provide leadership, Obama said . America was always to be assertive, he said .
 It did so both in the 1990s under Clinton and, more directly—but definitely not more effectively—under George W Bush, under Bush . The U.S. has been in touch with the world's most powerful military since 2001 .
 With the fall of the Soviet empire, democracy spread to most of the countries in Central and Eastern Europe . Democracy spread to Central and eastern Europe after the Soviet Empire fell .
 The major hold outs, as far as democracy and human rights were concerned, were the Muslim, particularly the Arab, world, and China . China, the Arab world and China are the major holdouts, as well as the Muslim .
 In 2011, the winds of change were finally affecting even the Arab countries in dramatic ways . Tunisia, Egypt, Libya, Yemen, and Syria were among the countries affected by the change .
 In all of them, with the temporary exception of Syria, the old regime was overthrown, although with increasing costs in terms of human lives . In Syria, Bashar al-Assad's regime has been overthrown with increasing cost of lives .
 Much of history has even been described as one long process of globalization . Much of the history of globalization is described as a process of globalization .
 Use of the term increased dramatically in the 1990s, although use of it increased dramatically . Thus, this process has been going on for a long time .
 The spread of religions from the Middle East to the rest of the world illustrated the long-term perspective, as did the development of plagues and illnesses as well as economic cycles, particularly in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries .
 The current papers were presented at a symposium in Lofoten, where the price of cod on the European continent has been decisive for the well-being of the inhabitants for about a thousand years .
 The economies of the world were in many respects as integrated before the First World War as they were for many decades after the Second World War . World's economies were integrated before and after the war .
 In some respects, they were much more integrated, as we see in how much easier it was for common people to move from one continent to another in the nineteenth century compared to the situation today, where all kinds of papers are needed to cross most international borders .
 What was new about globalization in the 1990s and later was that the world did indeed become smaller . The world has become smaller since the 1980s, but the world has never been smaller, he says .
 Most of us were able to experience events live, at least through the media, as they happened virtually all around the world . Most of the world was able to see the events in person .
 We could communicate instantly with each other in several different ways. We could do this in a number of different ways . We were able to communicate instantly by using different ways of communicating . We could use the language of communication to communicate with others .
 Enormous amounts of money constantly moved around seeking the best possible terms . Money constantly moves around seeking to be on the best terms .
 Intergovernmental and international non-governmental organizations increased tremendously in numbers and influence in the United States . Intergovernmental groups increased dramatically in numbers, influence and numbers of organizations .
 International norms were developing, such as the importance of human rights and even the protection of the peoples of the world against the most dramatic forms of exploitation . And international norms were being developed, says the president .
 It's easy to exaggerate how comprehensive globalization has become. Yet it is easy to overestimate how comprehensive it has become . Globalization has become so comprehensive that it's hard to overestimimagine how comprehensive globalization is .
 Most of the big multinational states have been under separatist pressure . Most of them are under pressure from separatist groups in the region .
 The Soviet Union has been replaced by Russia and 14 other states . Yugoslavia has been broken into seven parts . Yugoslavia was broken into 7 parts .
 Separatism is strong in China, in India, in the United Kingdom, and in Canada . Separtatism is also strong in the U.K. and Canada .
 The United States, which had its own civil war, is virtually the only really big state where the territorial unit is not questioned . The U.S. is the only big state in the world where territorial units are questioned .
 Regional organizations have proliferated in most parts of the world . Regional organizations are proliferating in most areas of the globe .
 Polls indicate attachment to the nation state is far stronger than to the European level . Even in the EU, even in the strongest of the new regional units, polls show attachment to nation state far stronger .
 Most production, by far, is still done for the national market . Despite the growth of the international market, most production is still for the local market .
 The vast majority of people still study and work in their home countries .
 The development of international norms and standards is still hesitant . Most countries insist, very firmly, on their national sovereignty, writes CNN.com .
 China and the U.S. are among the most powerful countries in the Middle East . The region has a long history of tension between Beijing and the West .
 After September 11, 2001, the focus has been very much on terrorism . While there is confusion about what to call the 1990s, after 9/11, there has been a focus on terrorism since .
 There had been several terrorist attacks in the 1990s, but the dramatic new focus came with the attacks of September 11, 2001 .
 "It doesn't matter to me how long it takes, we're going to rout out terror wherever it may exist," says President Obama . "We're not going to wait longer than it takes," says Obama .
 In 2011 it has been estimated that there are about six non-fiction books being published per week with terrorism in the title . Even in 2011 there are estimated to be six books per week being published with the terrorist title .
 Like war, terrorism had been part of history since time immemorial . Yet, like war, terrorists had been involved in terrorism, it had been in history .
 The histories of Russia and Ireland provide many examples, as do the more recent histories of Spain, Italy, and Germany . Spain, Germany, Italy and Spain are examples .
 After 9/11, terrorist attacks have proliferated virtually all over the world . After September 11, terrorism attacks proliferated worldwide . Terrorist attacks have also proliferated in the past decade .
 After September 11, there has been no major terrorist attack in the United States. Yet, whatever the explanation might be, after 9/11 there hasn't been a major attack in America .
 While there is broad international cooperation against terrorism, this struggle has not really become the catch7 Philip Zelikow, ""US Strategic Planning in 2001-02,"" in Leffler and Legro, In Uncertain Times, 102, 104.7 Philip Zelikow
 While such comparisons may provide a broader perspective, accidents are still clearly different from conscious political acts .
 Bathtub drowning comes in single accidents; terrorism in dramatic and terrible political acts . Bathtub drownings come in single accident; terrorism is a dramatic political act . Terrorism is a political act that can be tragic and dramatic, political, tragic .
 Politicians can do little about the first category; they neglect the second at their peril . Politicians should not neglect the first and the second category, they neglect them both at peril .
 The extended wars in the Democratic Republic of Congo illustrated. Yet the two phenomena were not necessarily connected, as the extended wars illustrated .
 There, hundreds of thousands of lives had been lost in the wars that had convulsed the country since the mid-1990s . Hundreds of thousands had been killed in those wars .
 Still, this had little or no influence on most of the rest of the world . Still, it had little influence on other nations .
 Modern, effective states were a new development, and states had failed throughout history . Most states of the world were, in fact, becoming increasingly better organized . Yet modern states were not new developments, but they were becoming more organized .
 In the current volume there is no general agreement on what we should call either the 1990s or the later years . The current volume of this volume is no more than a decade old, it is said .
 The search for the most appropriate terms to describe these years will have to go on . It will be difficult to come up with new terms, but the search for them will continue .
 Japan was still important, as were the EU and even Germany, France, and Britain by themselves . The EU and the EU were still important in the world, as was the UK .
 Decolonization was the competing theme in the first decades after the Second World War . globalization and fragmentation might be a somewhat alternative view on the most recent years . Decolonizing and fragmentation were the competing themes in the early 20th century .
 After the Second World War, economic growth had come to be taken as given . Economic growth had been taken as a given after the war .
 Politicians promise growth year in, year out, and it would happen . Politicians could apparently promise growth, year-in-year, and would happen, it's claimed .
 A feeling developed among economic experts that through the different economic instruments at their disposal the traditional financial fluctuations would be fine-tuned out of existence . A feeling had developed among . economic experts . that through . the . different economic tools at . their disposal . at their . disposal the .
 If economic growth would slow down, or even stop entirely, it would have dramatic consequences for relations both between and inside countries . The world's economic growth could have consequences for both countries .
 With a longer perspective we may, perhaps, be better able to understand how these various alternative processes were related . With a long perspective, we may better understand how they were connected .
 The first three chapters deal with various aspects of the overall international level as it has developed since the end of the Cold War . The contributions in the current volume are published by the U.S. State Department .
 To cope with this daunting global agenda, states increasingly turned to formal treaty-based organizations . States increasingly turn to more flexible arrangements of collective action . Countries increasingly turned not only to formal treaties, but to more . flexible arrangements .
 John Oneal provides strong reasons for optimism about the future . Oneal's book "Twenty Years of Research on the Causes of War" is published by John O'Neill .
 Earlier emphasis in the study of international relations on a realist orientation has allegedly been replaced by a liberal understanding . The earlier emphasis on international relations was allegedly replaced by an earlier liberal orientation .
 Oneal strongly argues that democratic rule is indeed more peaceful than more authoritarian forms . Oneal argues that democracy is peaceful than authoritarian rule .
 As democracy spreads, we should expect the world to become more peaceful . We should also expect to see more peaceful relations with each other, says David Cameron .
 Growing interdependence, in the form of increased international trade, should have a similar effect on the economy, says David Cameron . The UK is one of the fastest-growing economies in the world .
 Democracy, capitalism, and globalization are all likely to be strengthened in the future . Democracy and globalization provide the basis for this optimism, says Julian Zelizer .
 Two prominent political scientists disagree about the reasons for this optimism . Mueller shares Oneal's optimism with Mueller's optimism . Oneal and Mueller disagree on the reasons of this optimism in the polls .
 This aversion arose with the reaction to the horrors of the First World War . This aversion is relatively new, but it arose in response to the horror of the war .
 The relationship between democracy and peace is far less absolute than Oneal suggests . Experiences in the former Yugoslavia and between India and Pakistan also indicate that the relationship is less absolute .
 The 'State,' the 'West,' and the Cold War"" against the pervasive feeling in the United States that unhampered capitalism won the victory for the U.S. The 'West' and "the Cold War" against the "State," the "West," and the "
 The role of the government increased tremendously in the decades after the Second World War . Not only in Western Europe, but also in the United States, the role of government increased in decades after war .
 The government insured minimal social provisions, spurred research and innovation, and dispensed compensatory income in hard times . It dispensed compensation to those in need of social provisions .
 The United States was far superior to the Soviet Union in striking the right balance between the private and public elements . The U.S. struck a right balance in striking between the public and private elements of its government .
 The chapter is also relevant in the discussion about how the U.S. should be handling its economic future .
 Jeremi Suri, in line with many recent writings on international relations, stresses the importance of ideology . Suri: Four Ideas that Shaped the Twentieth-Century World"
 After the end of the Cold War, Washington drifted away especially from collective security and solvency . After the war, the U.S. government has been in decline .
 The task today is to articulate ideas that are relevant for the challenges of our time . The task is to find out what is relevant to the challenges we face today's challenges .
 Deterrence forced both sides to work with greater restraint and responsibility than they would otherwise have done . Deterrence made both sides work with more restraint than otherwise .
 The end of the Cold War has now deprived the United States of its main mission . The U.S. will no longer be able to rely on the U.K. to carry out its mission .
 The new Russia is struggling with some of the same problems as did the Soviet Union . The West has taken advantage of Russia's weakness by filling in power vacuums left by the Soviet collapse .
 Pechatnov expresses the hope that America's present problems can bring some humility and openness, and new ideas that will make it possible to break from the Cold War and its legacy .
 Odd Arne Westad argues that the entire Third World project collapsed in the 1970s and 1980s . Westad says the Cold War and the collapse of the Third World were linked .
 Westad has argued that local factors have not been given their due influence in accounts about the Cold War . But he still sees Cold War as the predominant feature of the international system in the latter half of the twentieth century .
 Nuclear weapons have woven into regional politics, especially in South Asia, the Middle East, and on the Korean peninsula . Yet, nuclear weapons have been woven in regional politics .
 A few new states are getting such weapons, yet some major states are choosing not to develop them . Some major states have even given up their weapons .
 The United States and the nuclear powers have to do more to reduce their numbers toward zero . The U.S. and nuclear powers must do more, the U.N. says .
 The nuclear arms race did not cause the Cold War, but it put its mark on it . Yet, while the arms race was not a cause, it put a distinct mark on the Cold war .
 Njolstad argues that arms races are less of a threat to international peace than to the economic wellbeing of nations . The latter may, of course, be serious enough .
 A substantial part of the Lofoten symposium was devoted to the status of the world's leading powers and the roles they play .
 There was broad agreement that while the U.S. had experienced relative decline, it was still the leading power in the world .
 China's economic growth has been unrivalled, but there was skepticism that China would be able to challenge the U.S. for the lead role . Its economic growth is unrivalling, but it is still unrivaled in the world .
 Russia's role is discussed, in part, as a continuation of its Cold War role . Russia is seen as a major player in the world's most powerful military power .
 It is facing problems in transforming itself into a modern state politically and economically . "It is facing considerable problems," says President Obama . "I'm not optimistic about the future," he says .
 While Japan is still an important economic power, the last twenty years have represented a period of standstill . The last 20 years have been an economic standstill for Japan .
 While countries such as India and Brazil are clearly rising, they still have a long way to go before they become powers of the first rank .
 Jussi Hanhimaki argues that while predictions in so many of the earlier debates about America's fall have proved wrong, this is in part because these debates have had—and continue to have relevance reversibility reform .
 America continues to be the leading global power and a key advocate of the prevalent liberal international order based on growing interconnectedness . U.S. is the world's leading superpower and advocate of liberal international orders based on interconnectedness.
 The challenges are not primarily the rise of China and the other BRIC countries, but whether the U.S. can continue wielding influence and leadership with fewer resources . The challenges will be whether the United States will be able to wield influence with less resources .
 Vladislav Zubok addresses the question of why Putin and his regime emerged in Russia . Zubok: "Twenty Difficult Years" is an attempt to explain why Putin's regime came to Russia .
 He points instead to contemporary and immediate factors as the crucial ones . He points to contemporary factors as crucial ones as a factor .
 The acute degradation of the elites in the post-Soviet environment and the ""generational skip” when new graduates replaced the depleted Soviet intelligentsia and middle groups .
 The abrupt transition from old to new destroyed the base for political reform in Russia, says Putin . Russia's abrupt transition to new policies has destroyed its base for reform, he says .
 Zubok says the West acted with little wisdom and energy toward the new Russia . Zubok also thinks that the West has little wisdom toward the Russian new Russia.
 For decades, the EU and its predecessors were able to combine a geographical widening and a deepening of content . The EU has been able to expand its borders and expand its content in the past .
 The Maastricht treaty of 1991-2 at first appeared to be a great success . With the EU prospering in the 1990s, the treaty was thought to have been a success . The treaty was signed in 1991-1992 .
 In the new millennium the EU was facing increasingly bigger problems . The EU was, however, facing increasingly big problems .
 It proved increasingly difficult to work out a common foreign and security policy . The EU quite simply did not become the global power many had hoped .
 The increasing economic problems of some of the EU countries raised questions about the EU's sustainability . Most observers thought that most observers thought had already been answered in the affirmative . Even more seriously, the increasing economic issues of some EU countries raise questions .
 Yet the outcome could well be another round of muddling through, he says . Yet, he suggests, it could be another attempt to get through .
 China's dramatic rise has probably been the most striking change in international affairs in recent years . China's rise has been the biggest change in the world's history since the 1980s .
 In foreign policy, China has been increasingly incorporated into the international economic order, while insisting that aspects of this order be changed . China has also insisted that parts of the world's economic order must be changed, writes Andrew Hammond .
 While there have been major changes in the international economic system, these may not necessarily add up to a power shift . First, while there are major changes to the international system, the power shift may not be all the same .
 The United States and the West still possess more capabilities and assets than many observers now seem to think . Second, the U.S. and West still have more assets and capabilities than many now think, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Cox suggests that we should stop thinking of the international system in terms of certain powers and regions rising and falling in some zero-sum game . Cox says that all of the major states in the new world order are compelled to play by a similar set of rules drawn up in the West .
 This spread of the West will not resolve all differences, but it will nevertheless represent some sort of common club or society, although with different kinds of membership . This spread will not resolved all differences but will nonetheless represent a common club, although there are many different ways .
 The editor speculates on what might become the key dimensions in international relations in the future .
 China is likely to overtake the United States in terms of the size of its production . The U.S. had had the world's largest gross domestic product since around 1870 .
 China, with four times the population of the US, will remain a relatively poor country . Still, China still has four times as many as the US .
 The U.S. holds a larger lead over China in military terms and, quite significantly, in terms of its allies . The United States also holds a bigger lead over its allies, especially in the region of China .
 China remains isolated internationally . While the U.S. has several of the world's leading countries as allies, China is isolated internationally.
 International organizations are being strengthened at both the international and the regional levels . More generally, it is true that the world is becoming increasingly globalized and that international organizations are strengthening at the international level .
 The nation state is likely to remain the basic unit in the international system . Still, the nation state will likely remain the most important unit in international system, experts say .
 Virtually all the new great powers, with China and India in the lead, are rather explicit on this point . Virtually every new great power is rather explicit, with India and China leading the way .
 The United States is also rather unwilling to give up any of its sovereignty . The U.S. is also unwilling to . give up .
 The editor concludes that despite the mass killings of the twentieth century, the world has made progress in the reduced number of wars in the world, in the increased number of democracies, and in the reduction of poverty .
 The financial crisis after 2008 indicates the tenuous nature of predictions in general . This progress could well continue in the future, although the financial crisis in 2008 indicates that predictions are very difficult .
 The collapse of the Soviet Union appeared to vindicate the Western model of democracy and free markets . It raised the prospect of a more peaceful ""new world order"" under benevolent American hegemony .
 By 2011, globalization and other forces had transformed the structure of world politics by altering the security, economic, normative, and institutional context in which sovereign states operated . The challenge of building a cooperative world order is complicated by changing the security and economic context of sovereign states, authors say .
 These major structural changes included the decline of American hegemony, a shift of global economic power to emerging economies, and the declining incidence of war . The persistence of authoritarian rule and the rise of failing states as major strategic concerns . The emergence of regionalism and regional organizations; and evolving norms of
 To cope with this daunting global agenda, states increasingly turned to formal treaty-based international organizations, but to more flexible arrangements of collective action . States increasingly turned not only to formal treaties, but also to flexible arrangements, such as collective action.
 The structure of the international system is always oligopolistic, the great French political theorist Raymond Aron wrote in 1967 . The unipolar moment is the moment for the U.S.
 World Stewart Patrick order has always depended on the managerial role of multiple great powers, he said . He meant that world Stewart Patrick Order has always depended on the role of several great powers .
 Aron did not envision the international system that suddenly emerged in 1991 . Aron, however, did not see the system emerge in 1991.
 The abrupt demise of the Soviet Union left the United States as the world's sole superpower . The U.S. remains the only superpower in the world .
 The advent of the ""unipolar moment,"" as Charles Krauthammer christened it in Foreign Affairs . 1 was unprecedented in the history of the Westphalian state system, in at least two senses, in both ways .
 First, the new order emerged not in the aftermath of major interstate war, as in 1815, 1919, or 1945, but through the peaceful collapse of one major player . New order emerged through peaceful collapse, not war, but a peaceful collapse .
 Second, the new landscape left a single dominant power with no conceivable peer competitor . Third, the landscape left the country's largest power in the world with no peer competitors .
 Not even imperial Britain, at the height of its nineteenth-century maritime influence, had enjoyed such status . Not even Imperial Britain had enjoyed that status, with its maritime influence .
 US preponderance did not inspire the formation of a counter-hegemonic coalition, either in the form of ""hard"" or ""soft"" balancing . Balance of power theory was based on the assumptions of classical balance of power .
 During the 1990s, the overwhelming response was ""bandwagoning,"" as potential rivals sought to align themselves with U.S. power . The overwhelming response to the situation was "Bandwagoning"
 The Soviet Union had collapsed, leaving anemic Russia and multiple successor states . Russia was one of the last bastions of Soviet Union power .
 Europe, meanwhile, was mired in slow growth, preoccupied with German reunification and, more generally, absorbed with the deepening and enlargement of the European project . Europe was preoccupied by reunification of Germany and more generally with deepening of the project .
 Japan, so recently viewed as a rising challenger, was entering its ""lost"" decade of zero growth . Japan entered its "lost" decade of . zero growth in GDP .
 China was engaged with its own internal development and only beginning its meteoric rise . The country was engaged in its internal development . It was only a few years before it began its own rise .
 Given this global correlation of forces, the determination of U.S. defense strategists to thwart any ""peer"" competitor 5 was irrelevant . Given this . determination of United States . strategists were determined to thwart . any . ""peer" competitor .
 The ease with which the US-led coalition reversed Saddam Hussein's invasion of Kuwait during 1991 reinforced this sense of U.S. omnipotence .
 President Bush heralded the advent of a ""new world order"" under benevolent American hegemony . Bush heralds the arrival of a new world order under benevolent U.S. hegemony .
 U.S. material power was not only material power that deterred potential challengers . But it was not merely material power but also economic power . The United States was the only superpower in the Middle East .
 The open, liberal nature of the US-led hegemonic order proved more attractive than threatening to major centers of world power . It was also the open nature of a liberal order, which proved to be attractive to major powers .
 Barton Gellman, ""Pentagon Abandons Goal of Thwarting United States Rivals.” Washington Post, May 24, 1992. Pentagon would Preclude a Rival Superpower,” D.C. Post, March 11 .
 The first, ""outside” order was bipolar and pit the United States and its allies against the Soviet Union and its satellites, with intense competition for the loyalties and resources of peripheral states .
 The second, ""inside” order was liberal, and centered on core ""Western"" states, notably—North America, Western Europe, and Japan . North America and Western Europe were liberal .
 Relations among these states were based on shared liberal principles, including attachment to political democracy, market economics, and institutionalized cooperation, with multilateral regimes governing trade, security, and political relations .
 In stark contrast to the Soviet system, this was no coercive ""empire,"" but a consensual system marked by consultation and compromise . The hegemon and its partners enjoyed ample ""voice opportunities" and were able to bargain over the norms .
 The United States enjoyed a legitimate form of leadership, including authority to shape Western agendas, set the parameters of policy debates, and take the initiative in decision-making . In return for shouldering disproportionate burdens, including in providing armed protection and promoting economic growth, the U.S. enjoyed
 The defeat of communism discredited the last serious ideological challenge to political and economic liberalism . Reinforcing this optimism was the conviction, most palpable in the United States, that the defeat of Communism had discredited ideological challenges .
 Francis Fukuyama expressed this sentiment most forcefully in a celebrated essay in The National Interest . Fukuyam: "I'm not going to let it slide down, but I'm going to make it happen."
 Toynbee once said: ""history"" would continue as a succession of prosaic events—""one damn thing after another" "History" would continue to be as prosaic as Toynbees once said .
 Human experience would no longer be marked by the clash of universalist world views . But the human experience would not have been marked by such clashes of universalists world views.
 The demise of the Soviet threat removed some of the security ""glue" binding Western allies to Washington, reducing U.S. leverage . Certainly, the demise of Soviet threat .
 The Origins, Crisis, and Transformation of the American World Order , 161 . The Origins of the U.S. World Order, 161, is published by Edward Snowden .
 The ""consensual" nature of U.S. hegemony was far more consistent in the OECD core than in the developing world . Of course, the "consensual"" nature of United States hegemony was more consistent with OECD core .
 The Clinton administration encapsulated this vision in its 1994 A National Security Strategy of Engagement and Enlargement .
 The strategy envisioned gradual incorporation of Cold War adversaries and the developing world into an ever-expanding coalition of market democracies . The strategy was outlined in the 1990s .
 Throughout the 1990s, the United States worked to expand and consolidate major multilateral global and regional institutions and alliances . The U.S. has been involved in several of the world's largest multilateral organizations .
 With vigorous support from Washington, the 1990s witnessed advances in economic integration . The 1990s saw advances in Washington-style economic integration in Europe .
 Globalization accelerated, driven by advances in information and telecommunications technology, new financial instruments, deregulation, and privatization of public sector assets under the Washington Consensus .
 By 2000, the U.S. spent as much on defense as the next ten countries combined . In 2000, it spent more than $1 billion on defense than any other country .
 Clinton administration officials acknowledged the unique U.S. position, but sought to reassure the world that its power would be used for all humanity . The Clinton administration sought to assure the world its power was used in good will .
 As Secretary of State Madeleine Albright observed, the U.S. was the world's ""indispensable power," one that ""stands taller and sees further into the future"
 French foreign minister Hubert Vedrine fretted that the U.S. had become a “hyperpique’, unbalanced by other international actors . Vedrine: The United States has become a "hyperpuissance"
 The U.S. was at peace and enjoyed good relations with all major centers of world power, including Russia and China . The United States had good relations in Europe, Japan and Russia, but also with China and Russia .
 The U.S. has long possessed an ambivalent and selective attitude toward multilateral cooperation . It's a function of its overwhelming power, its exceptionalist political traditions, and its constitutional separation of powers .
 From the presidency of Franklin D Roosevelt, the United States had promoted international institutions as the foundation for U.S. global leadership . Yet, from the . presidency of the . president of Franklin . Roosevelt, he said, that international institutions were a foundation for global leadership.
 From the moment it assumed office, the Bush administration signaled its desire to escape from historical constraints . From the start of his presidency, George W Bush signaled his desire to . escape from these historical constraints.
 The new president presided over an administration deeply skeptical of the U.N. and other standing international organizations, alliances and treaties .
 The attacks of September 11, 2001 accentuated these instincts, 15 reinforcing the administration's insistence on absolute freedom of action to defend national security . The attacks on 9/11 reinforced these instincts .
 In an age of catastrophic threats, other countries or international organizations could not be permitted to limit America's use of its massive military capabilities . The U.S. should not be allowed to limit its military capabilities, the author says .
 The rise of mass casualty terrorism and the proliferation of WMD means dangers could arise with little warning from non-state actors . The proliferation of weapons means traditional models of deterrence are obsolete .
 The time-consuming process of multilateral diplomacy became a luxury the U.S. could no longer afford . Consequently the United States no longer could afford multilateral diplomatic work .
 The new threat environment required a new national security strategy based on anticipation, speed, and flexibility . By erasing the comforts of time and distance, the threat environment needed a new strategy .
 The Causes and Consequences of U.S. Ambivalence,"" in Stewart Patrick and Shepard Forman , Multilateralism and United States Foreign Policy: Ambivalent Engagement , 1-44 .
 Bush administration's 2002 National Security Strategy explicitly articulated a new doctrine of unilateral ""pre-emption,"" expanding traditional conceptions of imminence to include emerging catastrophic threats . The Bush administration expanded the doctrine of "pre-empt"
 In effect, the new strategy embraced a doctrine not of ""pre-emption"" in the classic sense (as an enemy prepares to strike), but rather a doctrine of preventive war . The new strategy is not of "pre-empting" as an enemy is preparing to strike, but
 The administration seemed to be challenging international order, declaring itself unbound by traditional constraints on the use of force . The administration seems to have challenged international order .
 Russia would lead a global democratic revolution, says Putin . Russia would serve as the unilateral guarantor of world order, he says . Putin: "Russia would lead the world to a democratic revolution"
 The Bush administration's grand strategy was, in effect, one of Wilsonianism without international institutions . Bush administration: "Wilsonianism" is Wilsonianist without international organizations .
 The unilateralist thrust in U.S. foreign policy, especially the controversial doctrine of ""pre-emption,"" was deeply unsettling across the globe . The doctrine of "pre-empt" is deeply unsettling .
 Iraq crisis of 2002-2003 damaged international confidence in U.S. hegemony . Iraq crisis damaged confidence in a benevolent U.N. hegemony, author says .
 Operation Iraqi Freedom was launched after failing to secure UN Security Council approval for military action to end Iraq's suspected WMD program . The U.S. and coalition partners launched the operation in response to past UNSC resolutions on Iraq's WMD .
 On March 19, 2003, they invaded Iraq, despite the objections of close postwar allies like Germany and France . The U.S. invaded Iraq in 2003, despite objections from allies like France and Germany .
 The collapse of Security Council diplomacy reinforced Bush administration skepticism of UN-centered collective security . Many abroad doubt that Washington would accept any constraints on its power .
 It was unacceptable abroad, suggesting an America that wanted to ""rule,"" but not be bound by rules . The U.S. wants to "rule," but not "bound by rules," says Obama .
 It was also unsustainable at home, promising to entangle the United States in unending overseas adventures that required it to bear disproportionate costs and risks . The U.S. should not be entangling itself in unnecessary overseas adventures .
 Despite its instincts, the Bush administration returned to the United Nations repeatedly over the next several years . The U.N. helped in the stabilization and recovery of Iraq, but also to address multiple trouble spots throughout the world .
 Bush administration's distinct approach to multilateral cooperation itself . More enduring, arguably, was the Bush administration itself . The Bush administration has been criticized for its foreign policy approach .
 The administration preferred a selective and limited form of collective action, including the use of ""coalitions of the willing"" that could coalesce for discrete purposes .
 Bush administration believed multilateralism must be a means to concrete foreign policy ends, not an end in itself . Multilateralism is a means of foreign policy, but not a means in itself, as liberal internationalists believed .
 The administration regarded many standing international institutions, including the United Nations, as hopelessly dysfunctional, given to lowest common denominator policymaking and reflecting a consensus often at odds with United States interests or ideals .
 Conservatives within the administration regarded ""unaccountable" international institutions and the expanding reach of international law as a growing threat to U.S. sovereignty and the supremacy of the Constitution . Third, conservatives in the administration believed international institutions were responsible for the rise in international law .
 America's traditional multilateral alliances, notably NATO, were of dwindling utility, given widening asymmetries in military and technological capabilities between the U.S. and its allies .
 Bush administration was convinced that unilateralism could, at times, be an essential catalyst for effective multilateral action .
 Bush administration believed multilateralism was most successful when it reflected a true convergence of interests and values . Bush administration: Multilateralism is most successful if it reflects a true converging of interests .
 State Department policy planning chief Richard N Haass termed an ""a la carte"" approach . The U.S. should take a more flexible and opportunistic approach to addressing specific challenges, he says .
 Proliferation Security Initiative interdicts shipments of weapons of mass destruction and related technology . U.S. leadership led the initiative to interdict shipments of such technology . The initiative was a voluntary effort under U.N. leadership to stop proliferation .
 Central components of this strategy included a return to multilateral cooperation and the management of transnational problems . The strategy includes the peaceful accommodation of rising powers and the modernization of international institutions .
 His approach presumed an enduring role for U.S. leadership, but placed less emphasis on the pursuit of American primacy .
 Obama's strategy reflected new geopolitical realities of the twenty-first century, says Obama . Obama: "I'm not going to back down, but I'm going to make a difference"
 Economic and political power is diffusing, particularly to fast-growing emerging nations . China, India, Brazil, Russia, Turkey, and others are among the countries with growing economies .
 By 2010, the developing world was, for the first time, responsible for nearly half of all global economic activity . By 2025, its share may exceed 60 per cent .
 Power, of course, has multiple dimensions, making power analysis a tricky business . Power analysis is a tricky thing to do, especially when it comes to power analysis .
 On nearly all of these measures, U.S. power has declined in the past twenty years since the end of the Cold War . The United States has declined on nearly all measures, including power .
 When it comes to military might, it's true that the United States retains overwhelming advantages . The U.S. has overwhelming advantages in the Middle East, says CNN.com .
 In 2009, U.S. defense expenditures represented 43 per cent of the world's total, six and a half times what China was spending . China is the only major competitor to the United States .
 When it comes to economic power, the world is clearly multipolar, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The world is "clearly multipolar," says Sutter. Sutter, who says the world has a "multimolar" economy .
 In 2009 the EU possessed the world's largest economy as measured in nominal United States dollars, with a gross domestic product of $16,447 billion . The United States at $14,119 billion, Japan at $5,068 billion, and China at $4,984
 The United States often struggles to translate technological dominance into desired outcomes . But even within the military sphere the U.S. often struggles with technological dominance .
 A case in point is the decade-long US-led counterinsurgency and nation-building effort in Afghanistan . The US has been involved in the country's anti-terror efforts since 2001 .
 Changing nature of world politics has complicated U.S. relational power, says CNN's John Sutter . The changing nature of the world politics is complicated, he says .
 International relations shifts from great power competition to management of transnational issues . Success requires cooperation among multiple actors, success requires cooperation from multiple actors .
 At a minimum, emerging market economies retain impressive ""blocking" power . Emerging market economies have impressive "blocking power," say experts .
 Institutionalized multilateral cooperation helps level the playing field by devaluing and delegitimizing the brute exercise of power . Multilateral cooperation is increasingly required to address issues from climate to trade, authors say .
 As conceived by the late political economist Susan Strange, ""structural power” is the ability to define the global context in which other countries operate . The late economist's idea was that a country can define its global context .
 The United States depended on massive credit from China to cover enormous U.S. current account deficits and to maintain the role of the beleaguered dollar as the world's main reserve currency . China's credit helped to cover the United States current account deficit .
 America's soft power, so celebrated in the immediate aftermath of the Cold War, may also be a dwindling asset . Soft power is a fading asset in the United States, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The coercive turn in U.S. foreign policy during the Bush administration is partly to blame for damaging the United States ""brand,"" as well as discrediting United States global efforts to promote democracy and human rights around the world .
 The U.S. economic model has been badly tarnished by the global economic crisis that began in autumn 2008 . Likewise, the long-running Washington consensus has also been badly damaged .
 The domestic foundations of U.S. global leadership have eroded since the end of the Cold War . The country's global leadership, economic and political leadership, has eroded since that end of Cold War, authors say .
 Historically, the USled liberal world order has depended on U.S. willingness to provide global public goods, from open world economy to stable and secure oil supplies . The US has been seen as a key part of the world's liberal liberal order, which is dependent on the United States
 America's parlous fiscal situation is likely to encourage a period of retrenchment in U.S. global engagement . America's fiscal situation, however, is unlikely to encourage an end to the era of perceived overstretch .
 Domestic political dynamics will likewise complicate U.S. leadership, given the collapse of the post-1945 internationalist consensus and toxic levels of partisanship within the United States Congress and broader polity . Domestic political dynamic will also complicate United States leadership .
 In the coming decades, the world order problem will shift from harnessing U.S. power, to managing relative United States decline . In the future, the problem will be managing relative U.N. decline, experts say .
 The trick will be to do so while preserving the stability of the Western liberal order the U.S. and its allies endeavored to promote and protect for six. and a half decades .
 Effective multilateral cooperation in the twenty-first century will depend on mutual accommodation between established and rising powers on the basic norms and rules of international conduct . The strategic challenge of integrating rising powers will be the challenge of integration .
 Integrating emerging players as ""responsible stakeholders" was apparent in the determination of House Republicans to cut U.S. foreign aid, as well as contributions to international organizations .
 See Mary Beth Cheridan, "House Moves to Restrict United States Foreign Aid," Washington Post, July 21, 2011 .
 established and rising powers are often locked in strategic competition and fundamental clashes of interest . First, established powers often clash with each other, first, and second .
 This duality of great power relations is most obvious in Sino-American relations . China's relationship with the U.S. is one of the world's most powerful countries .
 The two nations hold incompatible visions for the future of East Asian security . One predicated on Chinese dominance, the other on a balance of power .
 Emerging powers are determined to test, dilute, and revise existing principles, norms, rules, and institutions to suit their values, interests, and preferences . Emerging powers do not share Western views on global order, not entirely, and are testing, diluting, and diluting existing principles
 The Cold War U.S. could be confident of normative solidarity within its broad ""Free World" coalition . Today's rising powers are at least moderately revisionist in outlook, and intent on being rulemakers .
 They don't recognize the authority of the U.S. to define what constitutes responsible behavior . Nor do they recognize U.K. or the wider ""West" to define "responsible" behavior .
 One should not expect emerging countries to endorse a US, or even a broadly Western agenda, simply out of gratitude for being able to join those exclusive clubs and have a seat at the table .
 Cooperation may be especially difficult between established democracies and authoritarian regimes like China, or quasi-authoritarian ones like Russia . Cooperation may not be easy for established democracies to meet authoritarian regimes .
 A crude analogy might be with the nineteenth-century Concert of Europe, which involved not simply a multipolar balance of power, but a balance of rights, satisfactions, and responsibilities among major players . A system capable of bridging differences in domestic regime type and political values, such as
 Rising powers are more inclined to enjoy the privileges than shoulder the obligations of power . Third, rising powers are less inclined to shoulder the burden of power. Third, they are more likely to enjoy privileges than responsibilities .
 Their status as developing countries reinforces an instinct to free ride on the contributions of established nations, including the United States, Europe, and Japan . Developed countries are less likely to rely heavily on established nations' contributions .
 They seek entree into, and weight within, the major decision-making forums of international life, from the IMF to the UNSC to the G20 . They are status conscious, and seek entry into, or weight, within, major decision making forums such as the IMF .
 At the same time, they are preoccupied with enormous internal development challenges, including bringing tens or hundreds of millions of citizens out of grinding poverty .
 They naturally resist commitments, such as binding greenhouse gas emissions reductions . They might constrain or jeopardize their growth prospects and social welfare goals, they say . They say .
 Emerging powers lack objective capacity to exercise leadership, adequate regulatory capacity to meet international obligations, or military assets to help guarantee global security . In some cases, emerging powers are lacking objective capacity, regulatory capacity, and military assets .
 The tumultuous internal politics of many emerging powers can hinder cooperation with established powers . Political leaders seek to reconcile multilateral agenda with complex domestic bargains and the volatile force of nationalism .
 A common commitment to democracy provides no guarantee of smooth cooperation with established Western powers, says Russia . Russia says it is committed to democracy, but democracy is not a guarantee for smooth cooperation .
 Some of the most robust developing world democracies are also leaders of blocs such as the G77 and the Non-Aligned Movement . Their ideologies put them at frequent loggerheads with Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development nations .
 The fact that today's rising powers are revisionist rather than revolutionary offers grounds to hope that the coming era will see gradual adjustments to the status quo, instead of a frontal assault on the existing order .
 Given the diversity of interests and identities of the world's emerging powers, we are unlikely to witness the consolidation of a single, coherent, counterhegemonic bloc . We will not see a single coherent, coherent bloc of counter hegemonic powers .
 Emerging countries will continue to coalesce into more flexible ""minilateral" associations and forums to pursue particular interests . Emerging countries have already coalesced into the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, South Africa) grouping, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization .
 Integration of rising powers will require difficult negotiations to adapt existing international institutions to newcomers .
 Global institutions are notoriously resistant to change, thanks to the vested interests of current power-wielders . Global institutions, such as the U.S. government, are resistant to the idea of change . The world's most powerful institutions, including the United States, are often resistant to
 The first of these calls for the smallest possible grouping; the second, the most representative body possible; and the third, a membership that shares a similar normative outlook . The first calls for a smaller possible grouping . The second calls for an even more representative body .
 In the wake of the global financial crisis, there has been some modest adaptation of institutional arrangements governing the world economy .
 The most significant of these is the elevation of the Group of Twenty to the leaders' level, and its designation as the ""premier forum"" for global economic coordination . The most important of these are the elevation to the leadership level .
 The G20 is the only international body in which the world's most important established and rising powers meet exclusively at the highest level in a situation of formal equality . It is arguably the most important innovation in global governance since the end of the Cold War era .
 G20 members have also agreed to modest adjustments to seats on the executive boards of international financial institutions . The adjustments will benefit major emerging economies, to the benefit of emerging economies .
 The United Nations Security Council is the world's primary body for international peace and security . Permanent membership of the U.N. Security Council has not changed since 1945 .
 Barring a cataclysm such as a world war or nuclear use, reallocating influence within the UNSC will be an uphill struggle . The UNSC is a powerful body of power in the world, but it is unlikely to change that .
 China and Russia oppose any new permanent UNSC members . The U.S. remains ambivalent at best, despite its determination to integrate rising powers .
 U.S. officials acknowledge that the Council is increasingly removed from global power realities, threatening its long-term credibility and perceived legitimacy . On the one hand, United States .
 The administration remains skeptical that any conceivable enlargement would be in the U.S. national interest . Even if it were, the United States could possibly bring it about, he says .
 U.S. would need to be confident that any expansion would be modest in size, and that any new members would be prepared to accept the weighty responsibilities of defending global peace and security .
 The declining incidence of war between states and within them has been one of the most noteworthy trends since the end of the Cold War . War between states is extremely rare, but within them is also rare .
 Globally, the number of armed conflicts peaked in 1992, following the collapse of the Soviet Union, at more than fifty . Globally there were more than 50 armed conflicts in the 1990s and 2000s .
 By 2010 analysts recorded only thirty active armed conflicts in some twenty-five locations . It has since fallen steeply, so that by 2010 there were no active conflicts .
 The average intensity of violence has also declined in Iraq and Afghanistan . Iraq has seen a decline in actual battle deaths .
 Armed violence declined from 16 active conflicts in 1998, to only eight in 2010, in sub-Saharan Africa . Sub-Saharan African armed violence has declined from sixteen active conflicts to just eight .
 At the same time, nearly a third were internationalized —involving the presence of foreign or international troops assisting one or both of the parties to the conflict . Nearly a third of the conflict was internationalized .
 Operation Enduring Freedom sought to bolster the government of President Hamid Karzai against the Taliban . The African Union Mission in Somalia sought to protect the Somali government from al-Shabaab extremists .
 Analysts have proposed several hypotheses for the declining incidence of intrastate war . Analysts propose several theories as to explain the decline in the incidence of war .
 These include rising levels of economic development, the end of Cold War proxy wars, and the actions of the international community .
 The most important factor may well be an extraordinary surge in international security activism, particularly through the United Nations . The U.N. has played a key role in the rise in security activism .
 UN and non-UN mandated peace operations tripled between 1988 and 2008 . Surge of UNSC Chapter VII resolutions from zero to forty between 1989 and 2009 . Increase in multilateral sanctions regimes from 1991 to 2008 .
 The structure of world politics has changed since the end of the Cold War, but in many respects also its substance . Transnational threats and security interdependence are key issues in the world's security systems . The U.S. has been in touch with the Middle East since the Cold
 For centuries, the primary focus of international security has been managing the balance of power among the world's leading nations . This is particularly during periods of rapid power transition, such as rapid power transitions .
 The imperative has not disappeared, as persistent frictions between the U.S. and China have not disappeared . China and Japan are key allies in the Middle East . The United States and China are the world's two largest economies . Japan and the United States are the two biggest economies in
 These cross-border concerns include terrorism, crime, and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction . These threats include terrorism and crime, as well as terrorism and terrorism without a threatener .
 This new threat environment poses fundamentally different strategic challenges to the world's leading states than management of global and regional balances of power . This is a different strategic challenge to the leaders of the world, leading states, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Major powers also find themselves coping with new logics of security interdependence . While zero-sum competition persists in some areas, major powers also cope with it .
 Guy Fawkes's efforts to blow up the Houses of Parliament were thwarted . Gavrilo Princip's assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand was the result of a plot to advance political agendas .
 What has changed is the potential scale of such attacks, and the sweeping objectives of some perpetrators, some say . The threat of such a terrorist attack has never been seen in the past, it has been said .
 Terrorist groups have emerged that aspire not merely to local goals, but to undermine global order and transform the international system . Terrorists have emerged in the form of groups that aspire to undermine the global order, transform the world .
 The diffusion of new technologies of mass destruction could provide them with the means to accomplish their ends . Simultaneously, the diffusion of . new technologies . could provide . the means of . accomplishing their ends, experts say .
 Despite the death of its leader Osama bin Laden in spring 2011, al Qaeda remains the most dangerous transnational terrorist group ever known . Al Qaeda is the most powerful transnational terror group in the world .
 Since 9/11, al Qaeda has evolved from a hierarchical organization into a looser network of affiliates and franchises . Al Qaeda has cells in scores of countries worldwide, including scores of nations .
 The experience of 9/11 illustrated how damaging even a conventional attack by a modern terrorist group could be . It is difficult for even the world's most powerful state to respond to such asymmetric threats, experts say .
 Bin Laden boasted that 9/11 had cost the terrorist group just $500,000 to pull off, yet cost the U.S. economy some $500 billion . The United States economy is worth more than $1 billion more than al Qaeda is worth .
 Were al Qaeda to gain access to, or develop, WMD capability, the implications for global security could be catastrophic, particularly given the lack of a clear ""return address" which could render traditional strategies of deterrence irrelevant .
 The proliferation of nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons poses perhaps the greatest threat to global security in the early twentieth century . Beyond the terrorist threat, the proliferation of nukes and biological weapons poses a great threat to world security .
 Contrary to the dire expectations several decades ago, actual nuclear proliferation to date has been limited . Actual nuclear proliferation has to date been limited.
 The United States, China, Russia, France, France and the UK have all developed nuclear weapons capability . Only four states have developed this capability .
 The development of nuclear weapons by Iran and North Korea threatens to set off regional arms races . North Korea and Iran are developing nuclear weapons, threatening to trigger regional arms wars .
 Exploitation of nuclear energy raises problems of misuse of dualuse technology and diversion of fissile materials . Exploiting nuclear energy could be a problem for future nuclear power users .
 Today, some forty-nine nations possess the know-how to produce nuclear weapons . Some of the world's most powerful nations are believed to have nuclear arms .
 Even if most states' intentions are peaceful, the spread of nuclear technology could present opportunities for sophisticated terrorist groups such as al Qaeda to pursue their nuclear ambitions .
 Biological weapons could still kill people on a massive scale, cripple public health systems, induce widespread fear, and cause catastrophic economic shocks . Although likely to be less devastating than nuclear terrorism, biological weapons, including "designer bugs,"" could kill people .
 Naturally occurring pathogens are also capable of generating global public health crises . Of course, naturally occurring pathogens can also be generating global crises .
 HIV/AIDS has claimed some 30 million lives over the past 30 years, and continues to infect more than 6,500 new victims per day . 42 is the most prominent example of the disease's prevalence in the world .
 Rapid-onset, short-wave pandemics, of which influenza is the most serious, are most serious . Potentially scarier are rapid-onsets, such as influenza .
 Medical experts concur that with the right mutation, a major flu pandemic could kill tens of millions of people worldwide . The right mutation could cause a prolonged global economic crisis .
 The dire consequences of global warming are likely to include melting of polar ice caps and dramatic rises in sea levels, extreme weather patterns, desertification, water shortages and famine .
 While some regions may benefit from climate change, these are likely to be dwarfed at the global level by negative effects . Climate change will be 'deteriorated' at global level, according to scientists .
 Avoiding the worst consequences of a warming planet will require dramatic cuts in greenhouse gases and major investments in adaptation, neither of which appears on the immediate horizon .
 Deepening security, economic, and ecological interdependence is transforming the nature of world politics . It is increasing incentives for cooperative problem-solving to address mutual vulnerabilities . The U.S. needs to work together to address global vulnerabilities .
 It refers to pragmatic problem-solving, through both formal and informal structures . It refers rather to pragmatic problems solving, rather than formal structures .
 World politics has come to focus less on great power rivalry than on the spillover consequences of venal or dysfunctional governance in the developing world . The persistence of autocracies and the specter of failing states is the reason for failing states .
 The frustrating vitality of authoritarian regimes and the failure and collapse of other states have become major threats to global order . Authoritarian regimes and failure of other countries have become threats to the world's stability, says David Cameron .
 The road to democracy has proven far bumpier and uneven than many in the West predicted following the collapse of the Berlin Wall . In fact, democracy has proved far more uneven than West predicted after the collapse .
 In country after country, politicians have exploited electoral processes to subvert constitutional liberalism, including the rule of law and basic human rights, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: Politicians are exploiting electoral processes, only to then govern in an autocratic fashion .
 The hard lesson, as Fareed Zakaria observed, is that democracy is no guarantee of liberty . Democracy is not a guarantee of freedom, he says .
 Freedom House says global freedom has declined for the fifth year in a row . Freedom House: Global freedom declined for fifth consecutive year in five years . The Authoritarian Challenge to Democracy , 48: 48: Freedom House .
 Authoritarian rulers everywhere have found support and succor in the examples of the world's most influential autocracies, including China, Russia, and Saudi Arabia . Authoritarism has found support everywhere, including Russia, China, Saudi Arabia and Russia .
 India, Brazil, and South Africa have shied away from criticizing authoritarian tendencies of autocratic leaders such as Robert Mugabe or the repressive Burmese junta .
 They ignore their brutality on grounds of Third World solidarity and postcolonial respect for the internal sovereignty of fellow developing countries, they say .
 Students of international relations have conceived of world politics as an ""anarchical,"" Hobbesian realm, in contrast to the relative stability of the sovereign domestic political arena . Historically, students have thought world politics was an anarchy .
 The locus of instability and violent conflict has shifted from the interstate to the intrastate realm . Put simply, it has shifted the region's instability from interstate to interstate, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Since 1991, the world has experienced very little warfare among states, but high levels of internal conflict and civil war . The world has seen little war since 1991, but has seen high internal conflict, civil war and internal conflict .
 Some 4 million people may have died of war-related causes since 1997, including four million in the Democratic Republic of the Congo . These include protracted situations of often brutal violence such as the DRC .
 Internal conflict remains a central preoccupation of the UN Security Council . Nevertheless, internal conflict remains an important issue for the council .
 As of 2010, the United Nations had some 100,000 troops in 16 peace operations around the globe . The U.N. is the second-largest globally deployed armed force after the United States .
 The ""failed state"" phenomenon first rose to international prominence in the early 1990s, in the wake of the collapse of Somalia, the dissolution of Yugoslavia and the horrific genocide in Rwanda .
 During the 1990s, the West's primary preoccupation with such states was humanitarian—a desire to alleviate human suffering . The West's preoccupations were primarily humanitarian, the author says .
 This strategic calculus changed fundamentally following the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001 . The U.S. government has been in touch with the world's most powerful institutions since 2001 .
 A1 Qaeda was able to launch the most devastating assault on the United States in U.S. history from Afghanistan, one of the world's poorest and most wretched countries . A1 al Qaeda launched the assault in Afghanistan from the country's poorest country .
 In recent years, senior UN officials have depicted state failure as the Achilles heel of global collective security . UN reform initiatives have underscored the need for effective, sovereign states to contend with today's transnational dangers .
 Much of the focus of global collective security has shifted from counterbalancing potentially aggressive powers, to assisting fragile, conflict-affected countries in achieving effective statehood .
 Regional and subregional organizations as frameworks for collective action in addressing this new global agenda . The rise of regionalism is one of the most dramatic changes of the last two decades has been the rise of the regional movement .
 Regional integration is most pronounced in Europe, where European Union member states have pooled sovereignty in unprecedented degrees . European Union members have pooled their sovereignty to ensure sovereignty is pooled in unprecedented ways .
 This includes the adoption by a majority of EU states of economic and monetary union, and the movement, still formative, toward a common foreign and security policy . The EU's movement is seen as a formative but formative approach to foreign policy .
 European integration remains an historic achievement in a region that for centuries witnessed recurrent, bloody struggles for continental hegemony . Despite the 2010-11 eurozone crisis, European integration is a historic achievement . European integration has been a struggle for continental dominance for centuries .
 Beyond Europe, regionalism is most developed in East Asia, which boasts a bewildering array of regional and subregional bodies to advance political, security, and economic cooperation .
 In the wake of the Asian financial crisis of 1997, East Asian countries embraced the Chiang Mai Initiative, as a form of self-insurance against volatile capital flows . The initiative was set up in the aftermath of the financial crisis .
 In the Western Hemisphere, the Organization of American States continues to be the most encompassing regional body . In the U.S. it is the most comprehensive body in the world .
 South American states are building economic and security links through the Common Market of the South and the Union of South American Nations . Hugo Chavez of Venezuela has sought to organize a populist grouping, the Bolivarian Alternative for the Americas .
 African Union has given way to the African Union and its regional economic communities . Africa's dysfunctional Organization of African Unity has become a model for the continent's economic community .
 AU has embraced an ambitious mandate for regional peace and security . The AU has a doctrine of ""non-indifference"" to undemocratic transfers of power .
 At the same time, the AU lacks the robust capabilities and often the political will to put its ambitions into practice . The AU lacks a robust capabilities, and often, to put it into practice.
 "The emergence of regional and subregional organizations is a positive development. Generally speaking, the emergence is a good development," says the author .
 Chapter VIII of the UN Charter clearly envisioned a role for such bodies, which may be more effective vehicles for addressing transnational problems and providing global public goods . The UN Charter envisioned such bodies as such as UN bodies .
 The members of regional organizations may face similar threats, have more at stake with a given challenge, possess closer cultural ties, and have longer histories of cooperation . The region's regional organizations face similar challenges, but have longer history of cooperation.
 Regionalism can provide a building block for more effective global governance . Regionalism allows for useful divisions of labor with more encompassing institutions, says David Cameron .
 Regional bodies can also increase the risk of global fragmentation into competing political, economic and security blocs . Regional bodies create tensions with universal, treaty-based multilateral institutions, ranging from the WTO to the U.N.
 Regional and subregional organizations also vary enormously in their capabilities and perceived legitimacy . Regional and regional organizations vary enormously .
 At times, burden sharing may become ""burden shifting,"" as universal bodies like the United Nations slough off responsibilities to entities (say, say, AU) that may be unprepared to fulfill mandates .
 Such bodies also run the risk of being dominated by regional power centers, such as China in East Asia, India in South Asia, Brazil in South America, or South Africa in sub-Saharan Africa . Such bodies could also be dominated by power centers such as South Africa or China .
 Despite these risks, regionalism seems destined to grow as an international force . Regionalism seems to be destined to be a force in the Middle East .
 Since the end of the Cold War, however, it has come under significant stress . The U.S. has been in a state of war with Russia since 1989 .
 To be sure, sovereignty has never been sacrosanct, and has often been violated in practice . "Sovereign" has been a thorny part of the U.S. government, but it's not always been a good thing .
 Many weak and failing states lack de facto sovereignty, finding themselves unable to marshal the capacity or legitimacy to translate their legal status into effective action . And yet, as the preceding section noted, many weak states lack the capacity to translate that status into action .
 Over the past two decades, the international community has devoted hundreds of billions of dollars to advance state-building in the developing world . The international community is spending hundreds of billion of dollars on state building .
 Beyond Afghanistan and Iraq, these efforts have ranged from East Timor to Liberia, to Haiti .
 Globalization testing capabilities of all states, including the most powerful, to control flows across their borders . Second, globalization is testing all states' capabilities, including those of all powerful .
 The past two decades have seen an explosion of cross-border transactions, driven largely by private corporations . Private corporations and other non-state actors are responsible for the transactions .
 States are struggling to cope with the swelling volume and accelerating velocity of the movements of goods, capital, technology, ideas and people . States are also struggling with the growing volume of goods and capital .
 Countries are entering into new bilateral and multilateral arrangements to manage risks ranging from financial instability, to transnational terrorism, narcotics production, WMD proliferation, and infectious disease .
 Some states are choosing to pool or delegate sovereign rights in return for the benefits of multilateral cooperation . Third, some states may choose pooling or delegating sovereign rights to cooperate with others .
 The author assisted in drafting as a member of the State Department Policy Planning Staff . "Existing Rights, Evolving Responsibilities,"""" is the result of a State Department report .
 All states face a basic conundrum of how much freedom of action and policy autonomy to relinquish in return for the benefits of multilateral cooperation . But all states face the conundrum: How much freedom to take control of policy and action is to give up?
 The United States has been among the most resistant to delegating sovereignty to international bodies and treaties . The U.S. has a tradition of ""exceptionalism'' and unique constitutional structure .
 Under the Chemical Weapons Convention, the U.S. has accepted an intrusive inspection regime that requires it to open its military installations and private industry facilities to international scrutiny .
 Under the World Trade Organization, the United States has accepted to submit any trade complaints to a binding dispute settlement mechanism, foreswearing unilateral action . The United States will not take unilateral action under the WTO, foreshining unilateral action.
 Fourth, and most dramatically, the past two decades have seen renewed debates over the limits of sovereignty . Fourth, most notably, has seen renewed debate over the limit of sovereignty in the world .
 There is an increasing tendency to treat it as something not absolute, but contingent on whether the state meets fundamental obligations . The state must meet fundamental obligations, both to its own citizens, and to wider international society .
 From the very foundation of the United Nations, there has been a tension between state sovereignty and non-intervention . The UN's parallel concern (embodied in the Charter, and also in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights) with the dignity and freedom of the individual .
 The contingency of state sovereignty is clearest in the rise of a new norm, the so-called ""responsibility to protect" UN member states unanimously endorsed at the UN World Summit in September 2005 . UN member countries unanimously endorsed the new norm in 2005 .
 ""R2P” establishes that each state has an unconditional obligation to prevent atrocities from being committed against its inhabitants . The norm was intended to help prevent future Rwandas, Srebrenicas, and Kosovos .
 Each UN member state has an obligation to protect citizens from genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity, and ethnic cleansing . The UN has a responsibility to protect people from genocide .
 The concept recognizes that sovereignty is, in effect, contingent, dependent on the state's fulfillment of these fundamental obligations . At the same time, the concept recognizes sovereignty is dependent on state's commitment to these obligations .
 When a government fails to discharge those obligations, the responsibility to protect its citizens is transferred to the international community . The international community may take a variety of actions, including resorting to military force, to protect citizens .
 The international community continues to struggle with transforming the responsibility to protect into an operational norm . International community struggles with transforming responsibility into a normal norm .
 The United Nations has placed much of its practical focus on capacity building, in accordance with the principle of state responsibility . To preserve the fragile consensus, and in the face of considerable ""buyers' remorse"" from some member states, the United Nations .
 What the international community has not yet done is to establish a clear threshold and triggering mechanism for launching more coercive interventions when states fail to meet their obligations . The international community needs to set a threshold and trigger mechanism to launch more coercive intervention, the UN says .
 UNSC Resolution 1973 of March 2011 authorized the creation of a ""no-fly zone"" and the use of ""all necessary means" to protect civilians from the threat of atrocities at the hands of Libyan leader Qaddafi .
 Carr indicted the statesmen of the interwar years for neglecting the centrality of power in world politics, and for falling prey to utopian thinking . Carr: The statesmen were neglected by the power of the U.S. by neglecting its centrality in politics .
 Carr understood the power of morality and idealism in international politics . Carr was no pure realist, for he understood morality, idealism and morality .
 In the two decades since the end of the Cold War, the world has experienced massive geopolitical, technological, economic, and normative shifts . In the past 20 years, Russia has emerged as the dominant superpower in the world .
 The U.S. embraced a privileged position as a benevolent global hegemon, inspiring many other countries to bandwagon with it, rather than oppose it . Immediately following the collapse of the Soviet Union, the United States embraced its privileged position .
 The result was a brief window of unchallenged United States primacy, at a time of deepening global interdependence . The result of the U.S. primacy is a brief period of unchalenged primacy .
 By the second decade of the new millennium, the structure and nature of world politics had altered . The structure of the world politics has altered. By the end of the decade, the world had changed.
 New centers of world power have risen, potentially challenging the US-led, Western liberal order . New centers could challenge the US led by the world's most powerful institutions .
 Traditional warfare, both interstate and intrastate, had declined dramatically . On the positive side, traditional warfare had declined significantly .
 Rapid technological change and deepening interdependence had transformed the global security agenda, enabling transnational threats . Rapid technological changes enabled WMD proliferation, pandemic disease, climate change, and climate change .
 Once-hoped-for worldwide democratic revolution had stalled, leaving authoritarian and failing states populating much of the developing world . Meanwhile, the once-hop hoped for worldwide democracy had stalled . Many of the world's most failed states are authoritarian states .
 Coping with this daunting agenda will require reinvigorating multilateral cooperation . Coping will require re-invigorating cooperation, says UN expert .
 One approach is to retool and reform international institutions -- always an arduous task, in the best of circumstances . The U.N. should retool international institutions and reform the world's most powerful institutions .
 New ways to generate global public goods and mitigate global 'bads' is to experiment with new forms of collective action . Another way is to use ad hoc arrangements or new standing regional and subregional organizations .
 Third is to negotiate new legal norms and principles to make state sovereignty conditional on the discharge of certain fundamental obligations . And a third is to renegotiate legal norms for state sovereignty to make it less dependent on foreign intervention .
 The world of the twenty-first century is quite different than Carr's day, of course . Carr's career is over and over, but the world is changing rapidly .
 Contemporary statesmen and women, no less than their predecessors, face the challenge of negotiating rapid power transitions, finding common ground amid competing interests and preferences .
 In navigating this age of turbulence, they too must strike a balance between world as it is, and world as they would have it be . In navigating the world as well as the world, they also must strike balance .
 National capabilities shape the behavior of states and determine the outcomes of their interactions as each pursues its national interests in the absence of world government . National capabilities, they maintained, shape the behaviour of states .
 Carr, Hans Morgenthau, and others of the early postwar years, had little to offer beyond a conceptual framework and maxims for the conduct of foreign affairs . Carr and Morgenthalau had little . to offer .
 Use of force is not associated with particular forms of government or economic systems . National leaders must respond to the constraints imposed by the global distribution of power . The use of force should not be associated with specific forms of governments, says David Cameron .
 Even the actions of a country with purely defensive motives may have violent consequences . Others may be unsure its intentions are peaceful . The actions may have a violent consequences because others may not believe its intentions .
 The solution is a self-organizing balance of power, with networks of alliances to preserve the independence of states while minimizing armed conflict . The solution to conflict is to have self-organized balance-of-power, say experts .
 Waltz relied on historical examples to illustrate his arguments . Waltz, like his predecessors, used examples of historical examples .
 Today, liberal rather than realist theories dominate research on the causes of war in political science . Theories dominate research into causes of wars .
 Social scientific studies show that democracies are democracies . The author would like to thank Margit Bussmann, Karl DeRouen, Michael Mousseau and Bruce Russett for their helpful comments .
 John R Oneal unlikely to fight one another; and economic interdependence, too, increases the prospects for peace . John R. Oneal said: 'I'm not fighting one another. I'm not going to be fighting for peace'
 Democracy and trade have effects at least as great as those of power and alliances . They are more amenable to manipulation than those of alliances and power, says Julian Zelizer .
 These conclusions are based on quantitative studies of many pairs of states through time . These conclusions have been made by quantitative studies on pairs of state pairs .
 By considering virtually all countries for more than a century, these analyses have great statistical power . By considering nearly all of the world's most recent history, the analysis can be used to make a point .
 In the next section I review the pre-eminent position of realism twenty years ago, and discuss the reasons for its decline . The next section we discuss the decline of realism in realism .
 Liberalism has dominated the discourse over the past ten years, says Julian Zelizer . Then he provides evidence that liberalism has dominated discourse for the last ten years .
 New analyses of 12,000 pairs of states over the period 1885-2001, using the same statistical techniques employed by medical epidemiologists . The results indicate the contributions democracy and interdependence make in reducing the risk of war .
 These tests are conducted using a liberal-realist model of armed interstate conflict that incorporates key elements from both schools of thought . The tests are based on a liberal, realist model .
 Key elements of realism also receive support in these analyses, but realism does not provide a path to world peace . Realism is not the only solution to the problem of world peace, authors say .
 The best hope is continued liberal reforms, including the expansion of democracy and capitalism . The inclusion of more countries in the international economic system is key to success, says Julian Zelizer .
 Globalization has advanced rapidly in recent decades . The prospects for its continued expansion, despite the travails of the Great Recession, are good . Fortunately, the prospects for globalization are good.
 Idealists presented moralistic arguments that inspired efforts to abolish war by international agreement . Realist theories of the causes of war were presented by idealists during the First World War .
 The most widely used international relations text in American colleges is Hans Morgenthau's Power Among Nations . Carr's The Twenty Year Crisis, and the first of many editions of The 20-20 Crisis, were published in the first edition of the book . Carr also wrote The Twenty-20
 Morgenthau's analysis was the inevitability of the quest for power by states wishing to remain independent . He said it was inevitable for states to become independent .
 Morgenthau did not offer a testable theory of world politics, and the ""balance of power"" had many meanings . But Morgenthalau did offer an alternative theory of the world politics .
 Realism was a conceptual framework that oriented study or a paradigm within which advice on foreign affairs could be offered . Realism is the conceptual framework for study or an approach to foreign affairs .
 Its power must be adequate to protect its sovereignty and territorial integrity and promote its national interests, says President Obama . Its power should be adequate, he says .
 The power of potential adversaries is mortally dangerous, and states must be able to mobilize, unilaterally or in combination, power equal or superior to that of its rivals . There is no world government and international law is an empty phrase, because there is no one world government .
 His Theory of International Politics, published in 1979, set the standard against which theoretical works would be judged for a generation . His theory of international politics was published by 1979 .
 Waltz, like Morgenthau, emphasized the importance of the balance of power . He focused on the structure of the international system, not diplomacy and foreign policy . Waltz: "Waltz's focus was on international system"
 In Waltz's neorealism, what matters is the number of great powers and the distribution of militarily relevant capabilities . The film is set to be released in cinemas on September 28 .
 A bipolar system is best because it is simplest, allowing the rivals to focus their attention . It is best for a bipolar system to be the simplest and easiest .
 The danger of war is also reduced by uncertainty about who would win a contest of arms . The risk of war was also reduced when it was uncertain about the outcome .
 Neither state can be confident of victory so, especially with all that is at stake, each will act cautiously . Each state can't be sure of victory, so, it will be cautious .
 The superpowers should also prevent adventurism by small states, fearing that they will be drawn into a costly war . Small states should also avoid being drawn into costly war, experts say .
 Waltz supported his theoretical claims in traditional, humanist fashion, by erudite argument and telling examples . But his historical references were illustrative, not systematically generated or subject to statistical testing . Waltz's historical references are illustrative .
 The importance of realism and Waltz's standing are indicated in a 1990 survey of the field widely used in graduate schools . Waltz is credited with realism realism in the film .
 Norman Angell's view that war in the industrial age is an unprofitable anachronism is briefly discussed in the same section . Angell: War in industrial age war in anachronicity is a profitable and profitable form of war .
 Dougherty and Pfaltzgraff note only in passing that there has never been a war between two democracies . Dougherty: "There has been no war between the two democracies"
 Realism's dominant position twenty years ago is confirmed in a recent review of the quantitative literature published from 1970 to 2000 . Realism was dominant position 20 years ago, according to the review .
 This was the highest percentage for any five-year period over the thirty years examined . Except for 1970-4, when 49 per cent were were were, this was highest percentage .
 Only 16 per cent of the articles, 1985-9, were liberal in theoretical focus, versus 8 per cent in 1970-4 . Only eight per cent were left-leaning in the 1970s-80s .
 Despite realism's success, there was no agreement among realists on key points . Realists are divided on key issues, including how to deal with reality .
 Karl Deutsch and Singer argued that war should be less frequent in multipolar systems than in bipolar ones . Doubts about the advantages of bipolarity had been expressed early on in the world .
 Lenin anticipated the consequences of uneven development, anticipated by Lenin, can be offset by shifting alliances, he says . Then, cross-cutting cleavages are more likely, he writes . Cross-cutting is more likely to be more likely in Russia, he adds .
 There was no consensus on the consequences of an equal balance of power for bilateral relations . Nor was there a consensus regarding the consequences for an equal power .
 Organski, echoing Thucydides and Hobbes, argued that peace, if not justice, is most likely when one state holds a preponderance of power . Waltz believed balanced bipolar systems are most peaceful .
 Organski, like Waltz, was primarily interested in the systemic implications of the bilateral balance between the leading state and potential challengers . He was also interested in looking at the relationship between Russia and Ukraine .
 Because a preponderance of power discourages conflict, a unipolar system is best, he believed . Unipolar systems are best, because they discourage conflict, he said .
 Debates were lively from the 1960s through the 1980s; but disagreement persisted . Debates between the 1960 and 1980s were lively, but disagreements persisted .
 John Mearsheimer has again argued for the greater peacefulness of bipolar systems . In a book that ""ranks with, and in many respects supersedes, the works of Morgenthau and Waltz," he writes . In the book, he argues that bipolar bipolar systems should
 J David Singer, and others of the Correlates of War project, collected information on wars among the major powers after 1815 . They collected information about wars among major powers .
 They focused on the international system, emphasizing the structural conditions within which great powers act . In keeping with the then dominant approach, they focused on international system . The then dominant view was that of great powers acting in the world .
 There was no consistent relationship between the distribution of capabilities and either the frequency or severity of war, the authors say .
 On the Limits and Possibilities of Ethical International Politics , 659. On the limits and Possibles of Ethically International Politics, 659 . The Limits of the Possibilities and Possibility of Ethic International Politics .
 Realism does not meet the standards for a progressive scientific research program . Realism is not the standard for scientific research programs, scientists say . "Realism is a failure to meet the requirements of a progressive science program," scientist says .
 If realists failed to provide convincing answers twenty years ago regarding the causes of war, liberals did no better . Liberals have no better than realists did in the 1980s when they tried to explain why war is war, they say .
 Several quantitative studies sought to determine whether democracies have been more peaceful than nondemocratic states . The results were based on the fact that democracies have more peaceful relations .
 In contrast to Singer etal., these investigators used the individual country, not the international system, as the unit of analysis . They examined the behavior of many countries over time .
 Liberals hypothesized several mechanisms might operate to make democracies more peaceful . Liberals hypothesized that several mechanisms could operate to help make democracies peaceful .
 There might be institutional constraints involving political accountability of democratic leaders, limits on executive power, competitive political parties, and free media . There might also be limits to executive power and competitive parties .
 Democracies might also be more peaceful because non-violent norms of conflict resolution are externalized . Democracies are peaceful because their domestic politics is externalized, says Julian Zelizer .
 The results of these studies, too, were inconclusive; but most failed to find a strong association between democracy and more peaceful foreign policies .
 The ascendance of liberal theory through statistical studies of pairs of states . Recently, there has been rapid progress in research on the causes of war .
 Considering pairs of states eliminates some serious methodological problems . The study was conducted by the University of California, California, in 2007 .
 Systemic studies avoids ecological fallacy that plagued systemic studies . Unlike individual states, it can easily accommodate relational variables like trade, alliances, or balance of power .
 Early works by Solomon Polachek and Bueno de Mesquita were path-breaking, but Stuart Bremer's research in the early 1990s sparked most new studies . Bremer used a liberal-realist model of dyadic interstate conflict .
 The analyses below confirm that both theoretical traditions help explain who fights whom . The analysis below confirms that both theories are true .
 Two democracies are unlikely to be involved in a militarized dispute . But bilateral balance of power and ability of states to project military force at a distance also matter .
 Liberal factors are at least as influential as power, but they are more important than alliances . Liberals are more likely to be more influential than alliances, according to the study .
 All states can become democratic and integrated into the international economy, says Nelson Mandela . Mandela: 'All states can be democratic and integrate into the world'
 It is this potential for constructive social engineering that gives liberalism its special appeal . The potential for social engineering is what makes liberalism special in liberalism .
 Presidential addresses to the American Political Science Association and the International Studies Association in 2008 emphasize the importance of liberalism .
 Walker and Morton also document the growing application of the scientific method . Walker, Morton and Morton document the scientific process .
 In the earliest period, 1970-4, only thirty-seven data-based articles were published in the journals they surveyed . In the 1970s-2000s, only seven data-backed articles were reported .
 Half of all articles in political science journals now include statistical analyses . About half of all political science articles in journals now use statistical analysis .
 Analyzing the onset of fatal militarized disputes, 1885-2001, using the liberal-realist model . In this section, I analyze the behavior of thousands of pairs of states from 1885 to 2001 .
 The liberal-realist model is designed to explain the state of relations between two countries in a year . It is based on a model of state relations between the two countries .
 Analyses with the LRM provide estimates of the probability of a militarized dispute between the U.S. and Soviet Union during the Cold War .
 The LRM can also be used to predict the likelihood of interstate violence for hypothetical cases of theoretical interest . It can be used in the future to predict how likely interstate violence will occur .
 The pooled time series of over 12,000 pairs of states for more than a century are considered here . More than 430,000 dyad-years are considered in the study .
 These observations were examined using statistical techniques common in medical epidemiology . These observations are examined using statistics common in medicine epidemiology.
 Quantitative methods can summarize information regarding the influence of democracy, the volume of trade, measures of national capabilities, etc. that would take hundreds of books to record . 1 focus on militarized interstate disputes involving a use of force by one state against another that results in the death of at
 Such ""fatal disputes"" are more numerous than large wars, increasing the precision of the statistical estimates . But they are of greater seriousness than mere threats or demonstrations of force, which are more apt to involve bluffing .
 The analysis of fatal MIDs also protects against the bias that comes from under-reporting minor incidents in remote regions .
 Liberal theory is represented in the tests below by measures of the political character of the two states, assessed along an autocracy-democracy continuum, and the degree to which the countries are economically interdependent . The tests are based on measures of political character and economic interdependency between the two
 The latest Polity data provides independent assessments of political regimes . The data is based on data from the United States and Canada .
 The sources for economic data prior to 1950 are 49 From Realism to the Liberal Peace . The third element of the Kantian peace, international organizations, is not considered . International organizations, not considered, are considered .
 Recent work with improved measures of institutional effectiveness provides evidence for the beneficial role intergovernmental organizations play in managing the process of globalization, but these measures are not available for the many cases examined here .
 The Correlates of War project measures power along demographic, industrial, and military dimensions . Recall that the project is based on demographic and industrial dimensions .
 The balance of power is calculated by dividing the larger state's composite index of national capability by the sum of the dyadic members' scores . The larger state is the most powerful in the country .
 This approximates the probability that the more powerful state would win a military contest . This is based on the strength of the most powerful state in the world . The probability is that a state with more powerful states would win military contests .
 The power-projection indicator is meant to capture the ability of the larger, less constrained state to use military force at a distance . The power projection indicator is intended to capture state's ability of using military force .
 There is also an indicator in the LRM of whether the members of a dyad in each year were allies .
 Realists stress the importance of geography; liberals, too, recognize that trade and other international interactions are affected by geographic proximity .
 I use both a continuous measure of the capital-to-capital distance separating two countries, and an indicator of contiguity . I use the capital to capital distance between two countries as a measure of distance .
 I consider each dyad's historical experience of violence, measured for each observation by the years of peace since the pair's last fatal dispute .
 This is a way of taking into account the influence of past conflict on current dyadic relations . This is the way to take account of the influence on past conflict .
 Taking Time Seriously in Binary-Time-Series-Cross-Section Models,"" American Journal of Political Science, 42 , 1260-88 .
 Only the onset of a dispute is considered; subsequent years are excluded . Only the start of a disputes are considered .
 There is also a statistical control for the number of states in the international system in each year .
 Two democracies are very peaceful, two autocracies less so, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "Mixed pairs of states fight a lot," he says. "Two democracies are peaceful, and two autocrats are less so."
 Wars are less likely when those who pay the price are involved in deciding whether they will be fought . Ideological differences fuel conflict between autocracies and democracies, says Julian Zelizer .
 The animosity of these political rivals obscured the separate peace among democracies in early studies of individual states .
 Economic interdependence reduces conflict because countries are reluctant to kill the goose laying golden eggs, says President Obama . Interdependency reduces conflict, says Obama .
 Commerce also permits costly signals to be sent, reducing uncertainty and helping states avoid military conflict . Commerce also allows states to send signals to reduce uncertainty and reduce military conflict risk .
 A preponderance of power increases the prospects for peace, but a balance of capabilities is more dangerous . A balance of power is a more dangerous balance than a lack of power makes peace more secure, says CNN.com .
 Leader's private information about military capabilities is less important when there is a clear imbalance of power, decreasing the risk of miscalculation and war . Leader's information on military capabilities should be less important than when there's an imbalance in power .
 Large powers are prone to fight because their interests are widespread and their capabilities for defending and promoting them are substantial . Large powers often fight because of their interests and capabilities for defense and promotion are substantial.
 The cumulative effect of power through these two channels is discussed below . The balance of power and power-projection capabilities are discussed here .
 The democratic peace and good economic relations provide much greater assurances of peace than does an explicit security agreement . "Democracy and economic relations" provide more assurances than security agreement, says President Obama .
 Conflict is much more likely for states that are geographically proximate, especially those that share a border . Countries that have fought recently are more likely to fight again, and countries that have recently fought are also more likely .
 The probability of a fatal militarized dispute between the U.S. and the USSR is estimated to have been 26 per cent in 1954 . Based on historical values of the . explanatory variables for 1953, the probability of the conflict was 26 per .
 The risk of a serious incident between the superpowers peaked at 47 per cent in 1967 . A serious incident in 1967 was the highest risk of an attack between the two superpowers .
 United States-Soviet Union, 1954 25.7% of the onset of a fatal militarized dispute, U.S. and Soviet Union, 1965 46.7%. U.N.-U.S.-Soviet Union was the second most likely to start a military conflict in history .
 France-Germany, 1938 8.3% from a dispute to its predictors. France-France-Germany was the worst-ever French-German relations in the world .
 The analysis was limited to countries with populations greater than 500,000 . The analysis is limited to those with populations of more than 50,000.
 The probability of a fatal MID between the former adversaries was about 1 per cent . The risk of conflict was even less for the United States and Canada—a mere 0.7 per cent that year .
 The estimated risk of conflict between Germany and France fell from 8% in 1939, to less than 0.2% in 2001 . The risk of war between France and Germany fell from 0.6% to 0.3% in the 1930s .
 These values are consistent with common understandings of historical developments, suggesting that the LRM does capture important aspects of the causes of war . It is consistent with understanding of the values of war and understanding of its causes .
 Because the LRM produces plausible historical estimates, we can have greater confidence in using it to clarify the influence of theoretical factors on the prospects for peace . The LRM is a model of historical estimates of the peace process .
 All the variables in the LRM are set at levels conducive to war . This is a very ""dangerous dyad,"" like the Cold War rivals; all the variables are set to be war-like .
 The annual risk of a fatal dispute for this hypothetical pair of powers is 10. per cent, and the 95 per cent confidence interval is ±1 per cent . The risk of the fatal dispute in this hypothetical case is 10 per cent.
 The danger of a fatal MID declines by over 80 per cent to 1.5 per cent if both states are democratic . Making both states autocratic reduces the probability to 5.7 per cent of a death toll .
 Rows 2-8 indicate the change in the baseline conditions, ceteris paribus. Rows 1-2 indicate the changes in the environment .
 Large democracies have wide-ranging interests and extensive military capabilities, say experts . Large democracies also have extensive military capability, experts say . The U.S. has the world's largest military presence .
 Large autocratic countries are much more violent than large autocratic nations . Covert action may be particularly tempting for them, but large autocracies are more violent . The U.S. has been in touch with the world's most secretive state of state .
 For every instance like the United States helping overthrow Salvador Allende's democratically elected government in 1973, there are many more cases like the Soviet interventions in East Germany in 1953, Hungary in 1956, and the 1968 Prague Spring .
 These results indicate the value of analyzing interstate conflict using pairs of states rather than individual countries . The results show that analyzing interstate conflicts using pairs rather than individuals is important .
 The probability of war is influenced by the political character of a state's government and that of its potential adversary, an influence easily modeled in the dyadic format . War probability is based on the political nature of the state and the political power of its government .
 Early studies assumed that institutional constraints or non-violent norms of conflict resolution would uniformly influence a democracy's relations with all other states . But studies have found that this is not the case .
 Democracies and autocracies fight a lot because they have a lot to fight about, not just security and foreign policy . LRM includes controls for controls for these realist influences .
 They also contend over the organization of their political and economic systems, including rule of law, human rights, and other domestic issues . They contend over rule of the law, rights and other issues .
 The superpowers avoided a general war during the ""long peace"" after the Second World War . But there were numerous fatal disputes that could have escalated . There were many fatal disputes between the superpowers .
 Early studies were inconclusive because they did not take into account the political character of the opposing state . Early studies have been inconclusive due to the political nature of opposing states .
 A world of democracies would be more peaceful than one filled with autocracies . Clearly, a world of democracy would be peaceful than a world filled with dictatorships . The world of dictatorships is peaceful, but it's not always peaceful .
 The democratic advantage compounds as the number of states in the system grows . It is possible to have a democratic advantage in the United States .
 Some worry that it is not democracy that promotes peace, but peace that leads to democracy . The potential for promoting world peace through democratization seems apparent, but some worry it will not promote peace .
 Including the years of peace in the regression equation addresses this concern, however, however . Including this concern is not the case, however. Including this year's peace into the equation addresses that concern .
 Introducing this variable into the statistical model would then eliminate evidence for the democratic peace . Introducing such a variable in the model would eliminate evidence of the peace, he says .
 Joint democracy reduces the risk of a fatal dispute by 80 per cent, controlling for past conflict . As we have seen, however, joint democracy reduces risk of fatal disputes by 80% .
 Five studies estimate the reciprocal effects of democracy and peace . Five studies explicitly estimate the benefits of democracy, peace and democracy .
 Three find evidence for the democratic peace, but not for the salutary effect of peace on democratization . Three of the authors find evidence that peace is good for democratic peace .
 Democracy and peace are ideas that have merely spread simultaneously, but are causally unrelated . Nor are the results reported here consistent with the view that democracy and peace have spread simultaneously .
 Non-violence has not affected relations among autocratic nations to nearly the same degree . Nor has a cultural norm of non-violence affected relations with authoritarian nations to the same extent .
 The probability of conflict drops from 10 per cent in the baseline case to 3. per cent if the pair of states has strong trading ties and all other factors are held constant . If the pair has strong trade ties, the chances of conflict drop from 10 to 3 .
 If the interdependent states are also democratic, the risk of a fatal MID is only 0.7 per cent, a reduction of 94 per cent from the baseline rate . The risk of an MID being killed is 0.3 per cent .
 National capabilities, too, affect the risk of violence, according to experts . The balance of power and the ability of states to project military force can affect violence, they say . National capabilities also affect the threat of violence .
 The probability that the two large states of the dangerous dyad will fight is 10 per cent . The probability is 10.7 per cent that the dyad would fight each other .
 The existence of an alliance has a relatively small, statistically insignificant effect on the likelihood of a fatal dispute, as shown in line 8 .
 It is hardly remarkable that a country's demographic, industrial size, and military capabilities influence the prospects for peace, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 It is surprising, however, that the liberal variables are more influential . It is nice that states' political regimes and economic relations are amenable to 90th percentile relative to all other states, even over a long time .
 Realists can counsel little more than an acceptance of fate, realists say . Realists are not realists, but realists are realists .
 In contrast, a country can become democratic or remove barriers to trade with its neighbors . Liberal reforms may be difficult to achieve in practice, though liberal reforms may not be possible .
 Some risk factors associated with heart disease are under our control, but others, like gender, race, and a family history of heart attacks, are not . Smoking or a sedentary lifestyle are some of the factors under control .
 Research on the liberal peace shows that nations and the international community can take actions that materially affect the prospects for peace . Fortunately, research shows that such actions can be taken by nations and international community .
 Most people consider democratic reform and integration into the world economy desirable because they increase freedom and prosperity . Moreover, most people think democratic reform is desirable because it increases freedom .
 Modern history, including the ongoing Arab spring, suggests a good prognosis for world peace . Autocrats and economic interests that depend upon protectionism will resist, but modern history suggests peace .
 Some stress the importance of capitalism and economic development, rather than democracy, in creating a more peaceful world . Some stress that capitalism is the key to creating peace .
 Adam Smith favored democracy and free markets domestically and internationally, so this is a debate within the liberal camp . Of course, Adam Smith and other Enlightenment figures favored democracy .
 Estimating the relative importance of democracy and capitalism can, however, guide the staging of reforms . Estimating empirically how important it is to democracy can help to stage reforms in the world .
 Capitalism is thought to encourage peace because militarized disputes disrupt commerce . Capitalism encourages peace because it's thought to discourage militarization of disputes .
 Large conflicts lead to greater government control of the economy, higher taxes, conscription, and increased public debt . In addition to large conflicts, large conflicts also lead to higher taxes and conscription . The U.S. government has a history of large conflicts .
 An advanced economy is characterized by a complex division of labor, a greater role for investment in the process of production, and an educated work force . The country's economy will be characterized by complex divisions of labor and a complex divide of labor .
 Peace is more likely when two states are economically developed, according to the U.S. State Department . Peace is most likely when the balance of power is held constant, the study says .
 Impersonal transactions in developed economies with contract-intensive markets promote values that encourage the non-violent resolution of conflict, says an extensive literature .
 To assess the relative importance of democracy and economic development in discouraging the use of military force, I added to the LRM for each dyad-year the geometric mean of the two states' real gross domestic product . The LRM is based on each country's GDP and the percentage of
 Less developed states are at greater risk of violence than randomly selected pair, ceteris paribus. The increase from 10. per cent, the baseline rate with the simple LRM, to 10.7 per cent .
 Making both states democratic dramatically reduces the danger to 2.5 per cent . Making both state democratic reduces the risk to 2 per cent. Making state democratic means reducing the risk of a terrorist attack .
 With this augmented LRM, economic interdependence has the greatest effect of the liberal variables . Economic inter-dependency is the most important factor in economic inter-interiority .
 Raising the trade-to-GDP ratio from the 10th to the 90th percentile reduces the risk of a fatal dispute to 1.5 per cent . Raising trade to GDP ratio from 10 to 90 per cent reduces risk of fatal dispute .
 As would be expected, two interdependent, developed democracies are very peaceful indeed . As well as the peace, they are peaceful indeed, the UK and France are peaceful .
 If there is consensus that democracies are more peaceful, there is little agreement as to why . There is no consensus as to whether democracies are peaceful, but there is no agreement on why .
 Autocracies and democracies are prone to violence, perhaps because democracies pose an existential threat to autocrats . Autocrats and democracies pose a threat to each other, writes CNN.com's John Defterios .
 West German television is said to have undermined totalitarianism in Eastern Europe during the Cold War . It was said to undermine totalitarianism during Eastern Europe .
 If democracies threaten authoritarian leaders, they must be prepared to defend themselves against autocrats willing to use force to stay in power, says David Cameron .
 No attempt has been made to determine who initiated a dispute . Thus far, I have analyzed non-directed dyads .
 Each state is paired twice with every other state in each year, once as the focal state that might use force, and once as a potential target of such action . The state is then paired with each other for each year as a focal state, and the potential target .
 To assess further their relative peacefulness, we can compare the likelihood that an autocracy will initiate military action against a democracy to the probability the democracy will resort to violence first . The likelihood of military action is to be compared to the likelihood the autocracy would use violence first in a democracy
 The liberal-realist model can be easily adapted to analyze initiations of armed conflict . It can be used to analyze the initiation process of conflict in Syria and Afghanistan .
 The results of estimating this directed LRM confirm that a democracy is unlikely to use force against another democracy . LRM: The results show that a democratic democracy is likely to avoid using force against a democracy .
 There are good reasons to prefer non-directed analyses of the onset of disputes to directed tests of conflict initiation .
 Data only indicates which state initiated the use of military force, not whether it was a preemptive strike . It is sometimes difficult to determine who launched the first attack, and even then the data only indicates who initiated the attack .
 They may even ""Bushwhack"" the democratic peace, citing the greater peacefulness of democracies as a rationale for aggression . They may also cite the greater peace as a justification for aggression against the U.S.
 Perhaps autocracies and democracies are prone to fight because democracies model good government, threatening the positions of autocratic rulers . Democracy is a model for good government and democracy is threatened by dictatorships .
 Future tests utilizing indicators of countries' commitments to human rights can shed light on this question . Future tests could shed light to this question, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 International treaties matter most for states of mixed political characteristics . Beth Simmons has shown that international treaties matter more for states with mixed political characteristics .
 Democracies guarantee human rights, and autocracies do not . International commitments are unnecessary in the first case, and ineffective in the second, he says .
 If mixed regimes committed to human rights are also involved in disputes with autocracies and are at peace with democracies, it would explain why relations between democracies and dictatorships are remarkably peaceful .
 It would indicate that a separate peace is possible among democracies because they share many values and good governance is not threatening . Good governance not threatening, good governance isn't threatening, says Julian Zelizer .
 Democratization in Eastern Europe and former Soviet Union at the end of the Cold War led some to fear a wave of international conflict fueled by domestic instability .
 Edward Mansfield and Jack Snyder warned that leaders in new democracies might use force for diversionary purposes . While acknowledging that a separate peace exists among established democracies, they also warned that new democracies may use force to divert attention .
 Dramatic changes in government often occur in tumultuous times, which might encourage leaders to divert attention from domestic problems by initiating conflict abroad . Dramatic change in government might encourage newly democratic leaders to start war abroad .
 Perhaps demagogues can rally support for aggression because jingoism is more effective when the populace is politically inexperienced and democratic institutions are undeveloped, says Julian Zelizer . Demagogues are able to rally support by appealing to the electorate to aggression .
 Still, it is not obvious that new democracies should be prone to fight . Still, the new democracies are not obvious they should fight, it's not obvious .
 In this view, democratic leaders are more likely to use force when they are popular, rather than using force to become popular . This view is based on the view that democratic leaders use force more often when they're popular .
 To determine if new democracies are prone to violence, I estimated the probability that a country would initiate a fatal dispute within five years of becoming democratic . I also estimated the likelihood that a new democracy would trigger a fatal incident within a year .
 A new democracy is more likely than an older one to use military force against an autocracy . The probability of initiating a fatal dispute is 4.2 per cent versus 4.4 per cent .
 The probability that a new democracy will use force against another democracy is 4. per cent, far above the risk that an established democracy will do so . But this finding rests on only seven cases; and five of these occurred within two years of the democratic transition, suggesting that any danger associated
 This was confirmed in an additional test incorporating a count of the years the focal state had been democratic . The results were confirmed in a further test by a further count of years it had been .
 The longevity of democracy in this test was not significantly related to the risk a democracy would initiate conflict, the author says . Democracy longevity was not significant related to risk of starting conflict .
 Twenty years ago research on the causes of war was dominated by realists . 20 years later research on causes of conflict is dominated by the realist .
 Kenneth Waltz and others emphasized the influence of the international system on national behavior . They worked in the humanistic tradition, artfully blending political theory and contemporary history . The book was published in 1998 .
 The Limits of Coercive Diplomacy ; Barry Blechman and Stephen Kaplan with others. The Limits to Coercives Diplomacy . Stephen Kaplan: The Limits are the limits of coercive diplomatic diplomacy .
 The Balkan conflicts of the 1990s are not inconstant with the democratic peace . The Balkans has been a source of conflict in the past, but the peace is still there .
 Immanuel Kant, Adam Smith, and other classical liberals believed that democracy, free markets, and international commerce would produce not only freedom and prosperity, but peace .
 Analyses of the behavior of over 12,000 pairs of states during the period 1885-2001, using a liberal-realist model, corroborate this view .
 Given the prospects for globalization and the continuing spread of liberal institutions, the prognosis for world politics in the twenty-first century is good, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: Given the prospect for globalization, the outlook is good .
 The statistical results show that a world of democracies would be remarkably peaceful . The world of democracy would be much more peaceful, the author says .
 The annual risk of a fatal dispute for two hypothetical states that are large, geographically proximate, non-allies is 10 per cent . The risk is 10. per cent for a democracy, and the other an autocracy, with no trade, is 10 .
 The liberal-realist model predicts that, if both states are democratic, the risk of conflict drops by 83 per cent to 1.5 per cent .
 Authoritarian countries have historically been more likely to initiate force against their democratic rivals, but the difference is not large enough to be statistically significant . Authoritarian nations have traditionally initiated force more often than their democratic opponents .
 Economic interdependence and the wealth of nations also affect the prospects for peace . Peace is possible in the future, says the author of the book "Peace"
 Economically developed countries are less likely to fight, though the effect is smaller than the benefit of democratization . The effect of democratizing is also smaller than that of economic development, says the author .
 Raising two states from the 10th to the 90th percentile in real gross domestic product per capita reduces the annual risk of a fatal dispute by 63 per cent . The risk is similar to an 81 per cent reduction if both states are made democratic . Raising states from 10 to the
 Wealthy, interdependent democracies enjoy a resilient security community . Wealthy nations have a resilient international community . The United States is one of the world's most successful nations .
 The likelihood of armed interstate conflict is also affected by the size and military capabilities of countries, as realists suggest . Realists suggest an alliance has little effect on the likelihood of interstate conflict .
 A preponderance of power, not a balance, raises the prospects for peace . But surprisingly, surprisingly, liberal variables are just as influential and more amenable to manipulation . The liberal variable is just as powerful and much more amable to manipulation.
 No state can increase its population, industry, or military from the 10th to the 90th percentile relative to all other states . No state could increase its military, population, or industry from 10 to 90th in the state's ranking .
 Countries can become democratic, institute economic reforms, or remove barriers to trade relatively quickly, they can be desirable . But countries can also become democratic and institute reforms quickly . That's not necessarily desirable .
 With any mixture of large and small countries, countries of similar size—absent the liberal effects—will fight . With any mix of small and large countries, small countries will fight, he says .
 Hopes for peace through the influence of a hegemon supported in social scientific tests are not realistic . Nor are hopes for peace in the Middle East supported by social science tests .
 The importance (or danger) of pax Britannica or Americana is generally exaggerated . The importance of the Americana has been exaggerated by some .
 The implications of these systematic, quantitative analyses for public policy seem clear, the authors say .
 To promote world peace, we should encourage democratization and liberal economic reforms by peaceful means . We should encourage democratic and liberal reforms, says President Obama . We need to encourage liberal economic reform and democracy, says Obama .
 Attempting to impose democracy and capitalism by force by force is fraught with practical as well as moral danger, says Julian Zelizer . Attempting democracy by force would be fraught as much as a moral danger .
 Kennan's advice today seems much the same that he offered in 1946 when the West faced the Soviet threat . Kennan offered the same advice today as he did in 1946 .
 We must be prepared to defend ourselves, and to contain those who would do us harm, while demonstrating the superiority of liberal institutions and encouraging reformist movements abroad . We must also demonstrate the superiority .
 The better alternative to regime change by force is democracy by example . Democracy by example, and the extension of peaceful incentives for change, is needed .
 Future social scientific research should clarify the reasons for the democratic peace . Future social science research will clarify the reason for the peace in the world .
 Why wealth and commerce are beneficial seems evident, a consequence of economic self-interest . But there is no consensus on why democracy matters, and why it matters . Why wealth is beneficial seems obvious, but there is a lack of consensus about democracy .
 Theories emphasizing institutional constraints, nonviolent norms, or signaling predict that democracies will avoid war with autocracies . Theories emphasize institutional constraints and nonviolent norms .
 Democracies may enjoy a separate peace because their leaders see one another as legitimate and voters are unlikely to support the use of force . Democracies enjoy peace because leaders see each other as legitimate .
 Democrats and Republicans generally agree on political and economic fundamentals . They also have less to fight about because they agree on the fundamentals of the economy .
 This encourages autocratic aggression, but also pre-emptive or preventive wars by democracies, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says . He says this encourages autocracies to take advantage of their own territory .
 New analyses of the effects of nations' commitments to human rights on the likelihood of military conflict may shed important new light on the foundations of the democratic peace .
 Democracy can be established whenever the process is uninhibited by thugs with guns . A remarkably simple form of government, democracy can rather easily be established when the process remains uninhibited .
 The rise of democracy has been correlated with the acceptance of another, essentially unrelated, idea, war aversion . The relationship has been seized upon by theorists and more recently, politicians, to be causal .
 Leaders in the U.S. have sought to impose democracy on the Middle East, partly operating under the misguided, if theoretically consistent, belief that this will cause peace to blossom in the area .
 Democracy is a device for aggregating and expressing policy preferences . Democracy and the aggregation of preferences are aggregated and expressed . Democracy is an aggregation of policy preferences, not aggregation .
 One is free to try to increase one's political importance by working in politics or by supplying money in appropriate places, or one can reduce it by succumbing to apathy and neglecting even to vote . One can reduce its importance by trying to increase it by .
 Some people, because of superior manipulative skills, social position, or sheer luck, will do better under the system than others . Some people have superior social skills or social position to do better in the system . Others will be better off the system if they have a better social position .
 Democracy gives to everyone the opportunity, without regard to social status or ideological conviction, to seek to manipulate the system in their favor . Unlike other systems, democracy gives people the opportunity to seek the system's favor . Democracy gives everyone an opportunity to manipulate system in its favor .
 Those who make little effort to do so may well be ignored, or maybe even persecuted by it . However, those who try to make a difference may be ignored or even persecuted .
 Democracy is, and will always be, distressingly messy, clumsy, and disorderly . People are permitted loudly and irritatingly to voice opinions that are clearly erroneous and even dangerous, even dangerous . Democracy is a mess, but people are permitted to voice their opinions, even if they are wrong
 democracies, on the whole, have done comparatively well at choosing leaders, managing their affairs, and at correcting their inevitable mistakes . Although there have been mistakes and exasperations and sometimes even disasters, it can be argued that democracies have done rather well at picking their leaders .
 Democracy does, by definition, requires that opposition and contention and special interest activity be peacefully preserved . But democracy does require that opposition to special interests be preserved . Although it may be a desirable gimmick for aggregating policy preferences, it does not create policy preferences .
 They have welcomed or committed naked aggression and fought to reverse it . They have devolved into vicious civil war and avoided it by artful compromise . Also embraced colonialism and rejected the practice entirely; embraced colonialism .
 It follows from this perspective that no elaborate prerequisites or cultural preparations are necessary for democracy to emerge, and that an agonizing process of ""democratization"" is not required, says historian .
 Democracy is easy to establish and maintain because it's based on giving people the freedom to complain . Democracy is based on allowing people to organize with other complainers to try to topple or influence the government .
 As Americans should surely know by now, any dimwit can do democracy . The U.S. should be proud of the fact that democracy is being held in America .
 It has triumphed because its ideas, ably executed and skillfully promoted—or marketed—at one point in the world's history, have increasingly managed to catch on . It has succeeded because it has been ably executed and skillfully promoted—or
 The world could have become democratic centuries earlier if the right people at the right time had gotten the idea, promoted and market tested it, and been graced by the right kind of luck . Literacy, economic development, and modern communications do not seem to be required for a country to
 By 1945, modern democracy had been on the market for less than two centuries . Modern democracy had already been in existence for more than 100 years . Democracy was born in France in 17th century .
 It had been tested, refined, and packaged to increase its appeal . During that time it had been suitably tested and refined to increase appeal .
 It had rebounded from such potentially discrediting calamities as the reign of terror in France and the Civil War in America . It had seen its comparative appeal and credibility enhanced as it survived two wars .
 Despite the successful imposition of democracy upon the losers of the Second World War, however, democracy didn't look all that well in 1975 . Despite other postwar advances, democracy looked a little worse in 1975.
 Between 1975 and the end of the Cold War, democracy burgeoned in the three remaining nondemocracies in Europe outside the communist bloc, Latin America, and East and Southeast Asia .
 For some it followed that periodic wars were necessary to cleanse the nation from the decadence of peace . For some, it followed . For others, it was necessary that periodic war was necessary .
 The institution of war came under truly organized and concentrated attack only after 1815 . Peace movement developed real momentum only by the end of the century .
 Idea entrepeneurs seeking to change opinion on war stressed various arguments . The idea entrepareurs sought to change opinions on war .
 Quakers opposed war primarily because they found it immoral . Some, like the Quakers, opposed war because of immoral actions . Others opposed war mainly because of morality .
 War was a capitalistic device in which the working class was used as cannon fodder . These protesters were joined by socialists and others who had concluded that war was capitalistic .
 A number of practical people concluded that war and conquest, which they took to be the chief goal of war, were economically counterproductive . Also important were people who had concluded that . War and conquest was economically counterproductive, they said .
 One of the most influential proponents of the economic position was an English journalist, Norman Angell .
 Several important businessmen have joined the movement . The movement has been criticized by some of the world's leading politicians .
 Angell helped to crystallize a line of reasoning that has been gaining in acceptability ever since . Angell’s work has been accepted in the U.S.
 War is unlikely if countries take prosperity as their chief goal and if they come to believe that war is a poor way to achieve that goal, they say . War is likely to be unlikely if nations believe prosperity is their main goal, not prosperity .
 Peace advocates were a noisy gadfly minority in the years before 1914 . Peace advocates explored alternatives to war such as arbitration and international law and organization .
 Their arguments were inescapable, but for the most part they were rejected and derided by the majority which still held to the traditional view that war was noble, natural, thrilling, thrilling and progressive, manly, redemptive, and beneficial .
 Peace activists thought peace activists really needed war to become worse . The idea surfaced in the years before the First World War that what the peace activists needed was for war to be much worse .
 "The only thing that will ever prevent them from waging war is terror," he wrote . He was pessimistic about mankind and decided to use germ warfare to defeat them .
 There is no way to quantify this change except perhaps through a rough sort of content analysis . There are no way of quantifying this change .
 After the war, such people become extremely rare, though the excitement of the combat experience continued to have its fascination to some . Such people are rare after the war .
 This abrupt and remarkable change is often noted by historians and political scientists . This abrupt change has often been noted by political scientists, including historians .
 Evan Luard observes that the First World War transformed traditional attitudes toward war . Luard's study of wars since 1400 reveals how the war transformed attitudes to war .
 Obviously, this change of attitude was not enough to keep developed countries out of all wars altogether . It's not just enough to stop developed countries from all wars .
 Adolf Hitler did not prevent the war of 1939-45, but was the product of the machinations of a single man, Adolf Hitler . Most disastrously, it did not stop the European half of that conflagration .
 The existence of this war should not be allowed to cloud an appreciation for the shift of opinion that occurred at the time of the First World War, one that was dramatically reinforced by the Second World War . However, the existence of the war shouldn't be allowed .
 Since 1945, developed countries have substantially abandoned war as a method for dealing with their disagreements . Developed countries in the world's most warlike continent, including those in the Middle East, have since abandoned war .
 Evan Luard, War in International Society, 365; Bernard Brodie, War and Politics, 30; Arnold J Toynbee, Experiences, 214 . Arnold JToynbee: War in international society, 365 .
 The data is for violent armed conflicts which result in at least 1,000 military and civilian battle-related deaths in the year indicated . Number of ongoing wars by year, 1946-2010; number of ongoing conflicts by year .
 Uppsala Conflict Data Program and correspondence with Kristian Gleditsch. impressive because the number of entities capable of conducting international war so greatly increased during the period. impressive . impressive because of the increased number of people able to conduct international war against each other . impressive .
 The Cold War was the final demise of the whole idea of empire—previously one of the great epochdefining constants in human history . Another great, if often undernoted, change was the end of the idea of empires .
 The norm against conquest and its associated institutional structure stress peace, but they are not so much the cause of the desire for peace as its result . Peace is the result of conquest, not the cause, but the result, of peace .
 Disputes over territory had been a major cause of international war in the past . War-averse countries were seeking to enforce and enshrine the norm, the author says .
 Its existence did not cause them to be war averse, but rather the reverse . Its existence was the reverse, and they were not war-averse .
 War, including civil war, has been in pronounced decline since the beginning of the 20th century . It is probably not a matter of cause and effect, but ever since that time, there has been great progress .
 Democracy replaced communism almost overnight and even more smoothly than had monarchy . Monarchies replaced communism in East Europe after 1989 and in much of the splintered USSR after 1991 .
 The 1989 experience suggests that only the tanks were necessarily hampering democratic development . Most of the countries in Eastern Europe (and probably those on the Baltic Sea) would have been democratic but for the forces of the Soviet Union .
 In Africa, there has been notable democratic progress in quite a few places . The African continent has a long history of democratic progress .
 Tanzania, Botswana, Malawi, Namibia, Mozambique, Ghana, Benin, Kenya, Zambia and Zambia . The most spectacular is South Africa, but there has also been democratic development in many other countries .
 The only countries where democracy has yet to penetrate deeply are the Islamic ones . Just about the only set of countries with democracy still lacking is the Islamic countries .
 Leaders have allowed elections in the Middle East, as in Algeria and Iran in 1997 . Voters displayed considerable ability to differentiate and express their interest . However, the choice of candidates and the freedom of speech were limited .
 Some Muslim states, such as Mali, Turkey, Pakistan, and Qatar, have moved substantially toward democracy . And some Muslim states have certainly been able to move significantly toward democracy, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Indonesia successfully navigated its way to democracy after 1997 . Most importantly, the world's most populous Muslim country, Indonesia . Indonesia's democracy was achieved in 1997 .
 Popular revolutions waged throughout the Middle East in 2011 suggest further progress is in the offing . And the popular revolutions waged in the region suggest that more progress is needed .
 Some of these devices are diplomatic, social, or economic, but the judicious application of military force is also potentially available . The judicious use of force could also look a great deal like war .
 There have been military interventions in Panama in 1989, in Kuwait and Iraq in 1991, in Somalia in 1992-3, in Haiti in 1994, in Bosnia in 1995, in Kosovo and East Timor in 1999, in Sierra Leone in 2000, in Afghanistan in 2001, and in Iraq
 Developed countries were able to engage in these ventures at remarkably little cost to themselves, particularly in casualties . They were most focused on thuggish regimes or on thugdominated civil wars, they were generally successful . Except for the last, however, the developed countries were .
 Despite a degree of success, the post-Cold War phenomenon of policing wars, rather tentative at best, seems more likely to wane than to grow . However, despite a degree success, policing wars seem to be wanes .
 There are several reasons for a lack of interest, including a low tolerance for casualties in military missions that are essentially humanitarian, and an aversion to long-term policing . There are also reasons for this, among them a lack .
 The experience of the wars in Iraq and, increasingly, Afghanistan are likely to further magnify a reluctance to intervene . Iraq and Afghanistan have led to a reluctance for intervention .
 The reluctance to intervene directly into the chaos in western Sudan in 2004 or in Libya in 2011 is suggestive of the process .
 Civil wars are least likely to occur in stable democracies and in stable autocracies . That is, in countries with effective governments and policing forces . Civil war is least likely in stable countries with an effective government and policing force .
 Civil war, following the pattern found with international war in the developed world, is going out of style . It is far too early to be certain, but it could be that civil war, like that in the past, is not going to be a problem .
 Governments increasingly able to police domestic conflicts rather than exacerbating them as frequently happened in the past . One key may have been in the rise of competent governments which have increasingly been able to .
 The number of first-class tyrannies has diminished greatly in the last decades . Certainly the number of dictatorships has diminished significantly in the past decades .
 Some argue peacekeeping efforts by international organizations have often proved effective at keeping the wars from reigniting . Peacekeeping efforts have often been successful at preventing wars from rekindling .
 International bodies may not be able to stop a war when the combatants are determined to continue fighting, but they can usefully seize the opportunity to stabilize a shaky peace . International bodies and consortiums of developed countries can help stabilize peace when it's exhausted, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The number of wars that took place from the 1960s to the early 1990s is on the rise . But perhaps the ""blip" is in the rise in the number of such wars .
 Much of this seems to have come from rapid decolonization which led to the creation of a host of countries that were, to put it mildly, ill-governed and therefore prime candidates for civil war arenas .
 For an extended development of this point, see Mueller, The Remnants of War, chapter 9 . If that is the case, it is 20 for the first time .
 War, as conventionally, even classically, understood then, has become a remarkably rare phenomenon . War as well as war, as well, has now become a remarkable rare phenomenon. War as such as war in Europe has never been seen as such a thing .
 If civil war becomes as unfashionable as the international variety, war could cease to exist as a substantial phenomenon . Indeed, if civil war is as unfashionable as international war, it could cease as a significant phenomenon .
 At base, it may turn out that war is merely an idea, an institution that has been grafted onto human existence, rather than a trick of fate, a thunderbolt from hell, a natural calamity, a systemic necessity, or a desperate plot contrivance .
 The institution may be in pronounced decline as attitudes toward it have changed . It follows the pattern by which the once formidable institution of formal slavery became discredited and then obsolete .
 A counterfactual argument remains popular contending that it was only the existence of nuclear weapons that prevented major war . Like many important ideas over the last few centuries, the notion that war is 23 is still popular .
 The rise of democracy is associated with the decline of slavery, religion, mercantilism, capital punishment, and cigarette smoking, says author . Democracy associated with rise of war aversion and acceptance of capitalism, scientific methodology, international trade, women's rights, environmentalism, abortion, and
 In the last couple of decades there has been a burgeoning and intriguing discussion about a possible connection between democracy and war aversion . In the 1990s, there was a growing discussion about the possibility of a link between war aversion and democracy .
 Most notable has been the empirical observation that democracies have never, or almost never, gotten into a war with each other . Most notable is the observation that democracy has never been at war with other nations .
 This relationship seems more correlative, or coincidental, than causal, however, however . The relationship seems to be more likely to be causal than coincidental .
 A necessary, logical connection between democracy and war aversion is far from clear . A necessary and logical connection is not clear, says CNN's John Sutter . The U.S. Senate is holding a hearing on the issue .
 It is often asserted that democracies are peaceful because they apply their domestic penchant for peaceful compromise to the international arena . Democracy requires decision makers to obtain domestic approval, such as the U.S. in 1861, it says .
 authoritarian regimes must necessarily develop skills at compromise in order to survive . They all have domestic constituencies that must be serviced such as the church, the landed gentry, potential rioters, the nomenklatura, the aristocracy, party members, the military, prominent business interests,
 Since the First World War, the democracies in the developed world have been in the lead in rejecting war as a methodology . The democracies have rejected war as an methodology since World War II .
 The Democratic Governance of National Security ; Russett and Oneal, Triangulating Peace. Russett . Oneal . Russett. Oneal. Russet and Onea . Russet . Onea, Oneal and Russett wrote a book on national security . The Democratic
 They have been willing actively to subvert or to threaten and sometimes apply military force when threats appeared to loom during the Cold War . In addition to subverting or to threatening, they have also been willing to apply military forces .
 At times this approach was used even against regimes that had some democratic credentials such as in Iran in 1953, Guatemala in 1954, Chile in 1973, and perhaps Nicaragua in the 1980s . At times it was used against regimes such as Iran, Guatemala and Chile .
 They have also sometimes used military force in their intermittent efforts to police the post-Cold War world . And they have also used .
 It is true that they have warred little or not at all against each other, but it is statistical regularity that most prominently informs the supposed connection between democracy and peace . It's true that there were few democracies outside the developed world until the last quarter of the twentieth century .
 The developed democracies hardly needed democracy to decide that war among them was a bad idea . However, democracy hardly needed to decide whether it was a good idea to go to war .
 The U.S. adopted a live-and-let-live approach toward dictatorships and other non-democracies during the Cold War . In addition, they also adopted an approach to dictatorships that did not seem threatening .
 Democracy's supposed penchant for peaceful compromise has not served them well when confronted with civil war situations, such as in Switzerland in 1847 and in U.S. in 1861 .
 Democracies have fought a considerable number of wars to retain colonial possessions . These wars can be considered essentially to be civil wars .
 To be sure, democracies have often managed to deal with colonial problems peacefully, mostly by letting the colonies go . This is not the case for the first time .
 While democracy and war aversion have often been promoted by the same advocates, the relationship does not seem to be a causal one . Thus, while democracy is often promoted, it is not a causal link to war .
 When the two trends are substantially out of step today, democracies will fight one another . The two trends will be substantially out-of-step today, says Julian Zelizer . "Democracy is not a matter of politics, but it's a matter matter of national security," he says
 Various warlike sentiments could be found in the elected parliaments in the former Yugoslavia in the early 1990s or in India and then-democratic Pakistan when these two countries engaged in armed conflict in 1999 .
 Argentina seized the Falkland Islands in 1982 when it seized the islands . It is unlikely that British opposition to the move would have been much less severe if Argentina had been a democracy .
 Latin America and most of Africa have engaged in very few international wars even without the benefit of being democratic . As she further points out, most of the countries of Latin America have engaged little international war even without benefit from being democratic.
 Since the Second World War, developed countries have enjoyed peace between authoritarian east and democratic west . The long peace enjoyed by developed countries since the 1950s includes the one that has prevailed between democracies and authoritarian east .
 Even if there is some connection, whether causal or atmospheric, between democracy and peace, it cannot explain this latter phenomenon . Even if some connection is causal, it can't explain this phenomenon .
 The United States has repeatedly and often evangelically urged democracy upon its neighbors to the South . The U.S. has often been quite prepared to use money and sometimes military force to coat the philosophic pill .
 Latin America's remarkable move toward democracy after 1975 was accomplished almost entirely by the people there themselves when market conditions improved . The people in Latin America are responsible for the country's democratic transition .
 Critics have argued that democracy can't be spread at the point of a gun . But these cases suggest that it sometimes can be, sometimes .
 Even Bruce Russett, a prominent democratic-peace analyst, concedes the possibility of a coup .
 Panama's Manuel Noriega stole an election that went against him in 1989 in the midst of Latin America's transition . He was deposed by an American military invasion and, liberated from this anachronistic tyrant, the country became a democracy .
 The U.S. successfully imposed or reimposed democracy on Grenada in 1983 . Grenada was also successfully imposed, or re-imposed, by the United States in 1984 .
 A somewhat similar process in Haiti in the 1990s met with far less success . However, a similar process was met with less success in the 90s .
 If democracy is so wonderful, and if in addition it inevitably brings peace, then forcefully jamming it down the throats of the decreasing number of nondemocratic countries in the world must be all to the good . The U.S. should be proud of its democracy, the author says
 George W Bush declared that the world has a clear interest in the spread of democratic values . He said stable and free nations do not breed the ideologies of murder .
 After Iraq was forced to enter the democratic (and hence peaceful) camp, military force would be deftly applied as necessary to speed up the domino-toppling process wherever necessary in the area .
 War architect Paul Wolfowitz also seems to have believed that the war would become an essential stage on the march toward freedom and democracy . Wolfowitz believed that war would be an essential part of the march to freedom, democracy .
 Bush and neocons may actually have believed their pre-war fantasies about the blessings that imposed democracy would in turn impose on the Middle East, Russett writes . Russett: The democracy argument rose in significance only after those security arguments for going to war proved to be empty .
 Saddam's Tyranny and America's Mission , 98-9; Frum and Perle, An End to Evil, 163.9 . Frum, Perle: "America's mission to defeat Saddam Hussein's tyranny"
 Iraq is acting very much like a standard democracy, albeit one with an exceptionally high crime and violence rate . Iraq's high crime, violence rate is not unusual for a nation with a very high crime rate .
 Politicians are squabbling continuously, interest groups are seeking to loot the public treasury as best they can . People are freely expressing themselves even where this may involve the airing of ethnic and racial hatreds . Those who use violence to do so are not democratic, however .
 Those elected will remain loyal to their constituencies and that may well mean intensified hostility to Israel and ungrateful animosity toward Iraq's naive, clumsy, and destructive democratic liberators . However, those elected will stay loyal to the wishes of their constituencies .
 It is wrong to celebrate the triumph of capitalism over communism in the Cold War as a simple victory of free markets and free men over totalitarian government and intrusive planning .
 As we re-examine the virtues of free markets and private enterprise, we must not forget the role of the ""state""—the importance of governmental capacity— in creating the conditions for victory in the Cold War . The importance of the state was the creation of government capacity .
 In the ""West,"" broadly defined, government policies modulated and stabilized the business cycle, nurtured economic growth, provided minimum social support . In the "West," government . policies modulate and stabilized . business cycles, provided . minimum social . support .
 The state complemented markets, structured markets, liberated markets, and helped allay the hardships caused by markets . The state of the state was created in order to create a free market for all markets .
 After two world wars, a great depression, and mass extermination, liberal capitalism was in disrepute . Liberal capitalism was a time when it came to a low point in the world's history .
 The magic of the market was not part of people's vocabulary after the despair of the depression and the misery of war . The magic was not in the vocabulary of people who had no faith in the market, says historian Richard Hammond .
 In 1944, in The Road to Serfdom, Friedrich von Hayek lamented, "If we take the people whose views influence developments, they are now in the democracies all socialists," he wrote .
 Even a decade later, Walter Lippmann wrote in The Public Philosophy, "We are living in a time of massive popular counter-revolution against liberal democracy," he said .
 Also see Tonyjudt, III Fares the Land, and Walter Lippmann, Essays in the Public Philosophy , 63 .
 National Security, the Truman Administration, and the Cold War , 35-6, 63-4. National Security . The Truman Administration . The Cold War .
 Europe and the United States, 1945 to 81: Victory . Victory revolutionary nationalist movements forming. Europe and U.S. were forming. America and Europe were at war in the early years of the war .
 They clamored for independence and sought transformative changes in political economy, national identity, and race relations . They sought transformational changes in the political economy and national identity .
 Planned economies, many revolutionary nationalist leaders believed, might propel their emerging nations into modernity . Planned economies might earn their people the dignity they merited in the international arena, they believed .
 President Franklin D Roosevelt grasped the challenges ahead of the Great Depression . Roosevelt faced a country scarred by years of depression and rife with fears of looming unemployment . Roosevelt's administration took on the challenges of the Depression .
 He understood that the American ""state"" had to act boldly at home so that the U.S. could exert leadership abroad . The American "state" must act boldly in order to exert leadership overseas .
 A liberal international economy, he explained, required a strong state at home . A strong state would be needed in order to keep a strong economy strong .
 The war, he knew, would bequeath fundamental problems for the world economy and the national economy . He knew that the war would be . be . fundamental problems .
 He supported the work of his Treasury and State Department subordinates to create the Bretton Wood institutions of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund as well as the U.N. He also supported the creation of the United Nations .
 These commitments were the legacy of nineteenthcentury industrialization and of the turmoil wrought by business fluctuations in free market economies . The commitments were made in the wake of industrialization .
 These commitments were the promises of democratic statesmen to their citizenry for enduring the hardships and misery of two world wars and a great depression . The promises were made to their citizens by their governments .
 In the literature on the international relations and political economy of the Cold War, these commitments receive scant attention . Yet, in the literature of the 1950s and 1960s, they are often overlooked by historians .
 The U.S. helped forge new multinational organizations like the World Bank and the IMF, formulated new initiatives like the Truman Doctrine and the Marshall Plan, practiced containment, embraced the politics of productivity .
 As we have illuminated these matters, however, we have tended to minimize how, amidst all these efforts, the role of the state grew . The role of state grew, but it has been minimized, the authors say .
 The success of the West inhered in its ability to marry the state with the market, to reconcile the rights of social citizenship with the dynamics of the marketplace . The West's ability to insure minimal social provision while nurturing private incentives is key to its success .
 Bretton Woods institutions organized to reconcile liberalization of trade and the maintenance of currency stability with the empowerment of national governments to exercise autonomy over their own economic fortunes and social policies .
 In Italy, with considerable U.S. assistance to the government of Alcide de Gasperi, the communists were also thwarted in the closely contested elections of 1948 and, thereafter, they never garnered the power they yearned for .
 Italian postwar governments embraced the principles of minimal social provision, welfare assistance, health insurance, and regional development .
 From 1950 to 1980, public expenditures as a percentage of GDP increased from about 25 per cent of GDP to about 45 per cent . Social expenditures from about 13 per cent to about 27 per cent. Public expenditures as percentage of gross domestic product .
 Ludwig Erhard, the economics minister, repudiated the Nazi legacy of statism in West Germany . Erhard embraced the free market in the 1930s and embraced the idea of socialism .
 To boost individual standards of living, he championed growth, competition, low taxes, monetary stability, and foreign trade . But he could not disregard the clamor for social protection .
 Erhard and Konrad Adenauer updated and expanded the already elaborate pension systems and accident and health insurance laws that went back to the late nineteenth century . Erhard added to the system of health insurance and pension systems .
 By 1953, 20 per cent of the West German population received some kind of state assistance . Perhaps as many as 50 per cent received government largesse . By 1955, perhaps as many of all German households received government assistance .
 The annual real growth rate of social expenditures from 1951 to 1966 was 8. per cent annually . Social expenditures increased by 8.7 per cent in the 1950s and 1960s . Social spending grew by 8 per cent per year .
 The American state grew, instituted new monetary and fiscal practices, assumed huge responsibilities for promoting the health and welfare of the American people, and taxed Americans at unprecedentedly high peacetime levels . But the U.S. state grew and instituted .
 Roosevelt's aspirations for postwar America were slowly realized despite conservative reaction . Republican takeover of Congress in 1946, end of wartime controls, dilution of Full Employment Act of 1946 . Taft-Hartley labor law passed in 1947 .
 For example, for 16 million veterans, the GI Bill of 1944 provided unemployment benefits, as well as tuition and subsistence allowances for education and training, and loans for farms, homes, and businesses .
 Between 1945 and 1966, 20 per cent of all single-family residences were financed by GI bills . The GI bill is estimated to account for nearly half of the population .
 In 1950, social security was extended to an additional 10 million persons . In 1954, the Agricultural Act brought 3 million farm operators and 2 million farm workers into the social security system . Disability insurance was added to old age and survivors' insurance in 1956 .
 Between 1945 and 1960 the number of people receiving Old Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance increased from 3.5 million to 14.6 million . Overall, between 1945 and 1959, the figure was 3.3 million people receiving insurance .
 Poverty in the U.S. fell from 51 per cent of the American people in 1935-36, to 30 per cent in 1950, to 20% in 1960, and to 17% in 1965 . Poverty in America fell dramatically in the 1930s and '60s .
 States embraced new forms of fiscal and monetary policies, helped mobilize capital and socialize risk, organized cartels, nurtured various forms of planning schemes, and sustained purchasing power in bad times . States embrace new ways of dealing with economic downturns .
 Governments modulated the business cycle, buttressed markets, slowly embraced liberalized trade, and boosted standards of living . In short, governments modulated business cycle and buttressed the economy .
 Non-communist Europe in the 1950s and 1960s increased educational expenditures by almost 15 per cent a year . The most advanced countries increased education expenditures by 15% a year and eliminated gender discrimination in many levels of schooling .
 The government nurtured growth and spawned technological innovation while building safety nets . Government nurtured innovation while built safety nets, government says .
 GDP in the U.S. grew by about 3. per cent per annum in the 1950s, and 4 per cent a year in the 1960s . GDP grew by 3.% per year in 1950s and 4.5 per cent in 1960s, according to the
 U.S. government spending as a percentage of GDP increased from 17 per cent in 1948 to 29. per cent . During these years, United States government spending increased from  17 per cent to 29 per cent of GDP in 1970 .
 Defense spending as a percentage of GDP dropped from a Korean War level of 14 per cent in 1952, to 8. per cent of GDP in 1970 . Government expenditures on payments to individuals increased from 3.% of GDP to 6.% in 1971 .
 The historian David Freund calculates that between 1947 and 1958 these agencies financed almost 50 per cent of new single-family homes purchased in the United States .
 The United States government nurtured a recalibration of power relationships between labor and capital . The U.S. government also nurtured the re-emergence of labor relations with capital capital .
 Union membership soared after the passage of the National Labor Relations Act and during the wartime emergency . Union membership in the U.S. increased during the war .
 The National Labor Relations Board, the War Labor Board, and the Office of Price Administration helped bolster the power and influence of organized labor in the U.S. State agencies helped bolster organized labor's power .
 From the 1940s through the 1960s, workers could count on the state to be a neutral, if not partial, supporter of their efforts to get a larger part of the income pie and join the middle class . The state was a neutral supporter of workers, especially organized workers .
 The United States government played a decisive role encouraging technological innovation and catalyzing the electronics, computer, and communication revolutions that transformed the American economy and society . The U.S. government also played a crucial role in encouraging technological innovations .
 Government spending for research and development increased from $940 million in 1949, to $16. billion (or 11. per cent of total government expenditures) in 1965 . Research and development spending for government research rose to $9 billion in 1949 .
 In 1959, a congressional committee estimated that about 85 per cent of electronics research and development in the U.S. was funded by the federal government . Much of that research went to major corporations like IBM, Burroughs, Control Data, and Sperry .
 The spillover impact on the civilian economy of these research endeavors was enormous, the author says . The spillout impact on civilian economy was enormous .
 The work on electronics, transistors, computers, and communications was quickly reconfigured, re-engineered, and adapted by other large corporations and by smaller competitors for the consuming public .
 These efforts reshaped habits, leisure, entertainment, and expectations in the U.S. and around the globe .
 At first, it meant a transformation of homelife, meaning the possession of indoor plumbing, stoves, refrigerators, washing machines, televisions, and cars . Later on it meant computers and cell phones, and later on it was computers .
 The state and the market together encouraged innovation, improved standards of living, and empowered the West to compete successfully with the East . The state, the market and the state encouraged innovation and improved living standards .
 Competition between communist and non-communist worlds was intense during the early decades of the Cold War . It was by no means certain that the West was ahead in stimulating economic growth and boosting standards of living .
 Soviet officials and their comrades in Eastern Europe took the competition extremely seriously . The Cold War was the first decades of the Cold War . Soviet governments did reasonably well during that period .
 In Eastern Europe, growth rate was 5.5 per cent in the 1950s and 4.4 per cent for the 1960s . Eastern Europe saw growth rate of 5.7 per cent between 1950 and 1960s, compared to 4.3 per cent .
 Life expectancy in Eastern Europe pretty much caught up with that experienced in the West . Infant mortality rates actually dropped more quickly in the East during these years .
 Despite housing shortages, there are remarkable improvements in social services and health care . Despite housing shortage, there were remarkable improvements to social services .
 Between 1965 and 1970, household consumption in East Germany increased by nearly 25 per cent . Percentage of homes with a refrigerator rose from 6 to 56 per cent, and with a television from 16 to 69 per cent. Percentage of East Germany homes with refrigerators rose from six to 56 .
 At meetings with his comrades and in speeches to his comrades, he stressed that his overriding priority was to demonstrate the superiority of socialism . He stressed that he wanted to demonstrate socialism's superiority to socialism .
 By 1970, Khrushchev asserted, the Soviet Union would equal America's gross national production . By the 1970s, it would surpass it, and then surpass it a decade later .
 Many observers in the 1950s and 1960s feared that Khrushchev might have been right . Many observers feared that he might be right. Many observers believed Khrushvic was right.
 In a generation, the Soviet Union had emancipated itself from the shackles of capitalists, managed a command economy to accelerate industrialization, developed immense military capabilities, and garnered power .
 Its trajectory was hugely appealing to nationalist leaders in the Third World . Leaders who yearned to modernize and hungered for status .
 Secretary of State John Foster Dulles observed that his colleagues "had very largely failed to appreciate the impact on the underdeveloped areas of the world of the phenomenon of Russia's rapid industrialization" Dulles noted that his . colleagues had failed to understand the impact .
 In 1974 and 1975, industrial output in the West plummeted by almost 10 per cent . Unemployment rates jumped to postwar highs . Industrial output fell by almost ten per cent, and unemployment rates hit postwar highs.
 History Workshop: A Journal of Socialist and Feminist Historians, 31 , 40-1; for figures regarding East Germany, see Greg Castillo, Cold War on the Home Front .
 The familiar narrative is that Western governments responded by jettisoning their Keynesian commitments, raising interest rates, deregulating their economies, privatizing state-owned enterprises, lowering taxes, and embracing more open markets, freer trade and capital inflows .
 Jimmy Carter, Margaret Thatcher, and Ronald Reagan led the way in this analysis . Helmut Kohl and Francois Mitterrand soon followed .
 In general, we think we know that a neo-liberal turn occurred, rejecting the state and embracing a globalized future . In the future, the state will become more powerful and more globalized, the authors say .
 Much of the narrative tells an important part of the story, but it is only a part of it, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "Much of that narrative is important to the story," Sutter says .
 What it omits is the continued role of the state in cushioning people from the hardships they faced, sustaining purchasing power, and modulating even more severe fluctuations in the business cycle . It omits that the state will continue to cushion people from hardships .
 Zbigniew Brzezinski, President Jimmy Carter's national security adviser, lamented the erosion of European economic vitality in the 1970s . He feared the consequences of high unemployment and soaring inflation in Europe . In the late 1970s, Brzezzinski feared high unemployment .
 Non-communist governments in the West increased spending as a percentage of GDP from 33 to 42 per cent . Non-Communist governments increased spending from 33-42 per cent in the 1990s .
 During the last two decades of the Cold War social security expenditures as a percentage of GDP in Japan went from 5. per cent to 14 per cent . Social security expenditures in Japan increased from 5 per cent of GDP to 14% in the last 20 years .
 In England, Margaret Thatcher talked about reconfiguring the relationship of the state and the individual . But welfare spending as a percentage of GDP (about 23 per cent) remained virtually constant .
 Spending on housing plummeted, but spending on health and education did not decline significantly . Health and education spending did not drop significantly .
 In France, Mitterrand ceded power from the state to the market and embraced privatization, deregulation, lower public spending, and higher productivity . In France he embraced privatization and deregulation, as well as monetary stability and European integration .
 During the 1980s social expenditures as a percentage of GDP in France actually went from 20 per cent to 24. per cent, dipping slightly in the late 1980s . Social expenditures went up to 20.7 per cent in 1980s, but dipped slightly in late 80s .
 Social expenditures as a percentage of GDP grew by almost 4. per cent a year from 1970 to 1982 . Social expenditures in West Germany grew by 4.5 per cent between 1970 and 1982 . In West Germany, social expenditures grew only minimally thereafter . Social expenditure as a per cent of
 Social expenditures as a percentage of GDP also increased during the 1980s from 18 per cent to 20 per cent . Italy's social expenditures increased during that period from 18% to 20% in 1980s . Social expenditures also increased from 18-18 per cent of GDP .
 Social spending dropped much in the United States, and neither did the size of the public sector . Nor did social spending drop much in U.S. and neither in the U.K.
 Total government expenditures in the U.S. as a percentage of GDP in 1980 were 31. per cent . In 1990, they were 32 per cent; in 1990, the same amount was 32.per cent .
 Social security and Medicare spending was 5.5 per cent of GDP in 1980 and 6.7 per cent in 1990 . Social security spending in 1980s was 5 per cent GDP . Medicare spending in 1990s was 6 per cent .
 Without acknowledging what they were doing, lawmakers were, in fact, using the state in creative new ways to expand the social net . Lawmakers were, for example, expanding the state's social safety net without acknowledging it .
 While deregulation, privatization, and liberalization proceeded to unfetter markets and trade, erode the power of labor unions, and increase levels of income inequality . The role of the state in shaping monetary policy, insuring minimum safety nets, promoting technological innovation, encouraging fuel production, and nurturing
 President Obama raised interest rates to thwart inflation and promote a strong dollar . The president raised rates to stop inflation and stop the rise in interest rates . He raised rates in order to prevent inflation .
 The Housing Act of 1968 and the Emergency Home Finance Act of 1970 created the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation . The Federal Home Loans Mortgage Corporation was created in 1970 .
 It encouraged production of oil shale, alcohol fuels, and geothermal and solar energy . It encouraged the production of alcohol fuels and oil shale .
 Congress passed the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988 . After protracted study and legislative logrolling, the act was passed by Congress .
 It institutionalized new forms of private-public collaboration . It allocated new powers to the executive branch to negotiate trade agreements and expand commerce . It also allocated powers to negotiate deals with the president .
 West European governments, meanwhile, negotiated ""The Single European Act of 1987,” further buttressing market forces and igniting increases in productivity . The single European Act was negotiated in 1987 .
 How the United States Traded Factories for Finance in the Seventies, 218. How the U.S. traded Factories in the 1970s . The United States traded factories for finance in the 70s .
 They enlarged their Social Action Program and scripted basic guidelines for full employment, better living and working conditions, and increased participation of labor .
 European governments were integrating their economies as never before, and embracing free markets . But they reconfirmed their commitment to social provision, safety nets, research, training, education, and higher standards of living .
 The 1989 Social Charter underscored the EC's commitments to maximum working hours, minimum working age, gender equality, and gender equality . Only small amounts of money was earmarked for these purposes .
 Compensatory social spending by governments helped preserve consumption even as unemployment increased in Europe and inequality began to grow in America .
 World trade increased competition from low-wage producers in Asia, undercut domestic wage levels in the West . In other words, safety nets, unemployment insurance, and retraining initiatives helped preserve individual opportunity and standards .
 Overall, there were few radical backlashes and only modest social turmoil in the West in the 1980s . Overall, the West was relatively stable in the '80s and '90s .
 Eurocommunism floundered in France and Italy; and Spain, Portugal, and Greece rid themselves of their neo-fascist pasts and opted for social democracy and market economies . Despite the tougher economic circumstances in Western Europe, communism lost the appeal it once had .
 European workers increasingly embraced lifestyles that emulated and then began to surpass their American counterparts . In fact, European workers began to emulate and then surpassed American counterparts, experts say .
 They jettisoned their self-identity in terms of their relationship to the means of production . They embraced a new sense of self based on their status as consumers .
 Women, teenagers, and men were tantalized by household gadgets that eased their lives . Images of glamour and sexuality that whet their deepest appetites whet appetites, they said .
 Through museum exhibitions and radio broadcasting, U.S. officials tried to illuminate the false promises of communism and convey the superiority of democratic polities where diverse peoples could speak freely, express their individual creativity .
 For U.S. leaders in particular, a key component of their system's strength was its capacity to deliver a superior standard of living, the U.N. leader says . For United States leaders, that was a key part of their strength was their ability to deliver the superior standard
 Capitalism, they insisted, did not exploit workers as producers; it empowered them as consumers . Capitalism empowered workers as consumers as consumers, they said . Capitalism does not exploit them as producers, it empowers them to consumers .
 Capitalism bred dignity among workers, exemplified through personal buying power, household appliances, cosmetics, leisure, travel, and entertainment . It was exemplified by personal buying and household appliances and cosmetics .
 After 1975, these messages from the West increasingly resonated in the East . The West's message of the West became increasingly resonant in the West .
 During the first decades of the Cold War, growth rates in the USSR compared favorably to those in the United States . Eastern Europe's growth rates also compared nicely to those of Western Europe, and those in East Germany .
 Economic growth rates in communist Europe fell in the 1970s and 1980s . But economic growth rates remained steady throughout communist Europe .
 Eastern Europe declined from 49 per cent of Western European per capita GDP in 1973 to 37 per cent in 1989 . Eastern Europe fell to a low of 49% in 1973, according to the OECD .
 Infant mortality rates and life expectancy statistics in Eastern Europe also suffered in comparison to what was happening in the West . Life expectancy rates and infant mortality rates also suffered from Eastern Europe .
 Communist regimes were unable to make the adjustments to new economic circumstances that their counterparts in the West were making, however jarringly . Basically, communist regimes were . unable to adjust to new . circumstances .
 After 1968, Eastern Europe retreated from economic reform, failed to adjust to the oil shocks of the 1970s . Eastern Europe became increasingly dependent on loans from the West .
 Communist leaders in Eastern Europe could not institute a functioning price system that provided incentives to innovate, innovate and boost productivity . They could not satisfy consumer demand at home or compete successfully in international markets, he says .
 More travel, increased tourism, and the influx of films and television programs into the East highlighted the discrepancies to more and more people .
 Soviet leaders from Khrushchev to Gorbachev never stopped believing and saying that the goal of communism or advanced socialism was to improve the living conditions of individuals and families .
 Journal of Cold War Studies, 12 , 3-31. United States Exchange Exhibits and Their Reception in the Soviet Union, 1959-1967. "Exhibits" and their Reactions in the USSR were met with hostility .
 Soviet leaders promised their people full employment, higher and more equal wages, and improving standards of living . The Soviet Union was founded in 1953 .
 Soviet economists who had been pondering ways to reconcile planning with the market were squelched . After the Kremlin crushed the reform movement in Czechoslovakia in 1968, Soviet economists were quelched.
 Gorbachev tried to revitalize their thinking and catalyze reforms in the command economy, he made things worse . He made things much worse, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Gorbachev made things very worse"
 Per capita spending on social services actually began declining in the 1970s . After 1981, after 1981, social services spending fell absolutely for consumption, health, and education .
 The United States and Western Europe are failing to catch up to the modernizing economies of East and Southeast Asia . The U.S. and Europe are now trailing the economies of Asia and the region .
 But it was not being crushed simply by the superiority of a free market system . It is not being beaten simply by free market systems, it is being crushed by free markets .
 It was crushed by reformed forms of capitalism, by social democracy, and by social market economies . Governments played critically important roles in providing safety nets, insuring minimal social provision, spurring research and innovation .
 Communism was defeated by people in democratic polities who expected their governments to structure, support, regulate, liberalize, and ameliorate market forces . Communism, in other words, was defeated because they expected their government to structure and regulate .
 This required judgment, fine-tuning, continual recalibrations of the role of the state and the market . This required judgement, fine tuning, and a constant recalibration of the roles of state and market .
 The Soviet Collapse, 1970-2000 , 19; also see Kotkin, Steeltown, 142; Kotkin's ""Kiss of Debt,"" 86-9 . Kotkin: The Soviet collapse of the Soviet Union was the result of the collapse of communism .
 Reagan declared governments were not the solution; they were the problem . Reagan declared that governments were the solution to the Cold War and economic woes . Reagan took office at a harrowing time in a dismal economic climate and in a harrowing climate .
 Any fairminded assessment of Western policies during the Cold War would affirm that the ""state"" was an indispensable part of the solution . The state was indispensable key to victory in Cold War, writes Peter Bergen .
 Thinking that free markets alone won the Cold War is fraught with ominous consequences . The Cold War has been a source of tension between the U.S. and Russia .
 Since the Soviet Union collapsed, some commentators, think tanks, political leaders, and government officials have proceeded more vigorously to attack entitlements and safety nets, dismantle or weaken regulatory agencies, deride the value of the state .
 Some initiatives of this sort no doubt contributed to the revitalization of the West in the 1980s . Some initiatives, such as this, contributed to a revitalization in the 80s .
 The welfare benefits and safety nets in a globalized economy bloated the budgets of Western governments, saddled them with onerous debt burdens, increased costs of production, and weakened the capacity of their entrepreneurs to compete in international markets . And, surely, generous welfare benefits .
 Bill Clinton famously stated, ""it's the economy, stupid,"" he might have added that it is the state and the market, neither alone, that nurture a thriving economy . The state and market are not alone alone, but they nurture the economy .
 The balance was one of the greatest accomplishments of the West during the Cold War, the success of which could not have been predicted in 1945 . Creating that balance, recalibrating it, and sustaining it, were one of West's greatest accomplishments .
 At the end of the Second World War, the United States invested in global industrial development, on the model of the Tennessee Valley Authority and comparable big domestic public works .
 David Ekbladh, Nick Cullather, and others have shown how this internationalization of the New Deal damaged many of the societies it hoped to serve . The New Deal was designed to help the poor, but it was also damaged by its internationalization .
 In the 1960s the United States merged ideas of development and counterinsurgency in Southeast Asia for ""modern"" security and prosperity . Similarly, in the 1960's the U.S. merged ideas with ideas of developing and counter-insurgentism .
 American rural projects exacerbated communist threats that policymakers in Washington hoped to forestall . Michael Latham, Philip Catton, and others have analyzed how these projects exacerbated the very communist threats . The U.S. rural projects have exacerbated the threat of communist threats, they say .
 President Reagan pledged to mobilize American technology to create an impregnable space shield against nuclear attacks . The Strategic Defense Initiative was created in the last decade of the Cold War .
 The Strategic Defense Initiative was an idea that overextended American resources, underserved the promised beneficiaries, and antagonized many American adversaries . Like the previous promises of global industrial development and rural modernization, the idea was overextending American resources .
 Big dreams were alluring to self-confident Americans in the Cold War, but often had nightmarish implications . Big dreams often had dark implications for the nation .
 Historians have made a career of identifying, deconstructing, and ultimately condemning the intellectual orthodoxies that underpinned America's misguided Cold War dreams . Historians say the Cold War was a 'misguided Cold War dream'
 Scholars have exposed how naive, ahistorical, and self-serving assumptions about ""development,"" ""modernization,"" and even ""health,"" encouraged intervention, violence, and authoritarianism . This is exactly the opposite of the aims American policymakers claimed to serve .
 Another group of writers has furthered this cultural ""outing"" of American foreign policy, focusing on the racist and sexist underpinnings of policies that encouraged particular kinds of nationalism and statehood .
 America's liberal democratic promises exported racist and chauvinist practices to societies in transition, authors say . Authors: Liberal democratic promises were exported racist practices to society in transition .
 American foreign policy in the Cold War was intellectually bankrupt, says Julian Zelizer . Reading this exciting new work, one might conclude that U.S. foreign policy is intellectually bankrupt .
 American foreign policy during the Cold War contributed to the spread of four basic propositions that, on the whole, enhanced global peace and prosperity . Despite all the misguided and harmful ideas promoted by the United States, the U.S. helped spread the spread .
 These propositions were not unique to the U.S. or the post-1945 years . They are not only the United States or post-1944 .
 They were empowered internationally, however, by an American government with global capabilities and commitments that knew few previous historical parallels, at least since the growth of British influence .
 The traditional American posture in all previous postwar periods emphasized a mix of unilateralism and isolationism . The traditional U.S. posture in postwar periods was to be more isolationist .
 American institution building, alliance formation, and containment doctrine after the Cold War championed multilateralism . U.S. institution building and alliance formation in the wake of the Cold Cold War led to multilateral cooperation .
 For the first time, the U.S. prepared to confront foreign threats as part of a permanent set of partnerships . The partnerships spanned from London and West Berlin to Tokyo and Seoul .
 Americans supported free trade across the globe, believing that open competition, not just open markets, would increase everyone's prosperity . Second, Americans supported the idea that free trade would increase prosperity across the world .
 Americans now cut their own traditional high protectionist walls to spur growth in bidirectional trade volume and spread production—not just consumption— across the globe . Moving far beyond ""Open Door"" efforts to reach foreign consumers and ""Dollar Diplomacy"" investments in foreign infrastructure, Americans now
 Americans placed unprecedented faith in the comparative advantages that would come from the economic advancement of all societies . Building factories and disseminating innovation for foreign competitors, Americans placed .
 The United States continued to maintain high tariffs on many industrial products and luxury items produced abroad . The U.S. kept a high tariff on some of the items produced in the United States .
 The American government offered lucrative financial supports for farmers and numerous manufacturers . Similarly, the American government also offered financial support for farmers .
 Overall, American trade policy remained restrictive, but it was still freer than it had ever been before . U.S. trade policy remains restrictive but it's still freeer than ever before .
 In comparison to any other period in the country's history, this was a high point for the practice and advocacy of free trade by the U.S. The United States. "This was a very high point"
 Third, and most often neglected by historians, American policymakers pursued collective security and free trade with a strong commitment to financial solvency . The belief that American resources were finite, that budgets had to be balanced, and that too much spending undermined domestic dynamism .
 The American aversion to traditional empire building reflected a belief that empire was simply too expensive . The U.S. has a long history of trying to build empires around the world .
 U.S. policy during the Cold War sought influence through preponderance and efficiency . American policy was based on pre-eminence and efficiency, not pre-emphasis .
 The United States would do more than others because it could, but also because it knew how . The U.S. knew how to do more because of its own ability to do so .
 This meant a preference for technology over manpower, for incrementalism over bold risk-taking . Time and again, this meant the government chose to prioritise technology over personnel .
 The United States promoted a concept of democracy, and a broader free society, to allies and adversaries alike after the Second World War . The U.S. also promoted democracy to allies, adversaries alike .
 This was a long-standing vision for global change, now married to unique and unprecedented power . This was the vision of a global change that was married to unprecedented power. This is now a global vision for change, says President Obama .
 For those who are more skeptical, democratic aspirations were unavoidable . For those more skeptical of democratic aspirations, they were unavoidable. For those those who were more skeptical it was unavoidable.
 The U.S. had the opportunity to help build participatory, representative, humane governments, especially in Europe and Asia, where they had not existed before . The United States had the extraordinary postwar opportunity to . help build participation of participatory and representative governments, writes Julian Zelizer .
 Americans blamed the absence of democracy for the rise of fascism and communism . They sought to secure themselves by making the world safe for democracy, to paraphrase Wilson's famous statement .
 Democratic nation building became a guiding idea for all American foreign interventions . Democratic nations building became the guiding idea of all U.S. foreign interventions.
 This vision remained powerful, even when policy practice departed from hopes and expectations, as it often did . This vision was powerful even though policy practice often departed from expectations . The U.S. Supreme Court has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 This contradiction does not reflect a lack of sincerity among Americans, but impatience with the slow and complex paths to change in foreign societies . This contradiction reflects the impatience of foreign societies, he says .
 Too often, Americans supported ""strongman” figures who promised a quick and orderly road to reform . Too often Americans supported "strongman" figures . "Strongman" leaders promised quick, orderly reform, but they failed to do so .
 Too often, Americans came to believe that long-term democratization was best served by short-term dictatorship, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: "Too often, we came to think that democracy would be served by dictatorship"
 Racism and cultural prejudice contributed to this process with common assertions that particular societies were allegedly ""not ready” for democracy and in need of paternalistic guidance . Racism contributed to the process with assertions that society was not ready for democracy .
 The strength of American democratic convictions drove anti-communism and interventionism in the Cold War, with very controversial results . U.S. democratic convictions led to interventionism, with controversial results.
 The standards of democracy that the U.S. promoted frequently provided the framework for criticizing Washington's specific policies . The standards that the United States promoted provided the . framework for criticism .
 The spread of democracy in the Cold War occurred because of and despite the U.S. The spread was due to and despite America, CNN's John Sutter says .
 These ideas entered a period of collective crisis during the last decades of the Cold War . Free trade, free trade, solvency, and democracy were also in crisis during that period .
 In the aftermath of detente, the oil crisis of 1973, the growth of domestic spending, and the emergence of many new states throughout the ""Third World,"" Washington found itself more constrained than it had been since the end of WWII .
 Inherited assumptions about alliances, resources, and popular consensus broke down . Inherited assumption about alliances and resources broke down. The result was a disaster for the country .
 The global ""shock"" of the 1970s had lasting effects that historians have only begun to examine . The global 'shock' of the '70s had left lasting effects on the planet .
 Despite these fundamental shifts, the four Cold War ideas continued to exert a strong hold on U.S. strategic thinking . The four key ideas were the Cold War core of American strategic thinking.
 Policy planners relied almost instinctively on the lessons of the early Cold War . Policy planners rely on lessons from the lessons learned from the Cold War.
 The ideas that shaped the years after 1945 acquired a staying power that they still have not lost . The ideas of the war era have never lost their staying power .
 President Barack Obama has reaffirmed this conventional wisdom . Obama has been criticized for his lack of transparency in the past .
 They are attitudes, aspirations, and ideal types whose complex practices never match simple definitions . They're attitudes and aspirations that never match the simple definitions of simple practices .
 You either believe in the first principles of each claim, or you do not, or do not . You either have to accept the principles of both claims or not .
 Most social scientists would respond affirmatively to each of the above questions, but none of us can actually prove our answers, beyond a series of cases selected to demonstrate what we already think .
 If asked these questions in, say 1938, many Americans would answer differently from citizens in 2012 . Many Americans today would answer the questions differently .
 Answers vary with context, and the assumptions that a particular context promotes . Answers vary depending on context and context .
 The emergence of an international consensus on collective security, free trade, solvency, and democracy during the Cold War was not preordained . It is not pre-ordained, says David Cameron .
 Americans never supported these ideas as strongly or as globally before the Second World War . Americans support these ideas strongly or more globally .
 The new consensus was manufactured by elites in Washington and other Western capitals . It was promoted actively by the U.S. government from Franklin Roosevelt's presidency to the present .
 With historical hindsight, spreading this American dream was the most successful thing that Washington did in the second half of the twentieth century, Washington says . Washington's role in spreading the U.S. dream was most successful, he says .
 The consensus on collective security, free trade, solvency, and democracy was not hegemonical, many scholars say . Many scholars use the term 'hegemonical' in ways that many scholars use it .
 Other contrary ideas—communism, Keynesianism, import-substitution, environmentalism, even enlightened authoritarianism— continued to challenge these propositions into the present day .
 The application of these ideas in the Cold War correlates with relative peace and expanding prosperity in many parts of the world . It surely does not mean that they are the ""correct" ideas, or that they have some special purchase on the ""truths"" of history .
 These ideas looked suspect to many well-informed observers in 1938, they may appear wrong-headed again in the future . Just as these ideas looked suspicious to many in 1938 in 1938 may look wrong again in future .
 To say that these ideas contributed to American successes, as they did, is not to say that they ""won" the Cold War . The Cold War was not won by these ideas or their promoters .
 Ideas do not win or lose wars any more than political debates . Ideas are not winning or losing wars, they win or losing political debates, says Julian Zelizer . Ideas win or loses wars but ideas do not, he says, any more, than they do in politics .
 Security, free trade, solvency, and democracy helped Americans take advantage of unique opportunities and deflect dangerous challenges in the second half of the twentieth century .
 The application of these ideas, in the peculiar circumstances of the time, enhanced U.S. power with manageable costs, says historian John Sutter .
 The promotion of these ideas, by a select group of leaders, served American interests, as well as the interests of America's closest allies, writes CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter says the promotion of ideas by a group of world leaders was a mistake .
 The foundational ideas behind American Cold War policies were well matched to the capabilities and desires of the American people . The American people want to know more about the Cold War, the author says .
 The ideas were practical and they resonated with popular fears and demands after 1945 . The ideas are practical and resonated .
 The Cold War was a sustainable struggle for American society notoriously fickle in its international commitments . More than anything, that is what made the Cold War a sustained struggle .
 The match between circumstances and ideas allowed the United States to maintain a consistent and successful Cold War grand strategy . The U.S. maintained a consistent, successful strategy during the Cold War .
 Grand strategies are built on ideas that serve a purpose in a particular historical epoch . Grand strategies were built up on ideas built up to a specific historical epoch. Grand strategies can be built up in a grand strategy .
 U.S. leaders have learned in the early troublesome years of the twenty-first century . They rarely endure for more than a few decades, as well as a few more .
 Before the Second World War, Americans had never accepted the idea of collective security .
 U.S. citizens assumed they would benefit from separation from European great power politics, abundant land and resources, and national self-reliance without dependence on foreign assistance .
 American foreign policy developed with precisely these assumptions during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries . U.S. foreign policy evolved with these assumptions in the late 1800s .
 In the formulation of the Monroe Doctrine, Secretary of State John Quincy Adams rejected any coordination with Great Britain, choosing a strong and unilateral American statement instead . The Monroe Doctrine was the result of a strong statement from Adams .
 In 1899 and 1900, Secretary of State John Hay's famous Open Door Notes rejected a collective imperial enterprise in Asia, demanding space for free and equal efforts by different nations seeking access to the China Market .
 Woodrow Wilson refused to make the U.S. an official ally of Great Britain, France, and Italy in the First World War . Wilson was the first major advocate of collective security .
 The U.S. Senate's rejection of the Paris Peace Treaty reaffirmed the American aversion to serious collective security efforts . The United States rejected the treaty, and the League of Nations in particular .
 Americans realized that they could no longer go it alone in the wake of a debilitating economic depression . Americans were fighting fascist powers on two fronts in the aftermath of the economic depression.
 They even needed to compromise with communist figures, like Soviet dictator Josef Stalin, like Stalin .
 The Grand Alliance in the Second World War was the first serious U.S. experience with collective security . It was first serious American experience in collective security during the war .
 The entire ethos of the New Deal was about building collective capacities, home and abroad, where they had not existed before . The New Deal's ethos was to build collective capacities where they were not previously existed before, he says .
 They transformed a free market society with a very small federal government into a much more regulated and purposely interconnected community of peoples, working together as they had not done before . They transformed the free market . society .
 In 1945, unlike in 1919, Americans were more comfortable with collective security than ever before . America's collective security was more secure in 1945 than in 1919 . In 1945 the nation was more comfortable in collective security .
 Collective action and cooperative deliberation had, over the course of the previous decade, become part of ""normal" politics . Collective action had, in the past decade, been part of 'normal' politics .
 Franklin Roosevelt's enduring popularity was, above all, his embodiment of this perspective . Franklin Roosevelt was the embodiment of that perspective . Roosevelt's popularity was above all the . FDR's enduring popularity was his .
 The American commitment to collective security at the end of the Second World War endured throughout the Cold War . The U.S. joined the European Union in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Historians have underestimated this attitudinal continuity, and overemphasized a break in the origins of the Cold War . If anything, historian says, historians have underestimated the attitudinal continuation of the cold war . The Cold War is not overreconceived as a new Cold War,
 American policies were much more expansive after 1945, and they addressed many new challenges . But they grew from an ideological seedbed planted a decade before . American policies became more expansive in 1945 .
 Melvyn Leffler and others have pointed to the fears of a postwar depression that motivated policymakers in the Cold War . The fears of postwar depression was cited as a factor in the decision to take action .
 Strategies of preponderant power, designed to insure economic sustenance, were also strategies of collective action to insure against the isolation of American society and the growth of external challengers .
 For the generation that lived through the 1930s and the 1940s, it was obvious that ""saving capitalism” meant building cooperative institutions that enhanced, but also committed, American power . For many, the cooperative institutions enhanced American power.
 The United Nations, the International Monetary Fund, and the World Bank were international expressions of this New Deal attitude . The U.N., IMF and World Bank are examples of this attitude .
 American support for the European Reconstruction Program and similar reconstruction and integration efforts in Asia were productive spillovers of the newfound emphasis on collective security . U.S. support for European reconstruction programs, the European Coal and Steel Community, was productive .
 Its support, often at great cost to the still precarious postwar economy, committed the country to the common advancement of its foreign allies as never before . The support of the U.S. has often cost the country's economy, but it has also made it vital to its allies .
 Cold War containment doctrine and its foremost practitioners embodied collective security as well as collective security in the Cold War era . The doctrine of containment doctrine was based on collective security .
 Kennan's original ideas called for a unified anti-communist stand against Soviet expansion . In rejecting all-out warfare or traditional negotiations with adversaries, Kennan rejected traditional negotiations .
 He sought to create a collective deterrence that would restrain and slowly demoralize the enemy, he said . He said it would restrain, slowly demoralizing the enemy . The U.S. government has been in touch with the U.N. since 2001 .
 He also expected that an impressive collective Western posture would attract adherents who initially showed communist leanings . He said he also expected to attract adherents with a Western posture .
 Josip Broz Tito of Yugoslavia, and his 1948 break-up with Stalin, was Kennan's primary example of this phenomenon . Kennan: Tito's split with Stalin was one of the most famous examples of this .
 Kennan's successors expanded the global reach of containment, but they remained true to the reliance on collective deterrence in combating communist advances . Paul Nitze, Dean Acheson, John Foster Dulles, Henry Kissinger, Zbigniew Brzezinski, and Brent Scowcroft were
 Containment gave the U.S. an international leadership role, but it demanded multilateral action . Containment led the United States to a leadership role in the Middle East . The United States was forced to take action against the Soviet Union in the 1990s .
 By the middle of the Cold War, this motivated the U.S. to finance and defend a series of undemocratic regimes in Asia, Africa, and Latin America . This motivated the United States to finance, defend and defend undemocracies .
 The U.S. promised to support collective responses to Soviet, Chinese, and Cuban interventions . Although these regimes were often an affront to American values, they promised to be supportive .
 Washington's obsession with collective responses to communism motivated support for brutal authoritarians, including Syngman Rhee, Ngo Dinh Diem, the Shah of Iran, and Augusto Pinochet .
 When Americans acted alone, they didn't have to make deals with devilish figures, they did not have to compromise their values for the sake of security . They did not need to defend faraway regimes, as well as defend the United States .
 Americans lost their independence, their moral clairvoyance, and their ethical exceptionalism . Americans are integrated into a world of collective institutions, says author .
 The United States made the kinds of Realpolitik compromises familiar to other great powers in prior eras . The U.S. made the same compromises as any other great power .
 This phenomenon showed the dynamism of U.S. foreign policy, but it never sat well with idealists at home and abroad . This phenomenon was a sign of America's dynamism, but not its idealism .
 Despite criticisms of the United States, collective security contributed to Washington's enduring strength throughout the Cold War . Despite the criticisms of U.S. especially in the aftermath of the Vietnam War, the U.K. contributed to its enduring strength .
 The United States nurtured a series of alliance relationships, particularly in Europe and East Asia . The alliance provided necessary resources, ingenuity, and popular support for containing communist advances .
 A Critical Appraisal of American National Security Policy During the Cold War, revised edition , revised edition . The Cold War was a Cold War era of American national security policy .
 America's harshest critics see a common purpose in supporting U.S. programs . Collective security contributed to transnational and interpersonal familiarities . Most important, collective security .
 The American commitment to collective security gave Washington a clear ""soft power"" advantage over Moscow . The U.S. commitment to security gave the U.K. a clear advantage over Russia .
 The individualistic sensibility of the United States in the Cold War supported more effective collective security measures than the communal ethic of the Soviet leadership .
 The United States pursued global free trade after the Second World War on an unprecedented scale . The U.S. pursued free trade in the wake of the war on a scale .
 This did not mean a complete elimination of trade tariffs, even within the U.S. This does not mean an elimination of all trade tariffs in the United States .
 It did mark a new commitment to the denationalization of economic production . It did, however, mark a . new commitment .
 In combating an anti-capitalist enemy that sought central control over all means of production, Americans made the remarkable decision to spread production capabilities to the largest number of possible places around the globe .
 Despite prior invocations of free trade, this was a radical idea in its time . This was the first time free trade was introduced in the 1930s .
 Until 1945, most Americans presumed that national strength required a centering of big industry within the U.S. Until 1945 most Americans assumed that big industry was in the United States .
 Foreign markets for resource extraction and the sale of finished products were a traditional goal, but production remained largely homebound . Foreign markets were a major goal for the U.S. industry .
 Profits accrued most directly to the domestic producers, not the foreign resource suppliers or consumers, according to the report . Profits accrue most directly .
 Free trade fueled the wealth of the Victorian British Empire . This was the model for the ""imperialism of free trade" According to Ronald Robinson and John Gallagher .
 Hobson and Lenin penned their famous criticisms of capitalist exploitation . Hobson had been in mind when he penned his criticisms of capitalism .
 For the first time, the United States invested heavily in factories and other industrial capacity in distant countries . The U.S. invested heavily into factories and factories in Western Europe and Japan, then South Korea, Taiwan and other emerging economies .
 Through the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, the U.S. and its allies also created an international lending system to encourage local investments in production, and the associated laws of contract, property, and exchange that would fuel capitalist development .
 American-sponsored free trade created one common system of exchange . Instead of rival empires, rival empires had one common exchange system . The U.S. helped create one of the world's largest economies .
 The dollar became the reserve currency of the world, the guarantor of value in production and exchange across diverse territories . According to the Bretton Woods System, and its successors, the dollar was the guarantator of value .
 The spread of dollars through free trade had advantages and disadvantages for Washington . Free trade has been a big problem for the U.S. since the start of the 1980s .
 President Richard Nixon ended convertibility to gold in 1971 . It gave the United States an ability to generate liquidity for investment, especially after 1971 .
 Since foreign countries held dollars in reserve, the U.S. could print more, and finance debt, at reduced cost . The United States was able to print more than $1.2 billion in dollars .
 Washington was constrained by the need to exchange its dollars for valuable goods and specie, on demand from foreign holders . In return, the U.S. was forced to exchange dollars with valuable goods, specie .
 Americans spent more on bases and businesses in Europe and Asia during the 1960s . The country risked a shortage of its own money to cover its growing costs .
 Policymakers feared the political consequences of pulling their money out of allied economies, but also confronted ever-growing shortfalls . Deficit spending was unprecedented, by the 1970s, for the U.S. in peacetime for the United States .
 The dollarization of a global free trade economy opened the world, including the U.S., to new dependencies . The United States is now dependent on the world's dollarized trade .
 Free trade required real sacrifices that Americans, among others, endured in the Cold War . Despite the obvious wealth creation, free trade created real sacrifices .
 A History of the International Monetary System, 2nd edition , chapters 4-5 . The IMF is the world's largest single currency system in the world .
 The Politics of International Monetary Relations, 1958-1971 ; Eichengreen, Globalizing Capital, chapters 4-5. no Jeremi Suri subsidize domestic industry . Suri says Suri's government subsidizes domestic industry. Suri: Suri’s government is
 For more than a century, Washington relied on very large tariffs to finance the federal budget and support internal development . Washington had relied on large tariffs for many years .
 Americans quickly reversed this equation for the sake of spreading production and wealth, and combating communism . Americans reversed the equation with communism, but not communism, in the past .
 With reduced industrial tariffs, U.S. companies faced more intensive foreign competition in their own markets . United States workers often lost their jobs to foreign counterparts . The burden for financing growing federal expenditures shifted decisively from tariffs to personal income taxes .
 Yes, Americans agreed to pay more taxes for a high production-high consumption world of free trade in the Cold War . Yes, yes, Americans paid more taxes in the 1950s .
 By the 1960s free trade meant that cars, appliances, and high-end machinery arrived from abroad . Initially after the Second World War the United States imported inexpensive products .
 They contributed to a new capitalist trading system that greatly increased the circulation of goods, reduced prices through increased competition, and spread wealth across the globe . The system was created in the early 1900s .
 The countries opened themselves to new production possibilities after the Second World War, with American assistance, became much wealthier than before .
 Those that resisted free trade remained poor until they eventually became free market producers themselves . Free trade is a free market economy that produces more and more products .
 China and India are prime examples of free trade latecomers who have achieved new prosperity . India and China are examples of late-comers to achieve new prosperity in free trade .
 The striking exception that proves the rule is the agricultural sector of the American economy . Political powerful farm states managed to maintain high tariffs to protect their crop values .
 A similar process took shape in Western Europe, Japan, and other industrial democracies . The process was similar to that of Western Europe and Japan .
 Industrial trade and growth far exceeded agricultural trade and innovation during the Cold War . As a consequence, industrial trade and . growth far outstripped agricultural trade, innovation during Cold War, experts say .
 American-sponsored free trade brought computer chip factories to Japan and software production centers to India . But it kept agriculture more rooted in traditional territories . Free trade kept agriculture in traditional areas .
 The gross inefficiencies in food production and distribution in the twenty-first century are a result of this exception to the free trade trend of the Cold War . Food production in the 20th century is due to the exception to free trade .
 Global free trade did not necessarily remove the harsh edges from capitalism, says economist . Free trade is not necessarily removing harsh edges of capitalism, he says .
 Free trade was a dynamic system of ""creative destruction,"" in Joseph Schumpeter's terms, that undermined efforts at central control by various political elites . Free trade undermined efforts to central control of various political leaders .
 Free trade often hurt American workers who lost jobs to overseas factories, but it increased consumption and encouraged innovation . Free trade increased consumption in the United States and increased innovation in manufacturing .
 Free trade economies were not more fair, but they were more dynamic than their counterparts . Free trade is not just fair, it's more dynamic, but it's dynamic than counterparts, he says .
 The United States did not ""win" the Cold War because, as Schumpeter predicted, the development of free trade capitalism was mixed, contradictory, and ever changing . Free trade capitalism is mixed and contradictory and changing .
 With global competition, the U.S. economy became more efficient and innovative, but also more susceptible to foreign shocks . Free trade assured basic assumptions about market exchanges, and private property would spread . The United States became more innovative and innovative .
 It was an idea, however, that continued to elicit mixed opinions among Americans . It was the idea, but it was still a controversial topic .
 In this controversial context, Washington's support for free trade throughout the Cold War is remarkable . Washington's consistent and unprecedented support of free trade is quite remarkable—and deserving of more attention .
 The United States came out of the Second World War with more resources and capabilities than any other society . The U.S. had more resources, capabilities than all other nations .
 In a reversal of its position at the start of the century, the U.S. was now the largest creditor to the world, controlling the flow of capital to favorable investors .
 The possibilities for American economic dominance are truly unprecedented, says President Obama . "The possibilities for U.S. economic dominance were truly unprecedented," he says .
 It left America's chief rival, the Soviet Union, in an especially weak economic position . The Soviet Union was left in a weak position .
 The challenge for the U.S. was not asserting global predominance, but managing the multiplication of foreign obligations and commitments . The challenge was managing the "multimillion dollar" commitment to foreign obligations .
 As never before, Washington found itself occupying and rebuilding societies in Europe and Asia . Washington found themselves occupying and . rebuilding societies .
 America's economic dominance was still insufficient for the demands of postwar global reconstruction . America's economy still insufficient to meet the needs of postwar reconstruction, the author says .
 Americans struggle to cover the costs of doing so much in so many places . Americans struggled to pay for many of the costs .
 As John Lewis Gaddis has shown in his seminal work on the history of containment doctrine, the tension between the ever-growing demands on the United States and the consistent constraints on available resources drove debates about strategy .
 In a recurring cycle, one administration sought to expand available resources with additional flexibilities . Its successor tried to correct for overspending and overcommitment through retrenchment policies that limited expenses .
 The cycle alternating between expansion and retrenchment continued . The next administration then reverted to more costly efforts, the next .
 Budgets cycles in the Cold War drove strategy as much as foreign threat perceptions . The Cold War was a Cold War era when budgets and threat perceptions were key to strategy .
 President Dwight Eisenhower was somewhat successful in the 1950s, holding the line on what he described as a creeping ""garrison state" if the United States continued to spend too much on foreign aid and defense .
 The president feared that excessive foreign commitments would undermine domestic growth . President Barack Obama has been criticized for his foreign policy decisions .
 Despite his own military background, he believed that a ""free society"" had to limit the peacetime presence of the American military, and its associated institutions . He said that a "free society" must limit the military presence in peacetime .
 Eisenhower: High military spending was inefficient, wasteful, and unsustainable in Eisenhower's view . Eisenhower: "High military spending" was inefficient and unsustainable . Eisenhower said it was unsustainable in his view .
 The ""New Look"" strategy of the 1950s sought to reduce the global American footprint and rely on technology, especially nuclear weapons, to project power on the cheap . The 'New Look' strategy was designed to reduce America's global footprint .
 Even this disciplined strategy fell prey to continued pressures for increased U.S. spending to combat communism and assure stability in places as distant as South Korea, Vietnam, Lebanon, and the Congo . Even this . strategy, however, fell prey for increased .
 The United States found that maintaining the technological edge in nuclear weapons and other technologies was very expensive . The U.S. found it was more expensive than Eisenhower expected . The cost of maintaining the edge was very high .
 The United States could not return to the more restrained and economical strategic posture that fiscal conservatives, like Eisenhower, demanded . Cold War expenditures continued to grow, and the U.S. couldn't return .
 Budget cycles bounced between periods of plenty and moments of austerity . But overall spending on foreign and defense activities increased .
 American leaders never mastered this dynamic, but they learned to live with it . American leaders learned to accept it, but it's not easy to do .
 Kennedy, Johnson, Reagan, Kennedy and LBJ were big spenders . The big spendingers were attentive to certain limits .
 "They tried to cut costs where they could, and they continued to rely upon the domestic tax base for financing foreign policy expenditures," the president says .
 Truman and Eisenhower spent unprecedented resources on expansive military, economic, and political commitments abroad . Budget cutters who feared the smothering effect of a ""garrison state" continued to spend unprecedented resources .
 As they pinched pennies, Truman and Eisenhower built the nuclear arsenal, with ""overkill" capabilities, that became the foundation for American Cold War strategy .
 The big spenders and the budget cutters balanced growing commitments with vigilance about long-term resource capabilities . The big spending and budget cuts are similar in the U.S.
 They were attentive to maintaining American solvency, the authors say . The U.S. can assure its foreign security without undermining its domestic dynamism, they say .
 They each found a way to pursue ""guns and butter" with reasonable success . They each had a way of pursuing their own interests .
 The balance between expanding commitments and continued solvency was the greatest source of American strength in the Cold War . This balance of expanding commitments was the strength of the U.S. in the world .
 It gave Washington the opportunity to recover from mistakes, to adjust to external changes, and to outlast adversaries . It gave the U.S. the chance to recover and to adjust from mistakes .
 "This was not a necessary outcome, as anyone who has studied the history of great powers knows," says David Cameron . This was not the necessary outcome for the UK, he says .
 Managing resources to meet foreign commitments without short-changing necessary domestic investments is the most difficult challenge confronting any internationally active country . Managing resources is the biggest challenge confronting an international active country. Managing resources must be met by domestic investments, experts say .
 It was a challenge multiplied many times over by America's superpower status in the Cold War . It was the challenge of the U.S. in the midst of a superpower superpower status .
 Some observers, like historian Paul Kennedy, believed 31 . See Gaddis, Strategies of Containment, chapter 6. Some observers believed 31 was 31 .
 Of course, Kennedy's forecast underestimated the dynamism and discipline that kept American society solvent, he says . Kennedy's prediction underestimated the strength of American society .
 Even Ronald Reagan, in the early hawkish years of his presidency, spent far less on the military (as a proportion of gross domestic product) than his predecessors in the 1950s .
 The nation's leaders preserved American solvency, despite pressures, despite many pressures . Examining the history of the Cold War one must say that . The Cold War was a time of stability in the United States .
 They did it because it remained an idea they never forgot, a guidepost they returned to in every moment of strategic re-evaluation . "They did it for the sake of their own sake," they said .
 Election cycles also helped, bringing budgetary issues to public attention and forcing leaders to explain how their strategies preserved national solvency . Election cycles have also helped .
 Every Cold War president had to sell his strategy, at home and abroad, as affordable and sustainable . "Every Cold War leader had to have a strategy that was affordable, sustainable," he says .
 American solvency was driven by a powerful belief that it mattered, that a vibrant democracy could not leverage its future to fight present-day enemies . The U.S. is now in a position that it matters, and that it does .
 Major investments in infrastructure, education, and social welfare programs reflected a remarkable American commitment to prepare for the future . The U.S. invested heavily in infrastructure and education programs .
 Cold War policies helped build the roads, the universities, and the basic programs for human needs in the U.S. in the Cold War .
 That was a key part of solvency— expanding capital along multiple dimensions . That was the key to expanding capital, expanding capital in multiple dimensions, he says .
 The power of solvency as an idea is illustrated best by its striking absence in the early twenty-first century . Solvency is an idea best illustrated by the power of the idea as a business .
 Reaction to threats and opportunities replaced attention to long-term elements of financial and social health, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The United States took on enormous new commitments, including two major wars, without any public discussion of costs, resources, and alternative needs . The U.S. took on such commitments without a public discussion .
 Inattention to solvency contributed to an intellectual shallowness that was not present before . Inatt attention to the nation's finances contributed to the mental state of the nation .
 Americans have always thought about their foreign policy as an extension of their democracy . The U.S. has always been concerned about its foreign policy, but now it's under scrutiny again .
 George Washington's Farewell Address of 1796 made precisely this point . The earliest statement of U.S. foreign policy doctrine was made by George Washington .
 From Washington through the Cold War, Americans believed that the ultimate purpose of their actions was to expand the virtues of a free society . From Washington to Washington, U.S. believed that .
 Until the Cold War, the U.S. generally pursued the spread of democracy overseas by non-military means . This includes commerce, culture, culture and diplomacy, especially commerce .
 After 1945, U.S. leaders married much more military power to this long-standing process . American leaders married more power to their military power after 1945 .
 During the Cold War the U.S. pursued a very muscular form of democratization, with an emphasis on intervention as much as local development . In the 1980s, the United States pursued an aggressive form of democraticization .
 The faith that distant and diverse societies would want to embrace the ""American way of life" undermined isolationist impulses .
 The feared expansion of communism raised the stakes for those who believed the U.S. had to support and promote an alternative model . In addition to the fears of communism, the United States had to back and promote alternative models .
 The risk of Soviet infiltration in Asia, Africa, and Latin America drove a desire to build strong democracies as a necessary bulwark . Even for a leader skeptical of foreign interventions, like President Dwight Eisenhower, the risk of foreign intervention led to a desire for strong democracies .
 Democratization in the Cold War was not idealistic; it was a form of communist containment . Democratization was a Cold War form of containment, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Cold War democracy provided a foundation for peace, prosperity, and reintegration into the global economy, with extensive American support . Western Europe and Japan benefited from the Cold War for decades, with support from the U.S. for decades .
 South Korea and Taiwan evaded similar democratizing efforts for the first years of the Cold War, largely because of the U.S. dependence on dictatorial figures .
 By the late 1950s, the United States pushed for democratization in these countries as well . The U.S. pushed for democraticization in the 1950s .
 For all its tragedies, American policies in the Cold War seeded an impressive string of new democracies that prospered, cooperated, and ultimately defined the last decades of the twentieth century .
 The American record was, of course, much less favorable in other parts of Asia, as well as most of Africa and Latin America . The U.S. record in Asia is much less than that of most of Asia .
 In these regions the United States failed to follow through on its democratic aspirations . The U.S. did not follow through to its aspirations, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Washington invested enormous resources in the transformation of politics and economy . In countries like Vietnam, Indonesia, Iran, and Chile, Washington invested resources in transformation .
 The U.S. presumed that democracy had to follow the American model and exclude those voices deemed traitorous and threatening, especially if they included communist influences . The United States assumed that democracy must follow its model, especially in Russia .
 The mix of American-style institutions and anti-communist injunctions in poor, fragmented, and conflict-ridden societies produced outcomes that contradicted democratic purposes, says the author of the book . "The mix of U.S. style institutions and . anti-Communist . injunctions
 The real problem was that many societies were ready for democratization after decades of empire . But American ideas of democracy were not ready for the complexities of these societies, he says .
 American ideas of democracy transformed the world in the Cold War, setting a standard for political legitimacy . Most societies would accept, at least in rhetoric, by the end of the twentieth century .
 These ideas contributed to remarkable peace and prosperity in Western Europe and East Asia . The ideas contributed a remarkable peace, prosperity in the region .
 These ideas, however, undermined peace and prosperity, often in other regions . These ideas undermined peace, prosperity, but also undermined peace in many other countries .
 Americans were serious about democracy in the Cold War, but they were often naive and self-defeating in their understanding of what it required beyond their borders . Americans were also naive in understanding what democracy required beyond the borders .
 For a start, see Latham, The Right Kind of Revolution; Westad, The Global Cold War, especially chapters 5-9 . Latham and Westad have written numerous books about the Cold War .
 Based on the nation's history, one would have expected fewer international commitments and more of an inward focus . The country's history has seen many international commitments .
 Many factors, including the very real threats posed by the Soviet Union, explain America's unprecedented Cold War path .
 The point of this chapter is not to privilege ideas above other influences, but to show that four particular ideas contributed to remarkably consistent policies that served American interests quite well .
 There were, of course, many other ideas that floated around Cold War policy discussions .
 Many of these other ideas were superficial, self-serving, and even stupid . Many of them were superficial and self-defending, and stupid. Many of the ideas are superficial .
 The bad ideas, however, should not dominate the study of the Cold War strategic landscape . The Cold War was a much richer Cold War era, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The four ideas that gained the most traction across the period, and provided continual value for policymakers, were not superficial, self-serving, or stupid . The ideas gained most traction in the 1990s and 2000s, and they are not superficial .
 The ideas were concise and enduring and enduring, as well as radical and relevant for the problems at hand . The ideas are concise, enduring, and enduring for the sake of the people .
 American leaders had many choices, and these ideas helped them choose . American leaders chose the best way to choose their policies, and they chose wisely .
 Collective security, free trade, solvency, and democracy became guideposts for U.S. policy . The nation's economy is one of the world's most powerful economies .
 They helped create public confidence in security and prosperity after more than a decade of depression and war . They helped to create public trust in the country's security after years of war .
 These ideas also served the interests of many non-Americans who embraced them as never before . These ideas were also served interests of people in the U.S.
 The ideas did not ""win" the Cold War, but they gave great advantage to one side . The ideas were not "winning" but they were giving advantage to the Soviets .
 Americans drifted from collective security and solvency after the Cold War . They faced new questions about meaning and effectiveness of collective security .
 Answering these questions does not require a return to the old canonical Cold War concepts . An answer to these questions doesn't need to be a Cold War concept .
 "The task is to articulate ideas that are relevant for the challenges of the time," says the president of the United States . The task of the president is to be able to speak to the world's most powerful people .
 Grand strategies are built on ideas that serve a purpose in a particular historical epoch . As was the case more than sixty years ago, grand strategies were built up on ideas . The U.S. has been in touch with the world since 1964 .
 New ideas will set the strategies that ultimately define the twentyfirst-century world . New ideas set to define the future of the 20th century world, say experts .
 With the opening of archives, historians naturally plunged into empirical studies, putting generalizations aside . Historians have been looking at archives since they were opened in 1970s and 1980s .
 There is already enough evidence and empirical research accumulated to put our microscopes aside and go back to a broader picture of Cold War origins, development, and legacies . The search for new documents and details will no doubt continue .
 Enough time has elapsed since the end of the Cold War to discern what has changed in East-West relations, and what has not . Time has also elapsed since end of Cold War, and thus come to a better understanding of what Cold War was about .
 There have been already some attempts at a new synthesis, most notably John Gaddis's book about what we know now . There have already been some attempts to synthesise the world's knowledge .
 The argument is far from over, but it's not over, with mixed reaction to it . The debate is still raging in the U.S. over whether it should be allowed to continue .
 Its focus is on the origins, some consequences, and legacies of the Cold War . The Cold War is the first of its kind .
 The Cold War was a messy mixture of ideology, geopolitics, and culture which mutually reinforced each other . War was about all of the above -- a messy mix of ideology and culture .
 In general, most of the complex phenomena in history are messy multi-factor developments that cannot be reduced to a single explanation . The author says that in general, history's complex phenomena cannot be easily explained .
 In each specific case it may have been different depending on the complex interplay of external and indigenous factors . Nor can we . provide an exact measurement of each of those factors, or their hierarchy, since .
 Stalin's strategy was heavily geopolitical, while Khrushchev was more of a revolutionary romantic, and Brezhnev was a cautious pragmatist . Stalin and Khrushnev were both revolutionary romantic and pragmatically pragmatic .
 On the U.S. side, ideology was correlated with the ups and downs of the American empire . Each retrenchment was accompanied by a lack of messianic pretensions .
 Realpolitik and geopolitics were essential, especially in the wake of the Second World War . The war left only two great powers and many power vacuums between them in strategically important areas of the world .
 As soon as the cementing threat from the common enemy disappeared, the competition for influence over those areas began in earnest, destroying the Big Three alliance from within . The Big 3 alliance was destroyed from within.
 For American and British planners, the Soviet Union, with its hostile ideology and huge military capability, became the next logical candidate after Nazi Germany for the role of Eurasian hegemonic power . The U.S. and its allies tried to prevent in two world wars .
 For the Soviet Union, the American-led Western bloc aimed at depriving it of the well-deserved fruits of great victory and, ultimately, its destruction . For the U.S. it was the West, the West was the source of Soviet Union's destruction .
 Soviet geopolitical aims in the wake of the Second World War included a buffer zone of pro-Soviet states on the western borders (as they were in 1941), an enfeebled Germany and Japan, regaining Tsarist possessions in the Far East, and acquiring a controlling influence over the Black
 Stalin also planned to create a Soviet enclave in Northern Iran to cover the USSR's vulnerable southern flank . Most Soviet oil deposits were located in northern Iran .
 The Soviet efforts of 1945-6 to implement most parts of this program met with stubborn Western resistance . That led to serious tension between former allies, which led to tension .
 Without the ideological factor, this geopolitical rivalry would have assumed more traditional and restrained forms . The ideological factor would have been more restrained and restrained . But without ideological factors, this rivalry would've assumed more restrained forms, say experts .
 Both sides believed in the universal nature of their principles and wanted to spread them to the whole world . Both sides were more global—because both sides believed .
 Each side believed it had a monopoly on tmth and was determined to win. More intense . More intense—because each side believed . it had to win . more intense .
 Ideological hostility led to exaggerated suspicions and fears, which in turn pushed both sides to overkill in providing for their security . More dangerous—because ideological hostility led . Both sides should be careful to avoid overkill, the author says .
 In culturalcivilization terms, Russia has always been a lonely country, torn between East and West, and never truly belonging to either . Russia has never truly belonged to either East or West, but it has been torn between both .
 Britain's relationship with the West has been particularly difficult since the thirteenth century . Ever since then, it has been difficult for the kingdom to overcome .
 For Russia, a more prosperous, modern, and technologically advanced West was a cultural and security challenge . Russia was a source of many invasions through indefensible western frontiers . For Russia it was a challenge to the West .
 For the West, the Russian problem was a combination of huge natural and manpower resources, with an authoritarian authoritarian regime capable of using those resources freely against Western interests . For the west, the heart of ""the Russian problem"—especially from the nineteenth century—was the combination of large natural
 Even the founders of Marxism—Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels—shared this view . Even the founder of Marxism, Karl Marx, shared this view with the world .
 Bolshevism served to widen the gap between Russia and the West, to increase Russia's isolation . Russia's traditional task of defending its vulnerable Eurasian landmass against real and potential enemies even more difficult .
 The Soviet system aggravated the brutality of Russian culture, while democracy's advance in the West enhanced human rights and individual dignity . Democracy's advance also enhanced individual dignity and human rights in Russia .
 The cultural gap between Russia and the West widened even further . Thus, the cultural gap has widened further further .
 Bolshevism was also a daring attempt to ""catch up with and overtake"" the capitalist West in technological development by means of central planning, a nationalized economy, and a one-party state . Bolshevists were also an attempt to "catch up" the capitalist Western in technological
 The Cold War was a confrontation between the two social systems which had geopolitical, ideological, and cultural dimensions, was global in scale, and was conducted by all means short of a major hot war . To sum up, the Cold War .
 Many other countries were drawn into the conflict, either by association or by becoming a battleground for that conflict . The U.S. became increasingly drawn into it by its involvement in the conflict .
 Some of the Soviet and American allies, like Great Britain, Cuba, and the German Democratic Republic, pushed the superpowers further than they would have liked to go themselves . Great Britain and Cuba were important players in the Soviet-American alliance .
 The Cold War was largely inevitable, to the extent there is an inevitability in history, says Julian Zelizer . "The Cold War is largely inevitable," he says .
 This seemingly inescapable conflict could have taken different forms . But it could have come to an end in a different way .
 It might have been less confrontational, if both sides had been ready to negotiate and compromise . Both sides should have been willing to negotiate, compromise, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The absence of a major hot war during the Cold War was made possible by the lethal nature of nuclear weapons . Nuclear weapons were made possible, in part, by their lethal nature .
 A full-scale war became too suicidal to resort to, says David Cameron . The arms race made arms race more costly, but also made it too costly, he says .
 Leaders on both sides were responsible enough to realize this early on . Fortunately, leaders in both parties realized this early . Crisis over Cuba in 1962 provided a little help provided by crises .
 This is understandable, because very few things in life are entirely bad or entirely good . And this is understandable because of the fact that life is not entirely good or bad . But it's understandable that life isn't always good or good .
 Each side mobilized resources to enhance its attractiveness and competitiveness in order to overtake the main rival and gain new allies . This rivalry forced each side to mobilize resources to increase its attractiveness .
 This challenge reached its peak in late 1950s and early 1960s, when the post-Stalinist Soviet Union was going through its most dynamic phase of development . This challenge was reached in the 1950s, 1960s and 1950s .
 For the highly competitive American nation, this challenge became an additional and powerful incentive to invoke domestic reforms . For the U.S. it was a powerful incentive for domestic reforms, the author says .
 The emergence of modern federal support for higher education and sciences, creation of NASA and space exploration programs, and even some social reforms of 1960s were all connected with Cold War competition .
 Keynesian policy of stimulating economic growth reached its height in the early 1960s during the JFK presidency . It was no accident that the policy was put in place during the Kennedy administration .
 The administration experts closely monitored Soviet economic growth for the president . The administration closely monitored the Soviet economy .
 Analyzing Khrushchev's program of communism construction over twenty years, they stressed that although the ultimate Soviet goal of surpassing the United States in per capita consumption was unrealistic . America had to speed up its economic growth so as not to let the Soviets catch up with United States GNP
 Cold War rivalry was not confined to purely economic competition . The Cold War was dominated by the Cold War of Cold War II .
 Soviet and U.S. Economic Growth in the Light of the New Soviet Program. Soviet and United States Economic Growth. The New Soviet program. The Soviet Union Program.
 Special mention should be made of a historical breakthrough of the 1960s in terms of black America . The 1960s was a breakthrough for black America, but it was also for black Americans .
 Racial segregation was probably the most damning side of America's image, as USIA experts constantly reminded the White House . USIA expert: "Racial segregation is probably the worst thing about America"
 In the context of the Soviet-American struggle for the Third World, the elimination of racial segregation became a problem of U.S. global standing .
 The Cold War forced Americans to see their country through other peoples' eyes, raising the price that had to be paid to maintain the non-liberal status quo .
 At the same time, Cold War imperatives provided political cover for those who would otherwise be unlikely to question that status quo . The Cold War era was dominated by Cold War post-9/11, post-war politics .
 Even conservatives would often tolerate liberal innovations as necessary for national security . Liberals eagerly exploited the ""Soviet threat" to legitimize their pet reform projects .
 In general, the rise of the American welfare state and government intervention was closely related to this external challenge . The welfare state helped overcome individualistic and laissez-faire traditions inherent in American political culture, he says .
 The Soviet Union became a functional equivalent of the devil that forced the West into doing what it should have done anyway . Thus, the Soviet Union—to use Arnold Toynbee's metaphor—became the devil .
 A big difference was that its impact was mostly confined to military technology, but it also involved science and education . The U.S. government has been involved in the creation of the Air Force in the 1980s .
 It was to the Cold War that the Soviet Union owed its greatest technological achievements of those years . Daniel Deudney and G John Ikenberry, "After the Long War,"" Foreign Policy, 94 , 27 .
 The Short Twentieth Century, 1914-1991 (London: Michael Joseph, 1994), 1914-1941 . Michael Joseph: The Short Twenty-Centenary, 1914/1991, is published by Michael Joseph in 1994 . In 1994, Michael Joseph published a book on the Short Tw
 Khrushchev shifted this competition into consumption into consumption . The Soviet system revealed its basic flaw, since it could not provide both guns and butter . The system failed to provide both weapons and butter, but it did provide both .
 The Cold War delivered more fruits for the U.S. than for the Soviet Union . All in all, on the social improvement level, the Cold War was more successful than the Soviet War .
 American complacency and arrogance created a fitting context for the current financial and economic crisis . The disappearance of this competition, and the resultant triumph of the U.S. liberal democratic model contributed to American complacent and arrogance, contributed to the collapse of the American economy .
 Competition stimulates, while monopoly leads to complacency and stagnation . This is not surprising since competition stimulates, it's not surprising . Competition stimulates and leads to stagnation and stagnation, it says .
 The impact of Soviet-American rivalry on the foreign policies of both countries was even more pronounced . The Soviet-U.S. relations between the Soviet Union and the United States was especially pronounced .
 The impact of competition intermingled with that of deterrence . The latter was a function of competition in the military-strategic sphere in a rough parity .
 Deterrence based on the danger of escalation of local conflicts into global nuclear war worked both ways, playing a checks and balances role on a global scale . Deterrence played a role on the global scale, as well as the role of international deterrence .
 It forced both sides to act with greater restraint and responsibility, keeping emotions and ideological instincts on a leash . Both sides were forced to act more carefully and restrained .
 A culture of deterrence emerged, based on the mutual recognition of a common responsibility for global security . In the course of mutual adjustment and . extended arms control negotiations a culture of . deterrence emerged .
 Many documents on Soviet foreign policy decisionmaking remain closed . This factor of ""existential deterrence,"" well documented in the studies of U.S. foreign policy, is beginning to be confirmed by new Russian literature .
 It is not hard to imagine how far the adventurous Khrushchev might have gone during the Berlin and Cuban crises without U.S. deterrence . The more cautious Stalin in Iran and Turkey of 1946-7 was cautious .
 In absence of Soviet countervailing power, U.S. might have resorted to use of nuclear weapons in Korea or Vietnam . U.N. might've resorted to the use of nukes in Korea, Vietnam, or to the escalation of other regional conflicts .
 The US's traumatic experience in Iraq is another example of the risks with which unchecked American supremacy is fraught . Unchecked U.S. supremacy in the Middle East is fraught, says CNN.com .
 It was this transatlantic cooperation that helped produce a historic rapprochement between Germany and the rest of Europe, the European economic miracle, and the knitting together of the fabric of the Atlantic community .
 During the postwar planning deliberations of 1943-45, a predominant attitude toward the prospect of European integration was mostly negative . Most experts were concerned with a probable emergence of a new competitive power center in Europe .
 Leading liberal institutionalists, like John Ikenberry, accuse George W Bush of betraying the best part of America's postwar strategy . They say multilateralism, mutual obligations, respect for international law, and allies' interests are at risk .
 Bush was deeply rooted in American strategic culture, with unilateralism, hegemony, and reliance on military force . On the other hand, historians of U.S. foreign policy and strategy say Bush was rooted in strategic culture . Historians Melvin Leffler and John Gaddis say Bush
 Of course, sooner or later America would have done this anyway, due to its huge economic and military potential . The U.S. would have had to do this anyway .
 In the absence of the Soviet threat, this process might have lasted much longer, and might have taken different, less drastic forms . But, in the meantime, this might have happened much longer . The Soviet threat might have led to the collapse of Soviet Union .
 One of the most interesting debates on this subject took place behind the closed doors of the Policy Planning Staff in late 1950 .
 George Kennan presided over the meeting, and Reinhold Niebuhr was an active participant . The meeting was held in New York City .
 Niebuhr also expressed doubts about America's maturity, a factor necessary for true world leadership, he says .
 "I am not at all certain that American people would handle this challenge if we are not surrounded by a broader community making decisions," says President Obama .
 It was the Soviet challenge itself that would serve as a mobilizing and educational stimulus for America which, in the process of responding to it, would evolve into a true world leader . America would evolve as a true leader in response to the challenge itself .
 The end of the Cold War has deprived the U.S. of the main enemy and strategic compass of containment, 30 but also of a former sense of a national mission, 30 . The Cold War is now over and out of the United States .
 These questions are being raised more and more often in public and academic debates . These questions have been raised more frequently in public, academic debates.
 The ruling nomenklatura was deeply pleased to run a superpower competing with the mighty U.S. in military power and global influence . The ruling body is deeply pleased with the result .
 For the ordinary Soviet people, the U.S. was also a worthy rival, enhancing their self-respect . "After all, we were in the same superleague with Americans, and could look down at ordinary players on the world scene," he says .
 "The loss of this great power status had painful consequences, which are still with us," says President Obama . The loss of power status "had painful consequences," he says .
 Russian policymakers now operate from a much narrower resource base than during the Cold War . Russian policymakers are now operating from a smaller resource base, analysts say . Russia's relationship with the U.S. has been strained in recent years, especially in Syria .
 Foreign policy should help to modernize U.S. instead of ruining its economy through arms race and foreign assistance . But this change is not entirely negative because it has forced our leadership and the public at large to realize that we have to be more modest .
 Second, there has been a radical de-ideologization of Russian foreign policy, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Russia has been de-integrated in its foreign policy .
 Gone are the messianic pretensions and global aspirations of Soviet times; also 29 See Deudney and Ikenberry, ""After the Long War,"" 27-8.
 Russia now subscribes to Western ideals of free markets and democracy . The Cold War value gap has greatly diminished . Russia is no longer a Cold War ally .
 Russia has rejected confrontation with the West, destroyed the Iron Curtain, and taken the course of integration into the world economy . Russia's rejection of confrontation with West has led to the collapse of the Cold War .
 Russia's leaders are proud to call themselves pragmatists, says Putin . Russia's economy, trade, and finance are sitting firmly in the saddle of Russian foreign policy, he says .
 Russia has radically downscaled its military and security requirements . Third, Russia has dramatically downgraded its military, security requirements. Russia has also radically downsized its own security needs .
 It no longer aspires to have a military capability equal to all of its real and potential enemies . The U.S. no longer wants to have an equal military capability to all its real or potential enemies, it says .
 To avoid militarization of the economy and confrontation with the West, it does not get involved in full-scale arms races . It has given away most of its military installations overseas . It does not engage in arms races and gives away most military installations .
 The current agenda of Russian foreign and security policies is rather modest and limited . Russia's current foreign policy is "modest and limited," says Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 Its primary task is to secure the new borders and to have stable, friendly, or neutral governments in the neighboring countries . It is also to secure, friendly and neutral governments .
 Russia pursues a so-called multi-vector foreign policy, developing mutually beneficial ties with all major power centers without regard to the nature of their political systems . The country's foreign policy has been criticized by some for its lack of transparency and lack of accountability .
 On a deeper geopolitical and cultural level, there are also some continuities with the past . Yet, there is also some continuity with past, says CNN's John Defterios .
 Great power mentality, a vulnerability complex, a zealous defense of Russian sovereignty and identity, and a mixed attitude toward the West are reemerging . Russia's national foreign policy tradition is being reemerged, says Alex Vatkov .
 This is happening not simply because of historical inertia, but as a reaction to Western policies . And this is happening because of Western policies, he says . He says .
 NATO expansion to the East, and advance of its infrastructure all the way to the Russian borders, are all developments which have caused growing Russian concern . NATO expansion, a forceful regime-change policy in the former Yugoslavia, active resistance to Russian-led integration of the post-Soviet space (
 Russia's legitimate security interests are less important than expanding their own influence and locking in the Cold War geopolitical gains . They have demonstrated that, for the U.S. and its allies, they have demonstrated . The United States and allies have shown that they are willing to expand their influence and
 For Russian policymakers, it has become clear that the end of the Cold War and of the ideological divide has not done away with interstate rivalry and with old Western syndromes . An apprehension about a strong Russia and its image .
 The country's new borders have become even more porous and difficult to defend, experts say . The new borders are more porous than ever before, they say .
 This pushes the Russian leadership to new attempts to create a defensive belt of friendly states around Russian borders . The Russian leadership is trying to create an 'army belt' around its borders .
 The first time around it was done by the brutal means of Sovietization, which became one of the main causes of the Cold War . The second time around, the brutal Sovietization was done with the brutal methods of Sovietizing .
 In a modern world, this task becomes more difficult than ever before, says David Cameron . Now the means are restrained, and mostly economic, but even so, the task becomes even more difficult, he says .
 The competition for influence over post-Soviet space has become an important source of tension between Russia and the West .
 This time the Cold War is more sensitive for Russia than in the 1940s, it was about Eastern Europe . Now it is about Ukraine, the Caucasus, and Central Asia, which are much closer to the Russian heartland . Another difference is that this time this time the issue is more
 The economic development gap between Russia and the West has widened again after the modernizing thrust of Soviet times . The gap between the two countries' economic development gaps widened again in Russia .
 Russia's civilizational loneliness remains, despite its openness to the world facing new challenges from the East and South . Russia is facing a new set of challenges, including the threat posed by the East, South and China .
 The issue of nationalism continues to produce instability in the Northern Caucasus and some other regions . The issue remains a major source of instability in some regions .
 The attempt to overcome these stubborn realities of Russia's position by Soviet means has failed . Russia's attempts to overcome this have failed to do so have failed, says Putin .
 It remains to be seen whether the new post-Soviet Russia will find more effective solutions to the problem .
 Russia is witnessing the end of ideology, but in America and the West there is a real renaissance of a liberal-democratic crusade . A strong reaffirmation of Western values and a new surge to expand them to the new virgin lands in the East, he says .
 That is why they are now called ""thugs,"" ""rogues" ""last dictators in Europe,"" etc. That's why they're now called "thugs""" and "rogues,"" "last dictators"
 There is nothing wrong with expanding markets and democracy provided it is not accompanied by expanding the world's most powerful military-political alliance . The alliance is still seen by many of its members as a means of containing Russia . Russia has never belonged to the alliance and is highly unlikely to ever belong
 NATO's official NATO line is that this expansion is not directed against Russia, now that we are partners, not enemies, etc. etc. Of course, the official NATO lines is that it is not aimed at Russia .
 If you mostly prepare for the worst, and do little but hope for the best, you may end up with an isolated, hostile and dangerous Russia . The logic of self-fulfilling prophesy is that Russia will be isolated and hostile, dangerous Russia, writes CNN.
 U.S. basic strategy has changed much less since the Cold War than Russia's, says U.N. official . Russia's military strategy has not changed much since Cold War, he says .
 Perhaps this is reading too much into current American policy and overestimating its consistency and purposefulness, 34 but that is how it looks to our policy planners used to worst-case scenarios .
 If their American counterparts were in their shoes, they would surely be even more worried . The U.S. government is worried about the situation in Syria .
 There is a new leadership in Washington which has learned from America's bitter experience in Iraq and from other foreign policy mistakes of their predecessors .
 There is more consideration of other countries' interests and a stronger emphasis on soft power, rather than military might, says President Obama . "There will be more consideration ... of other nations' interests," he says .
 The current financial/economic crisis also helps to save on expensive military toys . Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America, volume 2, 312, was a French writer .
 Both the White House and the Kremlin are now once again engaged in serious arms control negotiations . It is very encouraging that both sides are now engaged in arms control .
 The combination of lean budgets and internal preoccupation may serve as a healthy check on imperial ambitions and far-fetched schemes .
 The loss of confidence in the superiority of the American economic model, in the wake of the current crisis, may bring some much needed humility and openness to new ideas .
 In short, there is a chance to really break away from the Cold War and its legacy; but it will take a long and sustained effort from both sides .
 One of the key elements in the recent historiography of the Cold War deals with the destructive change created by the extension of that conflict into Asia, Africa, and Latin America . Arne Westad: How the End of the Third World and the end of the . Cold War are
 Historians point to the two final decades of the Cold War as decisive in how the nonWestern world looks today . The debate that this historiography has fashioned points to the final years of Cold War . The Cold War was crucial in shaping the non-Western world today .
 Developments outside Europe and North America are drawing closer to the center of international affairs . It is vitally important to test some of the propositions that underlie this generalization .
 These are the two questions that will be explored in this chapter, along with some suggestions for more general approaches to the study of links between the late Cold War era and our own time .
 I write this in the peace and quiet of my central London apartment because the Cold War did not end in a Third World War . It is not the end of a Cold War that ended in a third World War, says author .
 Destruction was widespread outside the industrialized West . But while cataclysm avoided, destruction was widespread .
 I am grateful to Mel for his friendship and for all the good discussions. I am also grateful for the friendship I had with him. Mel was a great friend. I'm grateful to have had a good time with Mel, I said .
 Wars destroyed states in quick succession and on a massive scale . Across Asia, Africa, and Central America devastating wars destroyed states across Asia and Africa .
 In all of these wars the Soviet-American confrontation played a major role . In all the wars, the Soviets and Americans were involved in the conflict .
 Cold War wars framed the states that these post-colonial societies created, and molded mindsets that would prove to be long lasting . The Cold War Wars shaped mindsets, especially with regard to governance .
 This policy adjustment ended the Brett on Woods system between 1944 and 1972 . It set the stage for an internationalization of the United States economy that was unprecedented .
 The U.S. monetary policies and the explosive growth of privately controlled liquidity in offshore money markets fueled the integration of the capitalist world economy in the first stage of what we have come to know as globalization .
 By the 1980s these (mostly unplanned and generally unintended) global processes of change were putting increasing pressure on any country that was attempting to follow a non-capitalist model of development .
 Their room for maneuver was much reduced in economic terms well before the Soviet state started its time of troubles in the 1980s . The Soviet state was much less maneuverable well before its troubles began well before that began .
 The collapse of the Third World as a political project is, in my view, intimately connected to these developments, says Julian Zelizer . The collapse is intimately linked to the collapse of Third World, he says .
 Third World leaders were hoping for increased South-South economic cooperation . The curtain fell on the systems of planning which their economies had been built on .
 The instability in the prices of raw materials contributed to the end of the show . The instability of raw material prices contributed to an end of show .
 Global demands for the Arab Spring have been met by the world's most powerful nations . But so did the political framework within which these demands were put forward .
 A number of Thirdworldists, especially new recruits to the cause from Latin America, are oblivious to the fact that embryonic globalization actually favored and promoted the economic growth of some states with whom they had earlier been aligned .
 The Cold War, therefore, ended not only with the collapse of the Soviet Union, it also ended with the fall of the Third World . Cold War ended with collapse of Soviet Union and collapse of Third World, author says .
 In the 1980s, China defected from the planned economy model and began its journey toward what some call ""market-Leninism,"" and its region surged ahead in economic rejuvenation . Other parts of the Third World were left further behind .
 The economic ruin of Africa, much of Latin America, and parts of South Asia happened at the same time as the East Asian surge . These other parts could not, or would not, benefit from the changes that took place in the global economy .
 One of the main effects of the macro-changes that took place in the 1970s has been the increased centrality of Eastern Asia in world affairs . Eastern Asia has become a central part of the world's most powerful region .
 The U.S. constructed a framework for trade with former Third World Eastern Asia in the 1970s and 1980s . As I have explained elsewhere, this rise to prominence could not have happened (or at least not happened as quickly as it did)
 In order to understand the collapse of the Third World, it is essential first to define what it was . The Third World was defined as the world's most powerful and prosperous .
 Many, who never bothered to explore its origins, today see the Third World as outdated term for non-Western countries . These are often the same people who deem the concept to be deeply politically incorrect .
 This devaluation of the term would have come as a great surprise to those who began using it after the Bandung conference in 1955 . The term has been devalued in recent years .
 It was powerful, plentiful, and proud, and confronted, self-consciously, the First World . The aristocrats of the United States, Britain, or France wanted to own it . The high priests of the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe wanted to save it for their own benefit .
 Out of the post-colonial position would come ideas that would unite the oppressed, destroy all forms of subservience, and free humankind from the threat of obliteration through nuclear war . Out of colonial position, ideas would unite oppressed and destroy subserviences .
 Fanon's Third World encompassed Asia, Africa, and the Caribbean, but not South America, China, or, for that matter, Japan . Fanon: "The Third World" was the Soviet-era Soviet invasion of the Soviet Union .
 Indonesian leader Sukarno said the Third World was an idea waiting to become a geographical reality . He said it would include all peoples who had been colonized by European powers . Sukarnos: "The Third World is a place for all people who have not lived in Europe"
 In Africa, after the early 1960s, the liberation movements in the Portuguese colonies and in the white supremacist states of South Africa, Southwest Africa, and Rhodesia were those who came closest to seeing the Third World as existing geographical space . For them it created a zone in which they could
 Maybe it is right to conclude that the Third World was a place as long as it fitted someone's political framework, or—if you like—satisfied their mental maps . Maybe it's right to say that the third world was a 'place' that fit into a political framework
 The Third World no longer exists today, neither as political project nor as geographical space . Whatever definition you want to give it, it's not a political project or geographical space, it doesn't exist today .
 The Third World concept is ""outmoded"" because its heyday belongs to the period, roughly, from 1955 to 1975; not because of any denigrating intent or origin with the concept itself . The placing in time is very important here .
 Social scientists as well as historians can study social scientists and historians . The concept is of interest today in terms of how we understand change at the end of the twentieth century and beyond .
 The debate about whether the Third World, as a political project, belonged within the Cold War is an old one . It is laden with tangled political baggage .
 The position from the political Right in the U.S. and Britain was that the Third World was simply another name for left-wing subversion of Western interests, de facto allied to Soviet expansionist urges in Asia, Africa and Latin America .
 Some radical Third World states moved ever closer to Soviet-style domestic politics and economics in the 1960s and 1970s . Cuba, Algeria, Ethiopia, Vietnam, and Cuba, for instance, were among them .
 Almost no Third World country broke with the capitalist world economy as they sought new internal development plans . But the bigger story is that almost no third World nation broke with capitalism .
 Post-colonial states sought more, not fewer, international market openings in spite of their domestic radicalism . Except for Cuba and Vietnam, which, for political reasons, were denied access to world trade by the United States .
 There were many reasons why Cold War was such a laden term among anticolonial leaders . Cold War is a term used to refer to the Cold War between Soviet and Arab nations .
 Many define the term, following Soviet parlance, as an aspect of U.S. foreign policy, not as description of a bipolar system . Many defined the term as a aspect of United States foreign policy .
 Others saw it as postulating a dichotomous world, in which no position was possible except those of the superpowers .
 The Cold War, as a term, seemed to get in the way of what the Third World promised to be . Whatever way it was seen, the Cold War was seen as a way of reaching out to the world's Third World .
 In reality, however, there was little escape from the Cold War, whichever way you defined it . The Cold War was a Cold War of Cold War .
 The Soviet Union was, and remained, the only alternative power with a global reach . Not only did the United States intervene in various forms against those who tried to assert their independence from the U.S. But the Soviet Union remained, as it was the only other alternative power .
 It did not matter whether you defined the world between the end of the Second World War and 1989 as unipolar or bipolar or bipolar, it was unipolar .
 As soon as you acted internationally, then those concerns that drove the Cold War impinged on your freedom and, in the end, constrained your options . The Cold War was driven by concerns over the future of the world's future .
 Many Third World countries tried to break out of the Cold War stranglehold . The Cold War was a Cold War of sorts for the Third World .
 Many Western Thirdworldists believed that the Third World project would defeat the Cold War and build a new global future . The claim of association with the Soviet Union was a particularly galling one for many .
 They opposed Soviet-linked communist parties in their own countries . They also often tried countermanding Soviet influence in their Third World country of choice .
 In Algeria, French ""tiersmondistes" warned Ben Bella of Soviet perfidy and parsimony . Ben Bella was assassinated in Algeria in June 1944 .
 In spite of the terror (well known, but often denied) and the waste , the Soviet experience for many Third World leaders offered a way out of the dilemmas of state-building .
 The Soviet Union's main advantage was being a Western country that was not a colonial power . It was also seen as economically successful and a pioneer of state planning .
 Soviet planning experience counted, not only for states that viewed themselves as socialist, but for those who wanted to move away from markets to centralized, state-led development . At a time when economic development models were considered .
 There were links between concepts of national liberation and Bolshevism that went back to the origins of the Russian revolution . But in addition to the obvious fact that there was much that did not endear post-colonial elites to capitalist .
 Lenin had seen a link between self-determination and socialism . The national bourgeoisie were allies of the working class while their country broke free from colonial domination .
 Soviet and other communists helped organize the anti-colonial resistance across the globe . They made themselves popular among those who were to become post-colonial leaders in the process .
 As United States historian Carol Anderson has reminded us, the emergence of non-communist opposition to racial discrimination abroad was a watershed, which helped set the stage for a decline in Soviet fortunes .
 Another key link to the Cold War was the category of state formation chosen by the post-colonial elites . Post-colonial elite chose a state to be formed by the state of state .
 Instead of building on broad identities or narrow ones, they chose the concept of the nation state to form the core of their political projects . The nation state is a key component of the country's political projects, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Third World solidarity was intended to flow outwards from these imagined entities . It was meant to flow to the Third World, but it was never intended to do so .
 The result was governments lacking legitimacy, peoples who did not see themselves as one people, and cross-cutting conflicts drawn from both deficits stirring hatred and often violence . Governments lacking legitimacy and people who didn't see themselves one people .
 It is quite possible that one of the main roles of the Cold War was to exacerbate conflicts that already existed . The Cold War may have played a role in exacerbating conflicts already existing .
 The form of the state itself was a key reason for the transmundaneity of the Third World project . The state itself got—cheered on equally by the United States and the Soviet sides in the Cold War—was a key part of the project .
 A further link worth contemplating is between Cold War strategies and religiously exclusive states . The literature, especially the comparative literature, so far is weak, is weak .
 The two main experiments in setting up new states based on religion—Israel and Pakistan—benefited massively from U.S. Cold War concerns, but at the cost of destabilizing their neighborhoods . Israel and Pakistan both benefited massively from United States Cold War Concerns .
 U.S. support for Israel and Pakistan brought the Cold War into play in the Middle East and South Asia .
 Identitarianist politics among Muslims, Hindus, and Jews fuelled long-term conflict . U.S. alliances helped push local populations toward identitarianismism .
 In the case of Pakistan, and throughout the Muslim world, it also linked Washington to authoritarian dictatorships that may have served short-term U.S. security interests . The dictatorships became less and less legitimate in the eyes of their own populations .
 The issue of state and elite legitimacy is the core of the debate on the effects of the Third World project itself . The issue is the key to understanding the impact of the project itself, writes Peter Bergen .
 Post-colonial regions waged war against their own peasant populations in an attempt to force them into the version of modernity that the regime subscribed to . Many of those who saw themselves as part of the Third World fought back against them .
 In these brutal efforts they were helped by the Cold War superpowers . Both saw the abolition of the peasantry as a key yardstick for progress . The Cold War saw the eradication of the peasants as key yardsticks for progress.
 The problem with these campaigns was not only that a lot of people died, but that hatreds were sown of a kind that would explode in the face of modern political projects . From Algeria to Iraq, Iraq, Burma, and Cambodia, the campaigns have sown hatreds that would
 Nick Cullather is right to argue that the United States ""battle against poverty"" was an intimate accomplice of its Cold War strategies . Cullather argues that the U.S. was right to think that poverty was a Cold War accomplice .
 The historiography of the Cold War in Latin America is among the most extensive and most complex in recent literature . The Cold War is a complex and extensive history of Latin America's Cold War .
 Greg Grandin has explained how U.S. interventionism and dominance in the region predated the Cold War . Grandin explains how there was a Latin American Cold War that more or less coincided with the global version of the global .
 Third World leaders in Asia and Africa, and Latin American radicals, were uncertain as to how the struggle in the Americas fitted in with the Third World project . This is important because, as we have seen, both . .
 The elites were mostly of European origin, something other radicals, especially nativist, found problematic . Moreover, the elites were largely European origin . This is something that radicals found problematic in the 1930s .
 What came to link Latin America with broader Third World developments were concepts of dependency and ""structural imperialism" The terms that gave the United States control of its southern neighbors a similar valeur as the suffering of those that had been directly colonized elsewhere .
 Americanism and Anti-Americanism in the Americas in the American Historical Review, 111:4 , 1042-66. Americanism is a form of Americanism .
 There were questions of definition and of inclusion that were hard to resolve, but not more than for the superpower blocs themselves . There were also questions of inclusion and of definition .
 The Third World project seemed set for survival and gradual institutionalization . In spite of its contradictions and its occasional cruelties, it seemed set to survive and institutionalize .
 Its original emphasis on social justice may have been blunted, but its emphasis on sovereignty and equality among states remained . The original emphasis was social justice, but it remained .
 The regime-led modernization model and the emphasis on planning, which seemed to be spreading outward from the Third World core during the 1960s . So did the modernization model, which was spreading outward .
 In the UN, Thirdworldist claims and proposals are adopted with increasing frequency . Thirdworldists are adopting increasing frequency in the UN .
 There are, as far as I can tell, four main reasons, three of which are dealt with below, and the fourth in the final part of the chapter . Three of the main reasons for the book's success is to be published in the U.S.
 The first is changes in global capitalism, which sent the economic situation for Third World countries into freefall . The second is the change in the world's economic outlook for the Third World, which has been in freefall for years .
 The second is the massive breakdown in legitimacy within many Third World regimes . The third is the breakdown of legitimacy within the Third World regime, writes David Cameron .
 The third is the anti-revolutionary offensive of the Reagan administration, which armed rebels in order to overthrow the last hold outs among Third World regimes . The Reagan administration also armed rebels to overthrow Third World dictatorships .
 And the fourth is the counterrevolution in China and the unprecedented economic growth in East Asia . And the fifth is the anti-Chinese counterrevolution .
 It was a kind of perfect storm, which very few international movements could have stood against. It was the perfect storm for the world's most powerful people to stand against .
 The fundamental changes in the global economy that took place at the beginning of the 1970s came, eventually, to privilege an internationalization of U.S. capitalism into what we today call globalization .
 Nixon administration took measures to deal with rising public indebtedness and inflation . They included floating exchange rates and abolishing capital controls . These measures helped create interactive and international financial markets that strengthened global capitalism .
 By the end of the decade the United States had begun, on a massive scale, to buy into economic change that happened elsewhere . The U.S. had begun to buy in on economic change, thereby slowing its own weakening relative position in the international economy .
 Even those who participated to a very high extent in the global economy through raw material exports did not benefit much, because of the instability of prices . The volatility of raw material prices has led to a drop in demand for some of the world's most expensive commodities .
 Since all the key countries in the Third World project fell into the two last categories, their economic development plans suffered and slowed down . Many of them were getting increasingly indebted to international financial institutions . The post-colonial world also fell into this category .
 Plans for socalled South-South economic cooperation had mostly failed . Loans were the only way that many states could make up for their economic shortfall .
 The Third World project also collapsed because many of the states that represented it became less and less legitimate in the eyes of their own populations . The project collapsed because of the lack of legitimacy in their own people's eyes, writes David Cameron .
 The first generation of leaders came to base their rule on fiat rather than popular participation in government . Nasser, Nkrumah destroyed much of the support they had had when their governments were formed .
 The message that the Third World concept had contained was overshadowed by the practices its representatives engaged in . The message of the concept was that it was based on the struggle against oppression in the past .
 First generation set the low standards that others lived down to . Military regimes that replaced the initial leaders who were the worst sinners in this respect .
 Some historians claim that the Third World project was shattered in the 1970s because of the enormous economic divergence that developed between three groups of post-colonial countries . The Third World agenda itself was becoming centered on international economic demands .
 The main problem for those who wanted to develop their industrial sectors was unstable energy prices . The country's main problem was the instability of energy prices, the government said .
 Third World's collapse was the interventionist offensive that Ronald Reagan conducted, says Julian Zelizer . Reagan's interventionist efforts came at the time when many Third World regimes were at their weakest, Zelizer says .
 In Angola, Ethiopia, Afghanistan, and Nicaragua the United States supplied materiel and weapons to the opposition, in order to defeat radical regimes . The U.S. supplied weapons and materiel to defeat the opposition in those countries .
 In Cambodia they supported the Khmer Rouge and its allies in their war against Vietnam . In Cambodia, they were involved in the war against the Vietnam War .
 Debt ridden regimes sought peace with the Americans as a condition for loans and market access . Elsewhere debt ridden, politically weakened regimes sought .
 Overall, this probably had more to do with markets than with threats of armed intervention . Overall, the situation was more likely to be affected by markets rather than by armed intervention threats .
 Japan was fast becoming the world's most dynamic economy . South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Singapore were surging ahead as the ""little dragons” of Eastern Asian economic development .
 Vietnam and the rest of Indochina opted for Soviet-style communism, while Indonesia seemed mired in an authoritarian statist development model with low growth . Indonesia is the second-largest country in the region, with a low growth rate .
 Eastern Asia embraced the market, embraced globalization, and had little time for those who still wanted to defend anti-capitalist Third World principles . Eastern Asia embraces the market and embraced globalization .
 Much of the divergence in terms of principles of political economy had, of course, started in the previous decade . Much of this divergence in . terms of . principles of . political . economy had started in . the previous . decade .
 In the early 1960s there was little basic difference in terms of levels of output between countries in Southeast Asia and the newly independent states in Africa .
 Zambia and Singapore were both members of the Group of 77, which supported the NIEO . But a decade later the difference between the two countries had become enormous in terms of their basic economies .
 Singapore's prime minister, Lee Kuan Yew, had been to Lusaka the first time for a very Thirdworldist non-aligned summit in 1964 . Singapore's former prime minister was Singapore's first to visit the country .
 Imported toiletries were absent and there was little by way of local substitutes . Imported toilets were absent, and there were no local substitutes for toiletries .
 Zambia was a single-commodity economy, copper, and its price had not kept up with the prices of oil and other imports . The only souvenir she could buy was a malachite egg .
 They had no foreign exchange, and their currency was rapidly depreciating . They had to rely on foreign exchange .
 Deng Xiaoping lectured Kaunda the following year on the need for rapid, market-induced development . Deng's comments shocked the Zambian leader, but also other Thirdworldists of the same generation .
 It cannot be called socialism while people's living standards remain very low,"" Deng said . Deng told Kaunda: "It cannot be socialism while living standards are very low"
 China's defection helped split the Third World apart and contributed significantly to the U.S. offensive against radical regimes during the 1980s . As Chen Jian has pointed out, the defection—both political and economic terms—helped split the third World apart .
 Eastern Asia's growth would not have been possible if it were not for their easy access to American and Western European markets . But the sensational growth in Eastern Asia—and especially in China—would not have happened without access to U.S. markets .
 The point is that successive U.S. administrations, from Truman to Reagan, provided market access for Cold War allies in order to stimulate economies and, eventually, defensive capabilities overseas .
 Of course there was also the hope that such links would benefit the U.S. economy .
 The main effect was to give Eastern Asia a trade advantage that these countries were now in a position to use to their benefit . But the main effect of the deal is to give them the advantage they are now able to use .
 Beijing feared more than a Soviet attack was the subterfugeous reintroduction of capitalism . In 1972, when Mao Zedong was still in control, the only thing Beijing feared was the return of capitalism to China . The only thing China feared was a Soviet invasion of capitalism.
 It wanted United States military hardware, not United States management models . The U.S. military hardware was wanted, not management models, it said .
 Deng Xiaoping saw its strategic links with the U.S. as the basis for a turnaround of China's economy . Mao's death and the military coup in 1976 led to a turnaround in China's economic fortunes . China's relationship with the United States was key to its success .
 During Ronald Reagan's hard-line administration, from 1981, the Chinese message was even more welcome than before . Reagan's early concerns about not betraying old friends on Taiwan .
 Throughout the 1980s the U.S. treated China as a de facto ally, sharing sensitive intelligence information with it . The United States gave China access to much needed technology that was sometimes unavailable to others outside the United States itself .
 Reagan's purpose was to build China into a real threat to the Soviet Union, thereby thereby thereby . Renmin ribao, Renmin .
 Reagan's friend, a U.S. film producer, toured China in 1981 and told Reagan that Beijing leaders were obsessed with Taiwan . Morrow: Any focus on the island's position would effectively prevent the United States from working with Deng and the Chinese leaders .
 It would be advisable not to be too paranoid, at this stage, about their being a communist state, says David Cameron .
 "I think they will bend, twist, and adjust to whatever seems to abet their progress," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "They will bend and twist"
 Reagan also declared himself willing to sell sophisticated weapons directly to Beijing . Reagan also said he would sell weapons to Beijing directly to the Chinese .
 Sino-U.S. security cooperation expanded in the early 1980s . The Cold War again grew substantially colder in the mid-'80s .
 United States anticommunist campaigns in Angola, Angola, and Cambodia were closely coordinated with the Chinese . Intelligence-sharing increased .
 China's access to America's markets was secure, thereby setting the stage for the first phase of the country's economic boom . China's opening to the U.S. market was secure .
 As they had done for Japan three decades earlier, the U.S. put pressure on their European allies to open up their markets to Chinese products .
 The story of the interaction between the Third World and the Cold War is a complex one . The Cold War was a major source of influence in the world's most powerful nations .
 It should be studied, I think, as part of the broader patterns of international and transnational history in the twentieth century, not simply as the rise and fall of anti-systemic Thirdworldist ideas . I think it should be looked at in a broader pattern of history, not
 In many cases it would make sense to see the Third World as a project of solidarity among elites who had been oppressed by colonial powers . The Third World is an emerging program for undoing injustices this oppression had created .
 It was a project bounded in time and geographical space, with some key states as its representatives . The project was bounded by time, geographical space and time . It was created by a group of key states .
 The Third World's involvement with the Cold War was in the form of the conflict between communism and its enemies . The Cold War's involvement in the Third World continued throughout this period .
 It is therefore right to reintroduce the contested concept of Cold War into key developments in the history of Africa, Asia, and Latin America over the past four generations .
 The United States and the Soviet Union are often portrayed as the determinant of events elsewhere in the world . But in order for it to succeed, it will have to give up the idea that the Cold War was a U.S.-Soviet battle .
 We may dislike the Cold War, both as a concept and a system, but we cannot dissolve it . We may want to de-center it, but it's not a way of de-centering it, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 By the mid-1980s there were about 70,000 nuclear warheads in the world, and over 95 per cent of them were owned by the U.S. and Soviet Union .
 Each side worked out elaborate doctrines for using nuclear weapons in war . Each side sought ways to use nuclear threats for political purposes . The U.S. and Russia sought ways of using nuclear threats .
 Both sides were conscious of the devastating consequences that nuclear war would have for the human race . They developed theories of deterrence and stability to help them conduct their rivalry without precipitating nuclear war .
 Mutual understanding of the consequences of nuclear war provided the basis for the Cold War nuclear order . Mutual understanding provided by Cold War Cold War was the basis of the order .
 There were several crises in which the danger of nuclear war seemed very close, but the Cold War ended without such a war .
 Nuclear weapons did not give rise to our current international order, however we might characterize it . Nor did nuclear weapons give rise . The rise of China, the rise of the West, the decline of the Western .
 Nuclear weapons continue to play an important role in today's world . Nevertheless, nuclear weapons still play a vital role in the world .
 A new nuclear order has been emerging, though whether it will prove to be stable is not yet clear . A new order has emerged, though it is not clear if it will be stable enough .
 This chapter will trace the emergence of that order and try to analyze how it will develop in the future . This chapter is titled "The Order of the World"
 The Reykjavik summit meeting between Gorbachev and Reagan in October 1986 was a turning point on the path to ending the Cold War . The summit meeting was widely regarded at the time as a failure .
 The nuclear arms race had entered a phase of great intensity in the previous decade . The United States and the Soviet Union deployed new, more accurate intercontinental ballistic missiles and submarine-launched ballistic missiles .
 Arms control negotiations resumed in 1985, after a hiatus of almost two years, following NATO's deployment of ground-launched cruise missiles and Pershing II missiles in Europe .
 Gorbachev requested the meeting in Reykjavik in order to give a new impetus to the negotiations . He was impatient with the progress being made and requested it .
 He brought with him proposals that contained significant concessions by the Soviet side . The Soviet Union had also made concessions .
 He and Reagan discussed deep cuts in their nuclear forces, even going so far as to talk about the elimination of nuclear weapons .
 The negotiations were intense, but the meeting ended in frustration and disappointment . The meeting ended with disappointment and frustration .
 Reykjavik talks helped make arms control treaties easier to work with . That made it possible to incorporate proposals discussed at the summit into arms control treaty .
 The Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty Treaty was signed in December 1987 . The treaty eliminated the two countries' shorter and intermediate-range missiles .
 The Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty capped the number of deployed strategic nuclear warheads on each side at 6,000 . The treaty was signed in July 1991 .
 Bush took the imaginative step of announcing the destruction of all United States ground-launched short-range nuclear weapons, as well as the withdrawal of tactical nuclear weapons deployed on surface ships, attack submarines, and land-based naval aircraft . Bush also announced the withdrawal to the United States of
 Eight days later Gorbachev reciprocated by announcing similar unilateral measures by the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union also announced unilateral measures in response .
 In the final years of the Cold War, the two sides made significant moves to bring the nuclear arms race to an end and to reduce their nuclear stockpiles .
 It was not immediately obvious that the three new countries would hand these missiles and their nuclear warheads over to Russia . Active and creative diplomacy was required to ensure that those three new states signed the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty as non-nuclear weapon states in 1993 .
 A second, more lasting consequence of the collapse of the Soviet Union was the threat that this posed to the security of the nuclear weapons complex . The collapse of Soviet Union posed a greater threat to the Soviet nuclear arms complex .
 As Soviet state collapsed, the fear arose that nuclear scientists, nuclear materials, or even nuclear weapons might find their way from Russia to other states, or into the hands of terrorist groups . That complex had been embedded in the internal security structure of the Soviet state, the author says .
 This danger was a matter of great concern to the international community, as well as to the new Russian government, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . This danger is a great concern, says Vladimir Putin's spokesman .
 The United States and Russia came up with creative approaches to dispose of surplus nuclear materials, enhance the security of the Russian nuclear complex . The European Union and Japan agreed to fund programs that would dispose of excess nuclear materials and provide alternative research opportunities .
 The third element in the Cold War legacy consists of the large nuclear forces still held by the U.S. and Russia . The United States and Russia still hold nuclear forces .
 Progress in reducing these forces has been disappointing when set against the political transformations of the last twenty-five years . Progress is disappointing compared to the political changes in the last 25 years, says David Cameron . The UK has not been able to reduce these forces, he says .
 In January 1993, the two countries signed the START II Treaty, which would have capped strategic nuclear forces at 3,000-3,500 deployed strategic nuclear warheads apiece . The treaty was signed in 1993, and would have caps the number of deployed nuclear warheads each .
 This treaty did not enter into force because of disagreements over missile defense . This treaty was based on a treaty between the U.S. and South Korea .
 In 1997, Clinton and Yeltsin agreed on the parameters for a START III Treaty with a limit of 2,000-2,500 deployed strategic warheads on each side . No agreement was ever reached .
 The 2002 Moscow Treaty limited deployed strategic warheads to 1,700-2,200 on each side . The 2002 treaty was signed by the U.S. and Russia .
 The New START Treaty entered into force in 2011 . It commits the two sides to reduce the number of deployed strategic warheads to 1,550 over a period of seven years . The treaty is a seven-year agreement between the two countries .
 In 2011, the total number of nuclear warheads in the world (including non-strategic and non-deployed warheads) was about 20,000 . Over 90 per cent of the nuclear warheads belonged to the United States and Russia .
 The removal of strategic weapons from Belarus, Kazakstan, and Ukraine was an unequivocal success from the point of view of nonproliferation . The removal was a success for the non-nuclear weapons removal from Belarus and Kazakistan .
 The Cooperative Threat Reduction programs appear to have been successful . Assessment is more difficult because it is not easy to judge exactly how serious the danger was in the first place, and how significantly foreign aid helped .
 There is no evidence that nuclear scientists, nuclear weapons, or significant quantities of fissile material have passed from the Russian nuclear weapons complex into the hands of undesirable states or terrorist groups . Nevertheless, the goals of the overall effort appear to have .
 The danger of a general nuclear war receded with the ending of the Cold War . Redefining the nuclear danger has been redefined as a nuclear threat .
 It became even harder than during the Cold War to imagine the circumstances under which the U.S. or Russia would intentionally launch a nuclear attack on the other .
 The military confrontation in Central Europe disappeared in the early 1990s when Russia withdrew its armed forces and nuclear weapons from Eastern Europe and the newly independent states . The confrontation ended in the 1990s .
 The U.S. greatly reduced—but did not eliminate—its forces and nuclear weapons in Europe . The United States too, greatly reduced, but not eliminated, its forces in Europe.
 Perceptions of the nuclear danger have changed since the end of the Cold War, though not in the same way in every country . Perceptions have changed in the past but not in every way in the world .
 Washington shifted its attention from its rivalry with the Soviet Union to the potential threat from rogue states and terrorists . Washington quickly shifted its focus from its . attention from the . rivalry with . the Soviet . Union to potential threat of rogue states .
 This shift was already implicit in the Cooperative Threat Reduction programs, which defined the threat from the Soviet Union/Russia not in terms of the number of nuclear warheads it possessed, but of the potential for leakage of knowledge, materials, and people .
 The new nuclear danger we face is perhaps a handful of nuclear devices in the hands of rogue states or even terrorist groups . The new danger is perhaps the threat posed by rogue states, terrorists or terrorists .
 The top priority was keeping the nuclear weapons complex secure and intact in conditions of economic and political collapse . Top priority was . keeping the . nuclear weapons . complex secure in . economic . and political . collapse .
 The second priority was maintaining strategic stability with the U.S. through arms control negotiations if possible, but by new weapons programs if necessary . If necessary, arms control would be used in arms negotiations, but not weapons programs .
 With Russian army in disarray, nuclear weapons provided compensation for the weakness of its conventional forces . Nuclear weapons provide compensation for weakness of the Russian army .
 The government felt it was vital for political as well as military reasons not to lose the strategic parity the Soviet Union had struggled so hard to attain . The Soviet Union felt it would not lose strategic parity with the West .
 Nuclear nonproliferation remained an important priority, but a lower one for Russia than for the U.S. The United States. Russia's nuclear disarmament policy remains a priority for Russia, the Russian president said .
 For other nuclear weapon states the end of the Cold War was less important, in part because their nuclear forces were so much smaller than those of the United States and the Soviet Union . For the other nuclear weapons states, it was not important because of their smaller forces .
 Britain and France have reduced their nuclear forces, treating them largely as insurance in an unpredictable world . The two countries have reduced nuclear forces in a bid to protect themselves from a nuclear attack .
 China has retained its policy of minimum nuclear deterrence . It is now modernizing its small nuclear force .
 The threat that Israeli nuclear weapons are designed to meet has not disappeared . The threat to Israel's nuclear weapons is not gone, experts say . Israel has a long history of using nuclear weapons to protect itself and its nuclear arsenal .
 The nuclear dimension of the confrontation between India and Pakistan emerged into the open only in the 1990s . Pakistan and India have been at odds for years over nuclear weapons .
 The main exception was South Africa, which decided to destroy its small nuclear stockpile at least partly in response to the change in its strategic environment caused by the end of the Cold War .
 The United States had sought from the beginning of the nuclear age to prevent other states, especially hostile ones, from acquiring nuclear weapons . The U.S. had sought to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons from other states .
 It developed a common interest with the Soviet Union in stopping the spread of nuclear weapons . This led to the signing of the NPT in 1968, and to the strengthening and creation of institutions to support the nonproliferation regime .
 The Gulf War of 1990-1 added greatly to the concern about proliferation . The Gulf war of 1990/1 added to the concerns .
 IAEA inspectors soon discovered that Iraq had organized extensive clandestine programs for uranium enrichment and nuclear weapons design . Iraq was found to have organized extensive programs for nuclear weapons development .
 Iraq was a party to the NPT and had been subject to IAEA safeguards . This was especially troubling because Iraq was subject to NPT safeguards . Iraq was part of the N.PT and subject to safeguards .
 In 1986 the five recognized nuclear weapon states (the United States, the Soviet Union, Britain, France, France and China) had nuclear weapons . Israel and South Africa also had nuclear arms .
 India had tested a nuclear device in 1974, but the decision to develop a nuclear arsenal came later, perhaps in 1988-90 . India tested a nuke in 1974 but decided to develop its nuclear arsenal later .
 Pakistan appears to have had a workable device at some point in the mid-1980s . The device is believed to have been used in Pakistan .
 In 1986 there were seven nuclear weapon states, plus two on the brink of possessing nuclear weapons . In 1986, seven of the world's nuclear weapons states were nuclear-armed states .
 Over the last twenty-five years three states have ended their nuclear weapon programs or have had them ended by others . Three nuclear weapons programs have been ended in the last 25 years .
 South Africa destroyed its nuclear weapons at the end of the Cold War . Iraq's nuclear weapons program was dismantled by the IAEA in the early 1990s; and Libya gave up its nuclear weapon program in 2003 .
 The treaty entered into force in 1970, once 40 states, including the three depository states, had signed it . It entered force in the 1970s, when 40 states signed it, the treaty entered force .
 China and France signed in 1992, helping to move the norm of nuclear nonproliferation closer to universal acceptance . The two countries signed a treaty in 1992 to end nuclear weapons proliferation .
 The prospects for strengthening the nuclear nonproliferation regime appeared to be good in the early 1990s . In the 1990s, the prospect of strengthening the regime was good in terms of nuclear disarmament . The U.N. Security Council says it is working to strengthen the nonpro
 The NPT was extended indefinitely at the Extension and Review conference in 1995 . After vigorous diplomacy by a number of governments, including the Clinton administration, the NPT is extended indefinitely .
 The third is between the states that have nuclear 7 UNSC 687, April 3, 1991 . The third nuclear war was between the U.S. and Russia in 1991 .
 The first and second of these bargains were crucial in inducing non-nuclear weapon states to sign the Treaty, but the significance of the third bargain has increased over time .
 In 1968, when the U.S. and the Soviet Union signed the treaty, strategic arms control talks were only about to begin, and disarmament seemed a very distant prospect . The treaty was signed by the United States and Soviet Union in 1968 .
 In 1995 the Cold War was over, and the non-nuclear weapon states were less willing to look charitably on the failure of the nuclear weapon states to disarm .
 The 1995 Extension and Review Conference adopted a set of principles and objectives that emphasized the importance of disarmament . The NPT was extended indefinitely in 1995 .
 It stressed early completion of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and early agreement on Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty . It stressed strenuous efforts to reduce nuclear weapons globally, with the ultimate goal of disarmament .
 The CTBT was signed in 1996, but it has not yet entered into force . The United States Senate voted against ratification of the CTBT in 1999 . The U.S. Senate votes against ratification .
 Since 1996, only nuclear tests have been conducted by India, Pakistan and North Korea . India conducted five nuclear tests in May 1998, six Pakistani tests in the same month . North Korea conducted two North Korean tests in 2006 and 2009 .
 The Conference on Disarmament, where this treaty is supposed to be negotiated, works by consensus, and so far no consensus has been found to start negotiations .
 The bargain between the non-nuclear weapon states and the nuclear weapon states has become more contentious and more salient . One consequence is that the bargain between non-nukes and nuclear weapons states is becoming more contentious .
 One hundred and ninety states have signed the NPT, giving it almost universal adherence . The NPT is the world's most restrictive single-nation treaty .
 The second is that some states that have signed the NPT have organized clandestine nuclear weapon programs . The NPT is a non-nuclear bomb treaty between the two countries .
 India and Pakistan by conducting nuclear tests; the others by renouncing nuclear weapons . Pakistan and India did not conduct nuclear tests, but conducted nuclear tests . The others did not do so .
 Nobody doubts that Israel has the bomb, but nobody doubts that it has it . Israel, however, still maintains its policy of opacity, though it still maintains a policy .
 The policy of opacity is intended to be less provocative than a declared policy of nuclear deterrence . The policy is meant to be 'less provocative' than that of nuclear disarmament .
 For four decades there has been no nuclear response to Israel from other Mideast countries . Israel now finds itself in an increasingly exposed position .
 The Iranian nuclear program has raised fears in Israel, but also stimulated interest in nuclear research in other countries in the region . The Iranian program has not only raised fears but has stimulated interest from other countries .
 The 1995 Extension and Review conference called for a nuclear weapon-free zone in the Middle East . The 1995 Conference called for the zone in 1995 .
 The 2010 Review Conference reiterated that call and backed the convening of a conference in 2012, to be attended by all states of the Middle East, on the establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction .
 India and Pakistan conducted nuclear weapon tests in May 1998 . The two countries then conducted nuclear tests in 1998 .
 India consistently resisted signing the NPT, denouncing it as discriminatory . Pakistan took the position that it would sign only if India did . India consistently denounced it as discrimination; Pakistan did not .
 India planned a test in 1995, but called it off under American pressure . The U.S. obtained satellite photographs of preparations for the test .
 In 1998 the Indians made their final preparations at night to avoid surveillance by satellite . The Indians made the final preparations in 1998 to avoid satellite surveillance .
 India's decision to test was not just a technical one; it was a political decision to ""come out"" as a nuclear power, in defiance of U.S. policy . India tested its first nuke test in 1996, a year after the first test was conducted by the U
 The government in Islamabad was under intense domestic pressure to match India . It resisted Washington's strenuous efforts to persuade it not to do so . The government was under domestic pressure .
 For a discussion of what the phrase may mean, see the exchange between Ambassador Yitzhak Rabin and Paul Warnke on November 12, 1968 .
 The American interest in nonproliferation was not always consistent . The U.S. has long been concerned about nuclear weapons proliferation .
 Washington turned a blind eye to Pakistani nuclear activities in the 1980s . Pakistan was a crucial ally in supporting the Mujahideen against Soviet forces in Afghanistan .
 The U.S. dropped the sanctions it had imposed after the 1998 tests . Pakistan once again became a crucial American ally in a war in Afghanistan .
 Washington tried to persuade New Delhi to change its policy on nuclear weapons after the nuclear tests failed completely . Washington's effort to persuade India to stop testing failed completely.
 Bush administration decided it was more important to enlist India as a friend and ally than impose futile sanctions on it . Bush administration: It was much more important than to continue to impose sanctions on India .
 Nonproliferation policy does not trump all other political goals, says CNN's John Sutter . This showed, once again, that nonprosiferation policy doesn't trump all political goals .
 The Indo-Pakistani nuclear relationship mimics the Cold War rivalry of the United States and the Soviet Union . There are several crucial differences between the two countries .
 First, India regards its nuclear weapons as a deterrent against China as well as Pakistan . China has helped Pakistan develop its nuclear industry including providing it with the design of a nuclear warhead .
 Direct conflict can take place at the level of low-intensity warfare, as well as conventional and nuclear warfare, and that has affected the calculation of risk on both sides . The risk of direct conflict has also affected the calculations of risk for both sides, he says .
 The two main protagonists can appeal to outside powers to tilt the bilateral balance . That affects their rhetoric and their behavior . The U.S. as well as China can influence their rhetoric, writes Peter Bergen .
 Pakistan as the weaker power has been more prone to do this than India . Pakistan as a weaker power more prone than India to do so, says Imran Khan .
 Two crises since 1998 have raised the prospect of nuclear war between India and Pakistan . Pakistan and India have been at odds for years over nuclear weapons . Two crises between 1998 and 1998 raised the possibility of war .
 Pakistan launched an attack across the Line of Control in Kashmir to seize the Kargil Heights in 1999 . In 1999, Pakistan launched a similar attack on the border with India in Kashmir . Pakistan launched the attack in 1999, when the border was still at the border .
 Pakistan believed Indian nuclear weapons would neutralize Indian conventional superiority, allowing Pakistan scope for guerrilla operations . It did so apparently in the belief that Pakistani nuclear weapons .
 The Clinton administration put severe pressure on Pakistan to withdraw behind the Line of Control . Pakistan withdrew from the border, but the U.S. did not .
 India blamed the attack on Kashmiri groups supported by Pakistan . It undertook a huge build-up of its forces along the Line of Control along the border .
 The United States and Britain put pressure on Pakistan to stop terrorist incursions into India . A further terrorist attack in May 2002 led India to put its forces on high alert, ready to go to war within hours .
 In the first crisis nuclear weapons appear to have emboldened Pakistan; in the second they seem to have acted as a restraint on both sides . In both cases nuclear weapons have been seen to be a restraint .
 Clandestine nuclear programs pose an even greater danger to the nonproproliferation regime . Clandestine nuke programs pose a greater risk to nonprosiferation regime, experts say .
 The most egregious case is that of North Korea, which built up its nuclear industry in the 1980s and 1990s . North Korea's nuclear industry was built up in the 80s and 90s .
 It signed the NPT in 1985 as a non-nuclear weapon state, and withdrew in 2003, before conducting its nuclear tests . It then conducted nuclear tests in 1998, before withdrawing from NPT as a result .
 In June 1994 the United States and North Korea nearly went to war over the latter's nuclear plans . North Korea and the U.S. nearly went on to war in June 1994 over North Korea's nuclear program .
 Kim II Sung defused the crisis by agreeing to negotiations, which resulted in the Agreed Framework of October 1994 . North Korea agreed to limit its nuclear program in return for help with oil supplies and the construction of two light-water reactors .
 Agreed Framework proved difficult to implement; there were constant complaints from each side about the willingness of the other to put it into practice . The Agreed
 For North Korea the agreement was fundamentally about the normalization of relations with the United States . For the U.S. it was primarily about preventing North Korea from acquiring nuclear weapons . For N. Korea the deal was about normalization, not nuclear disarmament .
 An agreement seemed tantalizingly close at the end of the Clinton administration, but the Agreed Framework finally broke down in 2002-2003 .
 There were moments of hope in 2005 and 2007 when joint documents were produced, but ultimately the talks proved unsuccessful . The talks were unsuccessful .
 Iran's nuclear program has been a thorny issue for the international community . The Iranian nuclear program is an even more vexing issue than Iran's own nuclear weapons program .
 In the late 1980s, the Islamic regime began to buy centrifuge components for uranium enrichment . The Islamic regime bought the components in the 1980s .
 It claims it is creating the basis for a civilian energy program . It has consistently denied that it plans to make nuclear weapons .
 Iran has refused to do this, in spite of the offer of guaranteed supplies of low-enriched uranium for Iranian reactors . Iran is refusing to accept the offer despite the offer .
 The current crisis came into focus in 2003, when the IAEA discovered that Iran had violated its commitments under the NPT by running a covert enrichment program and failing to disclose imports of nuclear materials . Iran has been accused of violating its NPT commitments by enriching Iran's nuke
 IAEA Board of Governors found Iran was not in compliance with its Safeguards Agreement . UN Security Council has imposed four rounds of sanctions on Iran since 2006 . Iran has been hit with sanctions since 2005 .
 These did not stop the Iranian nuclear program; nor did they remove concern about Iran's past activities . Iran's nuclear program was not stopped by these measures, but they were not stopped .
 Early in 2009 it was reported that Iran had accumulated sufficient LEU that, if converted to highly enriched uranium, would provide enough material for a bomb . Iran has been accused of using LEU to make nuclear weapons .
 It may be content to put itself in the position of being able to produce nuclear weapons quickly if it wishes to do so .
 Early in 2012, both the U.S. and the Europeans imposed significantly stronger sanctions on Iran . Iran agreed to new talks about its nuclear program with the West .
 Israeli government and some Republican politicians in the U.S. speak openly about the possibility of military strikes against Iran . At the same time the Israeli government began to speak much more openly .
 The United States has led the effort to halt the Iranian program . The U.S. sees it as a destabilizing factor in the Middle East and as a direct threat to the United States .
 The Iranian threat has served as a justification of U.S. Ballistic Missile Defense deployments in the United States and Europe . These deployments have complicated relations with Russia and China .
 Israel has felt particularly endangered by the prospect of an Iranian bomb, seeing it as an existential threat . Israel feels particularly threatened by an Iranian nuclear bomb, fearing it will be a threat .
 Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's provocative rhetoric has stoked Israeli fears . Ahmadinjad said Israel must be "wiped off the map" and Israel must wipe out the map . The provocative rhetoric of the Iranian president has stoked Israel fears .
 The possibility of military action by Israel or the U.S. against Iranian nuclear sites has been widely discussed . Israel and the United States have discussed the possibility of taking action against Iran .
 The correct translation of Ahmadinejad's words is correct . See the footnote to the article with a link to a discussion of the correct translation .
 The North Korean and Iranian cases have exposed weaknesses in the nonproproliferation regime . North Korea and Iran cases, different though they are in important respects, exposed weaknesses of the regime . Iran's case is the latest in a series of nuclear weapons cases .
 The NPT supports the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes while seeking to stop the proliferation of nuclear weapons . But it does not draw a clear line between civil and military programs, and this will become a more important issue if nuclear power spreads, says Peter Bergen .
 A plant that can enrich uranium to 3-5 per cent for use in nuclear power plants can also enrich it to 90 per cent in bombs . A plant can enrich the uranium to 5 per cent to 3 per cent, but it can enrich it for 90% for bomb bombs .
 A state can come very close to being able to produce nuclear warheads without breaching its obligations under the NPT . It can do so as long as it does not intend to produce nukes, as well as producing nuclear weapons .
 The safeguards regime has been strengthened since then, but not every country has adopted the IAEA's Additional Protocol . The Additional Protocol allows for more rigorous inspections .
 North Korea has at various times expelled IAEA inspectors, and Iran has restricted the access inspectors can gain to its facilities . Iran has also restricted access inspectors have been able to access its facilities in Iran .
 The IAEA does not have the power to impose inspections on unwilling governments . The agency has no power to inspect Iran's nuclear facilities .
 UN Security Council has adopted resolutions imposing sanctions on North Korea and Iran, but so far these have not had the desired effect of bringing about a change in the policy of those two states . IAEA can report on issues affecting international peace and security .
 Khan was a central figure in the most recent Israeli terror plot . Khan was also a key figure in Israel's most recent terror attacks . Khan is believed to have been involved in Operation El Shomel .
 North Korea was apparently helping Syria build an ""undeclared” nuclear reactor before an Israeli air attack destroyed it in September 2007 .
 The combination of great power and great vulnerability proved to be a volatile mixture of power and vulnerability . It was the first time the U.S. President Barack Obama had been in charge of the White House .
 National Security Strategy was produced by the Bush administration in September 2002 . This combination was reflected in the National Security strategy produced in 2002 .
 It became the focus of an intense debate about the need for, and the legitimacy of, preventive force . The case was the subject of intense debate .
 The Bush administration offered as the main justification for invading Iraq as the need to prevent Saddam Hussein from reconstituting his biological, chemical, and nuclear weapons programs . The invasion of Iraq was the administration's main justification .
 The National Security Strategy's argument that preventive military action might be required in dealing with new nuclear threats has been widely accepted .
 Nuclear deterrence is much less useful in dealing with the former threat than with the latter . Nuclear deterrence can't be used to deal with the threat of nuclear weapons, says U.S. President Obama .
 He called for more resources and authority for the IAEA and international inspections . He also called for a new framework for civil nuclear cooperation (including an international fuel bank)
 Obama drew on a well-established agenda of unfinished items in the area of arms control and disarmament . Obama's speech drew on an agenda of weapons control, disarmament issues .
 He framed them in the vision of a world without nuclear weapons, he said . What was new was that he framed them as a vision of nuclear weapons .
 Report of the Secretary-General's High-Level Panel on Threats, Challenges, and Change , 24. Report . Report . The Secretary of General's panel on threats, challenges, and change .
 George P Shultz, William J Perry, Henry A Kissinger, and Sam Nunn, wrote the Wall Street Journal, January 4, 2007 . Henry Kissinger, George P. Shultz and William J. Perry wrote a World Free of Nuclear Weapons .
 This approach is based on the assumption that a discriminatory regime, in which some states possess nuclear weapons and others do not, will not be viable in the long run . This approach, in contrast, is not based on an assumption that such a regime is not viable .
 The steps outlined in the Prague speech have proved more difficult to implement than was expected in 2009 . The Prague speech was expected to take place in 2009, but has proved more complicated than expected .
 The 2010 Nuclear Posture Review did play down the role of nuclear weapons in U.S. national security policy . It did not go as far as adopting a policy of no first use, as some critics had hoped .
 In April 2010, the Obama administration hosted an international summit conference on nuclear materials in Washington DC . The goal was to secure all vulnerable nuclear material around the world within four years .
 Negotiations on a new START treaty proved complex, and ratification by the United States Senate was contentious . The START treaty entered into force in 2011 .
 The prospects of having the U.S. Senate ratify the CTBT in Obama's first term are, at best, uncertain .
 Negotiations on a Fissile Material Cutoff Treaty have not begun, because Pakistan, which is increasing its production of fissile materials, opposes negotiations . Pakistan has increased production of the materials .
 The UN Security Council held a summit meeting at which 14 heads of state and government unanimously adopted Resolution 1887 reiterating the Security Council's support for nuclear disarmament and nuclear nonproliferation in 2009 .
 All the nuclear powers are concerned about nuclear proliferation and nuclear terrorism . International cooperation will not necessarily be easy, says CNN's John Defterios .
 Not all nuclear weapon states place these concerns at the top of their priorities, as the U.S. does . The United States does .
 P5 states have responded strongly to North Korean and Iranian nuclear programs . This has been evident in the response to the North Korea and Iran's nuclear programs, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 Chinese policy on the North Korean nuclear program has been influenced by the prospect of instability on the Korean peninsula . China has been wary of the possibility of a reunified Korea allied with the United States .
 A third difficulty is that deep reductions will be needed in U.S. and Russian nuclear forces if progress is made toward disarmament .
 Institutional interests may present obstacles to further reductions, experts say .
 Nuclear weapons policy in the U.S. and Russia is still framed in terms of Cold War notions of deterrence and strategic stability . This too complicates the process of disarmament, too .
 The tradition of non-use has continued since the end of the Cold War, though there have been dangerous moments .
 Indo-Pakistan conflict twice gave rise to fears that nuclear weapons might be used . Indo-Pakistani conflict twice raised fears of using nuclear weapons .
 The launch was communicated to the Russian president, but it was quickly established that the rocket posed no threat . No Russian forces were put on alert, and no Russian forces have been on alert .
 Some commentators have taken this as evidence of the danger of accidental nuclear war . Some commentators say it could be a sign of the risk of accidental war .
 A global nuclear war is no longer the main worry, given the changes that have taken place in relations between the U.S. and Russia . The relationship is still characterized by mutual deterrence .
 Nuclear weapons have become more tightly woven into regional politics, especially in South Asia, the Middle East, and on the Korean peninsula . Second, nuclear weapons have also become more closely woven in regional politics .
 Those conflicts contain within themselves the danger that nuclear weapons will be used . Settlement of those conflicts is essential if there is to be movement on the path to a world free of nuclear weapons .
 Nuclear proliferation has come to be seen by the U.S. as the main nuclear danger . Nuclear proliferation is seen by many, but not all, governments as a main danger . The United States is seen as the most vulnerable to nuclear proliferation .
 Their chief fear is that terrorist groups will acquire nuclear weapons or the materials for building them, perhaps with the help of rogue states . The U.S. government says it is concerned that terrorists are acquiring nuclear weapons .
 Khan 27 Pavel Podvig, ""If It's Broke, Don’t Fix It,"" Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 61:4 (July/August 2005), 21-2. Khan Khan 27 . Khan Khan Khan: "If It’s Broke
 Nuclear deterrence no longer serves, as it did during the Cold War, as the organizing principle for the nuclear order . As a result, nuclear deterrence is no longer an organizing principle of the order, it no longer exists .
 It retains its place in relations among the nuclear powers, especially in the conflict between India and Pakistan . But its role in preventing proliferation and nuclear terrorism is at best limited, experts say .
 Conventional deterrence and non-military forms of deterrence have begun to receive more attention in the United States in the effort to prevent terrorism . It is likely that these explorations will continue .
 These approaches to deterrence lack the brutal clarity of deterrence through the threat of nuclear retaliation . But they may prove to be more effective in dealing with the danger of nuclear terrorism .
 In order to meet the threats of nuclear proliferation and nuclear terrorism, governments have taken steps to ensure nuclear warheads and nuclear materials are tightly secured .
 The Bush administration established the Proliferation Security Initiative in 2003 . It is a global effort to stop the trafficking of weapons of mass destruction .
 Bush and Putin launched the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism in 2006 . The initiative aims to improve national and international efforts to prevent, detect and respond to, a nuclear terrorist threat .
 Nuclear weapons have not been used in war, but they have served as a casus belli . Most notably in Iraq in 2003, they were used in the Iraq war .
 The Bush administration promulgated the idea of using preventive force to stop rogue states and terrorist groups from acquiring nuclear weapons . But the Iraq War pointed up the difficulties of such an approach .
 Preventive force requires detailed and reliable intelligence, as well as clarity about the goals of the action, says the U.S. Preventive Force .
 The Israeli attack on the Iraqi Osirak reactor in 1981 destroyed the reactor, but may have speeded up the Iraqi nuclear program . The attack may have sped up the country's nuclear program, Israel says .
 The 2003 invasion of Iraq found that there was no nuclear program to shut down, but initiated a long and destructive war . Iraq's invasion of 2003 found no nuclear weapons, but started a long, destructive war.
 Preventive force raises questions about the legality and legitimacy of such action . Preventive use of preventive force is illegal in the U.S.
 He went to war with Iraq, which proved not to have a nuclear weapons program, but he was unable to stop the nuclear programs of the other two states . He went on to go to war against Iraq, but failed to stop other nuclear programs .
 Obama outlined a future in which movement by the nuclear powers toward a world free of nuclear weapons would make it possible to create a more effective nonproliferation regime . In his Prague speech, Obama outlined the future in his speech .
 The current nuclear state of the world raises questions about the future of nuclear power . Those are the central questions that the current nuclear world raises .
 Building International Order in an Era of Transnational Threats , chapter 1 . Building International order in an era of transnational threats, chapter 1. Building international Order in a era of threats .
 In the early 1980s, when U.S. arms spending rose rapidly after several years of stagnation, public concern about the arms race also increased . Public concern about arms race increased rapidly .
 The probability a run-away arms race would lead to nuclear war was seen as quite high . The probability of a nuclear arms race was thought to be very high .
 At the end of the 1980s, the INF agreement and the rapprochement between the superpowers have led many to the opposite extreme of declaring the arms race dead .
 Many arms races may lead to wars or extremely wasteful arms acquisitions . Many of these arms races could lead to war or very wasteful arms purchases .
 It makes sense to use this note as a point of departure for a brief examination of the arms race phenomenon, during and after the Cold War, and of how our understanding of it has evolved .
 There is less division about the nature and role of arms races among experts of today than there was a few decades ago . The Development of the Arms Race and How We Think About It .
 Next, I discuss what implications, if any, the emerging consensus might have for our understanding of the East-West arms race during the Cold War . I discuss the implications of this consensus for understanding of Cold War arms race .
 Cold War was a major feature of Cold War, but it should be seen more as an asymmetrical, and partly unsynchronized, militarization of an ideological and geopolitical conflict than a spiraling action-reaction process heading for Armageddon .
 The nuclear arms race did not cause the Cold War, but it put its mark on it, especially in the first and last decade of the East-West conflict . As for impact, I argue that whereas the nuclear arms war did not . cause it, it put a distinct mark on
 So far, they have been remarkably few, and their impact on international peace and stability correspondingly small . The impact of these types of weapons has been correspondably small, says CNN's John Defterios .
 Arms races, it seems, are less of a threat to international peace than to the economic well-being of nations . Arms races seem to be less of an economic threat to the world than to peace and prosperity .
 We adjust our thinking about arms races to the multidimensional conflicts and security dilemmas of the twenty-first century, the picture may well change again . That being said, the moment we adjust our thoughts about arms race to the multi-dimensional conflicts of the 20th century,
 The nature of the arms race phenomenon has been a contested issue among historians, political scientists and statesmen for more than a century . It has been debated among historians and political scientists over the years .
 By the end of the Cold War, numerous schools of thought had presented their perspectives on what arms races are, why they occur, and what implications they may have for international peace and stability .
 There seemed to be more arms race theories than weapon acquisition decisions to explain . As Matthew Evangelista put it, there seemed to have been more arms races than acquisition decisions .
 Over the last twenty-year period the explanatory field has both narrowed and widened up . Over the past twenty-years, the field has widened and narrowed up .
 It has narrowed in the sense that some of the theories and propositions that were still highly influential back in the 1980s have lost relevance and support . Theories and propositions still influential in the 80s are still relevant today, say experts .
 It has widened up in the sense that the walls and gaps that once separated the more important schools of thought, and prevented fruitful exchange between them, have indeed been lowered .
 Any comprehensive theory will have to offer more than just a single analytical perspective . Thus, any comprehensive theory must offer more of a single perspective .
 A rapid increase in military spending by two neighboring countries does not constitute a military competition or an arms race . In and by itself, a rapid increase of military spending is not by itself a major arms race, experts say .
 To do so, the military build-up must be imbedded in some sort of rivalry between the two governments in which they seek to improve, or at least maintain, their relative power and influence .
 Arms races cannot be caused and sustained by non-relational factors such as ""Eigendynamik” or ""technological momentum"" alone . Arms races can't be caused or sustained by "technological moments" alone .
 The claim of Dieter Senghaas and others that arms races are essentially ""autistic"" and ""inner-directed"" phenomena, is still in want of convincing empirical support . The claim is still not supported by evidence .
 This view can be traced back to the father of the English school of international relations, Hedley Bull . This view was the view of the father-of-the-people's view on international relations . This is the view that the British government should not be allowed to engage in international
 There is little evidence in support of Robert McNamara's notion of a ""mad momentum"" making arms races, once started, almost impossible to control . Even if arms races are caused by interstate rivalry driven by perceptions of fear and insecurity, there is little or no evidence .
 The perception of threat by one actor may trigger an action-reaction process, with the opponent responding in kind . Sure, it may trigger a reaction process, and the opponent responds in kind.
 At least for the Cold War period, armament decisions of the big powers and their allies had rather been "mainly inner-directed and less dictated by external forces", says historian .
 By the end of the Cold War, Senghaas himself was calling for multilevel analyses of the arms race phenomenon . By end of Cold War he had called for multiilevel analysis of arms race .
 " Arms races, rivalry, and war,"" Journal of Peace Research, 48:1 , 93, 97. Arms races and rivalry are the subject of war .
 To start and sustain arms races a number of rational decisions have to be made, says David Frum . To start an arms race, arms races must be rationalised, he says .
 There are many examples of aborted arms races as well as of arms races controlled or ended by mutual accord . These may in turn be criticized, reconsidered, modified, or reversed .
 The finding that arms races are caused by interstate rivalry, not the other way around, may be started and ended by the exercise of political will . Arms races cannot be a sufficient or necessary cause of war, the author says .
 Many experts still posit a direct or indirect causal relationship between the two . Yet many experts still believe there is a causal link between them .
 There is no direct causal relationship whatsoever between arms races and war; only a spurious one . In fact, there is strong reason to believe that there is no link between arms race and war .
 The arms race occurred early in the life of the rivalry . Still, they could find no positive correlation between arms races and war when the arms race began .
 Only when arms races occurred at a later stage, ""in the context of mature rivalry,"" did a significant positive correlation emerge . Arms races occurred later in the history of arms races, the author says .
 This may actually indicate a spurious, rather than a causal, relationship . escalation to war is more likely to happen later in rivalry, after repeated disputes, regardless of whether there is an arms race or not .
 The nuclear arms race stood out as the very essence of superpower rivalry . Indeed, to many laymen and experts alike, it was the essence of the rivalry .
 The term 'arms race' almost became shorthand for Cold War rivalry itself . To some, the term ""arms race" became shorthand .
 In the following I will present four propositions about the role and nature of the military competition in the Cold War that address different aspects of this question . These are four propositions that address the question .
 The Cold War may not fully qualify as an arms race, at least not a permanent one . In terms of relative military spending, the Soviet-American military competition in the Cold War was not fully a military competition .
 Military expenditure may not be the crucial criteria in this particular case . That being said, military expenditure is not the crucial criterion in this case .
 Many students of arms races prefer applying a simple quantitative indicator, such as an increase in annual military spending of the parties involved by 8 per cent or more for at least three successive years, 23 or 21 Hammond, Plowshares into Swords, 227 .
 Annual Soviet defense expenditure as a proportion of GNP was constantly, although with some fluctuations, well above 8 per cent . According to Western estimates, annual Soviet defense spending as a part of the Soviet defense budget was constantly .
 Annual growth rate averaged some 9-11 per cent from the end of the Second World War to 1960 .
 From then onwards, there was a continuous increase in Soviet defense spending for more than twenty years . The increase in defense spending was seen in the Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 No reliable figures were ever offered by the Soviet government itself . How to measure the level of Soviet military spending became an extremely politicized issue among Western experts .
 Soviet military expenditure rose sharply from 1959 till the end of the 1960s, and then consumed a steady 14 per cent of GNP throughout the 1970s and early 1980s . Annual growth rate of 4-5 per cent in the first half of the 70s and 1980s was less
 From 1982-3 onwards, annual growth in military spending increased once again, leading to an extremely heavy defense burden . The Soviet economy first stopped growing and next started to contract . The defense burden increased as the Soviet economy stopped growing .
 The defense sector was by now consuming almost onethird of the total expenditure of the Soviet government . Defense sector was consuming almost onethird of the total expense of the government .
 In 1987, Mikhail Gorbachev halted the rise in military outlays as part of his new economic reforms program, Perestroika . In 1987 the rise was halted in favor of the economic reforms known as Perestoika . The Soviet Union halted the increase in military spending in
 In the years 1989-91, military spending dropped more than 17 per cent .
 From the 1950s until the late 1980s the former Soviet Union was consistently spending 9 per cent or more of its GNP on national defense . This was a good margin, fulfilling one of the main numerical criteria of taking part in an arms race .
 Albert Wohlstetter was one of the first to question the notion of the Cold War as an arms race . Albert Wohstetter is the author of the book "The Cold War" and "Cold War"
 Wohlstetter argued that, of the two superpowers, only the Soviet Union was actually racing . In a two-part article published by Foreign Policy in the summer and fall of 1974, he argued .
 Since the early 1960s, he claimed, 24 Hammonds, Plowshares into Swords, 49, 49. Hammonds claimed to have been at the helm of the Hammonds since the 1960s . He claimed to be at the top of the world's most famous and most
 Even if there was political rivalry and military competition between the two, there was no race . Thus, even if there were political and military rivalry, there were no race between them .
 There is little doubt that Wohlstetter, together with neo-conservative pressure groups such as The Committee on the Present Danger, was instrumental in lifting the alleged Soviet military out-spending to the top of the U.S. political agenda .
 This, in turn, paved the way for the notorious Team B report and the following ""window of opportunity"" scare among influential U.S. national security experts in the second half of the 1970s .
 The annual defense expenditure of the USA as a percentage of GNP was in steady decline from 1954 until the late 1970s . According to official figures, the annual defense spending of the U.S. was in a steady decline between 1954 and 1970 .
 The above figures for the years of the Korean War and Vietnam War do include the United States war effort . Without it, the level of United States military spending would have been below 8 per cent of GNP also in the 1960s .
 Since the end of the Second World War, there are only eight out of forty-four years when U.S. outlays for defense per annum surpassed the 8 per cent of GNP criteria . The 1954-62 period was the period when the United States outlays exceeded the
 We may ask whether it really makes sense to apply any fixed numerical indicator, such as 8 per cent of GNP in annual military spending, when one of the rivals involved is economically superior to the other .
 If the stronger part, the USA spent only what it believed to be necessary to improve or maintain its military position vis-a-vis the weaker party, it would seem appropriate to speak of an arms race . The Soviet Union's military expenditure consumed more than 8 per cent of its GN
 Grey's arms race definition allows for this possibility since the only thing it asks for is that the parties do increase or improve their military forces at a rapid rate, without further specification . Grey's definition of the arms race allows this possibility .
 In the 1950s and the early and mid-1980s, the military competition between the superpowers was so intense that it fulfilled, or came very close to fulfilling, even the strict numerical criteria of an arms race . The records show that in certain periods of the Cold War, the
 By 1987, when the Reagan build-up started to level out, the annual national defense outlays of the USA had increased by 53. per cent, compared to what they were in 1980 . In 1987, the U.S. defense budget was down 53 per cent .
 Even in the periods when its military spending was considerably less than 8 per cent of GNP, the U.S. was still racing, only with less expensive means . Thirdly, even in those periods when it was less expensive, the United States still raced .
 The 1960s and 1970s saw a big leap forward in U.S. technology and strategy with respect to nuclear weapons . The 60s and 70s were a big step forward in the United States technology .
 Accuracy and survivability became more important than numbers and yield . Accuracy and survival became important for survival, not numbers .
 The emerging multiple independently targetable re-entry vehicle technology made it possible to increase offensive capabilities without increasing the number of strategic missiles . The emerging technology allows the U.S. to increase its offensive capabilities .
 The steady quantitative build-up of Soviet strategic forces could be balanced by qualitative means . Cruise missiles and stealth aircraft also gave reason to believe that Russia could balance its ambitions .
 In the Cold War, nuclear weapons served as symbolic measurements of destructive power, or --in Thomas Schelling's phrase—of ""power to hurt" The two superpowers apprehend the strategic military balance in roughly similar ways .
 The main function of the Cold War nuclear arms race was to secure that balance . The Cold War was to 'secure that balance' in the world of nuclear weapons .
 It took time for the decision makers in Washington and Moscow to fully comprehend the implications of the nuclear revolution . The nuclear revolution took place in Russia and the West .
 By the end of the 1950s, the essential workings of the new era had indeed dawned upon the national security experts in both East and West . The new era of the Cold War had not yet dawned on the world's security experts .
 Apart from the Cuban missile crisis, superpowers withstood the temptation to use their nuclear forces to intimidate the other, gain political or territorial concessions, or in some other way reorder the status quo .
 The U.S. government essentially allowed this to happen by slowing down its build-up of strategic nuclear forces exactly as the Soviets started its build up in earnest . The emerging parity was a product of both competition and cooperation, the author says .
 This is what really makes the nuclear arms race between the U.S. and the USSR, at least from the 1960s onwards, so special . This is the reason why it was so special for the United States and the Soviet Union to engage in the arms race .
 The purpose of the build-up was neither superiority nor intimidation, but parity and deterrence . The superpowers began to exchange information about their nuclear forces, installed the Hot Line and accepted strategic surveillance by national means .
 Richard K Betts, who seems to have been inspired by an ambition to prove the exact opposite, reached the conclusion that attempts at nuclear coercion were ambiguous in execution .
 President Eisenhower's farewell speech may have made American voters even more doubtful about the need for more and better weapons . President Eisenhower warned about the ""military industrial complex"
 Growing U.S. involvement in Vietnam War called for a shift of priorities within the defense sector . Also, the growing United States involvement in the Vietnam War was also a priority .
 In and by themselves, none of these factors was a compelling reasons for such a change of nuclear policy . However, in and by . themselves, they were not all the reasons for the change .
 By the late 1950s, U.S. decision makers had come to realize that nuclear weapons could not be used for intimidation of other major nuclear powers . They decided that rough parity, supported by an assured second-strike capability, would be good enough for deterrence .
 With increasing number of strategic missiles placed on nuclear-powered submarines, the U.S. government felt confident that it had an assured massive retaliation capability that could not be offset by any likely increase in the Soviet Union's offensive nuclear forces .
 Russia realized it would not add much security for the U.S. to sustain its build-up of land-based and airborne nuclear forces . The only thing that could possibly be achieved by this was to provoke fears in Moscow that the Soviet secondstrike capability might not be assured .
 It would seem rational, from an American perspective, to allow the Soviets to achieve a rough parity, or even a slight edge, in land-based strategic forces . Since such fears could have a potentially destabilizing effect, it would seem irrational, from a U.S. perspective,
 In this sense, the Soviet-American competition in strategic weapons was partly a cooperative game . The Soviet-U.S. competition in the 1980s was partly the cooperative game.
 For nuclear deterrence to work in a non-destabilizing way, cooperation, communication, and mutual restraint was being called for . The U.S. should cooperate with the North Korea, the author says .
 It is hard to find examples of the same mechanism of restraint in the arms races of the pre-nuclear past . The arms race was a major arms race in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Cold War was only a symptom of underlying political-ideological and geopolitical conflict, as in previous arms races, was widely perceived to be the main cause of the disease . The military competition between the Cold War superpowers was only the symptom of their underlying political conflict .
 The first held that the nuclear arms race was indeed a main, if not the main, cause of the Cold War . The first thought that the arms race led to a nuclear war was indeed the main cause .
 Allegedly, it was Hiroshima, and the preceding AngloAmerican decision to keep Stalin in the dark about the Manhattan Project, that triggered fears, suspicions, and distrust in Moscow that destroyed the Second World War alliance in the first place .
 The H-bomb decision, the thermonuclear atmospheric tests, the perceived bomber and missile gaps, and their subsequent U.S. responses, deepened the mistrust even further . The superpowers drove the superpowers toward the brink .
 This tendency to blame the Cold War on the nuclear arms race was particularly articulated in the 1950s and 1980s . The Cold War was the two periods when the military competition between the superpowers took the form of an intense nuclear arms war .
 In the 1950s, arguments of this sort were often made by the organized peace movement as well as by many liberal and leftist politicians . In the 1960s, the peace movement was often made in favor of peace .
 In the 1980s, the Nuclear Freeze movement, transnational elite networks, and epistemological communities— such as International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War, advocated similar views .
 In contrast, the years of managed parity in the 1960s and 1970s saw a more optimistic corollary of the original fallacy . In contrast to the 1970s and '60s, 'managed parity' saw more optimistic results .
 It held that since the nuclear arms race was driving the Cold War, nuclear arms control and disarmament would be the best means to dissolve the East-West conflict . It was held that, since the arms race .
 This thesis won wide acceptance among independent experts, political pressure groups, and governmental agencies and bureaucrats who were in favor of arms control negotiations with the Soviet Union . The United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency and its influential Director, Paul C Warnke.
 Even hard-nosed Soviet leaders would occasionally pay lip service to this view . But even hard-working Soviet leaders paid lip service .
 Generally speaking, the fallacy of pro hoc, propter hoc consists in putting the effect before the cause . These 37 phrases include: "Pro hoc" and "proter hoc"
 Gromyko may not have believed in this himself, but he had strong reason to believe that the new U.S. president, Jimmy Carter, did . He had a strong reason for believing in this .
 Detente was arms control—and very little else . The legitimacy of detente broke down when the SALT process lost momentum . Detente is arms control, which is why it broke down .
 It then became clear that arms control could not, in and by itself, reverse and resolve the competition in nuclear arms . Arms control is not a solution to the problem of nuclear arms, says David Cameron .
 The fall of detente also put question the thesis, which Carter himself subscribed to, that strategic arms control would pave the way for more cooperation in other areas . More important, it also put into question the idea that strategic weapons control would lead to cooperation, Carter says .
 Despite years of U.S. restraint, arms control and arms control, competition between superpowers intensifies . What many people saw instead was that the ideological-political and geopolitical competition between the superpowers was intensifying once again .
 The nuclear anus race played a distinct and important role in both the formation and peaceful ending of the Cold War . Whereas other factors were probably more decisive, the nuclear race nevertheless played a significant role in the formation of the .
 In his judgment, strategic nuclear weapons did add to deterrence, and still do, he says . "Strategic nuclear weapons added to deterrence," he says. "They still do," he adds .
 The leaders in Moscow and Washington had plenty reasons to avoid war with each other, even without the bomb . At the same time, as John Mueller has rightly pointed out, the leaders in Russia and Russia had plenty compelling reasons for avoiding war .
 Nuclear weapons also posed potential dangers of their own, so they were not simply great stabilizers . Nuclear weapons were also a potential danger to the U.S. in the 1960s .
 The main reason why the Cold War never turned into another world war had less to do with military hardware than with human software . At the end of the day, the main reason is that human software is the key to preventing war .
 Nuclear weapons put their distinct mark on the initial stage of the East-West conflict . Nuclear weapons were used in the early stages of the Cold War .
 Stalin was adamant that the U.S. should not be able to use its monopoly in nuclear weapons to intimidate the Soviet Union . As David Holloway spells out in his book, Stalin and the Bomb, the Soviet leader was adamant .
 The new challenge that dawned upon the Soviet leader in the aftermath of Hiroshima and Nagasaki did not change his general outlook on world affairs . The United States monopoly changed the direction of Soviet foreign policy in a way that, in and by itself, can be said to have caused the Cold
 The nuclear arms race had a graphic impact also on the transformation of US-Soviet relations in the 1980s . The US-Russia relations were also transformed by the arms race .
 The risk of unintentional nuclear war had a profound influence on the thinking of both Ronald Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev . The nuclear arms race and the risk of accidental nuclear war led to a profound effect on both men's thinking . Reagan's views on nuclear weapons and the threat of nuclear war
 They realized that the nuclear arms race was a waste of resources and talent; that nuclear war could produce no winners, only losers; and, that the continued build-up of nuclear arms would not make either the Soviet or American people more safe . The U.S. and the Soviet
 Reagan and Gorbachev wanted to reverse the nuclear arms race and reduce the role of nuclear weapons in Soviet-American relations . For all these reasons, Reagan wanted to reduce nuclear weapons .
 The INF Treaty in particular helped pave the way for the improved international climate that Gorbachev badly needed in order to pull out other, perhaps even more important, political concessions to the West, and to speed up domestic reform . The treaty paved the way to an improved international atmosphere .
 A far more controversial question is whether the U.S. military build-up in the 1980s, especially in nuclear weapons, was in fact the main cause of the peaceful ending of the Cold War . The question remains whether the United States military build up in the 80s was in
 David Holloway, Stalin and the Bomb , 368. This claim is an essential part of the 44-page account of Stalin's assassination .
 Gorbachev decided to opt for a peaceful settlement of the Cold War . The former Soviet Union leader decided to end the conflict with the West . The Soviet Union and the Soviet Union had been at loggerheads .
 At that stage, the argument goes, the Soviet economy had already been strained beyond repair, exactly as Reagan and his advisors had been expecting . The argument goes that Reagan's advisors were expecting a strain on the economy .
 The endgame started when Gorbachev's reform program proved ineffective . The domestic political and economic crisis accelerated . The end game started when the domestic political, economic crisis intensified .
 This self-congratulating narrative has been effectively rejected by Beth Fischer and others . Beth Fischer has effectively rejected the self-confident narrative, says Beth Fischer .
 The Reagan victory school vastly exaggerates the concern in Moscow about the U.S. military build-up and the SDI program . As Fischer points out, the Reagan school exaggerates concerns in Moscow .
 Reagan started changing his Soviet policy in favor of dialogue, cooperation, and mutual restraint in early 1984, more than a year before Gorbachev came to power . Reagan's policy was changed more than one year before the Soviet leader took power .
 The new Soviet leader never had to face, or give in to, a confrontationist Reagan . Thus, the new leader never faced, or gave in, a confrontationalist Reagan.
 Alan P Dobson adds to this that the aim of the Reagan military build-up was never to make the Soviet economy collapse and bring down communism . Norman A Bailey and others claimed to have been trying to bring down the Soviet Union .
 Reagan wanted to increase U.S. military power in order to start negotiating with Moscow from a position of strength, he says . Reagan: "Instead of increasing military power, we should increase it to negotiate with Moscow"
 There was no U.S. master plan at work as the Cold War confrontation faded away in the late 1980s . Thus, there was no United States master plan in the 1980s.
 The nuclear arms race may still have had a more profound impact on the process that brought the Cold War to its peaceful ending than is commonly acknowledged . This being said, the arms race still had a significant role in the process .
 Reagan and Gorbachev were brought together in the first place by a shared desire to reduce the risk of nuclear war and help eliminate nuclear weapons . Fischer points out that the two men shared a desire to help reduce nuclear war .
 Even if Reagan moderated his assertive Soviet policies in early 1984, the U.S. military build-up continued at full speed for another two or three years . Finally, the United States continued to build up its military capabilities for another three or four years .
 Soviet military expenditure did increase again in the early and mid-1980s, after some years of reduced growth . Whether this had any impact on Soviet decision-making is still unclear .
 This contributed to the economic crisis and helped convince the new leadership of the necessity of improving Soviet-American relations . Since this happened at the same time as the Soviet economy went into stagnation .
 Let me start with a few observations suggesting that arms races may be a diminishing concern in international politics . Arms races may no longer be an issue of concern in the world, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Arms races seem almost to have disappeared from the contemporary political and scholarly discourse . Arms races are almost extinct from the political discourse, says Julian Zelizer .
 The dissolution of the East-West conflict and the collapse of the former Soviet Union has led to a lack of military competition in many parts of the world . To a considerably degree, this fact reflects the fact that this fact is to blame for the lack of competition in the region .
 In the early post-Cold War years there was a general decline in world military spending . The decline in spending was due to the Cold War .
 The decline reflected both the fall in the annual military outlays of Russia in the early 1990s, and the international financial crisis in the latter half of the decade . The decline reflects both the decline in annual military outlay and the global financial crisis .
 By the turn of the century, many of the world's major purchasers of military equipment had embarked upon costly programs in order to modernize their armed forces .
 World military expenditure increased by almost 50 per cent in real terms, reaching U.S. $1,531 billion in 2009 . Given the parallel growth of the world economy during the first three-quarters of the decade, the world military expenditure has increased by nearly half .
 World military expenditure's share of global GNP jumped to 2.2 per cent as the first decade of the twentyfirst century came to a close .
 Examples of interstate arms races driven by mutual fear and hostility are rare . Even in this decade of increased military spending worldwide, examples of such an arms race rare .
 The United States alone stood for half of the real-terms increase . The U.S. was the biggest spenders .
 The very substantial increase in U.S. military expenditure since 2001 has been caused primarily by war, including ""war on terrorism,"" and protection of hegemonic interests . Not interstate rivalry, not interstate rivalry .
 Other major spenders, such as China, Russia, India, and Brazil also made large increases in their military outlays in the 2000-9 period . The increase reflected their continued economic growth, and aspirations for regional or even global influence, rather than any intense interstate rivalry typical of an
 Pakistan-India and North Korea-South Korea are examples of rivalry dyads with abundant arms race characteristics . There is a striking asymmetry between the parties of both dyads in terms of military and economic capabilities .
 Pakistan and India are competing ambitiously with respect to nuclear weapons . The former is spending far less on conventional arms, both in real and relative terms, but is spending more on nuclear arms . India and Pakistan are competing with each other on the conventional arms .
 Pakistani leaders realize that their country can never get into stride with India on conventional military strength . Most likely, they realize that they can't get in stride with the Indian nation on conventional strength .
 Pakistan hopes to increase its nuclear forces to offset Indian conventional lead . They want a rapid increase in the number of warheads and mobile missiles .
 The interstate rivalry between the two Korean neighbor republics is characterized by even more asymmetry . North Korea is one of the most populous countries in the world .
 Since the armistice of 1953, capitalist South Korea has thrived economically and become a dynamic and highly competitive society, even in an Asian perspective . South Korea is now a highly competitive and competitive society .
 North Korea has fallen increasingly backward in almost every category of progress and power apart from military forces and nuclear energy . North Korea is still suffering from poverty, stagnation, and occasional starvation .
 Sometime between 2003 and 2006, North Korea crossed the nuclear threshold to become a rogue nuclear weapons state outside the international nuclear order . North Korea became a rogue state in 2006, becoming the first state to have a nuclear arsenal .
 Until then, the economically superior South Koreans had been able to hold their own in the fierce military rivalry with their communist neighbors without having to overburden their economy . The U.S. provided generous financial support from the United States and the reassuring presence of American troops .
 Compared to the military spending of 2000, the Pakistani defense expenditure of 2009 represented a 20. per cent growth, which is less than onethird of the Indian growth rate in the same period . Pakistan's military spending in 2009 was 20 per cent higher than in 2000 .
 Pakistan is reported to have made a rapid increase in its military spending in 2010 . However, the increase was less dramatic than it might seem as the country was experiencing a two-digit high inflation .
 South Korea's military budget is expected to grow by as much as 6-9 per cent a year in the decade ahead in order to fulfill the current $665 billion Defense Reform 2020 plan . South Korea was spending only 0. per cent more on defense in 2009 than the world average of
 How Pyongyang will respond to the projected new South Korean capabilities remains to be seen .
 Arms races between India and Pakistan, and between the two Korean states, both have a very long history . Although deeply worrisome in many respects, it should be noted that the arms races between the countries have a long history of arms races .
 The Korean peninsula is, in many ways, the last remaining outpost of the Cold War . The interstate rivalry between the two dominant powers of South Asia was born together with the end of British colonial rule .
 To the extent that it makes sense to talk about the military competition within this pair of states as arms races, we should keep in mind that they are not really examples of new arms races . That is, that is arms races of the post-Cold War era .
 The few real arms races we see today are in fact leftovers from the eras of colonialism and the Cold War . However, before signing up to the optimistic conclusion that arms races are about to become obsolete, there are two important reservations .
 The first is that dyads of interstate rivalry may no longer be the crucial factor to look for as far as arms races are concerned . The second is that international rivalry may not be the key factor in arms races . The U.S. has a long history of arms race arms races
 It may well be that we have to start focusing on arms races from a perspective more adjusted to the dynamics of a globalized and increasingly interdependent world . The arms race may be the focus of arms races for the future .
 The first has to do with China and what is often referred to as the Southeast Asian arms race . The second has to deal with what is known as the 'arms race'
 Countries like Indonesia, Singapore, and Malaysia have increased their annual military expenditures by doubledigit percentages . Countries like Singapore and Indonesia have, in recent years, been increasing military expenditures .
 The import of conventional weapons almost doubled in the five-year period 2005-9, compared to the previous five-years period .
 There are many reasons for this very substantial build-up, including the financial crisis in the late 1990s . It was preceded by a period of artificially low military expenditure due to low military spending .
 Recent increases reflect a cluster of interwoven security dilemmas related to the rise of China as a regional economic and military power . To a considerable extent, however, the recent increases seem to reflect a considerable amount of security concerns .
 Southeast Asia is deeply concerned about China's increasing military presence in waters perceived to be vital to their access to key natural resources . The countries of Southeast Asia are about to take countermeasures against China .
 The ongoing military build-up adds considerably to the underlying economic and strategic tensions . No one should be surprised, however, if the ongoing military buildup adds considerably .
 The Middle East offers an even more complex situation as far as regional arms competition is concerned . The region offers a complex situation for arms competition, experts say .
 In recent years, countries like Syria, Bahrain, Jordan, and Lebanon have increased their annual military expenditures by more than 8 per cent . Israel, Oman, and Saudi Arabia have steadily been spending some 7 per cent or more of their GNP on defense .
 Some countries, such as Israel and Egypt, have received vast amounts of U.S. military aid or heavily subsidized weaponry . The picture is further complicated by the fact that some countries have received large amounts of United States military aid .
 No one really knows what amount Iran is spending on its conventional and non-conventional military programs . Iran has spent billions of dollars on its military programs, including Iran's nuclear program .
 It's difficult to see these developments as simply being results of interstate rivalry . Still, it is difficult to believe these developments are simply due to interstate rivalry.
 Its rapid increase in military expenditure cannot be fully explained in terms of interstate rivalry with any particular state, such as Israel or Iran .
 The build-up is reflecting the Saudi leadership's concerns about the stability of the Persian Gulf-Middle East region in general . The Saudi leadership is concerned about stability in the region, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 It reflects the financial wealth of the Saudi government, due to rising oil prices, as well as its increasing domestic security concerns . Moreover, it reflects the growing domestic security concern .
 Generous oil revenues and fears of domestic unrest are at work in other Middle East and African countries with high military expenditure .
 The rapid build-up of military capabilities in the Middle East is particularly worrisome because of the uncertainty about Iran's aspirations in the nuclear field . Iran's nuclear aspirations are uncertain because of its nuclear aspirations .
 The record of the post-Cold War era is an ambiguous one so far, marked by a mix of impressive achievements and serious setbacks . It is also marked by an ambiguous record of success and failure .
 Some observers say we may even be witnessing the beginning of a WMD disarmament race . The proliferation of WMD has been so limited it has led some observers to claim that we may be witnessing a disarmament war .
 This is not to say that the NPT and the non-proliferation regime is free from pressure from various directions, or that the risk of WMD falling in the hands of rogue states, rebel groups, or terrorist networks can be ruled out .
 There is certainly a lot to worry about in this respect; for instance, the internal stability of nuclear-armed Pakistan . Pakistan has a long history of instability in the region, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Since the end of the Cold War, countries like Ukraine, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Argentina, and Brazil have joined the Treaty as non-nuclear weapon states . China and France have joined as nuclear states .
 The small and unrecognized nuclear arsenal of South Africa was discreetly done away with by the outgoing apartheid government . Russia has removed or dismantled nuclear weapons left over from the former Soviet Union outside of Russia .
 Iraq, Libya, and Syria tried to develop nuclear weapons capability, but were stopped by force or diplomacy . Other attempted efforts to develop a nuclear weapon were successfully stopped, either by force and diplomacy .
 Only three states have never signed the NPT, Israel, India, Pakistan and Pakistan . North Korea withdrew from the treaty in 2003 . Israel, Pakistan, India and Pakistan are the only three states to have signed NPT .
 The Ultimate Preventable Catastrophe and John Mueller, Atomic Obsession. John Mueller . John Mueller. The ultimate preventable catastrophe . The ultimate prevention of a cataclysmic disaster .
 It is not evident that the Indian and Pakistani nuclear weapons tests, and growing nuclear arsenals, should be seen as posing a radically new threat to non-proliferation .
 The main proliferation threats of today are represented by two unattractive role models: North Korea and the repressive theocracy of Iran . North Korea's failed autocracy of North Korea is represented by an unattractive theocracy, writes Peter Bergen . Iran's repressive theocratic theocracy is a
 North Korea is such a bizarre and isolated entity in international politics that one would dismiss the possibility that it could serve as a source of inspiration and support to other potential proliferators . North Korea's isolated and isolated situation is unlikely to be dismissed as an inspiration .
 China is now believed to be fully in line with Russia and the Western powers about the necessity of stopping any undertaking of this sort . But the chances of success are probably diminishing for every failed attempt .
 Iran may or may not be on the course of developing a nuclear weapons capability . Iran may not have a nuclear weapon capability .
 No one can tell whether the issue eventually will be settled by political developments in Iran itself, or by an Israeli attack on Iran's nuclear installations .
 International support of the NPT has increased in recent years . Chemical weapons have been rolled out of use in Syria . NPT is the first step in the world to roll out chemical weapons .
 At least some of these countries are assumed to have stockpiles of chemical weapons . The list of countries with suspected chemical weapons includes Russia, Ukraine and Syria .
 The prospects for a world free of such weapons seem increasingly good, at least in a ten to twenty year perspective . Nevertheless, the tide seems to be definitely moving against any further proliferation of chemical weapons, and the prospects for the world are good .
 Washington and Moscow may well agree to seek strategic parity at increasingly reduced levels . The ambitious goal of nuclear abolition may prove unrealistic, or even undesirable, for reasons of stability .
 Eventually, this process may result in such deep cuts that it will be hard for China, France, and India to maintain their current position that there is no need for them to contemplate reductions of their own as long as they maintain their excessive forces .
 Should it ever come to that, interesting things may begin to happen in terms of global nuclear arms control, it may be possible .
 He asked a friend to help him identify some cutting issues that would help him to victory in November 1988 . He asked him to identify some of those issues .
 Friend suggested that Bush go alone to Camp David for a few days and try to figure out where he wanted to take the country . Bush's friend suggested that he should go alone .
 41st president was keen to define a 'vision thing' that would give continuity to America's primacy in the post-Cold War era . The 41st President was keen .
 In a time-honored fashion befitting U.S. leaders, he called for policies that emphasized America's indispensable role in international affairs . In the absence of a mortal foe in the shape of the Soviet Union, he stressed America's role in world affairs .
 In his best-selling Rise and Fall of Great Powers, Paul Kennedy had ruminated about the "relative decline" of the U.S. of the United States .
 Kennedy says the U.S. could not maintain its dominant position due to the overextension of its resources . He says the mismatch between the nation's economic performance and global responsibilities is to blame . Kennedy: The U.N. cannot maintain its dominance in the world .
 U.S. military commitments to allies, and other factors, had plunged the United States into a position where it was experiencing a situation similar to other former great powers in decline .
 It was, he implied, only a question of time before the U.S. would lose its ""number one" position . Obama said it was only a few days before the United States lost its position .
 Questions have characterized the debate about America's role in the post-Cold War world . These questions have characterized—and continue to characterize—the debate .
 The new book explores the evolution of U.S. foreign policy in the post-Cold War era . It explores the rise of the Cold War era in the United States .
 Debates about decline have evolved in tandem with the fluctuations of the U.S. economy and military engagements . First, the debate about decline has been cyclical and has evolved, logically, evolved with the American economy, military .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of snapshots of the world's most beautiful beaches .
 This is in part because these debates have had—and continue to have —strong policy relevance . But this is in a part because they have had a strong policy relevance, the authors say . The debates have continued to be relevant, they say .
 The U.S. used its global power to promote a liberal international order underlined by interconnectedness . In maintaining its central position, the United States promoted a global order . The world is increasingly linked together via growing trade links, technological innovations, and international institutions .
 Over the course of the past two decades the United States has become more ""ordinary"" than before . Over the past 20 years, the U.S. has been more "ordinary" than before.
 As the remit of what used to be called the ""free world” has grown, as democracy and free markets have spread, the U.S. has become less special than before .
 The U.S. emerged from the Cold War victorious, prosperous, and confident . The United States emerged victorious and prosperous, but not victorious .
 The collapse of the Soviet Union was interpreted as proof of the superiority of liberal capitalism over totalitarian socialism . The collapse was seen as proof that liberal capitalism is superior to Soviet socialism .
 The broad-based international support for the US-led military operation to oust Iraq from Kuwait was evidence of the fact that most of the world looked up to the United States as a protector of the principles of collective security .
 This was America's ""unipolar moment,"" Charles Krauthammer announced in a famous Foreign Affairs article in 1990 . America's unipolar moment was the moment for the U.S. to seize power, Krauthmmer said .
 While the former Soviet Union disintegrated and faced economic collapse, the U.S. economy remained robust . The United States entered, during the 1990s, a period of seemingly endless growth .
 U.S. leadership in global affairs remained virtually unchallenged, the declinists were increasingly on the defensive during the 1990s . Indeed, as the American economy surged ahead, the United States was on the defense of its leadership .
 A unipolar world was systemically more stable than the possible alternatives, he said . According to him, unipolar is systemically stable than possible alternatives .
 Wohlforth saw no American decline around the horizon, predicting the continuance of American primacy for decades to come due to the significant lead that the United States enjoyed in terms of its economy, military power, and technological development .
 Thrown into the discussion about primacy and decline in the early twentyfirst century was the revival of another, even older, debate . Thrown in the discussion of primacy .
 In the aftermath of 9/11, the term ""empire"" returned to scholarly discussions with a vengeance . The term "empire" has been used in scholarly discussions since then .
 It was given some additional gravitas due to the economic and financial crisis that rocked the world in 2007-2008 .
 Most scholars acknowledged that U.S. resources -- economic, military, and otherwise -- remained substantial . Most scholars acknowledge that United States resources remain substantial .
 Washington's ability to shape outcomes in the world seemed highly questionable . Nevertheless, Washington's . ability to . shape outcomes was highly questionable, Washington .
 The rise of the rest was seen as bringing about fundamental changes into the international system . While serious questions about the limits of America's ""hard power"" resources were one part of the story .
 The Bush administration's actions had prompted as much resistance as they had compliance and cooperation . After all, the Bush administration had faced resistance and cooperation from the public . The administration has been criticized for its actions in the past .
 Michael Mandelbaum had argued that a strong case for the American ""Goliath"" remained . In fact, a few years earlier, he had said that a . strong . case for American 'Goliath' remained .
 Debates about U.S. power have been continuous since the end of the Cold War . Debates have been about whether it was in decline or not; what the nature of this power was, is and will become .
 It is impossible to consider many of the contributions without taking into account the specific context in which they were written . A pervasive sense of ""presentism"" and a need to ""make a policy contribution"" does lay an opportunistic cloud over the entire exercise .
 Bush's approval ratings had gone through the roof due to the successes of the Gulf War, Bush would famously predict: Now, we can see a new world coming into view .
 Bush dropped the use of the term ""new world order" because it seemed to offend large segments of the American population, including members of the president's own party . Bush himself dropped the term because of its controversial nature .
 In subsequent years, the U.N. would, again, fall short of fulfilling its global mission . In part due to the Clinton administration's policies, the United Nations would, yet again, fail to meet its global goals .
 President Barack Obama has a high degree of optimism and confidence, but that's not one of them . Obama has been criticized for his lack of confidence in public speaking .
 While in office, Clinton came under much criticism for what many judged to be directionless conduct of America's external affairs . Clinton was criticized for what he called a directionless foreign policy .
 He was variously described as the president who considered foreign policy as social work . Despite his rhetoric, he presided over the ""end of idealism"" in American foreign policy .
 Even those who worked in the Clinton administration have not been particularly overflowing with praise regarding the substance of the 42nd president's foreign policy .
 Clinton's reputation in Europe was helped immensely by the general dislike of his successor . To be sure, Clinton's . reputation was helped by the . general dislike he had with his successor.
 Clinton's ability ""to sell American power to others"" as one of his greatest achievements, Clinton's State of the Union Address . Clinton's Foreign Policy, 84, is published by Auersweld and Garofano, in 2000 . Clinton: "To sell U.S.
 America's Role in the Post-Cold War World accomplishments is not exactly a ringing endorsement . America's role in the world's post-Cold war world accomplishments are not exactly an endorsement of America .
 Bill Clinton was a pluralist who believed the United States in most instances was better served exercising influence by persuasion and by acting in a community of nations . Bill Clinton is unlikely to set himself in a class of his own among postSecond World War American presidents .
 The Clinton years were distinguished by the fact that, while crises demanding a response appeared on a regular basis, they had no easily discernible pattern that would have pointed to a reasonably structured response . Clinton's years were marked by the lack of a pattern of crises that would've required a pattern
 America pursued the enlargement of NATO to the former Soviet bloc . The enlargement confirmed the continuance of transatlantic ties beyond the Cold War era . America, after some hesitation, pursued enlargement .
 Clinton engaged China, even winning Congressional support for China's entry into the World Trade Organization . He tried (and in an equally well-tested manner) to use his influence to solve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict .
 A certain Clinton style of foreign policy emerged that seemed quite well fitted to the demands of the 1990s . And, in the midst of it all, it seemed quite fitting to the needs of the 90s .
 Clinton recognized that American foreign policy was, by necessity, guided by a combination of values and interests, desired goals and available means . Clinton, like most of his predecessors and both of his successors, recognized that U.S. foreign policy must be guided by values, interests .
 The trouble for Clinton and his foreign policy record was not that he failed to appreciate the complexity of the post-Cold War environment, it was that he didn't . Clinton's foreign policy was not a failure to grasp the complexities of the Cold War era, he says .
 It seems difficult to argue that something had gone seriously astray at the beginning of the new millennium . Nevertheless, when one reviews the position of the U.S. at the . start of the . millennium, it seems that something went astray with the United States at the start of
 Michael Cox, “Empire, Imperialism and the Bush Doctrine,"" Review of International Studies, 30:4 , 604; John F Harris, The Survivor. 21 Michael Cox .
 This was more than three times the amount of China; eight times that of Russia; in fact, more than the next six countries combined . This is three times China, eight times Russia and three times more than China .
 The notion that Clinton had somehow left the U.S. militarily vulnerable was a myth . As Michael O'Hanlon pointed out, the notion of Clinton having left the United States vulnerable was myth .
 When Clinton left office, the longest sustained boom in American history was still intact . The longest sustained economic boom in U.S. history is still intact. Clinton was in office when he left .
 This was a remarkable contrast to the Cold War era when the U.S. ran budget deficits on a consistent basis, as it has also done in the last ten years . The United States has also run budget deficits in the past ten years, as well as the last decade .
 The alarming amount of national debt did not shrink, but at least it stopped growing . The nation's national debt has now been reduced to $1.4 billion .
 The United States remained by far the largest single economy in the world (40 per cent larger than the second-largest economy at the time, Japan), responsible for 23. per cent of global domestic product in 2000 .
 At the dawn of the new millennium the United States remained ahead of the rest of the world .
 In terms of foreign policy it will be difficult to argue that Clinton had an overwhelming purpose, a vision thing . Clinton had a vision for the world, but it's not clear how much of it was .
 It will be difficult to argue that Clinton mismanaged U.S. foreign policy, but it will be equally difficult to say that he mismanaged America's foreign policy .
 America's Role in the Post-Cold War World there were problems and critics . America's role in the Cold War World was criticized for its lack of leadership .
 Clinton left his successor a nation that was without a rival . But, overall, Clinton left a nation without a successor .
 The transition from Clinton to Bush took place in an environment of near omnipotency . It bred a coinciding sense inside the U.S. that the nation was secure from any significant threats to its security .
 Interest in foreign policy was low, and seemingly echoed in the persona of the new president . Interest is low in the country's foreign policy, and seems to be echoed in his persona .
 The shock of the 9/11 terrorist attacks naturally demanded an aggressive response . It seemed that the United States was capable of using its massive power to execute policies that had rapid and spectacular results .
 It appeared to consider any possibility of restraint dangerous . Even more so, it seemed to consider restraint dangerous. Even more .
 The most obvious example of this was the American refusal to take seriously the invocation of Article 5 by its NATO allies, viewing such shows of solidarity ""less as a boon than as a booby trap,"" as Robert Kagan put it .
 America was not going to be tied down when its security was menaced, not even by well meaning but poorly armed friends . America's security was at risk of being tied down, even when it was threatened by well-intentioned friends .
 As the Afghan and, in particular, Iraq wars unfolded, many analysts thought that the U.S. was engaged in a self-defeating exercise of power . Many analysts disagreed on the specific rationale for attacking Saddam Hussein .
 Answers varied and debated, with pronouncements about the negative side effects of the Bush administration's foreign policy on the globe .
 Some suggested that there was a ""Bush revolution"" in American foreign policy with neo-conservative ""vulcans"" taking advantage of the situation and pushing an aggressive democratization agenda forward . Some suggest that there is a 'Bush revolution' in American policy .
 Critics were soon handed plenty of ammunition as U.S. transgressions of international law and disrespect for basic human rights scandalized audiences around the world .
 Bush's defenders fired back with scenarios of terrorist plots that demanded strengthening America's national security apparatus and acting pre-emptively . The terrorists did not fight fair, neither should the Americans, either should the president .
 The fact that no WMD were discovered in post-intervention Iraq scandalized many . Iraq's lack of WMD was a major embarrassment for the nation .
 Bush Doctrine has been seen as a sign of unilateralism in the U.S. The Bush Doctrine is a form of American unilateralism, many have said . Obama's administration has been criticized for its unilateralism .
 By abandoning post-Cold War diplomatic practices after September 11, the U.S. is taking a new tack, Charles-Philippe David wrote in 2006 .
 Some saw the unilateralism of the Bush administration with regard to Iraq as the ultimate folly, ill-suited to an interdependent post-Cold War world . Others saw unilateralism as ill suited to the interdependent world .
 America was a rogue nation attacking the world order with its aggressive diplomacy and unilateral use of force . America was attacked by the U.S. as a rogue state, says President Obama . The U.N. has been accused of using unilateral force in the past .
 John Gaddis and Mel Leffler demonstrated that U.S. unilateral military actions had plenty of historical precedents . For the benefit of the historically less conscious, they demonstrated .
 The 2002 National Security Strategy did not represent a dramatic break with the past . The document that defined the so-called Bush Doctrine was published in 2002 . It was published by the U.S. State Department of Homeland Security in 2004 .
 George W Bush's presidency ended in diametrically opposite circumstances to that of his predecessor . George W. Bush's administration ended in the opposite way .
 If measured in military spending the U.S. of 2009 outstripped its closest rivals by a massive margin . The United States of 2009 spent more than any other nation .
 The United States was responsible for 43 per cent of global military spending . With a defense budget of $700 billion, the U.S. is responsible for more than half of the world's military budget .
 China is six times that of China, twelve times Russia and ninety-eight times Iran . This was six times the size of Russia and twelve times the amount of Iran .
 The United States has increased its spending dramatically, both in absolute and relative terms . The U.S. now allocated more money on defense than the next seventeen countries in the world .
 If military spending was a measure of security, the U.S. was very safe indeed . The United States is very safe, says President Barack Obama .
 Budget surpluses had become consistent deficits after 2001, hiking up U.S. debt . The deficit is now the largest in the world, raising the national debt .
 In late 2008 unemployment was just over 6. per cent; perhaps not too dramatic, but set to rise steadily toward the 10 per cent mark in the 31st century . Unemployment in late 2008 was about 6.7 per cent .
 The United States retained its position as the world's largest single economy, with 20 per cent of global domestic product (in purchasing power parity terms) in 2008 .
 China and India boasted growth rates approaching double digits . United States growth rates had not only stalled but also turned negative in Bush's last year in office .
 Bush gave his farewell address to an America struggling badly . If Clinton had left office amid the longest postwar economic boom, Bush would have given his farewell speech .
 With the publication of his unapologetic memoirs in 2010, the former president himself has made sure the ""last word"" will be a long time coming .
 America now has a new leader who would not be driven by simple-minded ideological excesses, says Obama . America now had a new president, he says .
 The 44th president would reverse course, bring back thousands of Americans from a mishandled war, and dazzle the world with winning diplomacy . Obama would bring thousands of U.S. troops back to the United States .
 America's Role in the Post-Cold War World prowess, but by using the irresistible appeal of the American dream, of which he was such a shining example, he says .
 Obama's inauguration was one of the highest rated media events throughout the globe in early 2009 . Inauguration of Obama in 2009 was a major media event in the world .
 Negative view of the U.S. that had become commonplace during the Bush presidency was gone . Almost overnight, the negative views of the United States that had been commonplace during Bush's presidency were gone .
 In fact, one of the striking things about the first years of the Obama administration was the amount of continuity from Bush to Obama . Obama's first years were marked by continuity between Bush and Obama .
 The current administration has wound down much of America's involvement in Iraq . Iraq has been a major source of conflict in the country since 2003 .
 In August 2010, the last American combat troops left Iraq . In essence, the administration continued the gradual withdrawal that Bush administration agreed upon in the fall 2008 .
 While Obama was winding down the Iraq ""war of choice,"" he escalated U.S. commitment to Afghanistan by deploying additional troops to Afghanistan, and ordering a series of deadly strikes .
 The May 2, 2011 spectacular killing of Osama Bin Laden brought some closure to many Americans who had been touched by the attacks of September 11, 2001 .
 The war on terror is no longer officially called that, but it goes on, and in Afghanistan there is no end in sight . The war is still on, but the war on terrorism is still a major issue in Afghanistan .
 The announcement that U.S. and NATO forces would end their combat role in 2013 sounded—to the skeptical observer—somewhat opportunistic (and lacking in detail) at the start of a presidential election year . The announcement, in February 2012, that . United States and NATO
 Of course, not all of Obama's foreign policy has been related to fighting wars . Otherwise, he would probably not have been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize . Obama won the prize for his foreign policy .
 President Obama has raised America's standing with its European allies . He has raised his standing with his European allies with the U.S.
 Obama has made an effort to repair America's difficult relations with much of the Muslim world . The Arab Spring of 2011 has complicated relations with the U.S.
 All such efforts can be seen as part of a long-term continuum of U.S. foreign policy, CNN says .
 When it comes to American primacy, there are only minor differences between Obama's rhetoric and those of his predecessors . The United States' special providence is one of the most important issues of Obama's presidency .
 Obama used some Kennedy-like rhetoric to remind any terrorist network ""that our spirit is stronger and cannot be broken" Obama also reminded any terrorist networks that their spirit "is stronger"
 Bush or Obama faced such a binary choice . Yet, there was little to suggest that either Bush or Clinton ever faced such an issue .
 That Obama vowed to uphold American ideals hardly contradicted what Bush had repeatedly promised . Bush had pledged to uphold ideals in the U.S.
 The 44th president ruminated about the existence of ""just war"" and ""just peace,"" as well as about evil in the world .
 Obama concluded that a just peace includes not only civil and political rights, but economic security and opportunity . The president concluded that "a just peace must encompass economic security"
 Ideally such interventions would be blessed by the international community . But a moment might arrive when this would not be the case .
 The Obama doctrine is an attempt to distinguish the Bush doctrine from the caricature-like Bush doctrine of unilateralism and reliance on U.S. military power .
 The NSS also emphasized the need for maintaining strong international alliances, the promotion of universal values like democracy and human rights . The crucial role of a strong economy and an innovative society at home is at home, NSS says .
 The main difference was the shift of emphasis away from military to economic threats . It's understandable, given the context in which the document was conceived . The document was written in the context of the country's context .
 Obama may have stopped using the term ""war on terror,"" yet he still identified defeating A1 Qaeda as a central mission for U.S. national security policy . For example, Obama may no longer use the term "war on terrorism,"" but still identify defeating a1 Qaeda
 The importance of alliances was hardly an innovation; it was phrased in a somewhat different manner than the 2002 Bush NSSs . The importance was not an innovation .
 The significance of economic development has been absent from the policy statements of the Bush administration . Nor had the significance of the economic development been absent .
 Obama's foreign policy in his first term can be regarded as a mixture of Clinton administration's emphasis on engagement and enlargement, and Bush doctrine's assertions about the American need to reserve the right for unilateral military action . Rather than a radical departure from the Bush doctrine, Obama's first term
 Most notably, the maintenance of American primacy was an undiluted part of Obama's agenda . Obama's goal was to maintain America's primacy in the world .
 China is likely to overtake the United States as the world's largest economy, perhaps as soon as 2017 . Ferguson and others cite projections indicating that China will overtake the U.S. as the largest economy .
 India will not be far behind in pushing the United States into third place in those particular league tables . India will push the U.S. into third .
 He does not dispute the fact that the United States is not, in relative terms, the unrivaled economic superpower it used to be . The U.S. is no longer an economic superpower, he says .
 Nye likes to remind his readers that America is not experiencing an absolute economic decline . America retains an unparalleled amount of global influence because of great reservoirs of soft power .
 John Ikenberry argues that the 'pronouncements of American decline miss the real transformation under way today' John Ikinberry says that the pronouncement of American decline misses the "real transformation" under way in America .
 The United States has been in a period of decline and self-doubt followed by an unexpected revival . Anyone who has studied American history in the twentieth-century would recall several moments in which the U.S. had been in decline .
 The United States has been in a seemingly unassailable position, only to be brought back to reality following an economic crisis or a costly foreign policy venture .
 America's Role in the Post-Cold War World gradual and relative decline has prompted the U.S. to scale back some of its commitments . America's role in the world has been diminished in recent years .
 The evident reluctance of the Obama administration to use military power in Libya in 2011 fit into a pattern . The U.S. has been reluctant to take a clear leadership role in that venture in Libya .
 Such issues as America's burgeoning long-term debt are serious and problematic . America's debt is a serious problem for the country, says CNN's John Sutter .
 It is not necessarily insoluble for a country that, a decade ago, was concerned over a government surplus . But it is not always insoluble, and it's not always a problem .
 In the end, there are two major challenges that will determine America's place in the world in the first half of the twenty-first century . The challenges will determine U.S. place in world in first half, the author says .
 The battle to defeat al Qaeda or the success or failure in Afghanistan is unlikely to be central to the U.S. future as a major player in the international arena . The battle against al Qaeda and Afghanistan is not likely to be a central issue for the United States' future .
 "What will matter more, I would maintain, is whether the United States can continue wielding influence and leadership with fewer resources," he said . The United States will be able to wield influence, leadership with less resources, he added .
 For there is no doubt that the current economic and financial situation demands belt-tightening . For there are no doubt .
 Given changing circumstances there is no point in expecting that the United States will ever re-emerge as the ""colossus"" of the late twentieth century . The United States is no longer expected to be the "colossus"
 American primacy can only be maintained if other nations see it as a positive influence in international affairs . The U.S. can still lead, but it should not even attempt to dominate, says President Obama .
 This seems to be a lesson that the current U.S. administration has not failed to grasp . The current United States administration seems to have not grasped this .
 Obama and those who come after him may find it increasingly difficult to explain America's global role to domestic audiences . Domestic audiences disillusioned by the economic downturn are too easily blamed on unfair competition from countries like China .
 The American public, even in this global age, remains a relatively insulated group . Whether one calls it parochialism or patriotism, the fact remains that the American public remains insulated .
 Openness has been the essential backbone of America's remarkable success . After all kinds of all kinds—migration, flow of goods and ideas, etc. etc. has been an essential part of U.S. success .
 It has been the ultimate ""vision thing"" that has survived plenty of crises and drawn others to accept, even invite, American leadership . The U.S. has been in the midst of many crises, but has survived .
 Failure to promote openness is the surest way of turning the specter of decline into hard reality .
 Twenty years have passed since the implosion of the Soviet Union . Historians should cautiously step in to map and explore this period .
 For anyone who leaps mentally from 1991 to 2011, several things are particularly unexpected and striking . For anyone with a mental leap, there are several things that are surprising and striking in the years leading up to 2011 .
 First, the West began to lose its relative positions of power and influence in the world . First, after enjoying a spectacular and unexpected ""victory"" in the Cold War, began losing its relative position of power .
 The period of enlargement of the ""pre-fabricated"" Western institutions eastward seems to have ended . Second, the period of . enlargement . of the . ""pre .fabrication"" of western institutions eastwards seems to . have ended, he says .
 One part of the post-Soviet area became integrated into the West, and another, including Russia, did not . Russia's relationship with the West has been strained in recent years . The West is divided between Russia and the United States .
 Russia, against all expectations, has regained its regional strength and financial solvency . Russia learned to benefit from the system of free trade the West had created . Russia has regained regional strength, financial stability and economic strength .
 A curious ""hybrid"" system emerged, presided over by Vladimir Putin, with a vast and corrupt bureaucracy, state capitalism, and the imitation of democratic institutions . Vladimir Putin presided over the 'hybrid' system, presided by Putin .
 Many critics of the Putin regime explain its emergence by ""path dependency”—Russia's development determined by its authoritarian past . Many critics say Russia's development was determined by authoritarian past. Putin regime has emerged by its emergence as a result of that .
 Without them, one cannot understand the phenomenon of Putin's Russia, Russian-Western tensions, and the continuing division of Europe . Without them they cannot understand Russia's rise in Crimea, Russia's annexation of Crimea .
 The ideas of reformist communism contributed to the collapse of the Soviet Union and disintegration of the state . In 1989-91, reformist ideas contributed to Russia's collapse and the anti-liberal backlash .
 Western liberal ideas of the free market, open society, and ""nation state"" gained surprising support in 1991 among educated professional groups of Soviet society . Western liberal ideals of the open society and the "nation state" were supported by educated professionals .
 Yeltsin and his supporters regarded the United States in particular as a teacher and partner . The United States was considered a "teacher and partner" by Yeltsins in the Soviet Union .
 A group of technocratic young economists led by Yegor Gaidar rushed Russia through a ""shock therapy" based on neo-liberal recipes . Yeltsin's support was backed by a group of young economists .
 The goals were to privatize the state economy, create a ""free market,"" and prevent a communist comeback . The goals of the government were to create a "free market"
 Lenin's reforms were improvised as the policies of Lenin after 1917, with similar far-reaching consequences . Those reforms were as improvised as those of 1917, Lenin's policies were .
 Market reformers treated Russia's population as a patient under surgery . Russia's market reformers treat the population as patients under surgery. Russia's economy has been hit hard by austerity measures .
 They did not even explain to the patient the details of the surgery, deeming it to be too technical .
 The liberal reforms wiped out people's savings and plunged Russia into seven years of severe economic depression . From the viewpoint of the majority, however, the majority of Russia's savings were wiped out . Russia's economic depression, disastrous deindustrialization and demodernization, destruction of most institutions
 The groups that benefited quickly from the liberal market reforms were, above all, ""violent entrepreneurs,""i.e. bandits, gangs, and violent crooks" The groups benefiting from the reforms were "violent entrepreneurs" and "violent criminals" The reforms were made in response to the
 In Russia, communist egalitarianism-in-misery was rapidly replaced by yawning gap between wealth of a few and abiding misery of the majority .
 The spike in mortality rate and plunge in birth rate reflected the social collapse, experts say . Social collapse reflected the collapse of the country's social collapse .
 Historians would argue forever if there were missed opportunities in 1991-2 . Historians will argue forever whether there were any missed opportunities .
 A slower tempo might well, as he argued, merely have protracted the distress . But a slower tempo may well have prolonged the distress, he argued . He said .
 For the vast majority of Russians the principles of ""liberalism"" and ""democracy"" came to be associated with technocratic plots, misery, and extreme uncertainty . For the majority of Russian people, this was associated with 'technocratic plots and misery'
 The collapse of all ideological beliefs fatally undermined the possibility for regularized mass politics, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: 'The collapse of ideological beliefs undermined the very possibility for mass politics'
 Similar trauma had undermined liberalism and produced fascist, semi-fascist, and Nazi regimes in Europe . And it was arguably not even the worst outcome, compared to Europe in the 1920s and 1930s, when similar trauma occurred .
 In Eastern Europe, liberal market reformers could appeal to a national consensus to escape from Moscow's influence, writes CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "In Eastern Europe it could be easier to join Western community, economic, and security institutions"
 Kremlin had to increasingly resort to political manipulations and authoritarian means to continue with marketization and pro-Western orientation . Kremlin increasingly resortes to authoritarian means in order to continue marketization, Western orientation, he says .
 Yeltsin used force against ""redbrown" radicals at Congress of People's Deputies in October 1993 . Yeltsins imposed on the country a new constitution that gave the president exorbitant power .
 The role of security and paramilitary structures began to increase when the war in Chechnya began in December 1994 . Security forces began to be involved in the conflict in 1994 .
 The biggest case of political manipulation was the 1996 presidential elections of 1996 . President George H.W. Bush was elected to the presidency in 1996 . Bush won the White House in 1996.
 Yeltsin decided against ceding power to the communist opposition under any circumstances . He refused to cede power to Russia's communist opposition .
 Twenty Difficult Years astute Western observers began to acknowledge what was happening . Western observers were beginning to acknowledge that the situation was getting worse .
 Even in Eastern Europe, as the recent political developments in Hungary reveal, sudden reversals and setbacks of democratic transition are possible . Even in eastern Europe, this is possible, writes Andrew Hammond .
 In 1996, the only true alternative to Yeltsin would have been Russian communists in coalition with Russian nationalists . In 1996 the only real alternative was Russian communists and Russian nationalists in coalition .
 The dangers of the ""red-brown revenge"" were grossly exaggerated by Russian liberals and those who feared losing their newly gained property and wealth . The dangers were exaggerated by Russians who feared they would lose their newly-found wealth .
 For Furman, the most likely political option for post-Soviet Russia was an authoritarian regime of a personalized nature, supported by the corrupt oligarchy . Furman: The authoritarian regime is similar to many regimes in Latin America and the Arab Middle East .
 The circumstances of Soviet collapse left Russia in a highly ambiguous position in the international system . Russia and the West part ways in the aftermath of the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 The Russian Federation inherited the Soviet nuclear arsenal and became a legal successor to the Soviet Union . With the Soviet seat on the UN Security Council and assets abroad, including embassies and consulates, the Russian Federation took over the nuclear arsenal .
 Retrospectively, Yeltsin seemed to regret that he did not start ""from scratch"" or declare Russia to be a successor of the pre-Soviet Russia .
 The West, especially the Bush administration, encouraged ""the Soviet succession"" by insisting that Moscow should be responsible for the Soviet debts and nukes . The West insisted that the Soviet debt and nuke debt should be paid for .
 The United States even had to pick up the tab for supervising and dismantling the Soviet nuclear-strategic arsenal . The U.S. even had the tab to supervise and dismantle the Soviet arsenal .
 Yeltsin and the Russian elites felt entitled both to the special status of a world power and to massive Western assistance . The West could not satisfy the demands that the West would not satisfy .
 Bill Clinton and Helmut Kohl appeared to be treating Russia as a special partner in the West . Clinton and Kohl brought Russia into a number of Western international institutions .
 The Americans and Western Europeans never showed the generosity that the Russians expected . Yet the Russians never showed any generosity that they expected, the Russian president says .
 Kremlin received $1 billion credit from the IMF, and $0.0 billion loan from the World Bank . Instead of another ""Marshall Plan,"" the Kremlin received a $0 billion credit . The IMF and World Bank imposed strict monetarist conditions .
 Many criticized even that assistance—citing Russian corruption and the massive flight of capital from Russia . Many criticized that assistance .
 Russia was treated neither as a preferred liberal-democratic partner, nor as a great power . Russia treated as neither a major power nor a major liberal-democracy partner, it was treated as a pre-war ally .
 NATO expansion was colored by the continuation of Cold War fears in the West, author says . NATO expansion is colored by Cold War concerns in West, he says . It is possible to prove that NATO expansion began in response to fears of the Cold War .
 Russia had often performed the role of ""negative other"" for Western collective identity . Many used ""Soviet"" and ""Russian"" as synonyms . Russia often performed role of 'negative other' for Western identity .
 When the war in Chechnya started, Russophobes in the West and Eastern Europe felt their fears of Russia as ""genetically"" expansionist and violent were vindicated . Russophobia was vindicated when the war started, writes David Cameron .
 Yeltsin sought to dispel anti-Russian bias in the West by ingratiating himself with groups that propagated this bias, he says . The West's anti-Russia bias was a residue of the Cold War, he adds . Yeltsins' liberal supporters treated the anti
 Yeltsin's entourage could not completely ignore the ""flight"" of all post-communist states away from Russia and their attempts to gain political capital in the West at Russia's expense . At the same time, Yeltsins' entourage couldn't ignore the 'flight'
 Even market liberals began to say that Russia had to preserve its greater economic space and take care of the Russians in the ""near abroad,"" meaning the post-Soviet area . Russia's economy is now the world's largest and most important source of power .
 The fateful security dilemma between Russia and its neighbors was gaining momentum . Russia's security dilemma is gaining momentum. Russia is facing a security dilemma with its neighbors .
 The Kremlin increasingly felt it should do something to prevent further disintegration of the post-Soviet space, and even of Russia itself . The Kremlin felt it needed to do something in order to keep Russia from disintegration .
 Balts, Ukrainians, and Georgians looked toward the U.S. as a protector against Russia's ambitions . And the nationalist Balts and Ukrainians looked to the United States as a protectors .
 The new Russophobia was expressed not by governments, but in the statements of out-of-office politicians . Academic experts, the sensational writings of journalists, and the products of the entertainment industry also expressed .
 It was fuelled by those who argued that the Russian Orthodox civilization was doomed to remain apart from the civilization for the West .
 Liberal Russians increasingly began to see the anti-Russian ""lobby"" in the United States, as well as in other Western countries, as a problem, while denying Russia's historic responsibility . Liberal Russians now see anti-Russia "lobby" in the U.S. as a
 Kennan, in 1951, advised the West to be patient toward the postcommunist Russia . George F Kennan in 1951 said the West should be patient with Russia .
 Few commentators acknowledged that the abrupt market transition was bound to doom Russia to anarchy and lawlessness . From there, it would go from oligarchy and authoritarianism to oligarchy, authoritarianism .
 Western experts began to declare that Russia was not ""fit"" for democracy, and inherently expansionist . Increasingly, Western experts declared that Russia is not "fit" for democracy . Russia is now seen as a model for democracy in Russia .
 Henry Kissinger and Zbigniew Brzezinsky argued that the best strategy for the West was to deny Russia any future ability to restore its control over the post-Soviet space, especially Ukraine . Henry Kissinger argued that Russia should not be allowed to regain control of post-Russian space
 Anti-Americanism and alienation from the West began to grow in Russia . Anti-U.S. isolation and anti-Westernism also grew in Russia in the 1980s .
 The old images of generous and opulent ""America"" became replaced by negative images . Resentment spread against market liberalism associated with the United States .
 Nationalist groups in Russia claimed that the West was interested in Russia's break-up, permanent misery, and weakness . Russia's nationalist groups claimed that Russia was being targeted by the West for its weakness .
 Reactionary, fundamentalist, and nationalist groups in the Russian Orthodox Church joined the anti-Western chorus . Reactionary groups in Russia have joined anti-West chorus .
 At some point the Russian-Western alienation developed a mutually reinforcing dynamic . Russia and the West have been at odds with each other for years .
 These exaggerated fears contributed to the vicious circle of alienation, authors say . Eastern Europeans and Western experts are worried about the possibility of a refugee crisis in Europe .
 The NATO 1991 military attack in Yugoslavia, ignoring the Russian veto at the UN, and the talk in Washington about suspending the principles of national sovereignty in the name of liberal internationalism, drove the last nails into the coffin of Russia's pro-Western orientation .
 Western politicians ignored Russian objections, referring to Gorbachev's behavior during the German reunification talks . Western politicians ignore Russia's objections . Western leaders ignored Russia's request .
 Eastern European states joined NATO and lobbied for a containment of Russia . Some Eastern European countries joined NATO, lobbied for containment .
 Twenty Difficult Years enlargement continued to delegitimize pro-Western liberals and favor ""hardliners"" in domestic politics . The enlargement of the country's borders in the 1980s and '90s was a major factor in politics . Twenty years later, the country was in a
 Centrist politicians, like Evgeny Primakov, Yuri Luzhkov, and security officials around Yeltsin, urged to defend Russian national interests in defiance of the West .
 Even sport events, such as a dispute over gold medals for figure skating at the Winter Olympics in 2000, showed the depth of Russians' new mistrust of the U.S.
 Yeltsin was still enormously respected in the West as an anti-communist revolutionary . Putin's Russia is still Russia's most secretive state of the world .
 Putin's KGB past, by contrast, defined his negative publicity in the West from the very start . Putin's former KGB past has defined him negative publicity from the start .
 Putin's rhetoric and policies helped mark the mistaken contrast between the ""democratic"" Yeltsin years and the ""authoritarian retreat"" of the 2000s . And Putin's policies helped to mark the authoritarian reaction of the 1990s .
 Putin's war in Chechnya (as brutal as Yeltsin's war) and the travesty of the 2004 and 2007 elections (similar to Yeltsina's re-election in 1996) pointed to continuity . Putin's election victory in 2004 was similar to that of Yel
 The arrest of Mikhail Khodorkovsky and the destmction of his oil corporation, Yukos, became the hallmarks of Putin's rule . The arrests of journalists and ex-KGB figures were the main reasons for his rule . But clumsy pressures on Ukraine, Georgia, and
 The Kremlin's attempt to control the pipelines bringing gas and oil from Asia to Europe has exacerbated old fears of renewed Russian predominance in the post-Soviet space and even in Eastern Europe .
 Putin initially appeared to be a successful reformer and consolidator in Russia . He has since been accused of corruption charges against him . Putin has been a controversial figure in Russia for years .
 He gained huge popular support, promising to check corruption, end the separatism of Chechnya, defeat organized crime, and relaunch Russia's modernization . He also promised to end separatism, end organized crime and defeat organized crimes .
 Putin ""nationalized"" these resources by subduing the tycoons and creating giant state monopolies . Putin's "nationalized" these resources, he says . Putin: Putin's 'nationalized' these resources and created giant state monopoly .
 Russia transformed from a debtor nation into a creditor, President Vladimir Putin says . Putin says he was able to achieve financial stability and transform Russia from a debt-ridden nation .
 The Russian state began to pay pensions on time and increased salaries for the first time in ten 27 years . See Shiraev and Zubok, Anti-Americanism in Russia, chapter 6.
 Yeltsin created an unexpected hybrid regime in Russia . Once stabilized, the system created under Yeltsins produced a hybrid regime . The system was created under the former president of Russia .
 Putin kept Yeltsin's constitution and its formal institutions intact, including the rotation in the president's seat . Putin kept the rotation of the president in the presidential seat .
 Political levers and enormous wealth became concentrated in the hands of the Kremlin's ruler . But political levers became more and more powerful in the Kremlin .
 Putin's course was a mixture of mercantilism and economic neoliberalism . Putin's aim was to win a better position for Russian oil and other state monopoly businesses in the global market .
 The largest net winner was not Russian business, however, but the sprawling state bureaucracies . State bureaucracy is the biggest winner in Russia's economy .
 Property and wealth conditional on political connections is a common phenomenon in world history . Property is conditional on connections to political connections, says CNN.com .
 The Chinese state-controlled economy demonstrates huge momentum for development . But in China the state fights corruption, and the state is fighting corruption .
 Russia's economic progress, aside from the energy sector, is very modest . No substitutes emerged for the degrading Soviet-era infrastructure, technological-scientific potential, and education . Russia's economy has suffered from a lack of infrastructure and technological potential .
 Modern norms of social transactions and civic society could hardly take root in Putin's Russia . Also, modern norms of civic society and social transactions could hardly be taken root in Russia .
 "Mafia-like rules and customs, chaotic in the 1990s, became regularized. Instead, criminalized mafia-like customs, chaos in the 90s, become regularized . Instead of criminalizing mafia-style rules, the rules were criminalized, instead of regularized
 The ""violent entrepreneurs"" of the early 1990s became integrated or supplanted by the corrupt state structures . The violent entrepreneurs of the 'violent entrepreneurs' of the 1990s were integrated by the 'corrupt state structures'
 By the end of the 2000s, Russian bureaucracy began to resemble such structures . Russia's bureaucracy has begun to resemble those structures .
 Some characterize today's Russian system of power and wealth as ""patrimonialism"" with ""neo-feudal"" hierarchies and clienteles . Some characterize the Russian system as "patriarchonialism"
 Others speak of ""neo-patrimonialism,"" admitting a potential for future change . Others say it's a 'neo' to be 'patrioticism'
 The majority favors the logic of path dependence, linking today's Russia to the centuries of backwardness and authoritarianism . The majority of Russia's voters favor path dependence in the past .
 A leading Russian sociologist defined ""Putinism"" as ""genealogically"" linked with the “totalitarian structures"" of the Soviet era . Leading Russian socologist defined it as "Putinism" Putinism is linked to the ‘totalitarian structure’ of the
 From his viewpoint, the Putin state and society represent the last stage of the totalitarian state, he says . On Putin and his policies, see in particular the works by Richard Sakwa and Lilya Shevtsova .
 Twenty Difficult Years decomposition decomposition in the environment of market economy, informational openness, and globalization . The book is published in the U.S. State Department's book, "Twenty Difficult years decomposition"
 The stabilization of Putin's regime can also be attributed to the workings of the global market system . Russia's stability of the Putin regime is also seen as a result of the market system, analysts say .
 Russia found itself on the periphery of this system, together with Paraguay, Upper Volta, and Sri Lanka . Paraguay is also part of the system, along with the U.S. and Paraguay .
 Russia was not "Upper Volta with missiles,"" as many in the West dismissively called it during the 1990s . Russia, however, was not ""Uppers Volta" with missiles, as many West dismissed it . Russia was known for its anti-Putin rhetoric,
 It was a country with an industrial infrastructure, developed social programs, masses of highly educated and skilled people, and enormous energy resources . It was also a nation with industrial infrastructure and social programs .
 Russia has found for itself a lucrative place as energy supplier, next to the Persian Gulf countries . While Russia could not emulate China, it eventually found a lucrative energy supplier .
 This also ""oiled"" an authoritarian distributive system, with political and social institutions that matched it . This also "oiled" an authoritarian distribution system, according to the author .
 The ""Dutch disease” of windfall oil profits created problems even for stable democracies . The "Dutch disease" of windfalls oil profits has created problems for stability in stable democracies, experts say .
 Russia's elites emerged as antidemocratic, cynically selfish, and opposed to any notion of public interests and social development . Russia's elite emerged as "antiidemocratic" and "anti-democratic" in the 1990s, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Even the Soviet technocratic elites, not the pre-Soviet intelligentsia, appear to be imbued with a sense of public good . Compared to these elites, even the . Soviet technocrats, not . mention the pre .Soviet . intellectuals .
 Of course, the realities of the late Soviet period encouraged cynical individualism, lack of social responsibility, and a ""beggar-thy-neighbor"" mentality .
 Gorbachev's perestroika and Yeltsin's initial thrust . Still, the Soviet society also produced minorities committed to reforms .
 The social elites of the younger educated cohort that came of age in the 1970s-80s took the full brunt of the Soviet collapse . Social elites of that generation took the brunt of that collapse .
 Many of the ""best and brightest"" of this age group emigrated; those who stayed suffered professional, social, and moral collapse . Those who stayed with them suffered professional and social collapse .
 Only a small proportion of this cohort regained the middle-class status of their parents and predecessors . Only a few of this generation's children regained middle class status of parents, predecessors .
 Young people aged 25 to 30 became the career reserve, bypassing the older cohorts . Young people in the 25-30s bypassed older cohorts, bypassed the older ones .
 The oil boom and bureaucratic expansion allowed many of them to score economic and social gains that surpassed their parents' achievements . Many of them, particularly in big cities, scored economic gains that surpass their parents .
 The Putin government seemed to be interested in promoting young cadres that could become conformist participants in the system . The young protagonist in John Grisham's novel The Finn is a young man who becomes a conformist participant .
 The young educated Russians became the ultimate individualists, but not in the liberal-democratic sense . Young educated Russians are now the 'ultimate individualists' in Russia, says Alexander Vatanka .
 They honed their survival skills in Hobbesian world and rejected idealistic notions of ""common good" of the Russian intelligentsia . They rejected the idealistic notion of the common good .
 In contrast to the old Soviet system, the Putinist system provided virtually unlimited individual opportunity and freedom, in exchange for non-involvement in public politics . Putin's system provides virtually unlimited freedom and individual opportunity, but not involvement in politics, he says .
 They no longer wanted to westernize Russia; they wanted to make money in Russia and move to the West . They wanted to move to Russia and make money, they said . They said: "They no longer . wanted to westize Russia."
 The years of Putin's consolidation and oil boom provided many of them with a chance to realize their dreams . Many of them are now living in Russia's oil and gas boom .
 In contrast to political stagnation, Russian leadership, state bureaucracies and young Russians moved quickly in adapting to the global market economy . In contrast, the Russian leadership and state bureaucracy have moved quickly .
 The winners in the ""survival of the fittest" games, they became ruthless ""users"" of the international economic system created by Western liberal policies during the previous century .
 Many Western scholars quoted Liah Greenfeld who wrote about ""ressentiment nationalism” as a reactionary phenomenon in pre-Soviet Russia and Eastern Europe .
 Any Russian identity could only be authoritarian, anti-Semitic, and anti-Western . Russian identity is authoritarian and antiWestern, according to the author of Twenty Difficult Years . The author argues that any Russian identity must be authoritarian .
 Russian liberalism and nationalism had not always been at odds . Meanwhile, Russian liberals and nationalism were not always at odds with each other .
 From the Decembrists to 1917, Russian Europeanized and liberal elites were very patriotic . From the 1917, Russia was very Europeanized .
 They rejected aggressive ethno-nationalism, as well as religious-conservative nationalism . They sought to articulate an idea of ""Russian patriotism"" as a multi-ethnic, civil, and liberal notion .
 Under the Bolshevik regime, however, this national-liberal identity became weakened, although not extinct . Under the Lenin regime, this identity became less prominent .
 Stalinism used most reactionary forms of Russian identity as material for empire-building . Stalinism was an attempt to create an empire in Russia . The Soviet state of Soviet Russia was a source of Soviet-era propaganda .
 Stalinist ""Russian patriots,"" and their liberal opponents regarded any form of Russian identity with intense suspicion . Stalinist "patriots" and "patriotic patriots" were viewed with suspicion of Russians .
 Russian history provided much rich material for the anti-Western identity of Russians . Of course, Russian history . Of Russia history .
 Some pre-1917 thinkers believed that Russia was an heir to the Byzantine empire . Russia's traditions and customs were opposed to the Catholic and Protestant West . Russia is now the world's most populous country .
 Ivan Ilyin, an influential emigre thinker, wrote in 1948 that all the countries of Europe, except for ""the little Serbia,"" were Russophobic . Ilyin: All the countries in Europe except for Serbia, except the little Serbia, were Russophobia .
 Perhaps we should recognize that the evolutionary development of our country from one authoritarian form to another will be more organic, smooth, and less painful . The evolutionary development will be smoother, less painful, and more organic .
 Russian historian Lev Gumilev adapted Eurasionist ideas to post-Soviet times . The Eurasionists were influential in the 1980s-90s, adapting their ideas to modern times .
 Yeltsin's market liberals regarded any form of Russian nationalism as a threat . Yeltsins' market liberals considered nationalism a threat to Russia's market liberalism .
 As a result, they allowed the opposition to gain a virtual monopoly on the nationalist discourse . The opposition has been able to take over the debate on the issue of nationalism .
 The anti-liberal, anti-Western forces blamed Yeltsin and market liberals for ""economic genocide"" of the Russian people . The Russian people are now dependent on Western markets and bank accounts, the anti-Russian forces say .
 These arguments underlined most convincing images, schemes, and concepts for a new Russian identity during the 1990s . These arguments were underlined by most convincing ideas, schemes and concepts .
 Several groups served as the main vehicles in propagating anti-Western concepts and images . Several groups were used as vehicles to propagate anti-western concepts . The groups were often used to spread anti-West propaganda .
 Ex-Soviet nationalists borrowed heavily from conservative nationalists, Solzhenitsyn and Gumilev . Ex-Russian patriots venerated Stalin's empire and the victory in the Great Patriotic War .
 Alexander Dugin combined Eurasianism with crude and almost racist versions of the early twentieth century geopolitics . Dugin was one of the world's most influential thinkers .
 The Russian communists were eager to put a patriotic sheen on the country's facade . Second, the Russian communists wanted to put the nation's facade on the facade .
 The Russian Orthodox Church was eager to become a state church and to ""protect Russia"" from the rival religious groups, especially Western missionaries . Third, the church wanted to protect Russia from Western missionaries, especially those of Russia .
 The fourth direction was the positive reassessment of the Stalinist period, particularly the Great Patriotic War . The fourth way was to reassess the Soviet-era Soviet period .
 James Billington was one of the first Western authors to take a panoramic assessment of anti-liberal concepts in Russia . Billington's work was published in the 1970s and 1980s in Moscow .
 He believed (writing in the early 2000s) that all of them would remain marginal . He said he believed ( writing in the mid-'90s) they would be marginal. He believed they would stay marginal .
 Evgeny Primakov used some neo-Eurasian ideas in his foreign policy in 1998-9 . Primakov already used some ideas in . his foreign . policy as justification of multivector diplomacy and the need to balance off the unilateral power of the United States .
 Under Putin, the Kremlin began to act as the main architect of the antiliberal, anti-Western Russian identity . The Kremlin is now acting as the architect of an anti-West Russian identity, writes Alex Vatkov .
 Surkov's campaign, in contrast to Soviet campaigns, did not aim at promoting one ideology . Surkov: "I'm not trying to promote one ideology. I'm trying to get people to believe in one ideology"
 It promoted, almost in postmodernist fashion, pseudopluralism . Instead, it promoted pseudpluralism. Instead of postmodernism, pseudopuralism is pseudopurism .
 Surkov's postmodernist agitprop sponsored a ""pantheon"" of great Russians, from Ivan the Terrible to Solzhenitsyn, and a ""bazaar"" of identity, Billington, Russia in Search of Itself .
 Twenty Difficult Years was a period where the clash between ""Soviet"" and ""Russian"" did not exist . Loyal to Stalin could be reconciled with anti-Soviet dissent . loyalty to Stalin was reconciled to anti-Stalin dissent .
 Kremlin did not try to build an ideological consensus, but rather sought to bring all ideological-political alternatives under one ""Russian"" umbrella . In other words, the Kremlin sought to unite all ideological and political alternatives under a Russian umbrella .
 Putin restored the Soviet anthem, but with Orthodox religious lyrics . Putin regretted the collapse of the Soviet Union, but publicly praised Solzhenitsyn . Putin also regretted the loss of Soviet Union .
 Officials of Russian foreign ministry and security agencies began to quote from Ilyin and Solzhenitsyn, while reading Dugin's geopolitics . Officials of Russia's foreign ministry started to quote them from their writings .
 Various ""foundations’ set up with Kremlin money began to promote a unity of ""Orthodox peoples,"" and even of ""the Russian world"" including emigre diasporas . Various ""Foundations” set up by Kremlin money started to promote the unity of
 Stalin's popularity in the Russian polls, especially among the young, attracted attention in the West . The most scandalous development attracted attention to the West, especially in the young .
 In the media and numerous books on sale in Russian bookstores Stalin was a hit, and the Stalinist years were presented as a grandiose and heroic—if tragic—period of Russian history . In the Soviet Union, the Soviet-era Soviet Union was a failed state of Soviet
 The eclectic engineering of this new identity from Stalinist and anti-communist parts had, of course, nothing to do with the real views of the Kremlin masters and their bureaucratic supporters . The new identity had, for example, no do with Stalinist or anti-Communist views .
 Putin used anti-liberal, traditionalist concepts and nostalgic images from the Stalin era to serve political goals . Putin, his entourage, bureaucracy, and other parts of the service classes used selectively anti-Liberal concepts and nostalgia images from Stalin era .
 First, they wanted to advertise that authoritarianism was ""organic"" for Russia and stability could only be undermined by the ideologies of Marxism or liberalism . Russia's authoritarianism is 'organic' for Russia, they said .
 First, they effectively neutralized and pre-empted the communists and the Russian nationalists by intercepting their concepts and images . Second, they also pre-pre-empt themselves by intercepting the communists and Russian nationalists .
 Third, they marginalized ""external enemies"" and their ""fifth column at home"" as non-Russian or anti-Russian . Fourth, the Russian government marginalized their "external enemies" and their "fifth column at home"
 Large segments of the Russian population readily agreed that anything is better than another revolution or a radical change . Large segments agreed that . anything was better than a revolution .
 The theme of the Great Patriotic War and victory of 1945 never failed to evoke sympathy . The theme was "The theme of 1945" was "Great Patriotic war and victory" of 1945 .
 Putin and his ideologists seemed to stand above bickering groups and factions . Putin and Vladimir Putin seemed to be above factions in the Kremlin .
 Putin's critics unwittingly played into the Kremlin's hands by defending Yeltsin's policies without acknowledging their deeply traumatic effects for millions . Putin's liberal critics unwittingly play into Russia's hands, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Russia's Putin regime is essentially the only possible option for statehood, without alternative . Polls show majority of Russia's citizens regard Putin regime as the only option for Russian statehood . Putin's regime is seen as a stable option for Russia's future .
 The growing tensions with the West became another factor helping the Kremlin . Growing tensions with Russia is another factor supporting the Kremlin in Russia's favour .
 In 2003-4, the Bush administration, and Western NGOs, became heavily involved in supporting the ""colored revolutions” in Georgia, Ukraine, and Kirgyzstan .
 U.S. reached agreements with Poland and Czech Republic to create a strategic missile defense . Poland and the Czech Republic agreed to create the system, aimed at Iran, but also facing Russia .
 All these developments seemed to ""prove"" to the Russian elite and general public that the West was waging a new Cold War—this time against post-Soviet Russia . The West seemed to "prove" to the Russians that the Russians were fighting against the West .
 All the Kremlin and its propagandists had to do was to orchestrate the world news in the controlled television channels to confirm this impression . The Kremlin's propaganda was to do this by orchestrating the world's news in controlled television .
 The Russian-Georgian war in August 2008 brought Russia and the West to the brink of conflict . Russia and Georgians were involved in the war in 2008 .
 Many European Union members were too dependent on Russian oil to risk a major conflict with the Kremlin . Not only because Russia was still a nuclear power, but also many EU members were dependent on Russia's oil .
 Danilov, Istoriia Rossii, 1945-2008 . Arkady Ostrovsky, ""Flirting with Stalin,"" Prospect Prospect , 30.30.
 The future of Ukraine, Belarus, and Moldova is in the focus of this proposal . The proposal is aimed at the future of Belarus, Moldova and Ukraine .
 This proposal suggests forms of financial, economic, and consultative assistance, supporting westward orientation of these countries . Instead of financial assistance, this proposal suggests financial and economic assistance .
 Some Western advocates of this proposal continue to use the arguments from the ""democratic peace"" theory as they did during NATO expansion . Some advocates of the proposal still use the argument from the 'democratic peace' theory .
 The integration of ""in between Europe"" by the West would promote peace and stability, and also exert pressure on Russia to reform and democratize . They argue that the integration of Russia into Europe would promote stability and peace .
 A number of Putin's liberal critics wax enthusiastic about this proposal . Putin's proposal would be the first time he has proposed such a change in policy .
 Too many in the West and Russia, as well as Ukraine, see any changes in Europe as containment of Russian ambitions or a threat to Russian security . Yet, too many in Russia and the West continue to see any change in Europe through realist lenses, as containment .
 Russian experts believe that the best scenario for Russia would be to modernize itself in alliance with the West . Another proposal comes from those Russian experts who believe that Russia should be modernizing itself . Russian experts say that Russia needs to be modernized to join the West in alliance .
 The long-time Western leader, the US, became bogged down in Afghanistan and Iraq . The center of industrial and financial power shifted from the West to Asia, above all to China .
 This second proposal reflects, in my opinion, the preferred scenario for the Kremlin and the elites that emerged in Russia under Putin's rule. This second scenario reflects, I think, the Kremlin's preferred scenario .
 The Putin-Medvedev Russia does not present a clear alternative to the West in institutional and ideational terms . Astute analysts noticed that for all the talk about a ""special Russian way"" and antiWestern rhetoric, the Putin- Medvedev rhetoric is anti-Western rhetoric .
 The Russian leaders do not even reject democratic forms of legitimacy, but instead adopt selectively the simulacra of democratic procedures and legal norms in legitimizing their control of Russia's politics and resources .
 The integrationist pragmatism of the Russian leaders and elites does not include Russia's evolution toward Western liberal-democratic models, norms, and regulations . Russia's integrationist pragmaticism is not reflected in Russia's progress toward Western norms, norms and regulations, says Alexander Nekrassov
 Hundreds of thousands, perhaps millions, of Russians now also have foreign passports . Most of them are from Western countries and Israel, mostly from Israel .
 In 2006, the number of well-to-do Russian homeowners in London was 300,000 . Now it is said to have reached 450,000, according to the latest figures . The number of Russians in London is now said to be more than half the population .
 The worst-case scenario for Russia-West relations would be a next round of struggle between the West and Russia for the remaining post-Soviet space . Russia and the West would be in a struggle for the rest of the post-Russian space .
 Despite the oil bonanza, Russia is a country of rapidly falling population . Only 25 per cent living above the standards of Soviet times, and many planning to transfer wealth abroad .
 Analysis of development of Russian nationalism reveals its cynical, instrumental, Kremlin-engineered nature . The Kremlin is exploiting the remaining patriotic feelings of the Russian people, authors say .
 This is an issue of historical memories, but also of a huge discrepancy in size and power . This is not only a historical issue, but a big discrepancy in power and power, it's also a power gap .
 Even authoritarian leaders, like Belorus's Lukashenko, do not want to become satellites of Moscow . Even authoritarian countries, like Belarusian President Vladimir Putin, want to avoid becoming Moscow satellites .
 Ukrainian elites decided not to join NATO or the EU, but for their own reasons and interests . Ukrainian elites chose to stay away from NATO and the EU for own reasons, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Any Ukrainian leadership would be likely to give a balance between Moscow, Brussels, and Washington . Ukraine is one of the most powerful countries in the world .
 There are many signs that the Kremlin realized this, and seeks, in a realpolitik way, to dismantle the ""security dilemma" between Russia and the Eastern Europeans . The Kremlin is trying to dismantle this "security dilemma".
 Symbolic gestures of reconciliation with Poland and Latvia are strongest indications of this trend . The Kremlin had previously considered almost as adversaries, but now considers them now as allies .
 Russia seems to no longer regard this through zero-sum lenses . Also, after years of competing over strategic pipelines from Asia to Europe, Russia no longer regards it as a zero-zero-sum .
 The optimistic scenario would be Russia's turn toward Western-style modernization . Russia's optimistic scenario is that it will turn toward the West . Russia has a long history of authoritarianism .
 President Medvedev issued vocal, even desperate, calls for Russia's modernization in 2009 . In September 2009 he issued vocal calls for Russian modernization .
 Medvedev's message pointed to a greater cooperation with Western countries, as well as with China and other centers of development . Medvedvedev: "We are looking forward to a better relationship with the West"
 For all the media noise about the ""Russian silicone valley” in Skolkovo, as well as the money allegedly allocated to return the best Russian scientists back home from the West, we see the same kinds of imitational policies, says Russian scientist .
 The rotation in the highest offices between Medvedev and Putin means additional political stagnation, not change . The rotation of the top offices means more political stagnation not change, says CNN's John Defterios .
 In fact, quite a few processes and unforeseen options remain outside of the proposals and scenarios we have discussed. "Quite a lot of processes and ideas remain outside the proposals," he said .
 Millions of people meet, talk, overcome stereotypes, have a myriad of relationships that transcend the limitations of the preexisting experiences . Millions of those people meet and talk with each other, overcoming stereotypes .
 The results of this development within the next twenty years will be hard to fathom, but they will be huge . The results are expected to be huge, but it's hard to predict .
 High-cost visas for Westerners provide income for private companies related to Russian bureaucrats . In the Russian system, high-cost visa fees for foreigners are paid by state officials .
 Many in the West argue that the repeal of the visa barriers would remunerate the ""authoritarian regime" in Russia . There is pressure to punish a few corrupt Russian bureaucrats by tightening visa restrictions for all Russians .
 The contradiction between these motives and the agenda of free movement of people across borders in Europe is glaring . The contradiction is glaring, says Simon Tisdall .
 By keeping European space divided by the ""visa curtain,"" the West follows the Cold War logic of carrots and sticks . The same logic the United States practiced for decades against Castro's Cuba, with negative results .
 Experts expect in 2014 eighty million citizens of Russia (71 per cent of the total population) will use the Internet . Experts expect that in 2014, in Russia, eighty million people will use Internet .
 In 2009-10, the newly founded ""Livejournal.ru" became a true alternative to the state-controlled television and radio, a venue of debates and information sharing among millions of Russians .
 The Internet has become a place where problems and views can be candidly discussed and ruthlessly exposed . Still, the Internet is a place for all who want to read and think, says CNN.com's Mark Sullivan .
 The information revolution also affects Western public views of Russia . Russia's information revolution has also affected Western views of the country .
 More Western users are learning to listen to the Russians and respect their views and experience through blogs and other Internet media . Russia's tragic and traumatic history is behind Russia's rise in power .
 Young Westerners and young Russians need to confront views, prejudices, stereotypes, and stereotypes . Especially useful for both sides is direct confrontation of views and prejudices, says CNN.com .
 This ""confrontation on the web"" is often as important as travel and tourism in affecting mutual stereotypes and expectations . This is especially true in the case of the Internet .
 Time is the most important dimension for a historian, historian says . And the last greatest factor is time, he says .
 Kennan's advice of patience about Russia's evolution has not lost its meaning . Kennan: 'Patience' is key to Russia's success .
 Twenty years after 1991 we see that only part of the job is done, but many of the past divides have been recycled and reinvented, albeit in less drastic ways . Twenty years later, the world has seen a significant change in the political landscape since 1991 .
 The status quo between Russia and the West may last for twenty more years, especially if Putin and his elites stay in power . Politically, the status quo could last for 20 more years .
 Since its inception six decades ago, obituaries have regularly been pronounced on the coming death of the European project . Frederic Bozo is the son of Frederic, who is a former member of the Royal Family .
 Europhobes or euroskeptics often make pronouncements about the EU . But such pronouncements could readily be dismissed, they could easily be dismissed . Such pronouncements, more often, have been made by europhobic or eurokeptics .
 The history of European unification has long been one of recurrent crises . True, the history of unifying Europe has been a long history of crises, but it has not been solved .
 The glass is either half full or half empty, depending on the optimistic or pessimistic nature of one's judgment . Twenty years after the creation of the European Union, the glass is still half full .
 "Europe is currently at a turning point of its history," says a group of prominent policymakers and academics . Yet there is little denying that Europe is at a 'turning point' in history .
 Only future developments will tell which of these descriptions— a glass half full or half empty— was closer to the truth .
 The present chapter was completed in the fall of 2011, in the midst of an umpteenth episode of the Greek debt crisis . Any prediction would be hazardous at best, since Greece's debt crisis began in 2011 .
 The first section of this chapter, therefore, focuses on the Maastricht ""moment"" and its aftermath . The first part of the chapter is to focus on the aftermath .
 The Maastricht Treaty was an ambivalent achievement against the backdrop of the end of the Cold War .
 The second section, by contrast, tries to explain the failures of the period that followed .
 It argues that the time has come to move beyond the ambivalence of the Maastricht moment . Irrespective of the unpredictable evolution of the current EU crisis, it argues that it is time to move .
 In order to assess the evolution of the European Union since the end of the Cold War, it is important to keep in mind the complex set of factors that led to the relaunch of European construction in the early 1990s .
 Maastricht Treaty was a forward-looking event aimed to shape European construction over the long term . But at the same time it was also the balancing act that ended a long historical period . The treaty was a balancing act between Europe and the world .
 Maastricht was forward-looking because of the dialectic that connected it with overcoming the Cold War, says historian . The city was forward looking because of its role in overcoming the cold war, he says .
 European construction was decisively relaunched as a result of the end of the Cold War . European construction in Europe was decisively re-launched in the 1980s, says CNN.com .
 French president Francois Mitterrand and West German chancellor Helmut Kohl had jointly decided to accelerate the process of European integration as a response to German unification . The promoters of the Maastricht Treaty believed it was the key response to the challenges that resulted from Yalta .
 The future European Union, they believed, would offer stability to the new democracies of Central and Eastern Europe . It would help anchor the Soviet Union to the West; and, last but not least, embed a reunified Germany in a revitalized European construction .
 Architects of Maastricht were determined to make the soon-to-be European Union the cornerstone of post-Cold War Europe . In short, they wanted to make it a cornerstone of the post-cold war Europe .
 The treaty's most symbolic aspect, the creation of the European Union itself, marked the conclusion of a process launched by the then Nine at the Paris Summit in 1972 . The treaty was launched in 1972 and marked the beginning of the process .
 The Maastricht Treaty was not only the expression of a grand design for post-Cold War Europe, it was also a design for the post-cold war era . It was the creation of a new model for the future of the continent .
 It was the result of a complicated and often frustrating negotiating process, not least between its two key promoters, France and Germany . It was, just as importantly, the end of a long and frustrating process .
 Each of its three main ambitions was mitigated by limits inherited from the past . Each of their main ambitions were mitigated in the past, says CNN.com .
 The foremost ambition of Maastricht was to trigger a new phase of European integration through the creation of a single currency . The aim is to create a single European currency, and to create an EU Single Currency .
 The EMU, its promoters believed, would both deepen Europe's economic integration in the wake of the completion of the single market (to be achieved by 1993) and hasten its political unification . EMU was intended to be a model for the European single market .
 The result was the creation of a currency union that left undecided, for the time being, the issue of an economic—let alone a political—union . The result of the currency union was left undecided .
 The EMU was in many ways a wager on the anticipated spillover effects of the creation of the euro . In the functionalist tradition launched by the Schuman Plan, the EMU, in other words, was in fact a bet on the outcome of the eurozone's creation .
 Maastricht's parallel ambition was to move beyond what for four decades had been predominantly an economics-centered process of integration . The city's economy has been dominated by the city of Amsterdam, Amsterdam and Amsterdam .
 The European Community —heir to the old European Economic Community —would, accordingly, amalgamate into a fully fledged European Union . The more encompassing character of European unification that would prevail from now on .
 There were limits to this grand design, whose promoters could not ignore the legacies and controversies of the past . Here again, however, there were limits .
 The political entity created by the Maastricht Treaty was the result of complex quid pro quos between advocates of a supranational approach and those of an intergovernmental approach . The political entities were created by a treaty between the two sides .
 Maastricht's final ambition was to establish the EU as the cornerstone of European stability and security after the Cold War and beyond . The EU is now a global politico-strategic actor in its own right, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The main vehicle here was the creation of CFSP and the long-term perspective for a common defense . CFSP was created by the U.S. government in 2007 .
 The result was a potential gap between the EU's proclaimed ambition and its ability to deliver security and act strategically . The EU's stated ambition and ability effectively can't be achieved, it said .
 The decisions of 1990-2 were defined by a combination of idealism and realism, of vision and negotiation . Like many previous turning points in European construction, the decisions were made in the 1990-2000 period .
 Over the following decade, they nevertheless yielded three major achievements . Over the next decade they were able to achieve three major milestones .
 First, Maastricht effectively inaugurated a new phase of European unification . First, the city of Maastsricht was the birthplace of the continent's largest city .
 The treaty's key project, the EMU, was successfully brought to completion . The EMU was a key part of the treaty's success .
 The currency crisis of 1992-3 and lingering disagreements over the contours and modalities of EMU could well have derailed it . Not only, as seen above, was the blueprint uncertain, but the currency crisis was also a major hurdle .
 By 1997 agreement had been reached, as reflected in the Stability and Growth Pact signed in May of that year, and on January 1, 1999 the euro was launched .
 It is of course easy to discard this achievement against the backdrop of the current crisis, it is easy to do so .
 This was, to be sure, a long, painful and frustrating process, but it was long and frustrating . This was a long and painful process that absorbed most of Europe's energies for nearly two decades . It was, for sure, that it was a painful but frustrating process .
 The 1997 Amsterdam Treaty to the 2001 Nice Treaty, and from the ill-fated 2004 Rome Constitutional Treaty, to the ""simplified"" 2007 Lisbon Treaty, has been a significant one .
 This third achievement was perhaps the least assured, given the EU's initial dismal performance . The EU's first major achievement is perhaps the most assured of all .
 In 1991, the foreign minister of Luxemburg had famously declared that this was ""the hour of Europe,"" the EU soon proved incapable of coping with the return of war on the continent .
 NATO intervention in the summer and the US-brokered peace in Dayton in the fall of 1995 illustrated the Europeans' Balkans fiasco . NATO intervention and Dayton's peace in fall 1995 illustrated Europe's failure in the Balkans .
 By the time of the 1999 Kosovo crisis, the Europeans had learned their lesson . Yet by the time the Kosovo crisis had occurred, Europe had learned its lesson . The European Union had already learned its lessons about Kosovo .
 The crisis convinced the Europeans that the EU needed to be able to cope with similar challenges in the future, leading to the creation of the ESDP . The role of NATO and the United States in the military operation against Serbia was once again overwhelming .
 The EU, in addition, from then on was carrying the bulk of reconstruction efforts in the Balkans . The EU carried out most of the reconstruction effort in the region .
 For an enlarged EU, the continent's stability had de facto become an internal affair . Europe's stability was de facto a matter of internal affair for the EU, it has said .
 The enlargement process was, in fact, the clearest expression of the persistent vitality of European unification in the post-Maastricht period . It was the cleapest expression of Europe's persistent vitality in the past .
 Mitterrand's ill-fated plan for a European confederation in 1989-91 had envisaged . Anchoring the new Central and Eastern European democracies to the EU could have been done without actually making them members, he says .
 By the time of the December 1993 European Council in Copenhagen, the ineluctability of plain enlargement had been confirmed, opening the way to the EU's increase from twelve to twenty-seven members in less than fifteen years .
 The 8 Meeting between Chirac and several members of the U.S. Supreme Court, July 11, 1998, 5AG5 BE11, was the 8th meeting of the United States Supreme Court . Throughout the 1990s and well into the following decade, the enlargement process
 By the turn of the new century, the European project was widely recognized as an ongoing success story . By the end of the century, it had been recognized as a success story.
 Given the original ambivalence of the Maastricht moment, this was by no means preordained . This was not pre-ordained, but it was no longer pre-orderained .
 Over the past few years, the picture has changed dramatically in the EU . The EU has been in the throes of a decade but has not been in touch with the world's biggest powers .
 The last decade of the twentieth century had been a beneficial period for European construction, the last decade has been a lost decade . In many ways, the first ten years of the twenty-first century has been the lost decade, the author says .
 The EU has become a dysfunctional organization, seemingly unable to make quick and relevant decisions . The EU is struggling to meet the huge challenges it faces, especially against the backdrop of the lingering economic and financial crisis .
 Major uncertainties prevail today as to the future sustainability of the European project . As a result, major uncertainties are still being considered for the future of Europe .
 The most daunting challenge confronting the EU today has to do with no less than its ability to remain a closely-knit economic entity . The EU is the foremost accomplishment of six decades of European integration—and down the road, a viable political entity .
 The issue of economic governance had been left undecided, it was hoped it would resolve itself thanks to the implementation of the Maastricht criteria and, at best, through the emergence of some kind of economic government .
 The ineluctable result, many assumed, would be a great leap forward in the direction of an ever closer political, not just economic, union . But many assumed it would be an ever further step forward .
 Over the past decade, the EU has not done particularly well compared with other developed economies . Over the last decade, it has not fared well compared to other countries .
 The global financial and economic crisis that erupted in 2008 has exposed the major design flaws of the Maastricht construct . Much more critically, by translating into a major upheaval of the eurozone, the global financial upheaval has exposed them . The eurozone has been rocked by the 2008 global financial crisis
 Germany was reluctant to adopt a collective and mutual European response to debt crises, and France strongly advocated such a response . The dividing line was between Germany and France .
 Throughout most of 2010 and 2011, the fate of the euro—and that of the European project as a whole—happened to hang in the balance . The fate of Europe's single currency is still at a high risk .
 As of completing this chapter in the fall of 2011, the still unresolved Greek debt crisis in fact remains a huge question mark .
 The Europeans, after a painful process, were able to find some common ground . True, the Europeans, had to find a common ground. True, they had to compromise .
 A default by a eurozone member would likely have resulted from a default . The eurozone has been able to avert a crisis thanks to the creation of a financial stability facility .
 The euro crisis has uncovered a three-fold structural reality which had been concealed during the euro's first decade . Many had sounded the alarm early on, even if many had sounded it early on . More crucially, the euro crisis uncovers the threefold structural structural reality .
 The very existence of a common currency has led over the years to increased divergences, not converging, among the national economies, says David Cameron . Cameron: A common currency would have led to a greater divergence in national economies .
 The availability of low interest rates has made it tempting for the weaker economies to tackle their problems simply by borrowing money, thus aggravating their deficits and debts . With devaluation no longer an option to address growth and competitiveness discrepancies within the eurozone, devaluation is no longer a solution .
 The crisis has exposed the inadequacy of the economic governance of the eurozone, says David Cameron . Second, on the economic policy level, he says, the crisis exposed an inadequacy in the eurozone's governance .
 For more than a decade after the launch of the single European currency, mechanisms to prevent or deal with divergences have remained almost non-existent . The problem is allowing the problem to grow to dangerous proportions, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Third, and even more fundamentally, on the political level, the crisis has made clear the inconsistency that prevails between the existence of a monetary union and the lack of a strong and pervasive political union . Without an effective system of economic governance is, in fact, impossible .
 The eurozone's global debt crisis is much more than a sovereign debt crisis, writes Financial Times . "EU moves to avoid future crises," says Financial Times, December 18, 2010 .
 Externally, the EU has fared no better than internally over the past decade . Externally and internally, the European Union has fared poorly over the last decade .
 One of the key ambitions of the promoters of Maastricht was to make the EU an actor on the world scene . The EU was one of the world's most powerful countries, with the rise of the European Union .
 The completion of EMU and the creation of the ESDP at the turn of the century seemed bound to achieve just that . It was bound to do just that, with the completion of the EMU, it was .
 With a common currency and a nascent defense, Europe was equipped with the key attributes of power . Europe was now equipped with a key attribute of power, Europe's leader says . Europe's currency and nascent defense were key to Europe's success .
 Europeans seemed to share a vision of the kind of international system they wanted to promote, and of their own role in it . In spite of crises, the Europeans shared a vision for the future of the world .
 Hopes that the EU would become America's foremost strategic partner after the divisive administration of George W Bush were quickly shattered by the lack of interest shown by the incoming administration of Barack Obama .
 Europe was further dismissed by a rising China, even less inclined to conceal its scorn, as shown by Beijing's cancellation of an EU-China summit in the fall of 2008 . Beijing canceled an EU and China summit in 2008 .
 The United States and China in effect converged at the EU's expense, ignoring Europe and its ambitious agenda for dealing with climate change . And at the 2009 Copenhagen conference, the U.S. and China ignored Europe's climate change agenda .
 The bottom line is that today's global players, old or new, do not recognize the EU as one of them . The EU is not one of the most powerful countries in the world, it is one of many .
 The EU's capacity to produce the kind of power (military, economic or environmental) that will shape the emerging multipolar world seems bound to remain limited . While it remains uniquely capable of diffusing norms and standards, the EU is bound to be desperately limited .
 The Europeans still lack both a common vision of their role on the world scene and the means to defend it . Libya—regularly show, the Europeans often show, they still lack common vision and means of defense .
 The external and internal challenges Europe is facing today are compounded by the dysfunctional character of the EU institutions . Europe's internal and external challenges have been compounded by dysfunctional EU institutions, says the European Commission .
 The treaty work that has been done since the 1997 Amsterdam Treaty has given way to a more robust institutional system . To be sure, the treaty work is done since 1997, it has given .
 The Lisbon Treaty has achieved significant progress in the direction of more efficient decisionmaking, especially externally . The Lisbon treaty has been ratified by the European Parliament .
 The situation remains unsatisfactory, given the nature and magnitude of the challenges the Europeans are confronting . Yet the situation clearly remains unsatisfied, says the European Parliament .
 The U.S. president was left ""incredulous” after his first encounter with the twenty-seven in Prague in 2008 . It's no wonder, then, that the major players of this world have a hard time taking the EU seriously .
 Current situation is the consequence of the Europeans' own choices, or non-choices, writes David Frum . Frum says the European crisis is a consequence of Europe's own choices and non-chaos .
 It is decisions made or not made at Maastricht and since then regarding key aspects of European construction that explain the currently precarious and unfinished state of the unification process .
 The Maastricht relaunch has fallen short of meeting the challenges of a far more unpredictable and troubled era of globalization . The project's design flaws have exposed the design flaws of the project, authors say .
 The European Union has been in disarray since the 1980s and 1990s . The EU has spent much of the past decade enlargement of the continent's borders . The continent is now in a state of disarray, and the EU is in trouble .
 The EU has been pursued at the expense of other considerations, not least effectiveness and cohesion . The new democracies of Central and Eastern Europe turned out to be the Europeans' most consistent effort in the 15 years after Maastricht .
 Although it has increased the European Union's economic and demographic weight, this situation has deepened its internal fault lines . The situation has, by the same token, deepened the EU's internal faults lines, says David Cameron .
 It seems clear today that such an economically diverse bloc is less likely eventually to develop into a coherent whole, thus making it a fragile and vulnerable entity . As a result, it seems . today it seems clear that such . a . well-populated bloc is . less likely to develop
 There is little doubt that a union of twenty-seven has more difficulties reaching a unified purpose on the international scene than would a smaller entity . This hampering the bloc's ambition to become a global player, it will hamper its ambitions .
 Enlargement may have been ineluctable and beneficial, but it has turned into a liability for the long-term future of the European project . The European Union has been criticised for its size in the past for enlargement .
 A second consequential choice has been that of a limited, if not minimal, deepening process . A second choice was that of the President's decision to withdraw from the U.S. Senate .
 The everlasting quarrels over the desirable end state of European unification have been all but buried under the treaty work from Amsterdam to Lisbon . As already underlined, the end state to European unification has all but been buried .
 The EU has failed to grow into a more potent and cohesive entity, says David Cameron . But there was a price to be paid in that the EU has not grown into a stronger and more cohesive entity .
 Maastricht Treaty created pretense, not reality, of increased unification . Treaty in many ways created the pretense of increased unity, not the reality, he says . Treaty created the illusion of greater unification, he adds .
 This situation goes a long way in explaining the present trials of the union . The union is struggling to cope with the challenges it faces .
 A more encompassing and robust entity, involving a more substantial degree of cohesion and solidarity, would obviously have fared better in the current crisis . A more robust entity would have survived the crisis, such as a more robust organisation .
 It would have been more capable of dealing with intra-EU economic divergences upstream, and of limiting the impact of the sovereign debt problem downstream . The European Commission would have had to be able to limit the impact on the debt .
 The same kind of argument applies to the EU's failed ambitions as a global power . The EU has failed to be a major global power, and the EU has never been a major power in the world .
 EU representing little more than the sum of its own member states on the world scene can hardly be expected to become a geopolitical heavyweight . EU's members have continued to diverge internationally .
 There is the core issue of integration in the functionalist sense (as distinct from institutional or organic approach), i.e. creating de facto solidarities in specific sectors with a view to advancing a genuinely European community over the long term .
 The present uncertainties affecting the union reflect decisions or non-decisions made since Maastricht . But here again, the present uncertainties affect the union .
 It was believed that the achievement of a single European market and a single currency would trigger a new phase of genuine integration in various sectors, but this calculation proved wrong .
 Although new common European policies were launched over the past two decades, none of them was truly integrationist a la Jean Monnet . None of the new common EU policies were truly integratedist, a la Monnet.
 For this to have happened, the Europeans would have had to embark on new, supranational projects, which has not been the case . For this, the European Union has not had to undertake new projects . The EU has been criticised for not having enough of a 'supr
 The euro has not led to the emergence of a significantly more integrated economic community . The exception was the euro itself, but, as seen above, it hasn't led to a significant economic integration .
 What the crisis reveals, in other words, is the incompleteness of the European project . The crisis reveals that the EU project is incomplete, says David Frum .
 Once again, under the facade of the newborn union, Maastricht was an ambivalent moment . Underneath the facade, the city was ambivalent . Under the facade it was a new union, under .
 Of course, it was an important contribution to the peaceful ending of the Cold War . It provided a robust framework for the management of post-Cold War Europe . The U.S. government has been criticized for its role in Afghanistan .
 Recent developments have exposed that such advances have not taken place, or that they have been limited in spite of the EU's institutional transformation . What recent developments expose, then, is that such progress has not been made, or not taken to the EU, has been limited .
 In a nutshell, the ambivalence of the Maastricht moment has not been superseded . "Ambivalence has not superseded," says the Dutchman . The Dutchman says: "It's not the same thing that happened in Maasticht, it's
 The current economic and financial crisis is a dangerous circumstance for the European project . The ongoing surge of populism in many EU countries is of course an aggravating factor in that regard . True, the current economic crisis—not least the seemingly unending Greek debt crisis—constitutes a dangerous situation
 To blame one's hardships on the European Union is all the more tempting in those countries hit by the euro debt crisis and subject, as a result, to draconian austerity measures . To blame the EU for your hardships is tempting .
 The current crisis can only foster the trend toward a renationalization of politics and politics that has occurred over the past few years throughout the European Union . This is the result of weakening European integration and undermining the Europeans' already elusive sense of commonality .
 A deliberate splintering of the eurozone would be a devastating blow to the European project as a whole . And yet a deliberate splipiping of eurozone appears quite improbable, writes David Frum .
 The economic cost of an individual country's abandoning the euro would be prohibitive as a result of the nominal increase in that country's national debt and of the kind of disruption that the move would no doubt provoke . The cost of leaving the euro is prohibitive due to the national debt .
 As to the political price, it would also be enormous, both for individual countries and for Europe as a whole . The political cost of the deal would be enormous for individual nations and Europe, both .
 The German chancellor and French president reaffirm their commitment to the euro in no uncertain terms . European construction had brought sixty years of peace to the European continent, writes David Frum .
 To relate the existence of the euro to the prevalence of peace in Europe may sound historically far-fetched, but it does give a measure of the sense of political responsibility that European leaders still share .
 As often in the history of European construction, muddling through seems to be a far more likely option at this juncture . Mudding through seems likely to be the most likely option for the project .
 As already emphasized, since 2009 European leaders have been in office since 2009 . See, for instance, Charles Kupchan, "As nationalism rises, will the EU fall?"
 Berlin and Paris have reached a compromise on fiscal responsibility of individual states . The former's call for a collective management of the debt crises and a strengthening of the economic governance of the eurozone on the other hand .
 EFSF/ESM agreed to consider effective steps toward a reinforced economic governance of the eurozone . Measures include allowing the fund to intervene on the secondary markets and thus offer precautionary credit lines .
 Still, decisions made over the past two years have prevented the European debt crisis from getting out of control . Still, the debt crisis remains in the balance .
 Much will depend on economic developments and the Europeans' ability to overcome the current conundrum and to weather future crises . Much, of course, will depend upon economic developments, and on European ability .
 As said above, the sovereign debt crisis, for one, is probably not over . The crisis is probably still not over, but it's not likely to be over .
 Markets may not be convinced that member states are seriously committed to doing what it takes to stem the crisis . As a result, more dominos may well fall, this time with potentially devastating consequences .
 See ""EU leaders agree €109 billion Greek bail-out,"" Financial Times, July 22, 2011. It is 21 .
 Merkel and Sarkozy made specific proposals for a reinforced governance of the eurozone . They included convening heads of states and governments periodically and appointing a stable president .
 The time may well have come to move beyond Maastricht—and not just monetary matters . The time is now being discussed in the European Parliament .
 To begin with, the EMU must finally be equipped with a fully fledged economic governance . A transfers union is arguably the only way to address economic divergences and competitiveness problems under a single currency .
 Only the consciousness of a true ""Schicksalsgemeinshaft"" can allow for enhanced fiscal and economic solidarity . This, in turn, would call for a major step toward a genuine political union . Without which such economic governance would be not only dysfunctional but politically unsustainable, such
 A closer union would be a prerequisite if the EU is ever to be in a position to gain the geopolitical weight it has been lacking so far on the international scene and to move beyond its present status as an economic giant with feet of clay .
 A new, decisive phase of European unification and integration is arguably the only way to pull the European project out of its present quagmire . The EU has been lacking over the past decade or so, writes David Cameron .
 The first has to do with the political and institutional model of European unification . The second has to be the model for the future of the European Union . The European Union has been a model for a long time .
 Since Maastricht and the creation of the European Union, the Europeans have been fudging this issue . The European Union was created in the late 1940s and early 1950s, when unionists and federalists were competing .
 The result has been the promotion of a hybrid model of unification, with, under the facade of a fully-fledged union, elements of supranationalism or federalism combined with elements of intergovernmentalism or confederalism .
 The current crisis has revealed the inadequacy of this hybrid model . Yet what the current crisis reveals is precisely the inadequacies of this model . The crisis has also revealed the need to be dealt with by the government .
 Of course, it has always been clear that a ""federation of nation states"" is, at least in theory, an oxymoron . Of course it is clear that it is always clear that the idea of a federation of nations states is a 'federal state' is an
 The crisis has shown that such a complex set-up cannot deliver the degree of political integration and solidarity that a functional economic governance requires . The crisis shows that such an economic governance cannot be achieved in the world .
 The same applies to the role of the European Union as a international actor . The European Union is a major international actor, according to the EU .
 It has become doubtful that a thriving European Union will ever result from the hybrid model as consecrated at Maastricht, and since then .
 Integration has served as the crucible of European unification, making it more than an intergovernmental project . The European Union has been an integral part of the European community since the 1950s .
 If anything, the current economic and financial crisis has revealed the resilience of the national logics and realities, be they economic or political . Yet, if anything, it has been revealed, the crisis has also revealed the resilient nature of the country's logics .
 Many of the weaknesses of the European Union as a would-be player on the global scene may also be related to the deficiencies of integration . The European Union is not a strong enough to be a major player in the global economy .
 Europe's strength and cohesion in dealing with neighboring Russia, for example, are hampered by national logics in the realm of energy, allowing external actors to divide and rule .
 A relaunch of the process of integration in key areas, such as energy, is a prerequisite if the Europeans want the European Union to be able to overcome its current internal and external challenges . The conclusion is that a relaunch is necessary for the EU to overcome the current challenges .
 No community of destiny will ever emerge without a genuine revival of the original European integrationist inspiration . No community will emerge without the revival of Europe's original integrationist ideology .
 It is increasingly hard to see how an ever-enlarging union will be able to develop the kind of common identity that would allow it to move in the direction of a closely knit, federal entity .
 The European project never had indisputable, let alone ""natural,"" frontiers . Of course, the European project had no indisputable or natural frontiers, it was never indisputable .
 Recent developments have exposed the conflict between widening the EU and strengthening it, both internally and externally . Yet developments over recent years have exposed a conflict within the EU .
 There is tactical agreement that further significant steps with regard to enlargement should be at least postponed until the union regains its ""absorption capacity" (a concept that has never really been clarified) There is so far no strategic consensus as to what the desirable end state should be .
 One of Europe's next crises could well be provoked by the issue of further enlargement, particularly to Turkey . Turkey's membership is increasingly opposed among current members, not least in Germany and France .
 The crisis could well be a salutary one for advocates of a strong, cohesive Europe . Only an EU with clear and definitive boundaries will ever be able to evolve into a viable entity, let alone a global power .
 While its backdrop has been the global financial and economic crisis of the past few years, the current crisis is fundamentally a crisis of European integration . The current crisis has been fundamentally the crisis of Europe's economic and political integration .
 The time has come to move beyond the ambivalence of the Maastricht moment, writes David Frum . The choices made at and since Maasticht were an important step on the road toward European unification, he says .
 For the European project to be able to survive, the glass of European unification has to be made at least half full . For the EU project to survive it must be made half full, says David Cameron .
 Whether the Europeans will be able to live up to the challenge is too early to say . The European continent is a huge opportunity for the continent's future .
 Nothing dramatic happened—no destructive earthquake, no sudden outbreak of war, no major terrorist attack, and no breakdown of any country's stock market. Indeed, nothing dramatic happened. Nothing happened .
 Quietly, however, something significant, though long anticipated, occurred . Quietly and quietly, though, it was a long awaited event .
 China passed Japan in the second quarter of 2010 to become the world's second-largest economy, next only to the U.S. China has overtaken Japan as the second largest economy .
 Some have also predicted that China's economy may surpass that of the United States to become the largest in the world by 2030, if not earlier .
 Liu was the first citizen of the People's Republic of China to become a Nobel prize laureate . This should have been a moment of celebration and national pride in China . Liu is the first Chinese citizen to win the Nobel Prize for Literature .
 Liu was unable to attend the Nobel Prize award ceremony in Oslo, Norway . Liu was not present at the ceremony because he was too ill to attend .
 In the second quarter of 2010, Japan's economy was valued at about $1.28 trillion . China's economy is valued at $ 1.33 trillion .
 China's economic growth in the past 30 years has been phenomenal . The paradoxes sit deep within China's phenomenal economic growth . They vividly depict, among other things, the profound paradoxes .
 China in the age of ""reform and opening up"" has witnessed mixed and highly uneven developments . China has seen mixed and uneven developments in the past decade .
 China's military buildup, accelerated in recent years, has caused worries that Beijing means not only to modernize China's defense capacity but also to expand its offensive capability beyond its borders . In the meantime, China's growing military buildup has also caused worries .
 In this chapter, I adopt a historical approach by treating China's rise—or, more accurately speaking, China's prolonged rise—as a phenomenon generated by the reform . 2 Remain ribao , December 10, 2010 .
 Despite the extraordinary magnitude of Mao's revolution and ""continuous revolution,"" these revolutions were unable to produce ultimate answers to such fundamental questions as how to define the meanings and essence of the ""new China"" and how best to identify China's role and position in the world .
 It was the successes and failures, progresses and setbacks, achievements and sufferings, and bright times and dark moments of China's revolutions that prepared some of the fundamental conditions for the coming of the reform and opening-up era .
 All of this has also burdened the reform and opening-up process with all kinds of hurdles . It is impossible for China's rise not to become a course paradoxical and prolonged, he says .
 The Chinese ""communist"" state has been facing a legitimacy challenge in Mao's times . Deng Xiaoping, Jiang Zemin and Hu Jintao served as China's top leaders . The state's legitimacy challenge has been faced in China since Mao's time .
 Mao established the legitimacy narrative that Mao established for the People's Republic and, related to it, some of the fundamental principles underlying his definition of China's role and position in the world, have remained in position . The legitimacy narrative has remained in place since Mao's death in 1968 .
 Among other things, it consolidated ""China"" as a modern state of multiple nationalities . It eliminated, sociologically and physically, China's age-old landlord class and the traditional gentry-scholar structure . It laid the foundation of China's industrialization .
 The PRC under Mao's reign constantly challenged the legitimacy of the existing international order . Mao and his comrades believed to be the result of Western domination and thus inimical to revolutionary China .
 Mao challenged Moscow's position as the headquarters of the world revolution, leading to the Sino-Soviet split as well as the disintegration of the international communist movement . Mao and the CCP challenged the position of Moscow as headquarters of revolution .
 Mao's vision of transforming China's backwardness into modernity in the shortest possible time was unable to stand the test of the Chinese people's lived experience . Mao's utopian vision was directed by a utopian vision, but his extraordinary aspiration of transforming the backwardness .
 The legitimacy of Mao's ""continuous revolution"" was called into serious question after the failure of the disastrous ""Great Leap Forward,"" which caused the deaths of tens of millions of ordinary Chinese people . Mao's legitimacy of the revolution was questioned after the Great Leap Forward .
 Mao found that adopting and adhering to a revolutionary foreign policy was of great relevance . In search of means to meet the legitimacy challenge to his revolution, Mao found it of relevance . Mao found the foreign policy of China was a vital part of his revolution .
 In the early years of the PRC, such a foreign policy helped make Mao's state and societal transformation programs powerful unifying and national themes, supplanting many local, regional, or factional concerns .
 When Mao's revolution was losing the Chinese people's support, it served as a useful and effective way through which Mao might maintain his authority and his revolutionary programs . Mao's revolutionary program was a useful way to keep Mao's authority and revolutionary programs intact .
 Mao and his colleagues seem to have been unafraid of using force in dealing with foreign policy crises . Consequently, Mao's government seems to have used force to deal with foreign crises .
 This should be understood in relation to the unique and highly influential Chinese ""victim mentality"" and Mao's reading of it . Mao's interpretation of the 'victim's mentality' is that of the victim mentality . This is said to have been Mao's 'Victim mentality'
 During modern times, Chinese perception of China's position in the world was always informed by the conviction that it was the political incursion, economic exploitation, and military aggression by foreign imperialist countries that had undermined the glory of China .
 The foundation of the legitimacy narrative of the PRC gradually shifted from a utopian vision of communism to nationalism and patriotism . The PRC's legitimacy narrative gradually shifted to nationalism, more accurately, patriotism .
 In Mao's times, patriotism, which created one's sense of attachment to the state, had formed the core of China's official ideology . patriotism was a key part of Mao's ideology, and patriotism was key to Mao's regime .
 This would be carried into the reform and opening-up era to support the post-Mao Chinese leadership's efforts to justify the one-party-dominated political institution . This would also be carried out into the opening and reform era .
 Mao's China was not an expansionist power as the term is typically defined in Western strategic discourse . In spite of its aggressive international behavior, Mao's Chinese were not an aggressive international power .
 Chinese leaders wanted to spread the spread of the Chinese revolution's influence to ""hearts and minds"" around the world . While using force, largely because of their domestic-centered and legitimacy-related concerns, the Chinese leaders hoped to achieve this .
 It was aspiration for ""centrality,"" rather than pursuit of ""dominance,"" that characterized Mao's external policy of Mao's China . Mao's policy was aspirational for centrality, not pursuit of power .
 This has important implications for understanding China's external behavior today and in the future . China's relationship with the U.S. has been described as one of the world's most powerful countries .
 Mao achieved a dramatic turn in Chinese foreign policy by achieving a rapprochement with the United States . The PRC's arch-enemy ever since its establishment, the U.S. has been an ally of the PRC .
 Mao's motivations for embracing the Chinese-American rapprochement were both strategic and domestic . Mao's motivation was to embrace China-U.S. relations with the United States . Mao was Mao's first leader in China in the 1950s and 1960s .
 His decisions to improve relations with the U.S. made it politically more feasible for his successors to pursue a course of opening up to the world . However, his actions made it less politically feasible for him to open up .
 China's drive for modernity in the post-Cold War era has been of great complexity . This is a crucial point for understanding why China survived the end of the Cold War and why it survived .
 Deng, who had been purged twice during the Cultural Revolution, emerged as China's paramount leader . Deng had probably helped him understand the dark side of Mao's revolution in China .
 Deng's reform and opening-up project was first of all a de-revolutionization process . It was launched, launched, to cope with the profound legitimacy crisis in the post-Mao era . Deng's reforms and opening up project was launched in response to the crisis in post-
 The specific ways in which Deng and the CCP leadership envisioned and carried out the project, however, created new legitimacy challenges for the Chinese state . While easing some of the old legitimacy pressure, the project created new challenges for China .
 Deng and the CCP leadership introduced a series of reform measures in China's countryside and cities . Aimed at modernizing the country's industry, agriculture, science and technology, and national defense .
 Beijing significantly broadened China's external connections through such steps as dispatching Chinese students to study abroad, promoting China's trade with Western countries . Beijing has adopted a more positive approach toward the world market .
 Beijing gradually reduced and finally stopped supporting foreign communist insurgences . In the meantime, Beijing gradually stopped supporting overseas communist insurgencies .
 Mao and Deng's strategies remained in China's strategies vis-a-vis the two superpowers . Another important area of continuity between Mao and . Deng existed in . China's strategy vis- a-vis .
 The ""tacit alliance"" between China and the U.S. that emerged in Mao's later years continued to develop when Deng became China's paramount leader .
 Deng regarded the Soviet Union as more dangerous than the United States, as he believed that the U.S. was more on the offensive . Deng said that the Soviets Union was on the defensive rather than the defensive . Deng was a member of the Deng family .
 Deng's view of China's relations with the U.S. has changed dramatically in recent years . Deng's views on China's relationship with the United States have changed dramatically since then . Deng says he's changed his view of American relations with China in recent decades .
 Beijing's new relationship with Washington helped enhance China's security position while at the same time allowing Mao to claim that indeed ""the Chinese people have stood up,"" in spite of the failure of his revolution .
 Deng's vision of Sino-U.S. relations was closely related to a new approach toward the capitalist-dominated world market . Meanwhile, Deng was closely involved in the development of China's relationship with the United States .
 Throughout the Maoist era, the market and the pursuit of profits were treated as values and practices inimical to genuine socialism . The market was treated as a value-less system of socialism, not socialism .
 Beijing's tacit alliance with Washington was highly compatible with Deng's new vision of looking to the West for ways to modernize China . Deng's vision was to look to the U.S. for ways of modernizing China, Deng said . Deng said China's relationship with the United States
 In the meantime, China's confrontation with the Soviet Union continued, especially after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in December 1979 . In the 1980s, China was involved in the conflict with the Soviets, especially in Afghanistan .
 The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan created a new barrier for Beijing to improve relations with Moscow, he said . He said the Soviet invasion created a barrier for China to improve its relations with Russia .
 Beijing's relations with Hanoi deteriorated rapidly after the Vietnamese communists unified the whole country in 1975 . Relations with Beijing deteriorated rapidly in the 1970s after the unification of Vietnam .
 Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia in December 1978 further damaged Chinese-Vietnamese relations . China and Vietnam have been involved in a series of diplomatic relations .
 Beijing's leaders believed that Hanoi served as an agent of Soviet expansionism in the region neighboring China . Beijing believed it served as a Soviet agent in Vietnam . Beijing's government believed it was a Communist Party agent .
 Throughout the 1980s, the borders between the two countries were turned into a front of protracted warfare . The borders between Russia and the U.S. have been turned into an international front of war .
 In retrospect, the years 1982-3 represented a turning point in China's external relations . The years 1982 and 1983 were 'turning point' for China's relations with the West .
 The difficulties that Beijing encountered with the Reagan administration made Deng and his fellow Chinese leaders rethink how best to define the scope of Sino-American relations . Deng and other Chinese leaders were forced to rethink their relationship with the U.S. in 1980s .
 Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev openly stated that Moscow was willing to improve relations with China . Meanwhile, Soviet leader Lezhnevs said that Moscow would be open to improving relations .
 Beijing announced in September 1982 that Chinese foreign policy would accord the principle of ""independence and self-determination" Beijing said in 1982 that China would keep a distance from both superpowers . China's foreign policy was designed to keep distance from the West .
 The main barriers were the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and, more importantly, the Vietnamese presence in Cambodia . The main barrier was the presence of the Vietnamese in Cambodia, writes John Defterios .
 Beijing's attitudes toward Vietnam were both international and domestic considerations . Underpinning Beijing's attitude toward Vietnam was both international .
 Deng's decision to ""teach Vietnam a lesson" provided him with a valuable opportunity to consolidate his military and political power . Deng's decision to "teach a lesson" was a valuable opportunity to consolidate his military and political power
 The prolonged confrontation with Vietnam created a sustained source of domestic mobilization . The Chinese people's patriotism appealed to the Chinese people, he says, of domestic mobilization .
 The confrontation with Vietnam, and Beijing's representation of it to the Chinese people, served to retain the support of ordinary Chinese for the state . At a time when reform policies were creating ever-deepening economic inequality in Chinese society, the legitimacy of the Chinese communist state was seriously called into
 The uneven development of the reform and opening-up process brought China's state and society to the verge of a serious crisis . China's uneven development has brought the country to the brink of a crisis, says the author .
 Lhasa, the capital of the Tibetan Autonomous Region, was placed under martial law in March 1989 . In March 1989, the Tibetan capital of Tibet was placed in place of martial law . The Tibetan capital is now located in the Tibetan autonomous region .
 The students defied the authorities angrily, leading to a stand-off at Tiananmen Square . The students defy the authorities, leading them to an angry confrontation with police .
 On June 3-4, People's Liberation Army soldiers fought their way into the Square, ending the protest in bloodshed . Soldiers fought to end the protest, ending it with bloodshed .
 In a sense, it triggered the chain of historic events that made 1989 a landmark year in world history . 1989 was a 'landmark year' for the world, with the events that triggered the events .
 In two short years the Soviet Union and the Soviet bloc in Eastern Europe collapsed . The collapse of Eastern Europe was two years ago .
 The Chinese communist state survived the Tiananmen tragedy of 1989 and the end of the Cold War . The Chinese Communist state survived its own tragedy .
 China had already virtually left the Cold War in the late 1970s . One main reason was that China had left the cold war in the 1970s.
 Deng's management of the crisis situation associated with the collapse of the Soviet Union led to his success . Deng also managed to deal with the situation in the aftermath of the collapse . Deng was a strong leader in the late 1980s and early 1990s .
 Deng sensed the ever-deepening legitimacy challenge that the Chinese communist state was facing . Deng's statement could also be read as his political testament, which demonstrated that Deng sensed that the state of China was facing a challenge .
 China's rise would be a difficult and prolonged process, China's leader says . China should not strive for a global leadership role, he says, not in the future .
 A guideline of utmost importance has been set up for China's international relations in the next two decades . A guideline was set up to help China's relations with the world .
 Few at that time could have expected that he would become more than a transitional figure . Few expected him to become more of a 'transformer' figure .
 Jiang's predecessors, Hu Yaobang and Zhao Ziyang, had been promoted to the position and then lost it in disgrace in a few short years . After all, two of Jiang's previous predecessors had to be stripped of the post .
 Jiang was by no means a front-runner after Zhao Ziyao's downfall . Jiang was among the possible candidates for the post-Ziyao post .
 A more likely choice should have been Li Peng, China's premier, who had been known as a hardliner . Li Peng was known for his hostile attitude toward the Tiananmen pro-democracy movement .
 Li seemed a logical choice as the new general secretary of China's Communist Party Party . Li's political atmosphere in the wake of the Tiananmen suppression, he said . Li has been a key figure in China's political climate since the suppression of the Chinese Revolution .
 Given Li's performance during the Tiananmen crisis, he was unlikely to be a wholehearted supporter of Deng's reformist ideas . Li was likely to be an outspoken critic of the reformist movement .
 Jiang was a better choice as he had had the experience of promoting the reform and opening-up project in Shanghai with great success . Jiang stood firm in the face of the ""bourgeoisie liberalization"" challenge in managing the student protest in late 1986 and also during the 1989 crisis
 Jiang was extremely cautious in the first two years of his tenure as general secretary . Jiang has been extremely cautious since taking over from the post in 2010 .
 His main attention was given to stabilizing China's domestic situation after Tiananmen . His main concern was stabilizing the domestic situation in China .
 Deng's advice to "do several practical things” that the Chinese people could see for themselves, so that their basic confidence in the government would be restored . So he followed Deng's . advice to ""do several . practical things" that the people could . see for . themselves,
 Jiang and the CCP leadership took a series of measures to fight against corruption, especially the profiteering behavior prevailing among officials . Jiang said the measures were taken to combat corruption, including profiting from officials .
 The Chinese government exerted stricter control over the money supply, quickly placing the high inflation rate under control . The government has placed stricter control on the money .
 Jiang said the challenges facing Jiang were also serious and complex . In China foreign policy, he said, "In Chinese foreign policy is also complex and complex"
 The Tiananmen tragedy had given him a very bad image among the Chinese as well as in the world, he said . As a person who cared about his own position in history, he knew well—as himself a student activist in his youth—that the Tiananman tragedy had
 The only way to regain his positive image was to regenerate the reform project, he said . He said: "The only way is to regain the positive image of the project"
 He knew that only by successfully carrying out the project would the Chinese communist state be able to deal with the profound legitimacy challenges that it had been facing .
 Deng issued a series of pro-reform statements during a vacation tour in Shanghai in 1991 . Deng is known for his pro-democracy statements in the early 1990s .
 Commentaries would not have been published without Jiang's endorsement . As Shanghai was Jiang's sphere of influence, the commentaries were published .
 When the coup occurred, many leaders in Beijing, and Jiang probably included, were of sympathy and hope . The initial responses by many leaders, including Jiang, were likely to have been sympathetic and hopeful .
 The coup failed, but its impact on Jiang and his colleagues was significant . Jiang was forced to step down from his post as a member of the government .
 First public sign of the change appeared in early September 1991, when Renmin Ribao (People's Daily) published a commentary stating that ""we should never allow reforms to go along the bourgeois liberalization or capitalist line""; the Xinhua News Agency followed Jiang's order to recall it
 This was an indication that the momentum for reforms was gathering again . This was a sign that momentum for reform is gathering again, says David Cameron . Cameron: "This is an indication of a positive trend for reforms in the UK"
 During this tour he delivered a series of statements emphasizing that reforms should be carried out in deeper ways . During the tour he emphasized that reforms are needed to be taken in deeper steps .
 The essence of socialism, stressed Deng, should be ""the development of 23 Yang Jisheng, Zhongguo gaige niandai de zhengzhi douzheng" (Political Struggles in China's Reform Era)
 In September 1992, the CCP's fourteenth congress formally adopted building a ""socialist market economy"" as the goal of China's regenerated reform and opening-up project .
 This development also consolidates Jiang's position as China's top leader . Jiang's move consolidates his position as leader .
 Jiang's reign can be divided into two periods between 1992 and 2004 . Jiang finally resigned from his last official post in 2004, with 1998 as the turning point .
 Jiang and the CCP leadership's main attention was domestic-oriented, concentrating on turning reform programs into the vehicles that would significantly promote China's economic growth . In the first period of Jiang's leadership, during which Jiang enhanced his leadership role, his main attention focused on domestic issues .
 In the 1980s, China had maintained an annual growth rate nearing or surpassing two percentage digits . China's economic growth rate has been at a steady pace since 1980s .
 Crisis of 1989 and its consequences caused stagnation in China's economic development in 1990-1. The crisis of 1989-1 was caused by stagnation in the country's economy .
 Jiang and his fellow CCP leaders, this was a trend that had to be turned around . Jiang: "This is a problem that has to be fixed. It's a problem"
 Jiang and his colleagues faced a critical legitimacy challenge, Jiang said . Jiang said: "In addition to its significance for the Chinese economy and society, this was also an important legitimacy challenge for Jiang's colleagues"
 China knew well well that if they could not bring higher economic growth rates back to China, the PRC's legitimacy narrative would be jeopardized . Mao's ""we the Chinese people have stood up" statement would be seriously jeopardized, he said .
 Chinese leaders were conscious of the importance of building a ""performance-based legitimacy" for the Chinese ""communist"" state .
 China's existing system on financial resource disposition and taxes, which had been adopted in the early years, was causing disorder and tension between the central and local governments, thus blocking faster and more sustainable growth . Yet, it soon became clear that the existing system was causing chaos and disorder .
 Zhu Rongji, then China's vice premier, initiated a far-reaching tax-sharing reform in 1994 . Zhu was Zhu's first Chinese vice premier in 1994, Zhu was in charge of the tax reform .
 The reform puts a larger share of taxes into the central government, while at the same time making the local share of tax revenues more transparent and accountable .
 The new system seemed to have played a good role in serving China's continuous economic development . Throughout the rest of the 1990s and in the first years of the twenty-first century, the new system seems to have helped China's development .
 Jiang and the Chinese leadership defined China's relations with the United States as ""the most important subject"" in China's external policies . Given that the U.S. had emerged as the sole superpower in the post-Cold War era, Jiang said China's relationship with the U .S
 Jiang repeatedly reminded his colleagues that if Beijing was able to maintain a good relationship with Washington, China would enjoy a much better international environment overall .
 Beijing made a series of efforts to demonstrate that China was continuously changing into an ""insider"" of the American and Western capitalist-dominated international system . Beijing made efforts to . demonstrate that . China was constantly changing into . an 'insider' of the Western capitalist system .
 Beijing's 'statement by action' shows it is willing to accept international norms and regulations . This was also Beijing's statement by action that China was willing to comply with regulations .
 Jiang and his fellow Beijing leaders decided to make tough responses, which they had not done toward Washington since 1989 . Instead of quietly ""swallowing the bitter pill,"" Jiang said, "Instead of quietly"
 Beijing staged armed missile tests aimed at areas off two of Taiwan's main seaports in 1996 . In March 1996, on the eve of the Taiwanese presidential election, Beijing staged missile tests . Beijing staged the tests on the day of the election .
 Washington responded by dispatching two aircraft carrier battle groups to the Taiwan Strait . The U.S. responded by sending two aircraft carriers to the area .
 All of this caused the most serious crisis in U.S.-China relations in the 1990s . The crisis was a major crisis in US-China relations relations .
 Jiang's decision was made in response to deep domestic concerns linked to the CCP leadership's legitimacy concerns . More importantly, the decision was linked to domestic concerns, says Jiang .
 The Taiwan case presented a serious challenge to the CCP's legitimacy narrative that ""we the Chinese people have stood up,"" and that the CCP was always ready to defend China's sovereignty and national integrity .
 In the wake of the 1995-6 Taiwan Strait crisis, the Clinton administration adjusted U.S. policies toward Taiwan, as well as toward China .
 When Clinton visited China in June 1998, he announced that Washington did not support Taiwan's independence . He also said that Washington didn't support ""one China, one Taiwan” or ""two Chinas,"" and said Taiwan's membership of any international bodies whose members are sovereign states .
 Clinton made these statements also in the wake of Beijing's ""cooperative and responsible responses"" to Asia's severe financial crisis in 1997 . Clinton made the statements in the aftermath of China's response to the crisis .
 China is becoming a more responsible and rules-abiding member of the international community, U.S. policymakers say . China's economic strength and political influence are seen as signs of China's continuous rise, they say .
 Jiang now felt that he was in a more powerful position to make history as China's top leader . Deng's passing away in February 1997, Jiang felt he was more powerful than Deng's . Jiang felt that Deng's death was a mistake .
 Zhu Rongji replaced Li Peng to assume the premiership of China . Zhu had won a reputation as the most reform-minded among all the CCP leaders .
 The establishment of the Jiang-Zhu regime, in retrospect, probably made the year 1998 an important potential turning point for China .
 When he began what I identify as the second period of his leadership tenure in 1998, there was evidence that he was thinking about ""making history"" by dealing with some ""very big issues" related to the legitimacy challenges that the CCP had been facing .
 His thinking, it seemed, concentrated on two matters: Taiwan and China's political reform . Both had close connections with the PRC's legitimacy narrative .
 Jiang attended the ceremony of the PRC restoring its sovereignty over Hong Kong . This thought must have been greatly enhanced when Jiang attended this ceremony .
 The book's main theme was the necessity and possibility of carrying out ""genuine political reforms"" in China . The book was published in China's first edition .
 The government neither responded to the requests nor took any suppression action . Surprisingly, the government did not take action .
 Not until six months later did the government begin to arrest the dissidents and sentence them to long imprisonment . Not until the government began to arrest dissidents six months after they were sentenced to long jail terms .
 An answer probably will need to wait until the declassification of China's official documents . An answer will probably need to be found out by declassification .
 Zhu Rongji visited the United States in April, taking with him an ""excellent package"" for winning U.S. support for China's WTO membership drive . Zhu visited the U.K. in April to win support for the WTO .
 Zhu was turned down by President Clinton out of domestic political considerations . Zhu was a labor leader in the United States . Zhu is now a member of the U.S. Senate of Representatives .
 NATO planes mistakenly bombarded the PRC embassy in Belgrade in May, leading to the outbreak of the worst anti-American protests in China in recent history . In May, NATO planes accidentally bombarded a Chinese embassy in Serbia . NATO planes crashed into the building in May .
 In July, Jiang and his colleagues made the decision to suppress Falungong, a cult organization that, Jiang believed, was presenting serious threats to the state and society . Jiang and the CCP leadership made the . decision . in July .
 These events mobilized the hardliners in the CCP elite, effectively blocking any possibility for Jiang to move toward a more flexible political stand . Jiang's move was effectively blocked by his hardliners, according to a report .
 The terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001 changed the larger environment for Sino-American relations again . The terrorist attack of 9/11 also changed the environment for China-U.S. relations again.
 Jiang was among the first group of world leaders to call Bush, providing China's support to the war on terror . Jiang was one of the first leaders to offer support for Bush .
 U.S. needs to focus on dealing with serious and lingering threats of terrorism, he says . China's need to deal with terrorism provided China with a "twentyyear period of strategic opportunities," he said .
 Jiang was approaching the end of his term as China's top leader, and he had made a last effort to define his own position in history .
 Millions and millions of everyday Chinese people paid little attention to it, which, by itself, was an indication of the legitimacy crisis entangling China . Millions of everyday people were not interested in the issue, which is a sign of China's legitimacy crisis .
 When Hu Jintao took over the post of general secretary, Jiang stayed as chairman of the Central Military Commission . Jiang had for a decade been designated as the CCP's next leader .
 Jiang actually should have felt quite satisfied with his own accomplishments . But Jiang should have been quite satisfied by his own accomplishment .
 China survived the Tiananmen tragedy of 1989 and the end of the global Cold War . China registered an impressive record of economic growth during his tenure .
 Fifteen years after the Tiananmen tragedy, it seemed that the majority of the Chinese population was gradually forgetting it . Fifteen-year-olds were gradually forgetting the tragedy .
 Hu occupied a better position than Jiang to deal with the challenges that China was facing . Hu was the first Chinese leader to take over from Jiang Jiang to handle the challenges .
 After he was designated as China's next top leader in the early 1990s, his primary concern seemed to have been avoiding any mistakes .
 An error-free record in those years was the best guarantor for him to assume China's leadership role, he says .
 A quarter century after the launch of the reform and opening-up project, Chinese society had become more dynamic, diverse, and difficult to control . A decade after Deng regenerated it, not only had the Chinese economy been rapidly growing but also had become dynamic and diverse, but also Chinese
 Hu had been in charge of the Central Secretariat's routine working meetings for almost a decade . One of his big headaches had been that increasing numbers of ""incidents of unrest"" throughout China had often been top of the meetings' agendas .
 He probably would not feel that Chinese society was approaching a major crisis, certainly not in the near future . But he would probably not feel as much as he did in the 1930s .
 Under the surface of China's booming economy and prosperous society, hidden dangers are hidden dangers, he says . Still, he could see that under the surface there were hidden dangers .
 Hu needed to make choices, including how to deal with Deng's and Jiang's legacies . Now, as China's top leader, Hu must decide how to handle the legacy of Deng and Jiang .
 China's average annual GDP growth rate from 1989-2004 was 9.7 per cent . Hu never failed 40 per cent of his predecessors .
 This does not necessarily mean that he genuinely embraced Deng's and Jiang's ideas . But this doesn't necessarily mean he embraced them, he said .
 Hu composed his own brand-name ""grand theory"" shortly after he became CCP general secretary . Unlike Deng, who never brought about a ""theory"" associated with his name, 41 or Jiang, who did not introduce a theory of his own until the very last stage of his leadership
 The CCP leadership adopted a polished version of the document in October 2003 . The document was adopted by the party's leadership in 2003 .
 He had virtually changed the focus of Jiang's thesis on promoting all-out economic growth . He placed solving worsening social tensions at the top of his agenda .
 By itself, this shifting emphasis in China's development strategy was not wrong . China's shift in emphasis in development strategy is not wrong, it's not wrong.
 Hu's answer was to enhance state intervention in and control over society . It soon turned out to be a step further in state control of society .
 Hu stated that although Cuba and North Korea had not done well in pursuing economic development, they were correct in 41 of his internal speeches . The term ""Deng Xiaoping Theory"" was never used by Deng himself; it was imposed on him and by his fellow CCP leaders .
 CCP leadership put ""maintaining stability and social order” as the absolute priority goal of its domestic policies . Not surprisingly, the CCP leadership puts stability and order as the ultimate priority goal .
 In the hope of "eliminating any element of instability in its first appearance,"" the state set up increasingly restrictive terms on public expression . The state sets up increasingly more restrictive, or even suppressive, terms .
 Hu's ""China's peaceful rise"" notion both followed Deng's ""maintaining a low profile"" advice and also attempted to surpass it . Hu's idea of a peaceful rise was similar to that of Deng's advice to maintain low profile . Hu: "Maintaining low profile
 The notion actually was not Hu's invention; it was introduced by Zheng Bijian, a high-ranking official who had also been regarded as one of China's leading thinkers on strategic and ideological issues . The notion was introduced in China by a high ranking official .
 China's rise was already an established fact, says China's people . Such a shift made other actors in the world share the responsibility of making China's peaceful, he says .
 The next year, the World Expo was held in Shanghai and became another great showcase of China's influence and achievements . The World Expo is held in China's capital, Shanghai .
 Hu and the CCP leadership endeavored to take full advantage of these events to mobilize the Chinese people's patriotism, thus generating support for the legitimacy of the Chinese state . Hu and Xi Jinping wanted to take advantage of this opportunity to mobilize patriotism, he says .
 The year 2008 also witnessed the eruption of the global financial crisis . 2008 was also the year when the world experienced the first major economic crisis .
 This was for Hu and his fellow Chinese leaders to face a serious challenge and, potentially, an opportunity . Hu: "This was for . Hu and . his fellow . leaders to be serious challenge, and potentially an opportunity"
 The Chinese government introduced a comprehensive and aggressive stimulus program of four trillion Renminbi to deal with the crisis . China has been the most successful country among all the major powers in coping with the impact of the crisis and recession that followed .
 In 2009-10, China kept a gross domestic product growth rate of close to 10 per cent . In 2009/10, the country kept a . gross domestic . GDP growth rate was close to a decade high .
 Debate began in 2009 among China's policymakers, military planners, and academic elite . Deng's 24-character advice has never been formally published .
 In 2009-10, Chinese foreign policy appeared more assertive than before toward such issues as the disputes over the South China Sea . China's foreign policy has been more aggressive in recent years .
 China's stimulus package failed to transform its expert-oriented structure . Stimulus package is aimed at keeping China's economic growth .
 It also led to the advance of the state sector of the economy at the cost of the retreat of the private sector . The state sector is now the most important sector in the world .
 Underneath China's new appearance of strength, there are deep-rooted accumulated tensions . Underneath the appearance of power, tensions remain high in China .
 In March 2008, a few months before the Beijing Olympics, a large number of Buddhist monks were involved in riots in Tibet . The worst protests and riots since 1989 occurred in Tibet, involving Buddhist monks, occurred in March 2008 .
 The Olympic torch relay was then turned into protests against China's human rights record in different parts of the world . The torch relay turned into a protest against the human rights of China .
 In July 2009, a series of violent riots erupted in Xinjiang, leading to widespread ethnic conflicts between the Uyghur and Han populations . Xinjiang is a region of China that borders borders with ethnic minorities . The region has been plagued by ethnic unrest since 2009 .
 The number of incidents of 'mass unrest' in China broke previous records . The unrest is often caused by popular anger over rampant corruption and economic disparities .
 Even under the government's tight censorship, cases of mining disasters, public health crises, and environmental destruction are from time to time reported in the media . The government has tight censorship .
 Behind China's continuous economic growth, tensions between Chinese society and the state were mounting and worsening . China's social tensions with the state actually were mounting, worsening .
 Beijing's leaders decided to arrest him and, as described in the opening paragraph of the chapter, sentence him to eleven years' imprisonment . Beijing's leader decided to jail him for eleven years .
 This was ""killing a chicken to scare the monkeys,"" a strategy that had long been used by Chinese rulers during imperial times to suppress dissident voices and actions . This was a strategy used by rulers to suppress dissenters .
 During his time, China's growth has continued, even when the whole world has been in recession . This is no small achievement for the Chinese leader, according to his time in China .
 Hu and his fellow Chinese leaders have also decided that China should continue to follow Deng's ""maintaining a low profile"" strategy in foreign affairs . With an understanding of China's own problems, Hu and fellow leaders have decided that .
 Three decades after the launch of the reform and opening-up project, China is now at a crossroads . China at the crossroads. Three decades later, the country is at a critical juncture in China .
 China's economic growth is extraordinary and real, yet China's rise has its own dilemmas and hurdles . China's growth raises questions as whether it is sustainable and where it will lead to. China's rapid rise has raised questions about sustainability .
 In the past three decades, the Chinese ""communist'' state has taken full advantage of China's rapid economic growth, linking it with Mao's ""we the Chinese people have stood up” rhetoric and changing it into a key justification of the PRC's legitimacy narrative .
 China's rapid economic growth is not guaranteed to last forever . However, the ""legitimacy"" so defined is no more than a ""performance-based"" one, says the author .
 China's phenomenal economic expansion has been accompanied by profound and continuous transformation in Chinese society . The country has released new and powerful social forces the country has never seen in its age-old history, says author .
 The convergence of a reduced economic growth rate and increasing social and political diversity will challenge the CCP's one-party reign structure . The convergence will inevitably challenge the one party in China .
 The legacy of China's age of revolutions has been reflected in the breakdown of the moral norms of Chinese society . The phenomenon has deepened as a result of the rampant materialism in the reform and opening-up era .
 The challenges facing China concern how to define the essence of ""The People's Republic of China"" (including both ""People's Republic” and ""China"), and how to reconstruct its legitimacy narrative . China's challenges include defining its essence of China, as well as reconstructing its
 Responses to the challenges will comprise many dimensions, yet two of them seem to be of fundamental importance . The challenges will be many, including how to respond to them, will be addressed by the U.S.
 Reforms aim at maintaining and enhancing the functioning and capacity of the state, but also introducing a structure characterized by power checking and balancing . Second, building or rebuilding the moral foundation of China's society in its ongoing pursuit of modernity and postmodernity, so that its continuous rise will
 An awareness of such profound challenges facing China has caused a sustained sense of legitimacy crisis on the part of its leaders . The situation has caused the country's leaders to feel a 'legitimate crisis'
 A profound general crisis involving China's economy, politics, and society may eventually break out . Rather than coming up with basic solutions to the challenges, this makes China's problems more accumulative, creating an increasingly dangerous scenario in 2 67 China's Prolonged Rise .
 The uncertainty of the course of China's continuous changes increases the difficulty of predicting China's role in Asia and the whole world in the coming decades . All of this not only reflects the uncertainty, but also increases the uncertainty of predicting the future of China .
 After all, true wisdom arises from genuine political and intellectual pluralism, says John Sutter . "True wisdom arises in genuine political ... pluralism," he says .
 Ten years after the end of the Cold War, the U.S. and its main Western allies in Europe could look back on the last decade of the twentieth century with a rare degree of satisfaction . The United States, Europe and the United Kingdom could look forward to a decade of peace
 Their core values seemed to have triumphed and then spread around the world . They continued to dominate or play host to the most successful and influential international organizations . Together, together, they still dominated the global economy . It was they, rather than any other actors, to whom the world
 The United States in particular seemed to be in an especially enviable position . The U.S. is in a strong position in the world, according to the latest polls .
 Some wondered whether the ""unipolar moment"" could last for ever . Some no doubt wondered whether it could be possible to last forever .
 Analysts have speculated about the possible limits of the power of the government .
 The occasional maverick still repeated the old Paul Kennedy line that the U.S. was in decline . The United States is in decline, but it's not in decline.
 Few but the most pessimistic envisaged that any other peer rival would likely rise to balance its vast power in the future . The most pessimistic say they would not be able to find a rival in the Middle East .
 Japan, followed by an eight-year economic boom of its own, America and Americans could reasonably look forward to yet another American century .
 Ten years later, this apparently durable and enduring order had seemingly changed beyond recognition . Ten years after the war, the world had seemed to be changing beyond recognition.
 Many thought it was a result of a shift in the underlying tectonics of world order . Rather it had occurred because of what many regarded as a basic shift in world order. That shift had occurred .
 In the simplest headline terms, this change was the result of three interconnected developments . In the simple words, this is a change in the direction of the U.S. government .
 Having abandoned Maoism, Maoism had weakened rather than enhanced Chinese power, China's Maoism has finally awoken from its slumbers . Maoism was a Maoism ideology that had weakened or enhanced China's power .
 See his ""When China Becomes number one,"" Financial Times, June 7, 2011. See his "When China becomes number one"
 As late as 1980, North America and Western Europe produced more than two thirds of this planet's income, argues author .
 By 2008, the center of gravity had shifted to a point just outside Izmir, Turkey, east of Helsinki and Bucharest . That is a drift of 3000 miles, or about three quarters of the Earth's radius . The rise of India, China and the rest of East Asia has
 In part this was the price America was being forced to pay for Bush's adventuristic foreign policy; in part the result of the economic crisis; and the inevitable consequence of evolutionary change in the international system itself that was leading to an erosion of influence .
 Of course, not everybody subscribed to each part of this complex narrative . Even when they did, they articulated it in sometimes more, sometimes less, subtle ways .
 The international system had changed beyond recognition between the turn of the millennium and the second decade of the twenty-first century . Still, there were very few experts by the end of the ""noughties"" who did not adhere in part, or in full, to the view that the
 Economic power, he believed, was now shifting, and shifting fast, from the West to the East . Economic power was shifting, he said, from West to East .
 Only a few years after having called upon the United States to behave like the empire it most obviously was, he was now talking in the most pessimistic terms about it going the way of all other empires in the past .
 Nemesis came first in the backstreets of Sadr City and the valleys of Helmand . It revealed the limits of American military might and the naivety of neoconservative visions of a democratic wave in the greater Middle East .
 The 'great recession’ of 2009 struck a second time with the escalation of the subprime crisis of 2007 into the credit crunch of 2008 . And it struck a third time in 2009 with the 'greatest recession' of 2009 .
 If the record shows one country's productivity and economy growing faster than others, then there will be a steady shift in the balances of power towards it, he says .
 Foreign Affairs fired a warning shot across Western bows in 2004 . Foreign Affairs warned that something serious was up when it published the issue in 2004.
 If not handled properly by the West, the West could very easily lead to major conflict, says James Hoge . Hoge: A 'global power shift in the making' could lead to a major conflict in the world .
 This somewhat alarming view— alarming at least for the West, was reiterated in different forms by a number of other observers in the years which followed . This view was then reiterated in various forms by other observers .
 The international order was changing, and the sooner the U.S. adjusted to the fact, the better . The sooner the United States adjusted to that, the sooner it did, he says .
 In the same year, influential Asian writer Kishore Mahbubani made the case for a power shift even more strongly .
 There was still resistance to this ""irresistible shift"" in the old centers of Western power . However, there was resistance to the "irresistable shift" in the West .
 The West still insisted on holding on to the top positions in the major international institutions like the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank . Mahbubani: "This no longer reflected international realities"
 How disturbing became only too clear as the dust began to settle following the great American ""crash"" of 2008 . How disturbing this became became clear following the 2008 financial crisis .
 Like most major events, this one was neither anticipated nor even thought possible by the bulk of economists . Like most of the world's major economic events, it was not anticipated by the majority of economists.
 The wider implications of something that had earlier been deemed impossible soon began to be debated in earnest . But within a very short space of time, the wider implications were debated .
 To this extent, the crisis would also have major geopolitical consequences . Crisis would not just have economic consequences, but also major geopolitical implications . The crisis would not only have economic and political consequences but also have geopolitical consequences.
 It was also likely to increase China's leverage in relation to the West, it was said . The move was likely to also increase its leverage with the West .
 Unlike the West, like its near neighbors in Asia, like India, it has managed to bounce back with ease . However, unlike the West—but like its neighbors in the Asia, it had managed to .
 In a popular book, China, he predicted, would one day ""rule the world,"" forcing or persuading others to dance to its new tune . China is now the world's most powerful state of power .
 The world was in the midst of one of the biggest economic shifts since the dawn of the industrial era . But even they were compelled to admit that the world was already reshaping Asia and likely to bring about a major change .
 A number of other major economic power centers were beginning to emerge as well, including among them India, Brazil, and Indonesia . Brazil, Indonesia and Indonesia are among the countries emerging as well .
 By 2010, China had become an increasingly major player in certain key areas of high technology, steel production, and software engineering .
 Indonesia, too, was undergoing massive economic change . Brazil, Turkey, and South Africa were also growing economic power centers .
 By 2010, the situation seemed to move from being problematic to critical, and by 2010 downright disastrous . The situation in the U.S. has been described as a 'problematic'
 The increasingly pessimistic tone of the debate in Europe itself about its own less than rosy future is an obvious measure of a deeper Western malaise . Indeed, one of the most obvious measures of the malaises is the pessimistic tone in Europe .
 It consumed more imported coal and raw materials than any other state . It had already become the key economic player in its own region, and fast becoming a major one in Australia, Latin America, and Africa .
 The crisis became more and more entangled with a more existential debate about the future of Europe itself and its symbolically important currency . What few if any could then have anticipated was the speed with which this crisis became .
 The evidence that we are in the middle of a major rearrangement in the distribution of global power looks overwhelming . The evidence is convincing enough to persuade the bulk of the commentariat .
 Some fear what is happening will undermine Western values, lead to greater instability, or even increase the possibility of war . The U.S. and China are among the countries involved in the conflict in the region .
 Most seem to welcome, or at least accept, what is taking place, as it delivers a more even distribution of economic power . This is delivering a larger middle class worldwide, alleviating poverty, helping keep inflation in check . Or leading to a more balanced, and therefore more stable,
 Both those fearing this change and those welcoming it do not seem to question that such a shift is now happening . In any case, both those fearing it and welcoming it don't seem to doubt it .
 Many in the West more generally accept that there is very little that can or should be done to stop it from going any further . Indeed, after a period of extended angst, it now looks as if many West accept there is nothing to do to stop the situation .
 It is at this juncture that I would like to call time, or ask a few awkward questions that few seem prepared to ask about what many now think has already happened to the international system .
 I do so not because I am opposed to change as such, or believe the West has a right to stay on top for ever . Instead I am suffering from some deep Spenglerian angst about the decline of Western civilization in general or the U.S. in particular .
 Analysts appear to be in a rush to prove one thesis about the emerging world order . But it is because they appear to have taken leave of their empirical senses . It is not because they are trying to prove their theories about the world's new world order, it's because they're
 Too many analysts are failing to distinguish between the emerging economies' growing material resources and power . The first, quite simply, is that too many analysts fail to distinguish from the emerging economy's growing material resource .
 Cataloging how much has changed in terms of trade or market share might tell us a lot about economics . Cataloguing how much of the world has changed might help explain how much it has changed .
 Over the last few years it has become fashionable to write off the transatlantic relationship . But it is not fashionable now to write it off the relationship .
 In terms of the balance of power in the modern international system its position still remains critically important . But rather than because in terms of balance-power in the . modern international . system, it still remains critical important .
 I then look at China and how we should view its rise, peaceful or otherwise . I look at the rise of China as a peaceful and peaceful state of mind . I also look at how we view China's rise in the world .
 China is still in many ways a ""poor"" country facing all sorts of specific problems . China is light years behind the United States and many other Western countries, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Even if China were to ""rise"" higher than it has already, it could just as easily diminish it badly . But I also make what I think is the more interesting observation that, even if it were to "rise" higher than already, far from increasing its power it could also
 The shift of power is now apparently taking place toward Asia and away from the West . I will seek to explain why. 1 then move on to look at the more general argument .
 As I point out, this idea begs as many questions as it answers, first about whether Asia as a single entity really exists, 29 and second about the impact of its ""rise"" on relations between the Asian countries themselves . 1 then move on to a brief conclusion.
 There is no point denying the fact that some important changes are taking place . Here I suggest that while we may not yet be witnessing some larger power shifts in the world, there is no doubt that we are witnessing a larger power shift .
 Future world system will be looking significantly different to that we have grown up with over the last twenty-five years . These, when taken together, mean that the future world will look significantly different than that of the past twenty years .
 These changes, I argue, should not be viewed as constituting a shift from the West but rather a generalization of it . I argue that these changes, however, shouldn't be seen as a shift in the West .
 We should not be thinking in terms of one part of the world rising and the other falling, but instead of new actors in the world increasingly playing by rules drawn up in the West itself . We should be thinking of the rise and fall of the West as a result of a rise in
 We may not be witnessing the end of the Western era, as many now argue, but instead its final triumph . To this degree, we may not have been witnessing end of Western era . We may be witnessing Western era's final triumph, rather its triumph .
 As they emerge, this is more likely to create more intense competition within Asia itself than between the West and Asia . However, he argues that as they emerge they will create more fierce competition within the region .
 The question is whether or not the United States and the West are as 'down and out' economically as some now seem to be suggesting . Let us deal with some of these issues in turn, beginning with the wider question as to whether the West is as economically down and out as some
 Recent headlines look like supporting the notion that the last ten years have been ""hell"" for the West 31 . But some basic economic facts show that the West has not been as bad as the rest of the world .
 Danny Quah has argued to a certain tilt eastwards . Some of these undoubtedly point to a tilt eastward . Danny has argued that this is due to a greater eastward tilt .
 But one should not confuse this ""tilt"" with an irreversible economic decline of the West itself . The West's economic decline is not irreversible, the author says .
 China may be consuming twice as much crude steel as the US, EU, and Japan combined . China may well be consuming more crude steel than any other nation .
 India may have a modern IT sector, a strong entrepreneurial culture, and the richest cricket league in the world . However, it is not the only country to have a cricket league with the richest one .
 Brazil may have large and growing agricultural, mining, manufacturing, and service sectors, making it the dominant economy in Latin America . And Brazil may also have large agriculture, mining and manufacturing sectors .
 Western economies overall still retain some big structural advantages . But the West's supposedly beleaguered leader, the U.S. of America, still has a big structural advantage .
 "Over the very long term, probably, probably; and naturally enough under conditions of globalization, others are beginning to make giant strides forward," says President Obama . "I'm not surprised, but I'm very proud of my achievements," he says .
 The U.S. has been the destination of choice for over twenty million emigrants since 1989 . But they still have a very long way to go to match the United States, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The United States sits at the very heart of the wider world economy . The U.S. is the world's largest economy and has the largest GDP .
 The country is far and away the world's biggest source of foreign direct investment and the largest recipient of overseas capital .
 As much as 8 per cent of China's GDP is exported to the United States each year . Without the U.S. importing as much as it does, the world economy would not function .
 The United States still possesses critical features that give it what one writer has called ""positional advantages"" over all other states . But, as has recently been suggested, the U.S. still possess critical features .
 Norloff challenges the fashionable view that America's hegemonic burdens are outweighing the benefits . He argues that the benefits of the U.S. should outweigh outweigh the benefits from the nation's foreign policy efforts .
 The United States is able to bargain for better commercial deals for American firms by the simple measure of threatening closure . Indeed, by maintaining an open market, the U.S. can bargain for deals for U.K. firms .
 In terms of GDP, it is over eight times larger than either Russia or India . It is over six times bigger than Brazil, and nearly three times more than China . Russia and India are the world's largest economies .
 The only other part of the world economy which comes anywhere close to matching it is the European Union, an organization comprising twenty-seven members .
 BRICs account for just over 15 per cent of world GDP, the ""West"" accounts for nearly 50 per cent . The ""West" accounts for over three times as much as the "BRICs"
 Other economic indicators point to an even greater gap between the US, the West, and the rest of the world .
 In 2010 average income was still only onetenth of that found in the West . In China, life is getting better for the ordinary citizen .
 In India and Brazil, income is far more unequally distributed, the gap is even greater . The gap is far greater in India, Brazil, and India .
 The United States is massively ahead of the emerging economies and the ""rest"" in terms of global competitiveness . The U.S. is ahead of emerging countries and the rest of the world, according to the OECD .
 The United States has slipped from second to fourth in the world's competitive league table . It is certainly true, as the last Davos report pointed out, that the United States slipped to fourth .
 But it is only fractionally behind the top three (Switzerland, Sweden, and Singapore) Main problems are less structural than connected to macroeconomic stability . Still a long way ahead of emerging countries like Indonesia, India, Turkey, and Brazil .
 China, meanwhile, is ranked twenty-fourth, India fifty-first, Brazil fifty-eighth, and Russia sixty-third . Uruguay is ranked just one ahead of Uruguay .
 Another way to measure U.S. economic power is to look at its fifty states and then compare these to various foreign countries . Another way of measuring United States economic power would be to compare the fifty states with other countries .
 The Economist did such a survey by matching the GDP equivalent of each American state with that of a sovereign nation . The Economist matched each state's GDP to that of that of sovereign nations .
 Taiwan, with a population of about twenty-three million, had an economy only 15 per cent bigger than Michigan, even though Michigan only had ten million . Taiwan's economy is only 15% bigger than the economy of Michigan, which is 15% smaller than Taiwan .
 Wealth is measured by the number of very rich people living in any particular country . It is measured in terms of the wealth of the rich and poor in particular .
 The United States has more millionaires than the rest of the world put together . The U.S. has the most millionaires in the world .
 The balance in the American population is under modern conditions about as good as it can be . The U.S. population is in the right direction, but the balance in modern conditions is not as bad as it could be .
 America is underpopulated, with enormous room for further population growth . America's cities might feel crowded, but there is still room for more growth . The U.S. has enormous room to grow .
 Its demographic position looks remarkably secure compared with its peers, its closest allies, and its main competitors .
 U.S. still produces one-quarter of all the world's goods and services . United States has only around 4 per cent of world's population, but still produces something close to one-fifth of all world's products .
 Through innovation, tinkering, and steady improvement, China and others have managed to narrow the gap somewhat . China and other countries have certainly managed to .
 The U.S. continues to lead the field in the world of soccer . The United States has done well enough to win the World Cup .
 The claims were examined and were found to be almost entirely spurious .
 The United States continued to lead the world, despite losing its top ranking . The U.S. has been ranked No. 1 in the world .
 In fact, it had actually grown faster than all other nations on several measurements . It had not just kept pace with its nearest competitors (again mainly in Europe)
 Of the ten Nobel prizes awarded in the broad sciences in 2008, eight went to those working in the United States . Significantly, but not coincidentally, eight of the 10 Nobel prizes were awarded in 2008 .
 The U.S. and its closest Western allies think in leadership terms when it comes to the larger international economy . It is still only the United States and its Western allies that really think in terms of leadership terms .
 No doubt their capacity to lead has been badly dented by the economic crisis . The rise of the ""rest" means they are bound to consult more, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Only the West appears to have some sort of positive vision for the world economic order . However, unlike the ""rest,"" it is still only the West—and the U.S. in particular—that appears to be optimistic .
 This was first formed in the period after 1945 and has remained remarkably consistent ever since . This is the first time since 1945 that the government has been able to form a government body .
 The United States joined a Chinese-created system and 42 Don Durfee and James Pomfret, “China struggles to find a formula for innovation,"" International Herald Triubune, May 6, 2011 .
 China has invested more and more in advanced science and technology, but innovation is held back by structural factors, including the important role still played by the state in the economy .
 China has chosen to join a world economic order originally created by the U.S. China has joined a world of rules written by the United States . It has been China that has chosen not to join an economic order that was originally created in the US .
 The United States remains a far more dominant economic player in the world than some have been suggesting of late . So too is that much underrated entity known as the transatlantic economic region . If the U.S. remains more dominant than some suggest of late, so too is the much underrated
 Asia in general and China in particular are becoming more significant in the Middle East . That Asia is becoming more important in the world, it is obvious .
 It is one thing to suggest that Asia is growing in economic importance; it is quite another to speak of the transatlantic area as if it were slipping rapidly into geo-economic obscurity .
 In the rush to prove the existence of an irresistible power shift away from the U.S. and Europe, these have been in very short supply indeed . Indeed, in the rush for evidence of this, these are in short supply .
 The EU and the U.S. constitute the biggest economic bloc in the world . Trade across the Atlantic still remains huge, but trade across the Pacific has been rising .
 Services and foreign investment tell an even more interesting story, however . Services and investment tell the story .
 Services now make up the bulk of any modern economy . Trade in services has risen rapidly under conditions of globalization . But it has risen especially quickly across the Atlantic .
 By 2008, by 2008 it amounted to around $350 billion, an increase of well over three times since 1995 . Indeed, by that time, the amount had increased by around three times .
 By 2007, the U.S. economy had grown to $15.2 trillion . By 2007 it had reached $15 trillion, the world's largest sum of $16 trillion .
 It has been the driver of the world economy since the end of the Second World War . It has also been the engine of the global economy since then .
 The largest market on earth, the greatest store of wealth, and the bulk of the world's corporations, it is hardly surprising that it exerts the extraordinary pull it does. Possessing, as it still does, the largest market in the world, the most powerful corporations .
 U.S. and EU financial markets account for well over two-thirds of global banking assets . Three-quarters of global financial services, 77 per cent of equity-linked derivatives . Almost 80% of all interest rate derivatives; almost 75% of new international debt securities .
 They are home to the overwhelming majority of the world's leading universities . They are, for example, home to many of the best universities in the world .
 Of the top five, three are American and two British; within the top twenty-five, only one is Asian . Only a handful are to be found outside the United States, Europe, or the English-speaking world more generally .
 The bulk of international students choose to study in either North America, Western Europe, or some other OECD ""Western"" country, notably English-speaking Australia .
 Between them the United States, Canada, the UK, Australia, France, and Germany account for something close to two-thirds of students studying abroad at any one time .
 The same very unequal pattern is found in terms of the most prestigious business schools, according to the study .
 Americans might complain at great length about how little their European allies are doing in terms of adding to the net surplus of global security . But they're doing little to add to the global security surplus, they say .
 They worry too about Europe's sluggish recovery from the economic crisis . They also worry about the slow recovery of the continent's economic recovery .
 The Pentagon might be upset that its NATO allies across the Atlantic are not doing as much as they should . But they are at least contributing something, the Pentagon says .
 The alliance has no equivalent anywhere else in the world—and certainly not in Asia . Furthermore, they are doing so within a collective alliance that has stood the test of time, that is in its own way more than just a coalition .
 Having allies one can trust is a huge significance for the U.S. Having allies is of huge significance to the United States, says Obama .
 If nothing else, they give the U.S. a set of usable friends in another, very important, part of the world .
 "In purely logistical terms they also provide a most important forward base," says Mauricio Pellegrini . "They also provide an important base," he adds .
 At crucial times, it adds significantly to what the U.S. can do, says CNN's John Sutter .
 As even the skeptical Atlanticist Robert Kagan once pointed out, while the two continents may look at the world through rather different lenses, they still share a set of ideas that are, broadly speaking, compatible with one another .
 Many differences are less an expression of how divided the two are, says one writer, but rather of how similar they happen to be . In fact, it may well be that they are so alike in so many ways that they sometimes feel a need to stress their differences .
 The U.S. and EU together are still able to shape events, ideas, and values in other parts of the world . It is important to determine the extent to which the two countries can shape events and ideas in other countries . The United States and the EU still influence events,
 These two traditional centers of power might now be less able to determine what is happening globally, says CNN's John Sutter .
 It would be absurd to suggest that some other state or combination of states will be replacing them any time soon . However, it would, however, be absurd .
 The U.S. and EU continue to exercise a great deal of soft power in the international system . The two still set the standards by which others measure themselves . The United States and EU are largest plural market democracies in the world .
 China deploys an enormous amount of hard power too -- first because of its economic weight and military capabilities . The U.S. has the world's strongest economy, but also has the strongest military might .
 Even those European Kantians have more than their fair share of fighter planes, tanks, aircraft carriers, and the like .
 Analysts are wedded to the idea that Europe has every other kind of power, other than military . Europe spends nearly $400 billion per annum on security, including $400bn on security .
 China's spending on defense might be on the rise; and countries like Brazil and Russia have sizeable defense sectors . China's defense spending has been on the decline in recent years .
 When this is then combined with United States spending, this adds up to 70 per cent of the world's total .
 In 2010 alone the United States spent close to $700 billion on national security . The U.S. spent ten times more than its nearest allies than China . The United States also spent 14 times as much as China .
 All future projections show that the U.S. will be the only major actor in the world capable of global projection for several decades to come . The United States will be able to project global projections in the future .
 The U.S. may have lost much standing because of the Iraq War . Western economic model might have suffered a blow due to the economic crisis . The United States may also have lost standing in the world because of its economic model .
 The first seems to have proved temporary—except in the ever hostile Arab world—and the second appears to have been short-lived . However, the first seemed to be temporary, except in the Arab world, .
 The 'West' seems to have been under stress, but little difference this has made in the end to its legitimacy . Indeed, one of the more remarkable aspects of the last few years, during which the ""West"" seems to be under such stress, is how little it has made
 Nearly 10 per cent of Americans are now unemployed . The figures in some European countries go even higher . Millions are now experiencing great insecurity .
 The West, and what English has called the ""idea of the West,"" appears to have remained intact with its institutions still in place, democratic practices as secure as ever, and with hardly anybody calling for or suggesting an alternative .
 Based on what we already know as opposed to that which we do not, we can make some reasonable projections . However, based on what is likely to happen over the next ten or twenty years, they can make a reasonable projection .
 Not all of the images suggest a future quite as rosy as many now seem to believe . And not all of them suggest that a future is quite rosy .
 Materially more powerful than ever, and playing an ever more influential role around the world, it still faces the international system without a very clear idea of what it is doing .
 Some have talked of China's increasing soft power, and the more alarmist of its growing military prowess . Some have said of the country's growing soft power . Others have said it is more likely to be China's growing military power .
 One aircraft carrier and a handful of Confucius Institutes do not add up to a forward strategy or a world view . Still, one aircraft carrier is not a good enough to be an aircraft carrier, it is said .
 The Westphalian notion that states should not interfere in the internal affairs of other states seems to be particularly ill-suited to dealing with most of the major security challenges facing the world community today .
 China has won more than its fair share of grateful friends on continents like Africa because of its economic largesse . But there is little indication that it is winning hearts and minds as well as hearts as well .
 But it has proven rather inept when it comes to acquiring true friends . It has proven that it has failed to acquire true friends in the past .
 The Chinese are not only regarded as being aloof and distant, they are also seen as ruthless competitors . But they are seen as being ruthless competitors whose only ambition seems to be to create a monopoly .
 The very real problems that China is facing on continents like Africa raise a much bigger question concerning its fragility as a would-be superpower in the international system . China's real problems raise the question about the fragility of its fragile position in international politics .
 This, it is clear, not only poses a series of longterm problems to which Chinese leaders do not seem to have an easy answer— hence their ongoing insecurity in spite of their record growth figures . This is why China's record growth in recent years has been seen as the world's
 China's own unique model combining Stalinist political rule and dynamic state capitalism might work under Chinese conditions . It would also suggest that its own very unique model .
 China attracts admiration, but there is not much evidence that it is attracting many imitators . China might attract admiration, it may also command respect, but it may command respect . There are not many imitations of China's success in the world .
 There is something distinctly ""Chinese"" about what is happening in China, says China's leaders . In part, this is because there is, as the Chinese leaders point out, something distinctly "Chinese" about what's happening .
 What is happening there is occurring under the direction of a party whose formal ideology at least has been abandoned in most other parts of the world . But it is also because what is happening is also being led by a party that has abandoned its formal ideology in other countries .
 Much has been said of late about ""the crisis of democracy"" and the rise of the authoritarian alternative . Much of the world's democracy has been overthrown by authoritarian regimes .
 No serious states in the world today are any longer ruled by communist parties . North Korea, Cuba and Vietnam are among the countries that no longer have communist parties in power .
 China of course might be run in ways that make it economically dynamic for the time being . But it might even be the kind of system that most ordinary Chinese prefer to what they had before . China's economic system might make it more economically dynamic, but it might also make it less dynamic
 There is no guarantee that the model it now has will remain in its current form for ever .
 Liberals are wrong to argue that capitalism always requires democracy to flourish . Liberals are certainly wrong to say that capitalism needs democracy to thrive . Liberals argue that democracy is essential to capitalism .
 Over time the present Chinese model could easily confront some very serious problems indeed . But one does not have to be a liberal to suggest that over time it could confront some serious problems .
 China is still very much a work in progress, with more than a passing chance of deep tensions and conflicts emerging in the future . Divisions between its increasingly unequal regions, the growing gap between rich and poor, inflation and corruption, and the very obvious tension between its dynamic open economy and
 As we have seen, it has only very limited amounts of soft power; it has few major allies worth the name . Even its hard power capabilities are light years behind those of the West in general and the United States in particular .
 Chinese appear to be exceedingly modest about what it is seeking to achieve internationally and how far they actually want to go in challenging the existing international order . Furthermore, for a supposed emerging great power with what some claim are hegemonic ambitions, the Chinese seem to be modest .
 No doubt there may be those in China who want China to confront the West and the U.S. more forcefully . There is some evidence to suggest that these voices might be becoming much louder .
 Many Western commentators seem unable to mention China without talking in hyperbolic terms about its rise . If this indeed remains the line, then China appears to have a much better grasp of international realities than many Western commentators .
 Such moves, they realize, would damage China's prospects at home, and unite a still very powerful West against it . They also frighten a number of other very powerful states in the region, they say .
 India, South Korea, Taiwan, and Japan would run for cover if Beijing were to pose a serious challenge to the status quo . But as functioning market democracies their security needs are tied up with the U.S., they would soon run .
 For them at least geography is not fate, any more than their global relationships are predetermined by where they happen to be located on a map of the world . For them, they are not fate - they are determined to live their lives .
 The idea that power is moving toward Asia not only overstates the degree of unity within Asia but underestimates the many fears that China's rise has engendered in the region more generally . As I have tried to show, the United States still has much residual power; the transatlantic relationship
 In making the case for greater structural continuity than is normally suggested by many writers, 1 am not implying that the world is an entirely static place . However, in making the point, I am not suggesting that . I am also suggesting that the . world is not entirely static .
 There are major trends in the world today that are raising important questions about where we are likely to be in the future . Indeed, as those I have criticized above have correctly suggested, there are major issues in our world today .
 CNN.com: "My main critique of them are not that they are wrong to talk of change" It is instead the significance of these changes attached to these changes, he says .
 Three scenarios have been suggested about the new international order in the making . Thus far at least three scenarios are being suggested .
 A second suggests that globalization has gone so far that even if new tensions do arise these will take place in a world where the incentives for peace are bound, by definition, to reduce any serious conflict .
 There is a view that we are in effect moving toward a new set of regional orders in which there will in fact be no superpowers at all .
 Even those who are now ""rising"" in China, India, and elsewhere are doing so largely because they have joined the West rather than as they did in the past .
 The idea of the West presupposes that all states operating increasingly by Western rules will look and act identically . Of course, this does not mean that there is a single version of the west, any more than the idea of a West .
 Nor, to continue, does it mean that the spread of the West will automatically resolve all differences or create a ""world society"" without contradiction . Nor, nor, does the spread . of the . West .
 That would be plainly absurd, as new tensions in Asia and between China and the U.S. attest . The United States and China are at odds with each other in the region .
 There is now only one club worth belonging to. Still, we have to look at the bigger canvas and not the various brushstrokes on it .
 It is to work out where precisely in the club's pecking order one is likely to find oneself and how high up the table one may be sitting . Rather, it is to be able to find yourself in the top flight of the Premier League .
 Geir Lundestad makes predictions about the future of the future . The Future is a risky business, but Geir says it's worth predicting the future itself .
 Statements about the permanent nature of the Berlin Wall, the Cold War, and the Soviet Union come to mind . The Berlin Wall remains a permanent part of the world .
 Even more recently, we have discovered that there is no permanent economic boom . Even more recent, there has been a growing number of problems with the economy .
 Mohamed Bouazizi self-immolated in Tunis in December 2010 . Self-immolation was apparently foreseen by nobody . The fruit seller set himself alight in Tunis .
 So academics, or other people, have time and again fallen rather short in predicting concrete events, it has been said . So academics have time again fallen short of predicting concrete things, it is said .
 Historians and political scientists may not be good at predicting historical events . We are very quick to pronounce something historically inevitable once it has happened . We're not good at making predictions, but we are quick to say it is historically inevitable .
 We may have fared slightly better in outlining broad historical processes than in predicting specific events . We may be slightly better than we predicted historical processes .
 Many came to understand that the Soviet communist system was facing increasing difficulties . Thus, many came to . understand that . the Soviet . communist system faced increasing difficulties.
 'It was just beyond our imagination that the outcome of these difficulties would be the total collapse of a system, an ideology, and a country,' he said .
 The Arab Human Development Report of 2002 had outlined all the shortcomings of these countries in great detail . The report was published in 2002 and cited many of the shortcomings in the Arab nations .
 Nobel symposiums always try to say something about the future. In our Nobel sympospositions we always try and think about future . We are looking forward to the future of the Nobel Peace Prize winners .
 The contributors of this book have dealt with the past and the present . It then falls upon the editor to deal with the future .
 The hope is that, while we may not necessarily be right in our most concrete predictions, we may still stimulate discussion that may tell us something about where we stand today, and where we may possibly be moving .
 Predictions about the transfer of power have often proved to be wrong . But predictions about the power transfer often proved wrong .
 We not only missed out on foreseeing the collapse of the Soviet Union, but the fall of the U.S. as the leading power has been predicted time and again . The fall of America as the world's leading power was predicted before .
 Nikita Khrushchev was not in any way alone in his belief that the Soviet Union would come to surpass the U.S. The Soviet Union is now the world's largest superpower .
 If you extended Japan's and America's economic curves into the future, some point Japan would have the biggest economy . Japan's economy would be the world's biggest, according to the economist .
 Once you had the biggest economy, the rest of the world would presumably follow . And once you had a big economy, you would have to follow .
 The unification process was moving briskly ahead . EU membership was constantly being enlarged . The scope of the integration was forever being deepened. The EU is constantly being expanded .
 "The fact that something has not happened in the past does not mean that it will not happen in the future," says Toni Morrison . "I don't think it's possible that it could happen again," she says .
 Chen Jian and Michael Cox disagree on the future role of China . Cox stresses the continued domination of the U.S. and the West .
 Since the reform policy was launched in 1978, the economic results have been spectacular. Since the reforms were launched, the economy has been booming .
 No major power in history has grown as rapidly over such a long period. No major country has grown so rapidly over the past century. No one has grown more rapidly than anyone in history .
 China coughed briefly at 6% growth, then nearly resumed its normal 10% growth . The Future after that, China has a long run of growth . China's economic growth is expected to be around 10 per cent growth .
 Although there may be questions about Chinese statistics, there is no doubt about the overall direction of China's economic growth .
 In recent years, China's production first surpassed that of Germany, then that of Japan . China's first surpassed Germany's production, then Japan's .
 If China continues to grow at the rate it has grown over the last ten years and the United States does the same, China will surpass the U.S. some time between 2019 and 2022, if not even earlier . The United States is expected to surpass China in the coming years .
 It is investing more and more in ever new regions and countries of the world . The company is investing in the world's most populous regions .
 China's ability to project power is increasing, particularly in the East Asian region . Its policy in the South China Sea and other waters near its coast is becoming increasingly ambitious .
 In other words, China will revert to the leading position it had for centuries . China will be able to reclaim its position in the world's leading position .
 Past predictions of the Soviet Union, Japan, and the EU surpassing the U.S. have also been accurate .
 "Time and again we have seen that growth curves could not be extended indefinitely into the future," says the author of a new book .
 U.S. share of world production declined steadily from almost 50% in 1945 to 40% in 1950, 30% in 1960, and 25% in 1975 . The United States share of global production has declined steadily since 1950 .
 The United States percentage of world production has held at close to 25 per cent ever since . The U.S. percentage of global production has remained close to that level .
 China and East Asia have clearly risen, but primarily at the expense of Western Europe, less the U.S. less than the United States . China, East Asia rise, but not at all the expense .
 Although rising rapidly, China still produces only 40 per cent of what the U.S. does . China still makes only 40% of what it does .
 If China's production were to surpass that of the United States in 2019, it would be a historic event . The U.S. has had the largest production in the world since around 1870 .
 China would still be a relatively poor country on a per capita basis, since it has a population four times larger than that of the U.S. China would be relatively poor on per capita .
 In terms of purchasing power parity, China actually already surpassed the United States in 2010 . Nobody sees Oman, Luxembourg, or Oman, 3 .
 The estimates about China's economic success are bound to be influenced by the personal wealth of its citizens . Still, estimates about the economic success of China's citizens will be affected by personal wealth .
 America's many military problems in Iraq and Afghanistan have shown the limits of its military power . But in terms of alliance politics and so much else military power is still important, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The rate of growth is higher in China than the US, with the long-term consequences that might have . The U.S. still spends six times more on defense than does China .
 China's first carrier was bought from Ukraine in 1998 and being renovated until now . China is still working to master the intricacies of its first aircraft carrier .
 NATO has not disappeared with the end of the Cold War, says CNN's John Defterios . NATO has been involved in NATO operations since the 1980s, he says . NATO says it is committed to the NATO mission to counterbalance Russia and Ukraine .
 The United States is still the definite leader, although its role is much more complicated than during the Cold War . It now has twenty-eight members and the U.S. is still a leader, but its role has changed dramatically .
 The rise of China has created renewed interest throughout much of East Asia and the Pacific in maintaining the United States as a counterweight . China's rise has led to renewed interest in maintaining U.S. as counterweight in Asia .
 His standing as a world leader is still in a league of its own compared to that of the rather faceless Chinese leadership . Yet, even more important in this context, his standing is that of China .
 In China the supply of labor is beginning to be limited, wages are rising, and competition from new entry-level countries is becoming a challenge . China's labor shortage is starting to be a problem .
 The state sector is still huge and has many problems; many banks are shaky; bubbles are beginning to develop . The state state sector still has problems, but it is still hugely important to the economy . The country's economy has been hit by a series of scandals, including the collapse of
 The question is not if, but when, when, high growth rates will begin to decline . High growth rates in the U.S. will continue to grow, experts say . It's not if but when the high growth rate will decline, they say .
 There are, moreover, two even deeper reasons for doubt about the future pre-eminence of China . There are also deep reasons for doubts about the country's future power .
 China has also made tremendous progress in innovation and research and has become a leader even in modern sectors such as solar energy and high-speed trains . The question remains of whether it will have the ingenuity to become the leading power scientifically .
 Science is the basis of much modern economic growth, and so far China has been lagging far behind the U.S. in this area . Science is a key part of China's economic growth .
 The extensive Chinese copying of Western innovation and science can only take the country so far . The extensive copying of western innovation and technology can only be taken so far, experts say .
 China has not won a single Nobel Prize in the sciences . It is no coincidence that, at least until now, China hasn't won a Nobel Prize .
 The Dalai Lama and dissident Liu Xiaobo have both received the Nobel Peace Prize . But for this they have received no compliments from the Chinese authorities, they have not .
 Chinese government has severely criticized and punished both sides of the debate . Instead, they have both been severely criticized by the government .
 The second and ultimate question relates to China's political system . The future of the political system will depend on the strength of the government .
 The rise of China has frequently been predicted, but something has always happened in the past that blocked the process . China's rise has been blocked by the Nationalists after 1911 or under the Communists after 1949 .
 The twists and turns under the Great Leap Forward and the Cultural Revolution were disastrous . The Chinese government has been in touch with the U.S. since the 1960s .
 In the last few decades, the political system has been remarkably stable, with transfers of power from one generation to the next . The political system is remarkably stable in recent decades .
 Huge changes at the economic level are normally sooner or later accompanied by political changes . In history, huge changes are normally accompanied by the political changes, says David Cameron .
 As long as the economy continues to improve at a rapid pace, political loyalties may well be maintained . The country's economy is expected to continue to improve .
 Pride in China's achievements has also strengthened a nationalism that benefits the party . Pride in the country's achievements also strengthened the party's nationalism, party says .
 Chen Jian reminds us that from a longer-term perspective the party has a mixed record indeed . Yet, as Chen Jian . Chen Jian says, "From a longer .term perspective, from a . longer . perspective, the party's record has been very good"
 As many as forty million people may have lost their lives during the Great Leap Forward . Forty million people died during the 'Great Leap Forward'
 Tens of thousands of 'mass incidents' are taking place in China every year . The number of these incidents is apparently increasing rapidly .
 Human rights and various forms of democracy have been spreading throughout the world . Human rights are spreading across the world, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Democracy has made great strides in Turkey, Indonesia, and even Malaysia . Now democracy has also been made in Indonesia, Turkey, and Malaysia .
 Chinese people will probably insist that their voice be heard more strongly than today . In some way, the Chinese people are probably insisting that they want their voice to be heard .
 As Jeremi Suri emphasizes, America stood for, and still stands for, important economic and political values . Jeremi: "America stood for ... important economic, political values"
 The U.S. has a better balance between young and old than almost any other major power . The United States has a growing population with a better mix of youth and old .
 Through immigration, the U.S. is still able to draw in many of the most talented people from virtually the entire world .
 Unemployment is higher than the 8 per cent reported in official statistics . Many have more or less given up looking for jobs, since many have given up trying for jobs .
 Inequality has risen sharply, with the top few earning extraordinary amounts of money and paying limited taxes . The top few per cent of the world's richest pay very little taxes .
 As Melvyn Leffler reminds us, most Americans appear to have forgotten how important the government in Washington is for America's growth and welfare . The government is vital to America's economy and its welfare, he says .
 For decades the U.S. lectured the world on the importance of balancing its budgets . Yet it did not do so itself . The United States did not balance its budget .
 Under George W Bush, taxes were substantially cut while expenses increased dramatically . Tax rates were cut dramatically under the Bush administration .
 Costly social programs were added, also under Bush, in the form of the drug prescription program . Social programs also added to the Bush administration .
 On top of all this came the huge expenses of fighting the economic recession in 2008-10 . The government also had to fight back from 2008-2010 .
 Most Americans are incredibly proud of their political system as such, but the politicians have been performing at a disappointingly low level in recent years . Second, while most Americans are extremely proud of the political system, politicians have performed at a low level .
 Many hurdles have to be overcome before anything really significant can actually be accomplished, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Traditionally, reform has come only in brief spurts, when the political powers are properly aligned . Reforms have come only when political power is properly aligned, such as in recent years .
 Gridlock exists in the form of a center-liberal president facing Republicans who try to oppose the president . This is in the most difficult of economic times, and this in a difficult economic times .
 "The outcome is clearly detrimental to the position of the United States in the world," says President Obama .
 When the president is unable to lead the United States, he definitely cannot lead the world, he can't lead the U.S. He says . The president is not capable of leading the world .
 It is far from obvious that the presidential election in 2012 will resolve this situation . It is not clear that the election will resolve it .
 This would definitely appear to be against the laws of history, so far as such laws exist . This is not the law of history. This would seem to be illegal, but it is not.
 The United States may still be the world's only fully global power, but its influence is being checked by a whole series of regional powers . The U.S. is still the only global power in the world, but it's being checked .
 In Europe, the U.S. is doing less than it did during the Cold War . The United States does less in Europe than in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Frederic Bozo: No one should write off a union that has a much larger population than that of the United States . The union has a somewhat larger total production than the U.S. and a larger population .
 The military resources of Britain and France are still the third and fourth largest in the world . British and French forces still have the largest military resources in the entire world .
 In the Asian balance of power, Japan should definitely not be overlooked . Japan is a key player in the region, especially in the Middle East .
 With Japan on America's side, China will not be able to dominate even in East Asia . Japan will be on the side of the U.S. with China not dominating the region .
 Russia has been facing great problems, but as Vladislav Zubok suggests, its lingering military base, its great natural resources, and still the education of its peoples provide some basis for its international role . Russia's military base and its natural resources are among the reasons for Russia's success
 Zubok and Pechatnov agree that the U.S. has not shown the necessary sensitivity to Russia's difficult situation . Zubok: The United States needs to be sensitive to the situation .
 There are those who argue that with its democracy and creativity, India may in the long run come to rival China . There are also those who say that with democracy, creativity and innovation, India could rival China.
 Its production is still only between one-third and one-quarter of China's . Its infrastructure is far inferior to that of that of China .
 Brazil has emerged as a regional leader and is eager to play a larger role in the western hemisphere . Brazil has also emerged as an important regional leader in the region .
 In Africa, particularly in the southern part, South Africa is the crucial actor, says CNN.com.com's John Defterios . South Africa has been a key player in the development of South Africa .
 In short, it is becoming increasingly difficult for anyone, much less for the U.S., to be the world's predominant power in the way it used to be .
 Stewart Patrick underlines how many dimensions there are to the international situation today . Stewart Patrick: "Stewart Patrick is a great ambassador to the U.S. for America"
 Some observers have argued that the international system requires a hegemon . Following Charles Kindleberger, some observers argue that the system must be hegomon .
 Britain no longer had the resources to lead, and the U.S. did not have the will to lead . The U.K. had no resources and the United States had no will, and Britain did not .
 The United States is still the pre-eminent power, but it is not able to lead in the way it did in earlier decades . Today, while the U.S. still leads the world, it has not been able to do so in the past decades .
 The U.S. president faces greater leadership challenges at home . Its position has been relatively weakened; the American president also faces leadership challenges .
 Still, the wider international system that was established after the Second World War has remained remarkably stable . Still, it has been remarkably stable since then, despite the crisis .
 Robert Keohane's question in 1984 of what would happen to the international system with the decline of the U.S. may have been premature . The United States was not then really in serious decline, he says .
 His answer may still be of interest today . His answer is that the system would most likely be maintained anyway .
 On the political side, the United Nations remains a key instrument for coordination and legitimation . The U.N. is a key tool for coordination, legitimation and coordination, the U.S. says .
 The International Monetary Fund and the World Bank have taken on new life with the West's economic problems, particularly the international debt situation . Despite periods of drift and uncertainty, the IMF and World Bank continue to work on the West .
 The current Doha Round has not been completed, at least in part a reflection of America's reduced role . But the WTO dispute mechanism has proved of great consequence .
 Protectionism proved as limited as it did during the recent recession . This is one reason protectionism proved to be limited during the recession .
 A similar lack of leadership, and of conflict between the U.S. and China, is seen in the international environmental field . The United States and China are seen to be at loggerheads in environmental issues .
 Traditional regional organizations such as NATO, the EU, and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development have been replicated in weaker form in many different regions of the world . The Association of Southeast Asian Nations replaced the Organization of African Unity in 2002 .
 Michael Cox has suggested that even China will be incorporated into this wider Western-dominated international system . In the present volume Michael Cox, and in other contexts .
 China's emphasis on rapid economic growth is bound to make it interested in rules and regulations that facilitate continued growth . China's focus on rapid growth will make it more interested in regulation that facilitates continued growth.
 Beijing insists on the importance of national sovereignty . Beijing insists that national sovereignty is important .
 No one should interfere in the internal affairs of China, or any other state for that matter, says the Chinese government . "No one should meddle in China's internal affairs," says the government .
 China has occasionally refrained from using its veto in the United Nations to stop further action . Yet, in sensitive matters such as the situation in Burma, Sudan, Libya, etc., China has sometimes refrained .
 China has even shown some interest in Responsibility to Protect . China has stressed responsibility of the various states to handle matters in such a way that genocide, crimes against humanity, etc. are avoided .
 Several of the BRIC states have similarly insisted on the priority of national sovereignty, although not quite as unwaveringly as China .
 Future international agreements include the Kyoto Protocol and the International Criminal Court . The Kyoto Protocol is one of the most important international agreements .
 This was even under the internationally oriented Clinton administration . And this was the case even under Clinton administration.
 The alternative scenario is that the rise of China is bound to create conflict and possibly even war . China's rise of the world's most populous nations is bound for conflict and war .
 Since Thucydides, political science realists have insisted that the rise of one state and the fall of another are bound to produce such an outcome . The rise and fall of a state is bound to result in the collapse of another, they say .
 The story seems to have been repeated over and over again in European history . It seems to be a repeat of what happened in Europe's history .
 China's rise implies that it should be the pre-eminent power, at least in its own East Asian region . The rise of China in East Asia has been seen as a major factor in the region's development .
 When this role is not favored either by most of the regional countries or by the United States, conflict is likely to follow . This may not necessarily be in the form of war, but this may not even be war .
 The differences between China and the West in their approaches to democracy and human rights are bound to produce tension . Even political science liberals, who tend to favor more optimistic scenarios, have to admit that .
 The rise of one state and the fall of another do not have to lead to war, as seen by the rise of the U.S. and fall of the United Kingdom since the late nineteenth century .
 China does have an obvious interest in peace as a precondition for its continued economic rise . Peace is an obvious pre-condition for China's continued economic success . China has a long history of instability in the Middle East .
 China has given up its revolutionary political ideology and has adjusted to the international regime in many economic ways . China has adjusted its revolutionary ideology and given up revolutionary ideology in many ways .
 The U.S. and China are much further apart geographically than were the various European powers whose wars provided so much of the basis for realism . The United States and China have been far more isolated than the rest of Europe .
 China should be given stronger influence, human rights should not be part of the international regime, etc. Human rights should be not part of an international regime . China should have stronger influence in the international community, says China's leader .
 The outcome seems to be that while there is broad support for the basic principles of international economic exchange, anything that more politically transcends the sovereignty of the nation state is much more difficult to agree on .
 As long as Taiwan does not openly secede from China, war would seem to be a very unlikely outcome . War seems unlikely, but situation particularly in the South China Sea is increasingly worrisome . Yet, as long as the situation is unclear, war seems unlikely .
 Through the huge American market for Chinese goods and China's investments in the U.S., the two countries are bound together in a state of mutual dependence . The two countries—one the leading creditor, the other the biggest debtor—are bound together .
 The technological side of the process has been moving on more or less continuously for several centuries . The technological aspect of the technology has also moved on continuously for centuries .
 One can only think of all the forms of communication that have developed in recent years . One of the most popular forms of social media in the world has been used to communicate with people .
 In the interwar years, when fascism and communism were so strongly on the offensive, protectionism made such inroads even in the leading democracies, globalization slowed down a great deal .
 Some groups support continued globalization while others try to fight it as best they can . Today, some groups say globalization is inevitable, but others say it is not .
 There appears to be a dialectical relationship between globalization and fragmentation, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter says globalization is a sign of fragmentation .
 To some extent they grow stronger and weaker at the same time, although it has to be admitted that in recent decades the former has held the upper hand .
 Globalization is primarily, but not exclusively, economic, while fragmentation is primarily political . Globalization and fragmentation are different types of economic and political factors .
 Globalization dominates in the economy and communications; politically, politically, we see more and more states achieving political independence . Political independence is a key issue in the future of the U.S.
 We travel more and more, but as we travel, most travelers strengthen their attachment to their respective nation states . As we travel we tend to strengthen our attachment to our respective nations states .
 Many different ideologies spread around the world, but one of the strongest is nationalism . It is also a form of political and religious extremism, and even forms of political extremism .
 Fundamentalism seems to be on the rise in most regions and religions, with the exception of Western Europe . There are dialogues between religions, but on the whole fundamentalism appears to be rising in most .
 The smallest and most extreme groups may exploit the modern means of communication for their purposes . The smallest group may exploit modern means to exploit modern communication for purposes .
 In the modern interdependent economy there no longer appear to be limits to how small a country may be and still survive economically . Smaller countries may no longer be able to survive economically in the interdependent world, experts say .
 Even the most isolated terrorists exploit the most modern means of communication whenever possible . Terrorists exploit the technology to communicate with each other in the world .
 Certain symbols of globalization are found in the tiniest and most distant villages of the world . The symbol of globalization is found in villages around the world.
 Poverty in the world has been declining relatively and in absolute numbers in recent years, particularly due to the immense progress made in China, and somewhat less in India . There are still more poor people in India than in all of Africa added together .
 Many of the rich countries are now struggling to maintain their standards of living . So many of the poorer ones are making huge economic progress . We are all becoming a little more alike .
 A rudimentary form of global consciousness is arising, in that we all not only know much more than before, but that we also care more about each other . We all know a lot more now than before and that we care more, says Dr. Andrew Keen .
 The network of intergovernmental and international organizations is proliferating . It's a network of international organizations that proliferates in the U.S.
 Amnesty, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the Campaign to Ban Landmines, and an array of others work very actively to influence the governments of the world .
 Their success varies, but there can be little doubt there is little doubt about their growing influence . The group's success varies but there is no doubt that it is growing .
 There are many different kinds of outliers in the international system . Yet, there is many different types of out-of-the-system outliers .
 The impotence of the center over the alleged periphery is demonstrated time and again, says the author . The impotent center is demonstrated, he says .
 These lists were passed on from one administration to the next virtually unchanged, illustrating Washington's inability to do much about these governments . Washington has been unable to do little to stop the lists from being passed on to one administration .
 North Korea has been violating all kinds of norms for international and national behavior for decades, without anyone being able to bring about much change . Even China has not been able to change its behavior .
 Cuba is in a different class altogether compared to North Korea, but again it illustrates the point that although the colossus to the North, the U.S. disliked what happened on the island from very soon after the revolution in 1959, it had very little influence .
 Zimbabwe ran its economy into the ground as Robert Mugabe was determined to hang on to power, decade after decade . Mugabe ran his country into an economic crisis in the 1980s and 1990s .
 There was little the world was able to do to bring about change, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 "He tried to develop nuclear weapons; he succeeded in blowing up a large passenger plane, and committed other atrocities," he says . "He was committed to developing nuclear weapons, and tried to blow up a passenger plane"
 In 2011 much of the Libyan population, with the assistance of the Western world and some Arab countries, finally got rid of him . In 2011, much of Libya's population finally decided to get rid of the dictator .
 14 of the twenty most failed states in the Failed States Index are African . Many of them consisted from the first days of independence of tribes and groups with little sense of common identity or modern government .
 Since its collapse in 1991 Somalia has become the symbol of a failed state . pockets of stability could be found even here, as in Somaliland and in Puntland .
 In Rwanda and Cambodia the governments killed hundreds of thousands of their own populations without the international community doing anything of substance to stop them . The problem here is not that the governments did too little, but they did too much .
 Foreign intervention has been an important part of Afghanistan's sad history . Afghanistan is a special case in that here foreign intervention, in so many different forms, has been important . Foreign intervention in Afghanistan has been a part of its sad history, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 East Timor has been struggling since the days of independence in 2002 . Despite its rapidly increasing oil wealth, the country has struggled since independence .
 The definition of a rogue state, even in the academic literature, has been influenced by what regimes in the world Washington disliked the most strongly . The whole definition of rogue state has been strongly influenced by the regimes Washington disliked most strongly.
 Failed states are primarily a threat to their own inhabitants, not to the wider world . Most of the failed states are, however, mainly a threat for their own people, not for the world .
 Congo is a case in point, although the drawn-out war there brought in several of its neighbors, particularly Rwanda and Uganda, before 2002-3 . Congo's long-running war in the country has brought in a host of neighbors, including Rwanda and Ugandas .
 The war that started in 1998 has killed thousands and thousands, although estimates of as many as five million having been killed appear grossly exaggerated . The estimates of up to five million killed appear to be exaggerated .
 A ""failed"" state may well become a ""rogue"" state, as the growing piracy in Somalia illustrates . A failed state can become a "rogue" state, the Somali pirates say .
 Terrorists have undoubtedly used Afghanistan, Somalia, and Yemen as base areas . But most forms of terrorism need some infrastructure as well to succeed as well .
 A1 Qaeda is not a poor man's organization, dependent as it is on funding and expertise from richer citizens, says Al Qaeda expert . Al Qaeda is dependent on funding, expertise from rich citizens, he says .
 If Pakistan were to collapse into a truly failed state, that could have major international consequences because of its very sensitive geographical location and its nuclear weapons . Pakistan's very sensitive location and nuclear weapons are at risk .
 This may well be one of the true horror scenarios as far as the future is concerned . This is a true horror scenario as far from the future of the future .
 The director of the Norwegian Nobel Institute says it is natural to end on a morally explicit note . He says it's natural to say: 'I'm sorry for what I've done'
 In the light of the Second World War and the mass slaughters by Hitler, Stalin, and Mao, it is impossible to give an unreservedly positive answer to that question .
 In a certain long-term historical perspective there would still seem to be reasons for optimism . In the U.S. President Barack Obama has been in office since 2001 .
 War appears to have virtually ended between major powers, says Mueller and Oneal . War has played a prominent role in the history of mankind, they say .
 International wars involving two or more states have become quite rare . International wars in general, involving two states, are rare .
 The number of civil wars has also declined, 13, although it is still so high that it is difficult to be optimistic about the future .
 Transitions from authoritarian to more democratic structures sometimes appear to stimulate conflict, as seen in the former Yugoslavia and in the Caucasus . Transitions between authoritarian and democratic structures often stimulate conflict .
 War has been banned almost entirely in a large ""zone of peace"" which has undergone no war since the end of the Second World War . War has not been banned in the zone of peace since World War II .
 After three major wars between Germany and France in the course of seventy years, war between the two has simply become impossible . The two countries have been at odds for more than 70 years .
 The wars in the former Yugoslavia illustrate that peace, even in Europe, is still a new experience . Peace in Europe is still an issue, even though it is still new to the continent .
 The very recent end to the ""troubles"" in Northern Ireland show that even in Western Europe continuities with the past are found . The end of the "trouble" in Ireland shows that the past is found .
 Democracy was a rare bird indeed outside North America and Northern Europe . Democracy was rare in the years between the First and the Second World Wars, says David Cameron .
 The Second World War ended in the defeat of fascism and, we see now, also contributed mightily to the end of colonialism . We see now that colonialism contributed to end of colonial rule .
 With India joining the democratic ranks immediately upon independence, the notion that democracy was an exclusively Western institution was undermined . India's democracy was undermined by the fact that it was not a Western institution . India is one of the world's most populous countries .
 In the G20, only China and Saudi Arabia have clearly authoritarian governments . Saudi Arabia and China are the only two authoritarian countries in the world .
 Still, talk about human rights representing Western values in opposition to Asian or other regional values lingers . Human rights represent Western values against Asian or regional values, but it's not enough .
 Asia is a huge and complex continent and its many countries have few things in common . Asia's many countries actually have few common things that have nothing to do with Asia .
 It was, however, difficult to imagine anything as Asian that did not include India . India is one of the most populous countries in the world .
 Representative government may well be a Western invention, but notions about various rights for the people existed in many cultures . Representation is an important part of the history of representative government .
 The growth of democracy in Taiwan, in South Korea, in Indonesia, in part in Thailand and Malaysia further weakened the Asian values argument .
 Even some who argued in principle against such rights sometimes included them in their constitutions . Even some of those who argued against them include them in some constitutions.
 This was even in China as well, although this certainly did not mean that the rights were respected in practice . This was the case even though this was not always the case .
 The United Nations and other international institutions have been strengthened. The U.N. has been strengthened in recent years .
 Of course the members of these institutions remained independent states. Of course, of course the . members of . these institutions remain independent states .
 The old Great Powers had their vetoes; the new ones wanted similar rights . The old great Powers had vetoes . The new ones had similar rights to the old ones .
 Many rogue states continued their evil practices, protected by one or more of the Great Powers . Many were the rogue states that continued their . practices . The rogue states were protected by the . Great Powers.
 Norms and standards were developing that ever so incrementally strengthened peace, favored human rights, and promoted economic growth . Yet slowly, slowly, norms and standards slowly strengthened peace .
 The debate about Responsibility to Protect was revealing. In this respect, the debate about responsibility to protect was revealing . The debate was about responsibility for responsibility for protecting the public .
 States had a responsibility to protect their populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing, and crimes against humanity . States must protect their population from genocide and war crimes. States must also protect their people from genocide .
 The principles were invoked with surprising success in some situations, such as Ivory Coast and Libya, much less so in Syria . The principles have been invoked in Ivory Coast, Libya, and Libya .
 Major differences remained about the application of these principles . Yet, major differences remained .
 BRIC countries, supported by others, feared Western-led interventions were just an excuse for regime change . The BRIC feared that Western-backed intervention was an excuse to change regimes .
 The UN might accept the principle, but what it actually meant had to be defined in each separate case . The UN had to define what it meant in each case .
 The European miracle in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries was that growth became more or less selfgenerating . The growth of European growth was self-generating, the author says . He says the European miracle of growth was that it became self-sufficient .
 Despite continued downturns, the long-term trend was now firmly upward . Despite continued declines, the trend was still firmly upward, says economist .
 Countries and individuals were finally able to make their ways out of poverty . Countries and individual were able to overcome poverty in the U.S.
 These developments were most clearly seen in Western Europe and North America . The developments were seen in Europe and the United States .
 The climax of growth was reached in the thirty years after the Second World War . It was reached during the 30 years after that war .
 Growth was strong over a long period of time; recessions were very limited indeed . The growth affected most of the people in very positive ways indeed, and virtually no one was left out entirely .
 There were those on the left who argued that the rich countries were getting rich at the expense of the poor ones . There were also those who said that the poor were getting richer in the rich .
 This argument assumed that there was a limited amount of wealth to distribute . This argument was based on the fact that wealth had to be distributed in the United States .
 History tells us how the total amount has increased dramatically in the last few centuries . The total amount of money has increased in the past few centuries.
 With the rise of Asian tigers of Hong Kong, Singapore, Taiwan, and South Korea, this argument was definitely put to rest . The rise of Southeast Asia in general, and finally China, and even India, has also put the argument into doubt .
 South Korea went from poverty to Southern European standards in no more than a long generation . South Korea has been in poverty for more than 20 years .
 Poverty in the world is being reduced, both in relative and absolute numbers . Poverty is reducing, both relative and in absolute numbers, according to the World's poorest .
 In recent years the number of poor people has actually been declining on all continents, probably for the first time in history . This is surprising in view of the economic difficulties in the most developed countries .
 About 1.25 dollars per day or less, most of them in South Asia and Africa . Still, about 1.1 billion people survive on just $1.25 per day . Most of them live in South Asian and African countries .
 In much of Africa there had for a long time been little or no growth, and even cases of dramatic decline were found because of war and incompetent government . In many of Africa, there had been no growth in the past few decades .
 Botswana represented the clearest example of strong growth over many decades, but after the turn of the millennium many others also experienced robust growth, not only the new oil countries . Botswana was the most robust growth country in the world .
 Pessimism about Africa, which had been so prevalent for so long, is on the wane . Despite the recurrence of drought and famine, drought is recurrence on Horn of Africa . Climate and local politics again and again resulted in the deaths of thousands .
 In more general terms, life expectancy has increased quite rapidly, child mortality has fallen, literacy has increased sharply, particularly among males, etc. Life expectancy has also increased rapidly, especially among males .
 Although there was much that seemed permanent, it was far from permanent who belonged to the center and who to the periphery in the world economy . Similarly, although there were much of that seems permanent, there was also much of what seemed permanent .
 As we have just seen, countries moved up, but they could also move down the economic scale . Countries moved up but could also be moved down the scale in the future .
 The clearest examples were found in Latin America, with Argentina in the lead . Argentina is the country with the highest proportion of people living in South America .
 Argentina had been among the richest countries in the world in the interwar years, then the long downward slide started . Argentina's economy has been on a downward spiral since the 1930s .
 Zimbabwe told the story of how a relatively prosperous country in Africa could fall into abject poverty in the course of a few decades . Zimbabwe is one of the most impoverished countries in the world .
 Different countries had more room to maneuver than the international framework would seem to suggest . Different countries have more room for maneuver than international framework seems to suggest.
 In all cases, the temptation was to blame some sinister outside force for the tragic outcome . The temptation to blame outside forces for the tragedy is to blame the tragedy on the outside .
 The international system was important, but the primary explanations were almost always found inside the various countries . The primary explanations for the international system were often found in the countries involved .
 As many of the countries of the South were making dramatic progress, growth in the North became more difficult to achieve . The North's growth was more difficult than the South's in the South .
 The growth rates declined after the thirty good years . Inflation picked up because of increases in the price of oil and a few other commodities . Governments refused to fully finance the many tasks they were now undertaking, resulting in growing debt .
 Public and private debt was one crucial dimension in the financial collapse in 2008 . Public debt was a crucial part of the financial crisis in 2008, experts say .
 More and more people saw the government that had assisted them previously as the explanation for their problems, not as the solution . As Melvyn Leffler spells out in his fascinating contribution, more and more than ever thought government was the solution to their problems .
 In the new globalized and technologically so advanced economy, a minority experienced tremendous personal economic success . The minority of African-American Americans experienced tremendous success .
 Some were losing their jobs, and suffering cuts in their public benefits . Some were, however, losing jobs and suffering public benefits, but others were not .
 It was no longer true that the children could always expect a higher standard of living than their parents had, it was said . The children were no longer expected to expect the same standard of life as their parents' .
 Recurrent bubbles led to serious recessions, first in technology in the early 1990s and then, much more seriously, in housing after 2008 . Technology bubbles have led to recessions in tech and housing after tech bubbles .
 In fact, as so many times before, governments had to save the situation . Governments had to come to the rescue of the situation, he says . He adds that governments have had to step in .
 Thousands of people were losing their lives in these wars, relatively rare or not . Thousands were losing lives, relatively . rare or . not . or not, they were losing . Thousands of lives .
 Nuclear weapons had not been used in war after Nagasaki, but using them only one more time would be a catastrophe . The U.S. had not used nuclear weapons in any war since 1945 .
 Democracy was making progress, but the process was not irreversible, as several countries showed . Democracy is making progress but it is not irreversible in some countries, as some countries show .
 Russia was only one example of a country moving in the wrong direction, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Russia is not the only country in the world that is moving in a wrong direction .
 The world had just barely started to address the basic environmental questions of human existence . And the world had barely begun to address these basic questions, it was just barely .
 At the national level some progress was made, but at the international level little was achieved . At national level, some progress has been made but little has been achieved at international level .
 In 1850 the world's population had reached one billion, in 1930 it reached two billion . In 1974 it reached four billion and in 1974 four billion, and in 1999 six billion. In 1999 the population reached six billion .
 With the population increasing, the price of food is going up . With millions eating better, the cost of food has increased . Food prices are going up as a result .
 We are using more and more fossil fuels; slowly the temperature of the earth is rising . "No one can be certain what the consequences will be. The consequences are unknown"
 Academics always try to fit the world into certain theoretical categories, such as the world of science . The world is not going to be easy to fit into certain categories, it's just a matter of fact .
 These categories are useful steps toward a deeper understanding, but the world is never as parsimonious as many academics, particularly political scientists, try to present it .
 The world is, in fact, so incredibly rich and complex that it cannot be encompassed in simple formulas, if at all . The world's complex nature cannot be summed up in simple formula, says author .
 If it does, which is far from self-evident, it is almost impossible to find out what exactly it is that repeats itself . It is impossible to say if it repeats itself, but it's almost impossible .
 Historians undoubtedly repeat themselves, but that is a different matter entirely . Historians may repeat themselves but that's not the case .
 The Uses of History for Decision Makers: How easy it is to learn from history . He argues that history can be used to help people make decisions . He also argues that it is possible to learn more from history than history .
 The first book is very persuasive; the second became quite popular and won several awards . "The first book was very persuasive," says author .