 JFK’S Secret Decisions on Vietnam, Cuba and Civil Rights, is to rehabilitate Nikita Sergeyevich Khrushchev . JFK's secret decision is to help rehabilitate the former Soviet Union leader .
 History recalls Khrushchev as a dangerous buffoon who underestimated President John F Kennedy in 1962 . He was sent reeling in the international arena when he was forced to withdraw nuclear-tipped Soviet rockets from Cuba .
 Time to forget that image of the untutored oaf pounding his shoe on the Soviet delegation desk during a debate at the United Nations .
 Think of the Cold War Russian leader at the chess table and thinking eight moves ahead of Kennedy . Think of a Cold War Russia leader thinking of the chess moves .
 Khrushchev engineers the first nuclear disarmament agreement in world history . Khruschev shows the young American leader the path away from nuclear warfare .
 Kennedy underestimated the Russian in a miscalculation that raised the specter of fiery death for millions . Kennedy, it turns out, was the one who underestimating the Russian .
 Khrushchev threatened Kennedy with war unless the U.S. gave up its share of Berlin—within six months . Kennedy threatened to go to war if the United States didn't give up Berlin . Kennedy was assassinated in September 1968 .
 Khrushchev also made clear that he was fed up with American rockets based in European countries that could drop hydrogen warheads on Moscow . The Soviet leader was angry that the U.S. didn't have to rely on European countries to carry out the mission .
 Kennedy’s predecessor, Dwight D Eisenhower, had given 30 Jupiter rockets to Italy and 60 Thor missiles to the U.K. At the time, Eisenhower had already given 30 . missiles to Italy, 60 to the United Kingdom .
 Khrushchev knew of U.S. plans to deploy 15 more Jupiters in Turkey . He knew of plans to use the Jupet in Turkey, according to the Soviet leader .
 The Turkish base would be closest to Moscow, just a quick flight over the Black Sea . The base is located in Turkey, close to the Turkish border .
 The following year, Kennedy overrode objections from Congress and the Pentagon and ordered the Jupiters deployed in Turkey . Kennedy over overruled objections to the decision and ordered them to Turkey .
 In secret, he ordered 30 nuclear warheads shipped to Cuba along with intermediate range rockets . The Cuban government ordered 30 warheads to Cuba in secret .
 They would become the leverage for forcing Kennedy’s retreat from Turkey . They would be the leverage to force Kennedy to withdraw from the country .
 On October 27, 1962, Kennedy was being urged to order a massive assault on Cuba . The next day, he was being told to order the very next day a massive attack on Cuba.
 More than 140,000 American soldiers would be landed there after five days of aerial bombardment . More than 130,000 Americans were landed in the area .
 Castro's Havana would have been turned into a smoking ruin in the Caribbean . Castro’s Havana . Castro would have turned Havana into a . smoking ruin .
 Russian rockets in Cuba would be removed if Kennedy pulled the Jupiters out of Turkey . Kennedy would have removed them from Cuba if he pulled them out .
 Almost all of Kennedy’s advisers—including his brother Robert—urged a dramatic rejection of the decision . Kennedy's brother Robert was among those urging him to reject it .
 The swap was accepted providing Khrushchev never reveals the agreement . The swap would have been accepted by the Soviet Union if it was revealed .
 The Soviet leader went to his grave without a hint of his triumphal reduction of U.S. and Russian nuclear warheads .
 He was the only modern Russian leader not honored by burial in the Kremlin wall . He was not buried in the wall because he was not a modern leader .
 Mikhail Gorbachev was almost a non-person until he set the record straight . He was a 'non-person' until he was released from prison in 1986 .
 Lyndon Baines Johnson is a figure Bobby Kennedy aims to rehabilitate with his book . Kennedy says he didn't contribute anything to the Cuban missile crisis .
 Later that day, Johnson lobbied the Joint Chiefs of Staff to accept the missile swap . Johnson lobbied for the deal to be accepted .
 After Kennedy’s assassination, Bobby and other senior administration officials, in gossip and books, treated Johnson as a political urinal . After Kennedy's assassination, senior officials treated him as a 'political urinal'
 At crucial moments, Johnson was clearly the president’s best adviser . Johnson was the president's best adviser at crucial moments .
 It was Johnson who counseled Kennedy to embrace the movement as its moral leader . It was Kennedy's counsel to embrace Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., it was Johnson .
 Kennedy wanted to hang on to southern electoral votes that helped win him the White House in 1960 . At the time, Kennedy was trying to hang onto those votes . Kennedy was elected to the presidency in 1960, but never won .
 In his last month in office, Kennedy ordered the overthrow and likely assassination of the president of South Vietnam . Kennedy also ordered the certain overthrow of the South Vietnam president of the country .
 The death of President Ngo Dinh Diem in 1963 resulted in the collapse of the Saigon government and its American-trained army . Saigon was ruled by the U.S. in Vietnam .
 Kennedy was killed three weeks after he devised the coup that killed Diem . Diem was killed by Kennedy's coup . Kennedy was assassinated three weeks later .
 As president, Johnson faced withdrawal or using combat troops in Indochina jungle . Johnson was confronted with withdrawal or use of combat troops .
 Both Johnson and Khrushchev were ridiculed and rejected in their day, but in my writing I may burnish their reputations . In my new book, I will burnish the reputations of both men and women .
 Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist has covered national and international affairs since 1960 . He is a Pulitzer Prize winner for his work in Washington DC .
 He has been awarded journalism’s most distinguished prizes for domestic and foreign reporting . He has won the Pulitzer Prize for International Reporting and Spot News Reporting, the George Polk Award for War Reporting .
 Sloyan has written for Rolling Stone, The New Republic, The Nation, and The Nation .