 The paper argues that the way Kennedy handled the Cuban crisis may well have played a role in Dr. Kennedy's decision . The paper reflects on the elements currently available for the interpretation of this piece of evidence .
 King reassesses Kennedy’s evolving qualities of leadership a view that King will further develop over the course of 1963 and will express after Dallas . King's reassessment of Kennedy's evolving leadership is a view of King will continue to develop over 1963 .
 Martin Luther King, John Kennedy, JFK, JFK and JFK were in the midst of the Cuban missile crisis in 1962 .
 The Cuban missile crisis represented a turning point in the Cold war and in the nuclear age . The Kennedy family's relationship with Kennedy was a key moment in history .
 Research article will focus on the reaction of Martin Luther King Jr. to the Cuban missile crisis of October 19621 . It includes the presentation of a previously unknown document of particular relevance on such a topic –e.e. a private letter from King to President Kennedy .
 The Cuban missile crisis occurred after the Soviet Union secretly deployed medium and intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Cuba . A memoir of the Cuban missile crisi 2As is well-known .
 The crisis was later defined by historian Arthur Schlesinger, Jr as “the most dangerous moment in human history”4. The crisis is later defined as the most dangerous in history . It was defined as ‘most dangerous in the history of humanity’
 Martin Luther King’s reaction to the Cuban crisis was initially dealt with in the context of an article by this author that first investigated the African Americans’ responses to said nuclear crisis5. On the crisis perceptions in the United States and the reactions of the press and among the intellectuals
 The overall reaction among African Americans was one of solid and widespread support – consistent with that of general American public opinion6, but in measures and tones that may appear remarkable considering the unprecedented dangers that the crisis implicated and the harsh struggle for civil rights .
 This however was not due to any tendency to court the administration, as confirmed by both his previous public condemnation of the Bay of Pigs invasion 11 and his later protest of the U.S. war in Vietnam 12 .
 The Limited Test Ban Treaty was signed in Moscow on August 5, 1963 . The limited test ban treaty was signed by the Soviet Union in 1963 .
 Before the Cuban crisis, it had 10 Cuban troops in the country . Before the crisis, the country had only had 10 .
 King had written Kennedy at least six times since his term began . With the partial exception of the letter dated March 17, 1961, in which King also congratulated Ken 14 .
 During the course of the crisis Kennedy surely took various steps to allow Khrushchev a way to retreat honorably . The letter probably refers to the choice of a blockade rather than a direct air strike .
 Dr. King usually valued Jones’ advices, defining him “a man of sound judgment, deep insights, and great dedication” Dr. Jones was described as a ‘man of sound judgement’ and ‘deep insights’
 King’s papers edition passingly referred to the item as a ‘draft statement’,30 rather than as a letter, may suggest prudence in considering the text as surely sent, or sent in this form .
 As he had written at the time of the Bay of Pigs, “I am as concerned about International affairs as I am about the civil rights struggle in the U.S.” .
 King had first discovered Gandhian non-violent methods as a student of theology in the spring of 1950 . King had consistently favored nuclear disarmament and opposed nuclear tests at least since December 1957 .
 King had a long and warm meeting with Ben Bella, the leader of the newly decolonized country of Algeria, in mid-October . The artic 48 of the artic 48
 The Cuban missile crisis spurred theoretical reflections on nonviolence and on the moral dilemmas of political ethics in the nuclear era . Several other clergy members and theologians of different confessions were involved .
 Future publications might be in a position to add new elements clarifying the letter’s practical context, or to locate the presidential reply claimed by Levison .
 They stand out in particular for their initial laconic prudence and their absence of criticism of Kennedy during the crisis . Later for their political lucidity in warning against any indulgence in national arrogance or self-complacency .
 The Cuban missile crisis represented a turning point in the Cold war and in the nuclear age . The crisis was the Cold War's turning point .
 The ‘Missile’ Crisis as seen from Cuba, ; Michael Dobbs, One minute to Midnight. The 'Missile' Crisis . as seen . from Cuba .
 A special survey carried out nationally by Gallup just hours after the President’s TV speech recorded that, among those who listened to it, 84% approved of his decision . 12% refused to express an opinion, while only 4% disapproved of the decision .
 Todd Gitlin, The Sixties – Years of hope, days of rage , 99 10 Jet, 8 November 1962, 17 November 1962 . Jet, "The Sixties" is published by The Jet on November 8, 1962, at 9pm ET .
 Allen Hunter, ed., Rethinking the Cold War: Essays on Its Dynamics, Meaning, and Morality , 147; Brenda Gayle Plummer, Rising Wind. A Cold War Watershed, in Allen Hunter .
 Robert Kennedy and His Times 530. See also, for instance, Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., Robert Kennedy's Times 530 .
 Beschloss, Crisis, 506; Robert Kennedy, Thirteen days , 98; Sheldon Stern, The week the world stood still , 112 .
 King’s frequent use of speechwriters and ghostwriters as a civil rights activist simply followed a common practice among public orators and prominent leaders in general . However this is not of direct relevance .
 Arthur M Schlesinger Jr. Jr., Jr., A Thousand Days, A Thousand days . Arthur Schlensinger, Jr. wrote about race and the image of American democracy . Schlesingers, Jr., wrote about the nation's race and democracy .