 It was a peak time in the cold war era when the U.S. and the Soviet Union were juggling for world dominance . It was the height of the Cold War .
 During the crisis, the United States and the USSR stood face to face with thousands of Nuclear missiles in their arsenal . The U.S. and the Soviet Union had thousands of nuclear missiles in the arsenal .
 Everyone was scared because a full scale nuclear war was about to happen, and which could potentially wipe off the human race from the face of Earth . After the news, everyone was scared .
 A nuclear missile was nearly launched due to some miss understanding and one man named Vasily Arkhipov saved us from nuclear armageddon . Vasily Arhipov is the man who stopped the missile launch .
 Cuba and The Soviet Union both were Communist Country and they had many things in common . At first we need to know that Cuba and the Soviet Union were both Communist Country .
 One was headed by the U.S. with its European allies and their main agenda was democracy and capitalism . Another was the United States and its allies in the Middle East . One of their main goals was to protect democracy, capitalism .
 Another bloc was headed by then Soviet Union or USSR with its small allies compared to the U.S. and their main agenda was Communism and Socialism . Whereas another bloc headed by the then USSR or USSR .
 During that time U.S. formed intergovernmental military alliance called NATO to counter the Soviet Union . In picture Jupiter Missile Jupiter Missile .
 U.S. had installed military base and Nuclear missile in Western Europe and Turkey, which raise insecurity in the minds of Soviets . United States had installed Military Base and Nuclear Missile in Western European and Turkish borders .
 Nikita Khrushchev saw an opportunity to level the playing ground with the U.S. in Cuba . Nikita was the leader of the Soviet Union in Cuba in the 1950s .
 By installing missiles in Cuba, the Soviet Union would be minutes away from hitting U.S. targets . This would give the Soviets an edge over the United States .
 The United States learned about Soviets’ arms supply to Cuba in July 1962 . The U.S. learned about the arms supply in July of 1962 .
 Fidel Castro wrote a letter to the Soviet leader Khrushchev to take decisive nuclear action against the U.S. if Cuba was attacked . Same day Fidel Castro write a letter . Fidel Castro writes a letter asking for action to be taken against the United States .
 Which had orders that allowed it to use the torpedo if it was damaged by depth charges or surface fire on the submarine . The torpedo was ordered to use if the submarine was damaged .
 Captain Valentin Grigorievich Savitsky of the B-59 thought that the war may have already started on the ground and tried to launch a nuclear torpedo . Savitski thought that war may already started in the air and tried a torpedo .
 The decision to launch the torpedo required consent from all three officers on board, but one of them, Vasily Arkhipov, objected, thus narrowly averting the nuclear launch . The decision was made to launch a torpedo, but the torpedo was launched without permission .
 In the following days during the standoff, diplomacy took the front seat and avoided a catastrophic disaster . Diplomacy took the lead in the standoff and the standoff was avoided .
 The United States president Kennedy and Soviet leader Khrushchev started talks and negotiations . Kennedy and Khrushchevitch started talks with the Soviet Union in 1961 .
 Khrushchev said USSR will stop military military constructions and leave Cuba but they have some conditions which the U.S. agreed . On 28th October 1962, Khrushchev said USSR would stop military buildings and leave .
 The North Korea-North Korea standoff ended in a nuclear standoff . It was one of the greatest military or nuclear standoff in the world .
 The U.S. would never attack Cuba without prior provocation as a retaliatory measure to the missile crisis . The Soviet Union removed nuclear missiles from Cuba by the Soviet Union . The United States would never strike Cuba without provocation .
 We are committed to give you every question, term, definition, latest news, current affairs related to Physics, Chemistry, Space, Life Science, Geography, Technology, History, Politics, Economics, etc. in most simplest and easiest way .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots to CNN iReport.com .
 Right now our world is fighting coronavirus pandemic . Which Infected One Third Of Worlds Population . Which infected one third of Worlds population .