 Kennedy was born in Brookline, Massachusetts, on May 29, 1917 . He was the second son of financier Joseph P Kennedy, who served as ambassador to Great Britain during the administration of FDR .
 In August 1943, as commander of the U.S. Navy torpedo boat PT-109, he rescued several crewmen after a Japanese destroyer rammed the boat off the Solomon Islands .
 The rich and ambitious young veteran joined the Democratic party and successfully ran for the U.S. House of Representatives in 1946 . He was awarded a citation for valor .
 Kennedy completed Profiles in Courage during recuperation from spinal surgery . Kennedy won a Pulitzer Prize in 1957 for his sketches of political heroes .
 After an unsuccessful attempt to win the vice-presidential nomination on the . ticket of Adlai E Stevenson in 1956, Kennedy began to plan for the presidential election of 1960 . Kennedy began planning for the election of the 1960 .
 Kennedy assumed the leadership of the Democratic party’s liberal wing . He assumed around him a group of talented young political aides, including his brother and campaign manager, Robert F Kennedy .
 He won the nomination on the first ballot and campaigned with Senator Lyndon B Johnson of Texas as his running mate against Vice President Richard M Nixon, the Republican nominee .
 The issues of defense and economic stagnation were raised in four televised debates . Kennedy’s poised and vigorous performance lent credence to his call for new leadership .
 Kennedy won the election by a narrow margin of 113,000 votes out of 68,800,000 cast . Kennedy had to accept reduced Democratic majorities in Congress in order to win the election .
 He was the youngest president ever elected and the first Roman Catholic . He was also the youngest person to be elected president .
 Kennedy's inaugural address set a tone of youthful idealism that raised the nation’s hopes . President Kennedy's inauguration speech was the first of his presidency to be held in office .
 An early executive order of the New Frontier, as the administration called itself, established a Peace Corps of Americans volunteering for service abroad . The Peace Corps was established in the 1930s .
 Kennedy was battered by a series of adverse international developments in 1961 . In 1961, his first year in office, Kennedy faced a number of international developments .
 Kennedy approved an invasion of Cuba in April by refugees operating with the help of U.S. agencies . Kennedy inherited a secret plan to overthrow the Cuban regime of Premier Fidel Castro .
 The abrupt failure of the invasion at the Bay of Pigs resulted in personal embarrassment for the president . The president was humiliated by the failure of his troops .
 Kennedy pondered sending U.S. troops into Laos, which was being threatened by Communist insurgents . Later in the spring Kennedy considered sending troops to Laos .
 He flew to Vienna in June to meet with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev . In June he met with Soviet Prime Minister Vladimir Putin .
 When the wall between the eastern and western sectors of Berlin was erected in August, Kennedy responded by sending 1500 United States troops over the land route to Berlin to reaffirm access rights .
 The Soviet Union sent the first man into space in April and resumed atmospheric nuclear tests in September . Cold war tensions were further aggravated by the Soviet Union's first space mission .
 In October, U.S. aerial reconnaissance confirmed that middle-range missiles were being installed . The U.N. says the missiles are being installed in Syria .
 President Obama announced his intention of placing a naval blockade around Cuba to prevent the arrival of more missiles . After a week of secret consultation with his advisers, on October 22, he announced the decision .
 He demanded that the Soviet Union dismantle and remove missiles and bombers that had been detected . The Soviet Union did not comply with the request .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy were opened through diplomatic channels . The two men were both assassinated in the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev acceded to the United States demands on October 28 . Kennedy halted the blockade and gave assurances that the U.S. would not invade Cuba . Kennedy also gave assurances the United. States would not attack Cuba .
 The Soviet retreat was considered a personal and political triumph for the president . The retreat was seen as a personal . and political . triumph .
 Kennedy’s prospects in foreign affairs further improved in 1963, his final year . Kennedy's prospects for foreign policy in 1963 improved in 1962 .
 During a successful European tour he was warmly received in West Berlin, where he pledged continued support for West Germany . During a tour of Europe he pledged to continue his support for the West .
 In June, he delivered an innovative foreign policy speech calling for an end to the cold war .
 The two superpowers agreed to establish a ‘hot line’ between Moscow and Washington, D.C., to facilitate communication in time of crisis . The two countries agreed to set up a "hot line" between Russia and the U.S. to communicate .
 In July an agreement was reached with the Soviet Union and Great Britain on a nuclear test-ban treaty . The treaty was reached in July after a series of nuclear tests were banned in North Korea .
 The Alliance for Progress, a program of aid for Latin America, proved popular . It was the first program of its kind .
 Kennedy committed 17,000 U.S. military advisers on behalf of an unstable regime in Vietnam . South Vietnam was beset by corruption and growing Communist insurgency .
 Kennedy’s wit and charm earned him considerable popularity at home and abroad . But he did not fare well with Congress .
 Kennedy responded to efforts to thwart school integration in the South . Kennedy responded energetically against efforts to stop integration in South .
 The president ordered 3000 federal troops to the campus to quell the ensuing riots . President Obama ordered 3000 troops to University of Columbia University .
 In 1963 Kennedy used the threat of federal force to help win partial desegregation of public accommodations in Birmingham, Alabama, and of classrooms in Alabama public schools . In 1963 he used the same threat of force to win partial segregation in Alabama schools .
 Kennedy sent a special message to Congress asking for legislation to desegregate public facilities and give the Justice Department authority to bring school integration suits . Kennedy also asked Congress to pass legislation to allow the Justice Dept. to bring integration suits into schools .
 Most of his proposals were ultimately enacted in the Civil Rights Act of 1964 . Most of them were part of the civil rights act .
 In the fall of 1963 Kennedy began to plan his strategy for reelection . Kennedy was assassinated by the assassination of President Richard Nixon .
 He flew across the country extolling the improvements in U.S.-Soviet relations . He received generally favorable responses from the public .
 Kennedy was shot in the head and neck in Dallas, Texas, on November 22, at 12:30 PM CST . Kennedy was riding in an open limousine through Dallas when he was shot .
 He was rushed to Parkland Memorial Hospital, where efforts to revive him failed . He was pronounced dead at the hospital .
 A commission headed by Chief Justice Earl Warren concluded in September 1964 that the sole assassin was Lee Harvey Oswald . Oswald was a former United States Marine, a former Marine .
 Oswald was captured hours after the assassination in a nearby theater . Oswald was himself killed two days later by Dallas nightclub owner Jack Ruby while being moved to the county jail .
 State funeral of President Kennedy was watched on television by millions around the world . The state funeral of JFK was watched by millions of Americans .