 Baker and his S.Mertnykh, now speak b to work out common schedules to permit as an official . The task is t interests of both the over, Baker and S. Mertnyk .
 Secretary Baker and thenForeign Minister Shevardnadze immediately condemned the invasion in a tough joint statement . Secretary Baker was fishing in the U.S.R. when the invasion occurred in Georgia . Baker, then foreign minister, was in the United States when the attack occurred .
 There followed in the United Nations Security Council a degree of cooperation between the United States and U.S.R. previously not possible .
 U.S.-Soviet conversion to bilateral mutual security does not necessarily herald the onset of what President Bush has chosen to call a new world order . Underlying the argument here is our conviction that the U.K. and the Soviet conversion does not herald an end to U.N.
 Other Third World states, es Soviet Union, already find themse candidates for the kind of kind of Kuwait-that seem foolhardy, e who, like the United States and U.S. mutual security .
 Many methodological response because they fail to provide . acces aspects of this ""unipolar mom powers," says the author . On a third point in a rea one may find evidence of super concerns that boomeranged . That may have had direct policy consequences .
 That was the moment, odological requirements we have and eventually desperation in a consequences for both the Unite relevance. That was eventually desperation for both of the Unites relevance. The moment, which was the . moment, is the moment when the . odological . requirements we . have
 Our approach is generally regarded as the puris of the Cold War, a 13-day super irrelevant to a world moved beyo . But such a view is itself a pro to which scholars have focused o their withdrawal-and ignored were emplaced and removed .
 The story of the origins of the Soviet missile deployment in Cuba is told to students of postwar U.S.-Soviet relations . The story is told in the story of Soviet missile deployments in Cuba .
 It appears that Khrushc the nuclear imbalance, as well as his wish to protect the Cuban from an American attack, were primary motives for the deployment . The nuclear imbalance and the Cuban threat of attack were primary reasons for deployment .
 On October 22, Presiden announced his decision to quarantine Cuba with a naval blockade, pre delivery of additional missiles on ships which had already set sail fro Union Union .
 Leaders in both the Unite U.S. and the United States.R. began to feel they were losing control of events .
 Amer ships, for example, may have tried to force Soviet nuclear submarin without permission from the president .
 On October 26, Khrushche removed the missiles in exchange for a U.S. commitment not Cuba . The deal was reached in Cuba, not Cuba, but Cuba .
 By November 19, Castr The resolution of the missile cris triangular relationship between Wa 28 years will be complete . Castr Castr will announce the resolution on Nov. 19 .
 Kennedy w saving way to back down. When they mutually ably close to annihilating each oth greater degree than at any time s World War II, the American presi terests took into account .
 Instead of a z options that would let both sides ""w after the crisis as the two sides teletype machine for direct commu al secretary-and signed the 1963 . The Cuban government initiated negotiations which led to the Seabed Treaty , and th
 Administration did, in fa attack even before the discovery the preparations were made . Although clear, the administration did, it did, and in fact, the preparations had been made .
 Then we received a telegr have reliable information t hours to strike Cuba . In that p price of their conveyanan was the price of the conveyance .
 Castro suggested that to p launch a pre-emptive strik . Castro suggested to launch the strike . Castro: "My comrades in the leade understand our purpose"
 Fidel Castro and other Cuban officials have begun to speak about their experience of the missile crisis . Fidel Castro has spoken about the threat they faced from the U.S. and the Soviets .
 The secret, deceptive deployment had hardly begun, when the Cubans began to suspect that the Soviet gambit was not well-thought-out . Yet, the Cuban government began suspecting that the gambit had not been well thought-out.
 Che Guevara and Emilio Aragones, two members of the ruling six-man secretariat, were sent to Moscow in late August to urge the Soviets to go public with the deployment . The United States discovered the missiles in mid-course, and use their presence as
 The deal seemed to Castro to have placed Cuba in imminent danger, and he was furious in any case at the Soviet for having struck such a deal without consulting Cuba . Castro was furious that the deal had been struck by the Soviet without consulting .
 Castro became sufficiently desperate to make a contingent request to the Sovie that they launch their nuclear missiles at the United States should an invasio take place . As has recently been revealed by the declassification of his crisis correspondence with Khrushchev Castro .
 Khrushchev horrified by what he took to be a request for nuclear pre-emption, immediately agreed to Kennedy's terms . Kennedy agreed to the terms and thereby ended t intense phase of superpower crisis .
 The Soviet abandonment of Cuba during the missile crisis still rankle Cuban officia nearly 30 years later . The Soviet refusa to consult with Cuba over the terms of the resolution, still rankles Cuban officials . The Soviets abandoned Cuba during missile crisis .
 If Nikita's message to Kennedy said, 'We are willing to withdraw the missiles from Cuba, provided that Cuba's security is guaranteed, in Cuba's view' Kennedy: "There would be no negotiations about Cuba without Cuba . . There would have been no negotiations .
 U.S. always told Soviet friends that we disagreed with Cuba's exclusion from the negotiations . S. S. disagreed with the Soviet Union's exclusion of Cuba from negotiations .
 Castro's reaction, as recorded by Alekseev, shows the depth and th object of Cuban concern . The reaction shows the Cuban president's concern for his country .
 All this wa been used by the counter-revolution to for the situation that has been create destroyed . All this has been used as a weapon to destroy the situation, he said .
 Castro told Lee Lockwood several would ever remove the missiles . Castro told Lockwood that superpowers might act to preserve a small ally .
 Consider the minimum States removal of Soviet missil States not to invade Cuba . Consider a minimum States remove of Soviet Union missil . Consider the . minimum States removed of Soviet Missil States . consider .
 Khrushchev found themselv the Cuban minimum goal was not of the objective sources of the . Naval Base to Cuba; dra Florida; cessation of covert activi sance overflights of the island (C not only between United States and Cuban interests)
 First, when Washington and Moscow push around third parties, there ma be consequences . There are consequences for the U.S. and Russia pushing around the world's most powerful allies .
 The third lesson is that leaders grasp their adversaries' priorities . For Cuba, w the specter of annihilation was so changes in their situation caused b Castro was able to think only in w security guarantees issued in good
 Khrushchev d weak in the face of communism, to anticipate stiff U.S. resist into account Castro's invasion . The Soviet Union was weakened by the strength of the Soviet Union .
 The priorities of Kennedy and Khrushchev came to objectives in order to avoid war mained constant . And neither he nor he nor powerlessness and fury which foll that, in this case, the priorities were that, they came to .
 The case study follows from our case study of the Cuban missile crisis . While our purpose is not primarily theoretical, it may be usef clearly as possible what we take to be the most important issue .
 It takes little imagination added to what we now know about the Soviet-Cuban side of the story to see how superpower security was linked to Cuba's sense of imminent annihilation . Yet, it is not surprising that superpower security linked to Cuban security .
 Kennedy decided to give Khrushchev a face-saving way o crisis . Kennedy was thinking in positive sum terms despite a political co stressed unilateral gain .
 When large states develop policies toward small ones, however, threat may be quite low . Large states are able to do so because nuclear dange dange . When large countries develop policies, the threat of small ones may be low .
 Policy-makers in large countries find it difficult to believe or even to imagine that their security is wir with the security of smaller countries . Policy makers in large nations find it hard to believe that security of small countries is comparable to that of smaller ones .
 The security of the superpowers m together with the security of Third-World nations, even though thi apparent despite or until the outbreak of crisis . One lesson from the missile ever, is that in certain cases the . security . of the . superpowers, however, is not always
 In 1962, the Unite Soviet Union did not realize that they were in a triangular security . Their own fates were connected with the fate of Cuba . The Soviet Union didn't realize their own fate was connected with Cuba's .
 Castro's anxiety, anger, and, because of heavy U.S.-Soviet relations, could provoke superpower war . Castro's anger, anger and anxiety could provoke war, he says . Castro: "I'm not going to be afraid of war"
 The security of all t became intertwined during the height of the crisis to an extent we beginning to appreciate . As a result, the security of the nation's security became intertwined in the crisis, the government says .
 Moscow and Washington may act deliberately in order to back back desperate leaders into corners, say analysts . Great powers may uninten crease their own security by decreasing the security of smaller states, they say .
 The superpowers should try to develop sophisticat sensibilities before crises unfold . Therefore, they should be prepared to prepare for crises before they occur .
 E need to be aware that joint resolutions which exclude third parties are the danger for all . And when troubles do develop, E must also be aware of the danger of all .
 Several countries in the Middle East could be oil sources in minutes . Even the Lithuanians could assassinate leaders and withhold goods from the U.S.
 I onical rational scenario, a leader calculates that the cost/benefit payo pre-emption outweighs the payoff ratio of other courses of action . A leader calculates the cost of pre-empting outweighs other options .
 The missile crisis is as proof that leaders will never choose nuclear war, says CNN.com's Peter Bergen . The crisis was as proof leaders will not choose to go nuclear war .
 We contend t arriving out of the unacknowledg neither rationality nor irrationality secure superpowers of Cuba's se desperation . Cuba's desperation is not a matter of rationality or irrationality .
 We need to move beyond the rational/irrational psychology in order to understand the Cuban frame of mind and to prevent other leaders from arriving at desperation caused by great power entrapment .
 Such a psychology would be both phenomenological-its goal would be putting oneself vicariously in the other's shoes -and triangular- Its practitioners would be on the lookout for situations in which leaders of small, militarily threatened nations feel backed into a comer, optionless, abandoned
 What looks outwardly like suicide may feel like a last chance at honor or survival . Suicide may be suicide, but it may be a last attempt to honor or survive, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The great powers are well advised to avoid the triangular ignorance of yesteryear if, sorting though the ruins of some present or future triangular crisis, they are not to find themselves pining away pitifully for the good old days .