 As had been suggested in that paper, there are obvious limitations to drawing conclusions about deterrence policies based purely on theories of deterrence . As had previously suggested, there were obvious limitations on drawing conclusions .
 It is equally important to examine the validity of these theories on the basis of actual experience . It is also important to look at the reality of life in the real world .
 The paper focuses on operation of deterrence, taking nuclear crises as examples of such an operation . It also focuses on the operation of nuclear crises .
 It is notoriously difficult to show that deterrence has worked successfully in most cases, especially over a long course of time . It is difficult to prove that deterrence works successfully, especially in long-term cases .
 It is often stated that the nuclear deterrence prevented the cold war from turning hot during the half-century after the end of the Second World War .
 It would involve demonstrating that one or the other superpower was intent on an aggressive war, which the presence of nuclear weapons alone prevented . It might indeed have, but proving it would be an extremely difficult undertaking .
 The U.S. tried to 'deter' an Indian attack on West Pakistan in December 1971 by dispatching the 'Enterprise' carrier battlegroup to the Bay of Bengal . A familiar example was the American .
 Henry Kissinger, then American National Security Advisor, would characterise the mission as a success because it deterred Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi from refocusing Indian military forces against West Pakistan after the completion of operations in the eastern sector .
 The problem, of course, is that there is little indication that there was any Indian plan to attack West Pakistan . The problem is that little indication of any Indian attack on West Pakistan.
 Kissinger appeared convinced that India had planned to strike towards the West . India's non-attack on West Pakistan could have been the consequence of a successful American deterrent threat, Kissinger said .
 If there had been no such Indian plan, as all available evidence appears to suggest, then deterrence could not have worked because there was nothing to deter . But if there was no such plan, if deterrence was not worked, deterrence could have worked, he says .
 These were the only Cold War cases where there was direct confrontation between two nuclear powers in which nuclear weapons appear to have played a significant role . These were chosen because of the only cases where nuclear weapons appeared to have been involved .
 There have been numerous other instances when nuclear threats were made or implied, but where only one nuclear power was involved, or if both were involved, the threats themselves were ambiguous . This makes it difficult to come to any judgements about the operation of nuclear deterrence .
 In the 1990s, after the collapse of the Soviet Union, even more historical material has become available for scholars to examine . The collapse of Soviet Union has allowed even more material to be examined .
 Most, scholarly nnd popular accounts have only stressed how dose the two superpowers came to a nuclear war . Though this now allows us to re-examine the crisis, most, scholarly . accounts only stressed the . dose of the two . superpowers . came to nuclear war,
 A more surprising outcome was that the nuclear deterrence worked, and that it worked in spite of considerable disparities in the nudear arsenals of the two powers . The nuclear deterrence works, and it worked despite considerable disparities between the two nations' arsenals .
 What deterred the U.S. was the certainty that some Soviet retaliation would take place . The United States was afraid of retaliation from Soviet retaliation .
 The decision to place Soviet missiles in Cuba was taken in late May 1962 . The decision was made by Soviet President Vladimir Putin .
 Nikita Khrushchev's primary motivation appears to have been to defend Cuba against continuing American-sponsored attacks by anti-Castro forces and the real possibility of an American invasion .
 Khrushchev ordered that the mission be carried out in complete secrecy . Hoping to present the U.S. with a fait accompli, the mission was carried out .
 The extraordinary measures that the Soviet military took to conceal the operation, as well as favourable weather, allowed the operation to take place in secret . The Soviet military successfully conducted much of the operation in secret.
 By the middle of October, U.S. intelligence had begun to suspect that Soviet missiles might have been shipped to Cuba . Nevertheless, American intelligence believed Soviet missiles were being shipped .
 On October 16, President Kennedy was informed that there was conclusive photo-reconnaissance evidence of Soviet medium-range missiles in Cuba . President Kennedy received the news on October 16 .
 Kennedy eventually decided on a 'quarantine' of Cuba to prevent any more missiles going into that country . Kennedy also demanded that Moscow remove the missiles already in Cuba or face war .
 Khrushchev decided to pull missiles out of Cuba in exchange for an American undertaking to not invade Cuba, and to eventually remove American 7 Jupiter' missiles from Turkey . The crisis ended short of war, when the U.S. pulled the missiles from Cuba .
 There is now little doubt about the lopsided nature of the nuclear balance at the time of the missile crisis . The nuclear balance in North Korea was much more balanced in the 1950s .
 Through the late 1950s, a section of the American strategic elite had worried continuously about advances in Soviet missile and bomber strength . The U.S. strategic elite was worried about advances .
 Much of this concern was exaggerated, primarily because of lack of intelligence about the true strength of the Soviet strategic forces . But much of this was exaggerated due to lack of information about the strength of Soviet forces .
 The Soviet leader Khrushchev had deliberately exaggerated Soviet accomplishments . He said the Soviet Union had built large numbers of strategic weapons . The Soviet Union has since been accused of exaggerating its achievements .
 By 1960, the existence of a 'missile gap' was an article of faith among both the American public and leadership . It was used to great effect by John F Kennedy in his presidential campaign .
 The United States and the Soviet Union were aware of each other's superiority . The U.S. and the USSR knew each other knew of their superiority .
 The overwhelming advantage played little part in the confrontation . But this overwhelming advantage was not enough to stop the fight .
 Many participants believed that it was the threat of a nuclear war itself that deterred the U.S. from acting on its superiority . Then and subsequently, many believed that .
 Despite the American advantage, both superpowers were vulnerable to nuclear war . The U.S. and Russia were at risk of nuclear war in the 1950s .
 Bundy: "We had to assume that in any nuclear exchange, no matter who started it, some of ther."" missiles and bombers would get through with megaton bombs . Bundy: In any nuclear war, some missiles would be able to get through the bombs .
 "The fact that our own strategic forces were very much larger gave us no comfort," says President Barack Obama . "We are not going to be surprised by the strength of our forces," says Obama .
 President Kennedy said the more relevant issue was avoiding war itself . But it was clear that for the critical participants, including President Kennedy, the issue was avoided war itself.
 Russia's strategic balance was a critical factor, but what was important was the impact of the strategic superiority on Kremlin decision-makers . Russia is now the only superpower in the world, according to analysts .
 Khrushchev backed down only because the U.S. had both local conventional superiority and strategic nuclear superiority, argument says . The United States had both conventional and strategic superiority .
 'The dog that didn't bark' in the Cuban missile crisis was not Soviet restraint, but American restraint . The U.S. didn't want to engage in a fight with the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 Soviet restraint was understandable, considering their relative weakness . Soviet restraint is understandable considering the country's weakness .
 The American restraint, despite their overwhelming advantage, is counter-intuitive and difficult to explain, except as the consequence of the fear of nuclear war itself . The U.S. restraint is counterintuitive, but it is the result of fear of a nuclear war .
 The American restraint becomes even more remarkable when considered in the light of new evidence that suggests that President Kennedy was willing to even make a public bargain of the Jupiter missiles in Turkey .
 The new history of the missile crisis suggests even greater American restraint than was realised earlier . It strengthens the proposition that the U.S. was as deterred by the threat of war as the Soviet Union was, says historian .
 This is a lesson that has implications for SNFs such as the Indian deterrent force . This is the case of SNFs, such as India's deterrent force.
 A good part of the debate about the Indian nuclear deterrent has been focussed on the issue of numbers . What kind of weapons, and what quality of weapons are necessary to ensure deterrence, are necessary .
 The numbers might not be a critical factor in achieving deterrence, experts say . What the experience of the Cuban missile crisis suggests is that the numbers may not be the key factor in deterrence .
 If superiority and inferiority does not matter when dealing with nuclear weapons, then numbers and balances do not either . Numbers and balances don't matter in dealing with such weapons, says David Cameron .
 The presence of the TNWs was first revealed in 1992 by General Anatoli Gribkov, the man who oversaw the planning and deployment of Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 The presence of the Soviet TNWs had been completely missed by the U.S. intelligence effort, which was primarily based on low-flying U.2 missions .
 A U-2 mission on October 25 had spotted the dual-capable FROG missiles . This information was passed on to the White House by the CIA in its daily estimate of the progress of the Soviet missile deployments in Cuba .
 The report reached the White House only on October 27, and even then there was no mention of the possibility that these missiles might be carrying nuclear warheads . Even then, even then, the report was not mentioned .
 US intelligence remained unaware that there were more than 80 other TNWs on Cuba . U.S. intelligence remained completely unaware of the other 80 other 'TNWs' on Cuba.
 TNWs were included from the beginning in the package of forces sent to Cuba, mainly because it was believed that if the United States did attack, the Soviet forces in Cuba would be cut-off, and that they would therefore be required to carry with them as much fire-power
 Khrushchev personally expanded the TNW component of the force being sent to Cuba and speeded up their delivery . President Kennedy made a speech warning Moscow that the United States would not tolerate Soviet offensive weapons .
 The 12 'Luna/FROG missiles and the 6 bombs for the IL-28s were added by Khrushchev to the original contingent which only included nuclear-tipped cruise missiles . The 12 ‘Luna’s’ and 6 bombs were added to the
 General Gribkov said local commanders in Cuba had the authority to use missiles . The most dramatic revelation was that local commanders had the power to use the missiles .
 TNWs were considered simply to be a more effective version of conventional battlefield warheads . Soviet military doctrine made clear distinctions between TNS and strategic weapons .
 In the early 1960s, standard Soviet procedure gave local commanders predelegated authority to use TNWs in the event of war . In the 1970s, local commanders were able to use them in war .
 Little thought appears to have been given to the impact that this would have on the nuclear escalation process . Little thought was given to consider the impact of the escalation process.
 Moscow further limited the authority of local commanders to employ the TNWs . Moscow also limited local commanders' authority to employ them . Moscow has also limited the power of local commandos to employ TNW personnel .
 Two new orders, the first given on October 22, and the same order on October 27, explicitly forbade the local commanders from employing the TNWs authorisation from Moscow .
 Moscow required direct authorisation from Moscow for release of all nuclear weapons, including the TNWs, to release all the nuclear weapons . In the event, the procedural limitations imposed by Moscow was a sufficient barrier to the misuse of these weapons, writes Andrew Hammond .
 There are useful lessons to be gleaned from the Soviet experience with TNWs in Cuba . Lessons that are as applicable to SNFs as they were to the other nuclear powers .
 The Soviet leadership itself learned important lessons from the crisis, writes Peter Bergen . Indeed, the Soviet leadership learned lessons from this crisis, he says .
 Fear of loss of control over TNWs in Cuba was a significant factor in tightening up Moscow's control of nuclear weapons . Moscow's refusal to permit its Warsaw Pact allies to have anything similar to NATO 'dual-key' command structure .
 The difficulties over command and control over TNWs are applicable also to SNFs . SNFs need to be able to control their own SNFs in the future .
 TNWs present different command and control difficulties as compared to strategic weapons . As was shown by the Cuban missile crisis, TNWS present different control difficulties .
 Unlike strategic weapons, which are normally deployed deep in the interior, the weapons are deployed in the country's interior .
 TNWs, given their short range, have to be deployed close to the probable battle area . TNS have been deployed in the U.S. since 2010 .
 Such deployment will be meaningless unless accompanied by predelegation of launch authority, as the Soviets had considered providing their local commanders in Cuba . The U.S. had considered giving their local commander in Cuba a command post .
 Predelegation raises the probability that these weapons will be used . Military commanders will face a strong 'use-them-or-lose-them' dilemma, says David Cameron .
 The pressure will be particularly acute when local commanders are operationally on the defensive, as the Soviet commanders in Cuba were . Such pressures will be especially acute in Cuba, as they were in Cuba .
 As in the case of the other nuclear powers, there have been calls in India for the development of TNWs .
 In October 1962, the only way that Moscow could prevent the threat of escalation was by reassuring control over its TNWs in Cuba . The only way to prevent escalation was to reassess control of the TNW in Cuba.
 TNWs were essentially useless, since it was widely recognised, both in Moscow and among Soviet commanders in Cuba, that communications with Moscow would not survive the beginning of any American assault .
 Two more lessons can be derived from the Cuban crisis . The other lessons of the missile crisis can be learned from the crisis .
 First, it is dear that nuclear deterrence is far more than many scholars have assumed . It is important to know that nuclear weapons are not only possible, but they are also essential to the survival .
 If any crisis should have resulted in war, it was the Cuban crisis . The Cuban crisis was because of the enormous complexities of the crisis, the trouble that both sides had in controlling their respective military forces .
 That deterrence worked despite all these hurdles should be a cause for comfprt . The world had come close to a nuclear holocaust, and suggest a different way .
 Another lesson from the Cuban missile crisis is that aggressive nuclear declaratory policies should be treated with greater circumspection . The U.S. should be wary of aggressive nuclear disarmament policies .
 In 1962, both sides had declaratory policies which, if they had been faithfully followed, would have resulted in a nuclear war . Both sides had declared policies which would have led to nuclear war in 1962 .
 The changes in Soviet TNW release procedures have already been discussed . The changes have been made in the past .
 TNW procedures had similarly been liberalised a decade earlier . American TNW had similarly liberalised procedures in the past .
 Much of the military, and the SAC in particular, was intent on carrying out the existing nuclear war plans .
 Declaratory 'first-use' policies were too unrealistic to meet the challenge of crisis reality . Declaratories 'first use' policies 'too unrealistic' to meet challenge of reality .
 The end of the Cold War and the opening of the Soviet and East European archives have increased the understanding of the history of the Sino-Soviet rift . The Sino and Soviet archives have been opened in China .
 Even the few new documents that have emerged, though interesting in themselves, only support previously available information . Even the new documents only support previous available information.
 Some of the conclusions drawn must necessarily be tentative . Given our scant knowledge of many of the details of the border crisis, some of these conclusions must be tentative.
 Kremlin worried about stability of China and willingness to use its nuclear might responsibly . The Soviet Union was an early contributor to the Chinese nuclear programme .
 Mao expected the Soviet advances in strategic nuclear forces would be used for the general benefit of the socialist fraternity . Mao expected Soviet advantage in inter-continental range ballistic missiles to be used . A comprehensive history of Sino-Soviet nuclear relations has yet to be written .
 Moscow worried that Chinese recklessness might lead to a direct nuclear confrontation between the Soviet Union and the US, a confrontation in which Moscow had little interest . But Moscow also worried that China might provoke a nuclear confrontation with the U.S.
 Khrushchev was alarmed by Mao's refusal to understand the implications of a nuclear war . Mao refused to understand implications of nuclear war, Khrushchchev said .
 Soviet unwillingness to back Mao in his conflicts with the US confirmed Mao's long-held suspicion about the undependability of its ally . Mao's suspicion of the US was at the root of the emerging Sino-Soviet rift .
 China 'acquiesced' in maintaining the status quo on the border for the decade after 1949, but began challenging Moscow after 1959 . Between 1959 and 1966, China undertook an aggressive policy which included sending soldiers and civilians into disputed areas .
 Mao ordered that groups challenging Soviet presence in disputed territories can, under certain circumstances, fight back . Mao's policy changed in 1966, as Mao ordered . The policy changed when Mao ordered groups challenging the Soviet presence to fight back in 1966 .
 Moscow alleged that Chinese 'systematic provocations' began in June 1962, and reached crisis situation by 1967 . Moscow, on the other hand, claimed that Chinese provocations began in . June 1962 . The Soviets and Chinese imposed strict control on their soldiers and border troops .
 Negotiations to solve the dispute were suspended in 1964, and contacts between the two countries on the border issue were limited to whatever exchanges took place between the troops .
 Soviet deployment now also included some forces deployed in Mongolia . In addition to the Soviet deployment, some of the Soviet forces were also deployed .
 The border skirmishes, and larger scale clashes, appear to have begun in early March 1969 . The border clashes are thought to have started in March .
 Most of the information that is available is only on two major clashes on March 2 and 15, mainly because both sides publicised the incidents . Both clashes occurred on the Zhen Bao/Amansky Island on the Ussuri river on March 15 .
 China appears to have provoked the first fight on March 2, ambushing a Soviet patrol from tactically superior positions, killing a large number of Soviet soldiers . To all appearance, China appeared to be provoked by the move .
 The March 15 fighting appears to have been a Soviet retaliation though (because of the Chinese tactical advantages in the area) the Soviets also suffered considerable losses .
 Beijing rebuffed Soviet efforts to initiate a dialogue on the continuing clashes . Beijing repeatedly rebuffed attempts to engage with the Soviet Union .
 The Soviets responded by increasing the military pressure on the border, including skirmishes as far away as in Central Asia . The Soviet response was apparently initiated by skirmishes at many points .
 In these engagements, the Soviets ensured they always had superior forces, including some armoured forces . The Soviets ensured that they always have superior forces in these engagements .
 They suggested the possibility of further escalation, including that of nuclear attack . They also suggested that a nuclear attack could be possible .
 Moscow sent letters to several communist parties in the West warning of the possibility of an attack on Chinese nuclear facilities . A Soviet diplomat posted in Washington enquired of a State Department official what the United States would react to a Soviet attack .
 Henry Kissinger convened a meeting of the Washington Special Group, a group that dealt with contingency planning and crisis management, to prepare contingency plans for American policy in the event of Sino-Soviet war . Henry Kissinger the U.S. National Security Advisor, convened the group to discuss contingency plans
 Moscow's repeated warnings appear to have been to threaten China with a nuclear escalation . Whether or not Moscow seriously contemplated an attack on Chinese nuclear facilities, the primary purpose of these repeated warnings appears to be to warn China with an escalation .
 By the end of July, Chinese military leaders were claiming that they had no interest in a war . The move was a remarkable turn-around from the aggressive stance they had adopted in March .
 In September, China reluctantly agreed to talks, bringing to an end the series of violent clashes that began on March 2 . China has agreed to a series of talks to end the violent clashes .
 Unconfirmed reports of further clashes on the border do not appear to have been extensive, serious or related to the March 1969 clashes .
 The Soviet Union succeeded in its policy of careful but determined coercion of China, a policy that included the implicit and explicit threat of use of nuclear weapons . On the face of it, it is difficult to disagree with the predominant scholarly opinion that the Soviet Union .
 Richard Betts has argued that it was the Soviet nuclear superiority that gave the Soviets success in their confrontation against China, even if it was only for a short time . Betts argues that the Soviets' nuclear superiority gave them success .
 It is difficult to judge whether this is a valid conclusion in the absence of any evidence from the Chinese archives about Chinese deliberations during this time .
 One way for China to have responded to the Soviet threat would have been to accelerate its nuclear and missile programmes . China would have accelerated its nuclear programme to deal with the threat of Soviet threat, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The Soviet Union had clearly replaced the United States as the primary focus of Chinese nuclear developments since the late 1960s . It is difficult to separate this change from the overall realignment of Chinese foreign policy .
 If the Soviet Union did contemplate a nuclear strike against China, or a strike against nuclear sites, the fact that it eventually decided not to undertake them might suggest that even the rudimentary deterrent capabilities of the Chinese strategic forces were a sufficient deterrent to the Soviet U.S.
 The evidence available on these questions is too limited yet to make any final judgements on this score . The evidence is too limited yet to be able to make a final judgement on the issue .
 Some reports suggest that there were serious discussions at the highest levels in the Kremlim on such a strike . No documentary evidence has come to light to back it up .
 The relatively relaxed Chinese approach to the problem of deterring Moscow suggests that Beijing has not been particularly impressed by the nuclear threats .
 The caveats stated at the beginning of this essay need to be reiterated when trying to draw conclusions from this review of the two crises and what they might mean for nuclear deterrence with SNFs . Conclusion: The caveats should be reiterated in this essay .
 President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev played important role in the Cuban crisis . Kennedy's role in solving the crisis was key to the successful resolution of both crises .
 Several have been suggested in the course of the essay, and they bear repetition . Several of the ideas have already been suggested, but bear repetition.
 The Cuban missile crisis and the Sino-Soviet border conflict illustrated the uselessness of nuclear superiority or the implications of nuclear inferiority . Both the Cuban missile crises and the Chinese border conflict were examples of uselessness .
 In the end, what mattered was the threat of nuclear war itself, writes Peter Bergen . This was a sufficiently serious threat as to encourage caution from all the parties to the disputes .
 Nuclear numbers, in other words, are not very relevant to nuclear deterrence, the author says . "Nuclear numbers" are not relevant to deterrence, he says .
 The Cuban crisis also demonstrated the importance of central political control over nuclear weapons . The danger to such control that results from building TNWs can be traced from the Cuban crisis .
 This also has implications for SNFs, who would not be able to afford the elaborate command and control infrastructure that the superpowers developed . SNFs would be even more serious for them, as they would be unable to afford to use the infrastructure .
 The crises also demonstrated the need for greater skepticism in examining nuclear doctrines . Muscular nuclear doctrines might have some impact on domestic politics but are of little use in actual confrontations .
 U.S. strategy was implicitly an NFU strategy in October 1962, as was the Soviet strategy . American strategy in 1962 was implicitly implicit in the decision to adopt the NFU .
 'Deterrence was shown to be far more robust than most scholars and political leaders have assumed' 'It is not poised on any Tcnife's edge' nor was there any 'delicate balance' that the slightest tremor would upset .
 All this should induce . greater confidence in SNFs than has hitherto been the case. SNFs should be given more confidence in the SNFs .
 Most American participants and scholars were, till recently, convinced that correcting the strategic imbalance was the primary Soviet motivation . However, until recently, most American participants were convinced that correcting the deficit was the main Soviet motivation.
 Even as late as in 1992, Ray Cline, the CIA's Deputy Director for Research and Analysis, would insist that correcting the strategic imbalance was the primary Soviet objective in putting the missiles in Cuba .
 Anatoli I Gribkov, "The View from Moscow and Havana" was published in the book, "Anatoli" and "Gribkov and Smith, especially chps. Anatoli" in Gribk and Smith . The book was published by Gribakov and
 New research based on material released from American and Soviet archives about the events surrounding the 1962 crisis . This early work has been largely substantiated by new research .
 Excerpts from an Interview with Generals Curtis E LeMay, Leon W Johnson, David A Burchinal, and Jack J Catton, 94 .
 Much of the early history of the Cuban crisis suggested that Kennedy had refused to make any such trade-off . Even implicitly, he did, even implicitly .
 The UN initiative was known only to the President, his brother Robert Kennedy and Secretary of State Dean Rusk . It was to have been activated if Khrushchev rejected the deal on Jupiter trade-off .
 Khrushchev accepted the secret deal, thus obviating the need for this initiative . The secret deal was accepted by Khrushchevitch, but it was never discussed .
 A series of conferences were held, beginning in 1987, that brought together scholars and the participants in the crisis . The conferences were started in 1987 .
 Gribkov in ""The View from Moscow and Havana"" in Gribakov and Smith, Operation ANADRY, 27.05 . Smith . Smith, Smith, Gribk, Smith . Gribov and Smith .
 Gribkov, ""The View from Moscow and Havana"" in Russia and Cuba, is published by Smith and Smith in Russia's "Operation ANADYR, 27.05 .
 The TNW controversy has taken several twists and turns over the last decade, ever since the original revelations about the presence of the TNWs were made in 1992 .
 The United States had not detected the presence of TNWs in Cuba . No TNW operations were planned in OP PLAN 312, the United States plan for the invasion .
 The United States did have some contingency plans for responding to Soviet TNWs . However, the U.S. did not have plans to respond to the threat .
 Brahma Chellaney, ""Tactical Nukes,"" The Hindustan Times, January 27, 1999, quoted Brahma .
 Documents from East European archives reveal little difference between what Moscow was claiming publicly and what it was telling its allies in confidence . The Soviet Union had publicised its version, and declassified documents show little difference .
 Russian defector Arkady Shevchenko recounts the shock that the clash caused among the highest levels in the Kremlin . Additional circumstantial evidence that China was the initiator of the March 2 clash comes from the account of the Soviet defector .