 Many nuclear warheads were poised for launch in Cuba aimed at the U.S. Many of the warheads were meant to be aimed at Cuba . Many of them were launched at the United States .
 Five times more powerful than the Hiroshima bomb, the missiles might have meant the end of humanity . The missiles were five times the size of a nuclear bomb .
 From the start the U.S. saw Castro's ways to be communist, but he denied all accusations . Castro denies all accusations of being a communist . Castro was accused of being communist in the United States .
 The United States eventually cut off trade with Cuba on May 27, 1960 . The U.S. saw through his act and cut off Cuba trade with the Cuban government .
 That's when Nikita Khrushchev, the premier of the Soviet Union, stepped in . Nikita was the prime minister of the USSR during the Cold War .
 Then the United States started training Cuban exiles to deploy a surprise attack on Cuba . Then the U.S. started training ex-Cubans to carry out the attack .
 On April 17, 1961, the troops were moved into a bay known as the Bay of Pigs . The Bay was the site of the Cuban uprising .
 Khrushchev decided to build missile bases and installations in Cuba so they would have the upper hand if the U.S. decided to retaliate against the Soviet Union . The bases were built in Cuba to protect themselves from the United States .
 The next morning President John F Kennedy was informed about the missiles during breakfast . The next day he was informed of the missile threat .
 October 17, Kennedy met with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrie Gromyko and said that the U.S. would not tolerate Soviet missiles in Cuba . October 17 was Kennedy's first visit to Cuba .
 The alliance laid the ground for the missile stations in Cuba, and the Missile Crisis itself . This alliance laid ground for missile bases in Cuba and the missile crisis itself .
 The Cuban missile crisis marked a point where both sides almost fought a nuclear war but then decided to draw back . Both sides decided to pull back from the brink of nuclear war after the crisis .