 Rudolf Anderson Jr. streaked through the stratosphere 14 miles above a planet tied up in knots . His death may have saved the lives of millions of people .
 Air Force major had flown one of the first top-secret reconnaissance missions over Cuba . The mission confirmed the existence of Soviet missile sites just 90 miles from the American mainland .
 Anderson lobbied hard for the assignment when the mission was added to the schedule . Anderson was not originally scheduled to fly on this day, but he lobbied hard .
 Mission 3127 would be Anderson’s sixth foray over Cuba as part of “Operation Brass Knob” Anderson entered Cuban air space on mission 3127 . Soviet SA-2 surface-to-air missiles now operational and war seemingly imminent .
 The Soviet military tracked the intruding aircraft, fearing it was photographing secret locations of tactical nuclear weapons near America’s Guantanamo Bay Naval Base . The pilot was photographed by the Soviet military in the 1980s .
 Two surface-to-air missiles rocketed into the sky near the eastern port city of Banes . The missiles were fired at Banes, a port city in eastern Syria .
 Shrapnel pierced the cockpit along with Anderson’s pressurized flight suit and helmet, likely killing him instantly . Anderson was likely killed instantly by shrapnel in the cockpit .
 Word of the shootdown reached the White House Cabinet Room, which all day long had crackled with tension . Another U-2 plane had accidentally flown over the Soviet Union, sending MiG fighters scrambling in pursuit .
 Military leaders overwhelmingly urged Kennedy to launch airstrikes against Cuba’s air defenses the following morning . Cuban air defenses were the subject of a major U.S. strike .
 For Kennedy and Khrushchev, Anderson’s death crystallized their realization that the crisis was rapidly spiraling out of control . The president, however, correctly suspected that Soviet leader Nikita Khruschev had not authorized the downings of unarmed reconnaissance planes .
 Kennedy worried retaliatory airstrikes would inevitably result in all-out war . Kennedy worried that retaliatory strikes would inevitably lead to war . JFK worried that retaliation would inevitably end up being an act of war .
 The Soviets agreed to remove their nuclear missiles from Cuba, while the Americans pledged to withdraw intermediate nuclear missile from Turkey and not invade Cuba . The U.S. and the Soviets also pledged to remove intermediate missile missiles from Turkey .
 Rudolf Anderson posthumously became the first-ever recipient of the Air Force Cross, the service’s highest designation short of the Medal of Honor . Anderson chose “Good humor is the clear blue sky of the soul” as his high school yearbook quote .
 Anderson’s death “escalated the crisis significantly,” said Upcountry History Museum historian Courtney Tollison . Anderson's death escalated the crisis, she said . Anderson was the only person to die in the Upcountry history museum's history .