 On September 24, 1964, a copy of the official Warren Commission Report was delivered to President Lyndon Johnson in the Oval Office . National Archives: The Warren Commission report was delivered in 1964 . The report was presented to the president by President Johnson in September 1964 .
 Its conclusions were, in hindsight, as accurate as possible, given the commission's impossibly short investigative calendar and its utter lack of foreign intelligence . The commission's conclusion was, of course, accurate, given that the commission had a short timeline .
 It named, correctly, Lee Harvey Oswald as the lone shooter . It hypothesized that in shooting John F Kennedy he had been lashing out for reasons only he knew .
 A few weeks later, President Johnson's hidden tape recorder captured a phone conversation with Senator Richard Russell . President Johnson had pressured Russell to be on the Warren Commission .
 Johnson was on the phone with his old friend Mike Mansfield, the majority leader of the Senate . Mansfield is also the Senate majority leader .
 Johnson handpicked the members of the Warren Commission and directed its focus . Johnson had handpicked some of the panel members .
 The fact was, Lyndon Johnson never would believe the conclusions of the Warren Commission Report . The president never would have believed the findings of the report .
 A year before his death, in 1972, Johnson finally started revealing his secret to people outside his close circle . Johnson told George Weidenfeld, publisher of his autobiography, that one day he would prove the Oswald-Castro connection .
 There weren't enough days left at that point for Johnson to expose the truth . But there weren't too many days left for him to do so .
 Evidence from a variety of different sources, many of them newly available, can be pieced together to tell the real story for the first time . A conspiracy of silence would keep the facts hidden until now, 45 years later, when evidence is new available .
 Two charismatic leaders prevailed over the Western Hemisphere in the early 1960s . Both men rose to power with two fundamentally different visions of freedom .
 Initially, some saw a natural kinship between John E Kennedy and Fidel Castro, but they were each in the grip of the new cold war's paradigm, one of strictly defined opposites . The two men were in the grips of a new Cold War's paradigm .
 In many ways, the young Jack Kennedy was not much different from the young Fidel Castro . "In many ways," he says, "I'm not a kid who has a lot of respect for Fidel Castro," says Kennedy .
 Angel Castro lived as a gentrified peasant, self-made and considered rich on his own turf but still a lowly Guajiro in the eyes of the Cuban aristocracy . Joe Sr. had acquired his millions as a scheming, streetwise Irish outsider .
 Their talented sons leaped over decades, even centuries of class prejudice to become leaders by sheer force of personality . The talented sons had leaped . over decades to become . leaders by force of . personality .
 They were intellectually curious and articulate, articulate, easy in the company of men, and attracted to the spotlight . They were intellectual, articulate and easy in company, they said .
 Both Jack and Fidel came from large Catholic families, and both of their fathers made a sport of bedding women out of wedlock .
 Joe Sr. kept his mistresses out of sight in hotel rooms, at the penthouses of trusted friends, or on his private yacht . Joe Sr.'s mistresses were kept in the shadows of his hotel rooms .
 Angel took lovers wherever he desired them, including in his own home . Angel took his lovers wherever they desired, including his own house . Angel's lover took his lover wherever he wanted them, even in his home .
 Fidel, Raul, Fidel, and their siblings were born to Angel's housekeeper while she worked for his wife . Angel made no secret of the small shack full of his offspring, who lived just out of sight of the casa grande .
 It was not until Fidel was seventeen years old that Angel recognized him as his legal offspring . Angel recognized Fidel as his son Fidel when he was just 17 years old .
 Angel knew Fidel was exceptional and would grant him special privileges, sending him to the country's best preparatory school, keeping him in natty clothes, and furnishing him with a car as he approached college years . Still, Angel knew that Fidel would be exceptional .
 Fidel Castro's sister Juanita noted that he treated the peasants on the plantation with the same cruelty as his father did . Fidel's sister said he was cruel to the peasants . Juanita said he treated them like his father .
 He made no public declaration on behalf of the poor until he joined Cuba's leftward drift in his early twenties . Jack Kennedy was first elected to Congress in his first term .
 Fidel overcame his “rustic’ upbringing to be reasonably well liked at El Colegio de Belen in Havana . Fidel overcame a 'rustic' upbringing to become a well-liked student .
 The priests who taught there sensed a certain moral indifference in him . But they also sensed that he had a moral indifference, they say .
 "He accepted leadership from no one, taking only the wise counsel of one brilliant priest named Llorente," he said .
 The unpretentious, honest, and egalitarian PT boat commander of World War II gave way to a cooler peer of the realm . His charm became more calculating, and he became a more calculating peer .
 He understood, intellectually, that power could improve the lives of those less fortunate . He was capable of kindness, and he understood that power can help others, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 He seemed content to believe that “people who are different have different responses.”
 It was Jack and Fidel's younger brothers, Bobby and Raul, who schooled the older ones in their humanity . It was the naturally empathetic ones, Bobby, Raul said .
 When Jack made his run for the presidency, it was Bobby who tutored him in the nuances of American poverty and injustice . Bobby was Jack's mentor in his presidential campaign .
 Fidel made his first triumphal tour of the U.S. after he had vanquished the dictator Fulgencio Batista . Raul waylaid him in a Houston hotel and berated him for not telling Americans that he was a Marxist .
 The garrulous yet emotionally remote older boys gained depth in the presence of their kid brothers, but conversely, they were also pushed to positions of passionate intransigence, too . The film is set in New York and London .
 By the early sixties, the brothers had reached their initial goals of winning the U.S. presidency and leadership in Cuba . The brothers' initial goals were winning the American presidency .
 Historians debate whether Fidel ever actually murdered someone . Historians have debated whether he ever actually killed someone . Fidel Castro was assassinated in 1968 .
 After the U.S. backed assassinations of Trujillo and Diem, Castro was certain he was next . Castro was killed by the United States in 1953 .
 Kennedy and Castro began directing their newfound power to destroying each other . Under pressure from within and without, Castro and Kennedy began directing his newfound power . Castro and Castro were under pressure to destroy each other.
 When Jack came to power, he considered Fidel to be Cuba's liberator after the corrupt cruelties of Batista, but Eisenhower and Nixon had already been plotting a coup .
 The secret war against the Castros was forced upon the Kennedys by the American Right, by Jack's early disdain for moderating “liberalism,” and by the Hard Left pressure exerted by Raul and Che Guevara .
 Political decapitation was seen as tactically concise and morally expedient . Assassination was only one tool in the American kit, but given the nightmare cults that had so recently empowered Hitler and Stalin, political decapitation seen as politically expedient and tactically .
 This secret war, however, would leave deeply buried scars on the heart of America . The secret war would leave a deeply buried scar .
 In November 1961 the CIAs Cuba desk officers Bill Harvey and Sam Halpern had a plan to remove Castro . The plan was the next phase in the ongoing attempt to remove the Castro regime .
 Operation Mongoose is named after a carnivorous predator that kills its prey after stealing its eggs . The operation is called 'Operation Mongoose' and is named for the carnivorous predators that kill its prey . Operation Mangoose is the first of its kind in the world, killing its
 The Kennedy White House and the CIA had a goal in mind for the Castros and their political descendants . It thus both dispatches its enemy and removes its progeny, thereby preventing any line of succession .
 The operation had somewhere between $50 million and $150 million to spend on its endeavor . The plans were to continue fomenting revolution, and, by most estimates, were to be foment revolution .
 The White House had taken the Cuban operation out of the purview of the CIAs Western Hemisphere Division . Bobby Kennedy placed it directly under the control of Bobby Kennedy and the White House staff .
 On March 16, 1962, a meeting convened in the Oval Office with the goal of setting presidential guidelines for Operation Mongoose . The meeting was intended to set guidelines for the operation .
 The meeting was attended by the president; Bobby; the newly installed director of the CIA, John McCone, and all the rest of the innermost players in the secret war .
 It was Lansdale who wrote a memorandum of this meeting, which remains the only known documentary evidence that Jack and Bobby ever endorsed or authorized a hit on Fidel Castro .
 Lansdale gave briefing on training of Cuban exile insurgents in the fine points of guerrilla warfare .
 The president then reiterated that he was not yet ready to approve any direct American military involvement in such plans . He said he is yet to approve direct U.S. military involvement .
 Lately he had made many speeches warning against the new insurrectionary forms of war, and calling for improved countermeasures . Lately, he had been making many speeches .
 Bobby briefly described a possible opportunity in which members of the Cuban underground might stake out Fidel Castro . Bobby then briefly described the possibility of a Cuban underground stake-out with Fidel .
 Lansdale's memo, written later that same afternoon, called ‘die plan’ “worth assessing firmly and pursuing vigorously” Lansdale’s memo later that afternoon . Lansdale: “The plan is worth assessing firmly, pursuing vigorously"
 In the words of a former CIA director, “The language of the memo speaks for itself.”
 The only thing that Robert Kennedy can be referring to is the assassination of Castro . Robert Kennedy was referring to Castro's assassination, the only thing he can say is that he's referring to .
 Fidel goaded Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev to fire the first nuke in the Missile Crisis in October 1962 . Fidel went on to embrace the Red path, goading Soviet Premier to fire nuke .
 Given Cuba's rogue tendencies, Khrushchev had made it it his business to stay on top of U.S. efforts . The Soviets had learned of Operation Mongoose, and the Soviets learned of it .
 Soviet leader started taking steps to contain Castro's megalomania . Later, when Castro embraced the Chinese Communists, the Soviet leader began taking steps .
 There is evidence that the Soviet premier and the U.S. president colluded in this regard, according to reports . There is also evidence that they secretly discussed the political neutralization of Fidel Castro in Cuba .
 U.S. plans to kill Castro continued in the last year of JFK's life . JFK's last year, while those more circumspect means were in play, the United States planned to kill him . Castro was assassinated in 1961 .
 Fidel Castro became more certain that he was the next hit on the Kennedys' list . With the U.S.-backed assassinations of other world leaders, Fidel became even more certain he was next hit .
 Rolando Cubela was a military hero of the Cuban revolution who had secretly grown disillusioned with Fidel's Communist leanings . The CIA began to focus upon one of the Cubela's disillusioned military leaders .
 He began flirting with CIA agents in order to form a possible alliance aimed at el presidente's removal . He thus began to flirt with the CIA agents .
 According to the CIA, there was no contact with Cubela from August 29, 1962, until September 1963 . The CIA says Cubela was in contact with the CIA from September 1963 to August 1963 .
 Officer Nestor Sanchez and his partner met Cubela at a safe house in Porto Alegre, Brazil, on September 7 . They reassured Cubela that the agency had decided to use him in the next phase of their plan to overthrow Castro .
 Cubela told Sanchez that he wanted assurances at the top who could ensure America's support for his actions . They discussed ways of approaching other Cuban military officers . Cubela said he wanted to decapitate the Cuban regime .
 Plot hurtled forward in hopes of success before 1964 elections in the U.S. The plot was launched in the hope of success in 1964 elections .
 Bobby had pushed for a secret base in Costa Rica, which was carrying out raids in Cuba with materials provided by the Defense Department . Bobby pushed for the secret base to carry out raids .
 They bombed Cuban infrastructure, such as railroads, bridges, and power plants . They smuggled in radio equipment, arms, and supplies to resistance forces .
 Fidel Castro publicly charged the U.S. with responsibility for an air attack on Santa Clara, Cuba, in September . On September 6, Fidel charged the United States with the attack .
 A G2 officer known as Oscar Marino became aware that Cubela was a counterrevolutionary . It was during that summer that G2 became aware of Cubela's activities .
 The same day that Cubela was having his meeting with the CIA in Brazil, Fidel was due at a reception at the Brazilian embassy in Havana . The day Cubela had the CIA meeting, the same day was due to attend a reception .
 Niciximo pulled aside Associated Press correspondent Daniel Harker, within earshot of other journalists . There, niciximo pulls aside Associated AP correspondent . The lider pulled aside reporter Daniel .
 Harker, a native of Colombia, spoke fluent Spanish . He was preferred by Castro for American press interviews because of his accuracy in translating . Castro preferred him to speak to the press because he spoke fluent English .
 He started in about the recent attacks, the other reporters bending in to hear more . He started talking about the attacks on the U.S. Capitol Hill .
 Fidel strode on into the reception and began shaking hands, resplendendendending in his olive fatigues . With that, he strode onto the stage and shook hands with Fidel .
 The New Orleans Times-Picayune was read by a young Castro supporter named Lee Harvey Oswald . Two days later, the story hit the Associated Press and the U.S. newspapers .
 The apartment at 4936 Collingwood was the nineteenth home this boy had known . The apartment was the 19th home he'd lived in .
 Child psychologists examined Lee Harvey Oswald's future as a disaster waiting to happen . Raised without a father, in the clutches of a mentally unstable mother, he was examined by child psychologists .
 Lee may have suffered brain damage at the age of five when a chest of drawers toppled over on his head during a move . There is some evidence that Lee suffered some brain damage when he was just five .
 From then on, he would suffer occasional blackouts, doing things he couldn't remember, walking out in the middle of classes and wandering his school's hallways . He would suffer from blackouts .
 A year after his outreach to the YPSL, Oswald enlisted in the Marines, where his pro-Communist rants rendered him something between a joke and a pariah . Oswald, desperate to leave his mother, enlisted in his mother's Army .
 After an early discharge in September 1959, he almost immediately boarded a ship as the first leg of a pilgrimage to Moscow . He intended to defect to Moscow, where he planned to defect . After his early discharge, he boarded the ship to board a ship to make his way to Russia .
 When he was rejected by the Soviets, the youngster forced their hand by attempting suicide . The youngster forced the Soviets to accept his suicide attempt .
 The Soviets sent him off to Minsk, where the KGB would babysit him around the clock for the next two and a half years . Faced with the cold war equivalent of a public relations nightmare, the Soviets decided to smile upon him, sending him off .
 It was in Minsk that he married the tempestuous young Marina Prusakova . She was the niece of an elite Soviet intelligence officer . He married her niece's aunt, a former Soviet spy .
 As the Castros continued to co-opt the Cuban revolution, Rani flirted ever more heavily with the Soviet state . He was sending his youngest spies to Minsk for special training at the academy of the Russians' MVD .
 Among the students were Jose Abrantes, the personal assistant to the Cuban intelligence chief, Ramiro Valdes Menendez . Fabian Escalante Font, a young agent of increasingly dangerous reputation, would rise to the top of the G2 .
 Oswald's moviegoing habits, every piece of cake and cup of coffee he consumed in public, his stinginess on dates with women he wasn't enthused about . Oswald's preference for blondes, his ignorance of Marxist-Leninist theory, the records and appliances he bought,
 The “official” record of his life in Minsk omitted only what reflected badly on the Soviet intelligence apparatus . The ‘official’ record of Minsk, Belarusian, was omitted only .
 Oswald spent so much time on Ulyanov Street that he soon became acquainted with a number of the junior Cuban spies . Oswald spent most of his time in the Soviet Union during the Second World War .
 Lee would brag to Marina that he had gotten tight with some of the young future Cuban ""ministers"" and expected that he might be such a minister there himself one day . Lee bragged that he hoped to be a minister in Cuba himself .
 Recently released KGB files stated that “Lee Harvey Oswald is ideologically unsound and psychically unstable” in 1962, a year and a half before the assassination . KGB files said that Oswald was “psychologically unstable and politically unsound’s”
 Recently, actors from the Cuban side have corroborated the Cuban link to Oswald . The Cuban side is still alive in the Americas .
 One of them, who went by the name “Oscar Marino” in our talks, had been a senior Cuban spy, a founder of G2, and a revolutionary companero of Fidel's . One of the names of Oscar Marino was a revolutionary of Fidel Castro .
 It was his esteemed place in the national leadership that made him privy to the overtures . Oswald overtures were made to him by his position in the country's national leadership .
 It took over a year of negotiations for him to agree to sit for interviews with us . It took him more than a year to sit down for the first time .
 In 2005, he said he had “had enough” of ideology and bloody intrigue . He lived, and perhaps still lives, in a Latin American metropolis . He sighed that he had "had enough"
 He felt “no love for Kennedy,” and still considered himself a revolutionary, but was demoralized by the “corruption” of Castro's original promise . He still felt ‘no love” for Kennedy .
 When asked when the Cuban secret service first made contact with Oswald, Oscar flinched and gave a long pause, gazing out a window at the tops of some mimosa trees .
 He had also been present during high-level discussions on how to make contact with Oswald . He was also present during discussions about how to contact Oswald .
 According to the KGB document, a Cuban operative met Oswald “repeatedly, several times,” with the first rendezvous at the end of 1962 . The KGB document says the first meeting was exactly when Marino said it had been .
 Oswalds' relationship was on the emotional edge . Cubela liaison occurred during a period of exceptional marital discord for the Oswalds .
 According to recent inter-views, some G2 money may have appeared at just the right time . G2 may have arrived at the right place at the moment .
 Oswald's known expenses from October to January, based on a laborious reconstruction by the Warren Commission, were $537, and his earnings were $892 . Paying off the loan would have left him $101 in the red—making this a rather strange time to settle a major
 Where this money came from has been a source of speculation for nearly half a century . It's been a long-standing mystery for nearly 50 years .
 Oscar Marino says money was provided by the Cubans, who preferred to recruit “true believers” not men who could be bought for big money . Oscar Marino: "Cubans prefer to recruit 'true believers' not 'big-money'
 The small payments gave Lee some fiscal breathing room, and he did not spend conspicuously—just enough, on specific needs . Lee: "I'm not going to spend too much, but I'm going to make sure I'm not spending too much"
 He would not be able to receive a new, updated passport before that debt was cleared, and apparently he might soon be doing some traveling .
 Oswald was more optimistic about his chances of becoming a Cuban spy than those of his G2 contacts . Oswald was optimistic about the chances of working with the Cuban government .
 He became an aggressive “self-recruiter,” and his first attempt to impress had its genesis at a February 13, 1963, party in Fort Worth, Texas .
 Oswald's plans to impress the Cubans were inspired by a German intellectual . Oswald was inspired by the German intellectual who inspired him to do so . Oswald's plan to impress Cubans was inspired in his plans .
 Oswald tried to divert his hatred toward a local race-baiter, a fervid anti-Castroite . The German tried to distract Oswald's hatred toward the retired Gen. Gen. George H. Eisenhower .
 Oswald ordered a cheap pistol and an Italian rifle by mail by mail . Oswald ordered the guns by mail in August . Oswald had already ordered a pistol and a rifle . Oswald died in September .
 Oswald took a shot at Walker from his fence line on April 10, 1963, as he sat inside by a window . Oswald had reconnaissance of Walker's upscale home . Oswald shot Walker in the head with a bullet to the head .
 Oswald thought he had killed Walker, but he had missed by inches, and he was never a suspect in the assault . Walker's death remained unsolved until Lee was arrested for killing Kennedy . Walker was never found guilty of Walker's murder .
 Even then it was seen as just another example of his political derangement . Even then, it was thought to be just another attempt to smear himself .
 In the awful suspense that followed the Walker shooting, Marina suggested that Lee leave town for a while . Maybe go back to New Orleans, where he had lived as a boy and still had relatives .
 Cuban ex-Cuban ex-cuba leader travels to New Orleans to talk with Cuban exiles . He's been in the Big Easy since April 24 .
 Oswald's attempts to infiltrate the local anti-Castro exiles apparently impressed no one in that city or in Havana, where he most desired to make an impact . Over the next four months, Oswald's . attempts to . infiltrate the . anti- Castro exiles seem to have failed
 He learned that the Kennedys were planning another invasion of his beloved Cuba . But he did learn some things on the streets, most notably that they were planning to invade .
 It was also the G2's staging point for Cuban terrorists and assassins . It was not only a place where all had embassies in close proximity, it was also a G2 staging point .
 Oswald's G2 contacts were cursory at this point, perhaps because he could not have been a reliable operative but more of a wild card useful only for ""disposable,"" one-off actions . Oswald's contacts with G2 may have been cursory, maybe because he
 Oswald appears to have felt pressed to take more direct action to gain their trust . Oswald thus appears to be feeling pressed to . to gain more trust from the public .
 Oswald spent five days amid the spy intrigue of Mexico City weeks before he murdered President Kennedy . Oswald spent the time in Mexico City amid spy intrigue in late September 1963, weeks before his assassination .
 The CIA had peppered the opposition's embassies with hidden microphones, phone taps, and surveillance cameras . The CIA claimed after the assassination that no photos or tapes of Oswald in Mexico exist . Oswald was killed in August 1963 .
 Oswald spent at least half of his time in the company of Cuban spies . Oswald spent most of his life in Cuba, where he was killed by the Cuban government in 1961 .
 Oswald spent at least half of his time in the company of Cuban spies during his trip to Mexico City . Oswald spent most of his trip in Mexico City with Cuban spies . Oswald is believed to have been killed by the Cuban government .
 His behavior was so erratic, so green and yet desperate, that they refused his request for a visa to Cuba . The Cuban government refused to grant him a visa because of his behavior .
 Oswald went to a university and tried to enlist the help of some Mexican radicals . That night, we now know, Oswald tried to get help of the Mexican radicals. Oswald was in Mexico at the time of his assassination .
 They took him out on the town, but when one of their leaders interceded on his behalf the next day at the Cuban Embassy, he was told to forget it . The Cuban Embassy in Havana, Cuba, is now in the midst of a crisis .
 Oswald went back to make a last stand at the embassies later that afternoon . Not until he broke down, pulled a gun, wept, and finally claimed that he would prove his revolutionary loyalty by killing “that bastard, Kennedy” The doors to his Communist utopia suddenly opened
 The authors learned that one low level G2 agent saw him repeatedly in the Cuban Embassy garage . He met with an elite G2 operative, a red-haired black man, in the garage .
 Others, including a Mexican insurance investigator there on business, would also see him .
 An attractive Mexican receptionist would take him briefly as her lover . The wife and daughter of a future Nobel laureate would party with him at an apartment full of Cuban diplomats and staffers . All within the span of his ‘lost week” in the Mexican capital .
 Oswald met with CIA agents in Paris to receive the weapon with which he was meant to kill Fidel . Seven weeks later, while Oswald lay in wait for the president, the first Cuban who recruited him would be meeting with the CIA .
 It was overcast in the City of Light, but, despite the chill, the sidewalk cafes were already aglow in the city .
 Cubela had met with a man who called himself James Clark a few weeks earlier . The two men arrived at the same luxury apartment building in which, just weeks earlier, one of them, Cubela met with Clark .
 ""Clark"" was the alias used by the CIA's Cuba desk chief, Desmond FitzGerald, when he was on covert operations . In fact, "Clark" was used by Desmond Fitzgerald, who was the Cuba desk boss .
 Cubela had been convinced that he was a senior American official; he wore his blueblood authority well . Even without knowing the man's real identity, Cubela was convinced he was an official .
 The man known as Clark had given Cubela the assurances he had demanded . The operation under discussion had been approved at the highest levels of the U.S. government, he said .
 Bobby Kennedy, the president's brother, had contacted Cubela directly . Cubela says she was contacted by Bobby Kennedy within days of the first meeting .
 Cubela would not have returned if he had not received the guarantees . Cubela was not allowed to return to the country .
 CIA agent known to Cubela as “Sanson’s” placed a small, black leather case on a table before him . Cubela: "Sanson, known to me as ‘Sanson," was a CIA agent . He says he was given the case
 In his other hand he held a tiny flashlight, and when he switched it on, a fluorescent beam revealed a micro-thin needle where the ballpoint would ordinarily be .
 Sanson suggested Black Leaf 40, a slow-acting commercially available pesticide . Sanson: Black Leaf is a slow, but effective pesticide. Sanson suggests it is not a pesticide .
 Cubela had a house at Veradero Beach, right next door to one of Fidel's many domiciles . This seemed like the place for an easy strike .
 Cubela would be frisked, and a dart gun would give him away, police say . Cubela says he's not afraid to get in close to him, but he's afraid to .
 The case officer promised once again that rifles and explosives would be forthcoming . Cubela and his fellow insurrectionists would need weapons for both a palace coup and a revolt .
 These munitions were in fact stockpiled at a secret location in rural Cuba that would be revealed at the last moment . The munitions were already stockpiled in secret locations .
 Sanson listened, briefly, and then returned the phone to its cradle, pausing for a long moment before he spoke . Sanson: "I don't know what I'm going to do with my life," he said .
 The president of the U.S. had just been shot, he said, in Texas . The president was shot in Texas, the president was killed in the attack .
 Marino, wanting to be clear, added, “That doesn't mean he was brainwashed—that wasn't necessary.” Marino said . Marino said, ‘That doesn’t mean that wasn't brainwashed. That wasn”t necessary.
 The evidence is overwhelming that a Cuban-style Communist who had learned of the planned U.S. reinvasion was the sole triggerman . He did it with the aid and comfort of Fidel and Raid Castro, the author says .
 It could even be said that he reduced the chances of a big, hot war, simply by ending the little one . Because that small, proxy war had provoked a nuclear confrontation 13 months earlier .
 Oswald's Cuban contacts were so great that it nearly provoked a new nuclear showdown . On the other hand, the fears his crime raised in the minds of international leaders, who worried over his Cuban contacts .
 His duality was hiding in plain sight in the screed he wrote on the SS Maasdam during his return voyage .
 His manifesto debated the relative merits and injustices of the world's two dominant systems . It then ended with a prediction of an imminent nuclear war .
 Oswald's effect on the cold war was perhaps a wash . Internationally speaking, by averting nuclear war on one hand and increasing its likelihood on the other, Oswald's impact on the Cold War was perhaps wash .
 "Domestically, however, his effect has been, up until now, more definitive," he said . Domestically .
 In the short run, his crime further polarized the United States in an already extreme moment . His crime further polarizes the U.S. in the short-term .
 In the longer term, it split the country open and made it susceptible to a form of political decay that was nearly as insidious as the recoil of the crime itself . In the long term, the country was split by the crime that split it open .
 Brothers in Arms by Gus Russo and Stephen Molton © 2008. The book is published by Brothers In Arms .
 American Heritage is a 70-year tradition of trusted historical writing and the volunteers that sustain it with a donation to American Heritage . Please support the tradition of trustful historical writing by writing for the first time .
 A distinguished historian of Cuban affairs examines the critical years when the Castro revolution became a communist dictatorship . The Castro revolution was the birthplace of the Castro regime .
 In the twilight of Castro’s regime, one of the soldiers who put him in power recalls what it was like to be a fidelista up in the hills . The U-2, Cuba, and the CIA I Fought For Fidelby Neill Macaulay .
 The author visits there in the late afternoon of a straitened era and looks back on four centuries of passionate misunderstandings . The author looks back at four centuries, looking back to four centuries .
 Richard B Trask was JFK's official photographer . The day Kennedy was shot was the most important assignment of his career . Trask's assignment was a routine chore for JFK .
 The magazine was forced to suspend print publication in 2013, but a group of volunteers saved the archives and relaunched it in digital form in 2017 . The magazine has been relaunching in digital format since 2013 .
 Please consider a donation to help us keep this American treasure alive . Free subscription to our weekly Washington Post .