 It had been, to say the least, an interesting and challenging situation . It was an interesting, challenging situation, she said . She said: "It had been a very difficult time for me to come to terms with the situation"
 I’ll always remember the late President with deep respect because, in the final analysis, he showed himself to be sober-minded and determined to avoid war . I'll always remember him as a 'wise-minded' and 'determined' leader .
 He didn't overestimate America’s might, and he left himself a way out of the crisis . He didn’t overestimate U.S. might . He left himself an opportunity to avoid a crisis .
 President Obama turned his back on right wing forces in the U.S. who were trying to goad him into taking military action against Cuba . He showed real wisdom and statesmanship when he turned back, he says .
 “We behaved with dignity and forced the United States to demobilize and to recognize Cuba – not de jure, but de facto. If countries desire to avoid war enough, they can find a compromise to avoid it,” he says .
 In other words, one must have an intelligent, sober-minded counterpart with whom to deal with . One must also have a sober, soberminded counterpart to deal .
 At that point in his political career, my partner was Kennedy, the head of the mightiest capitalist country in the world . At that time, he was in a relationship with Kennedy, who is now the world's richest man .
 I believe he was a man who understood the situation correctly and who genuinely did not want war . I believe that he was not trying to get involved in a war .
 Kennedy realized that the time had passed when such disputes could be decided by force . Kennedy was also someone we could trust. He realized that he realized that such disputes had not been settled by force. Kennedy realized this was not the case of a war .
 To resolve a crisis, both leaders must be sober-minded and trustworthy, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: To resolve the crisis, they must resolve it, and both leaders need to be sober .
 “I repeat that it was a correct move on our part. Strobe Talbott said . “It was the correct move,” said Talbott . Strobe said . Talbott: “We are not going to go to jail. We are going to jail
 This detail gave us some reassurance that at a critical movement there could be direct talks, direct talks that wouldn’t have to go through the diplomatic labyrinth, says CNN.com .
 The two met a goat on the bar over an abyss . But it could be like a fairy tale when the two met each other . The goat is a goat over the bar .
 Both sides need to concede to resolve a crisis, especially if alternative is a destructive, nuclear war . In international crises, both sides must concede, especially in the case of nuclear war, writes Peter Bergen .