 The largest misconception was the idea that America thought this crisis was about defending Cuba against possible invasion some broader implications* with relations to … infiltration* into South America … theories that have nothing to do with reality .
 The reality is that after the Bay of Pigs Fidel Castro announced he officially joined the Soviet bloc . The reality was that he joined the Communist Party in the 1960s .
 The obligation* of the Soviets was to defend all their clients, all their allies . Otherwise they would lose face and your allies would not trust you. The Soviets would not be trusted by their allies, and their allies would lose trust .
 Cuba, after 1961, became for the Soviet Union the same as West Berlin to the United States . Cuba was a small useless piece of land deep inside hostile* territory .
 The Cuban situation had its origins in the nuclear arms race; an expensive competition between the USA and USSR . However, the Americans easily bested* the Soviets in terms of nuclear weapon technology and deployment .
 Khrushchev was determined to assert* his country as America's equal in military, diplomatic, economic and scientific strength . Despite the ""peaceful co-existence"" Khrushche was determined .
 Khrushchev believed capitalism would ultimately destroy itself and communism would inevitably spread . In 1959, the Cuban Revolution resulted in Fidel Castro's revolutionaries overthrowing the corrupt and despotic Batista regime .
 The planned clandestine placement of Soviet in Cuba, just 90km from Florida, meant the warning time in America to prepare for a nuclear attack would be less than one minute . It would have been less than a minute .
 Khrushchev reasoned that the missiles would not only deter* any American attack on Cuba, but they could also be used as a bargaining chip to force the West out of Berlin . In consultation with his military Chiefs of Staff, Kennedy ordered preparations to begin for a full conventional military invasion of
 Kennedy responds to the USSR's build-up of nuclear weapons on the island of Cuba . Kennedy on 22 October 1962 in which he responds to Cuba's nuclear weapons .
 All ships of any kind bound for Cuba from whatever nation or port will, if found to contain cargoes of offensive weapons, be turned back . We are not at this time, however, denying the necessities* of life as the Soviets attempted to do in their Berlin blockade of 1948
 I call upon him further to abandon this course of world domination and to join in an historic effort to end the perilous* arms race and transform the history of man. I call on him further .
 It would mean for us to conduct our relations with other countries not by reason, but by yielding to tyranny . You want to intimidate* us. It would be for us not to conduct relations by reason but by yield to tyranny, he says .