 President Kennedy's assassination was the result of the assassination of President Kennedy . He explains how these programs tragically backfired when they were joined with extremists and key government officials .
 The evidence of the master conspiracy is developed step-by-step until the powerful people behind the plot are revealed . The master conspiracy will be revealed in the final stages of the plot .
 The Zapruder film was the first Zapruders to film a film that was released in the U.S. in 1945 . The film was shot in New York City, New York and Washington, DC .
 It gives me a chance to correct some errors or omissions in the original, and to report major new work that has buttressed my original conclusions . The new work is published in the next edition of this week's edition of CNN Living .
 Roy Hargraves, not Frank Sturgis, is the person in the photo . The photo was taken in the Schoolbook Depository's sixth floor .
 A new Appendix E discusses one of a category of critics who reacted against Bloody Treason because it undercut their long-held theory that the Z-Film is authentic .
 Appendix F discusses startling new evidence of involvement of CIA’s National Photo Interpretation Center with President Lyndon Johnson in the alteration of the Zapruder film . A new appendix F discusses the CIA's involvement with President Johnson .
 Murder in Dealey Plaza LL: President Kennedy's skull and brain were altered in autopsy . What I wrote in Bloody Treason about x-rays (assisted by Dr. David Mantik about alterations of X-rays of President Kennedy’s skull and . brain, plus much more
 Mantik's continued work has held up and expanded by his continued work . Mantik: "The legacy of Mantik and Mantik continues to be unique"
 Another example of great progress in supporting my work about the Zapruder film is Dr. Dr. Bob Greene's conclusion that it is a forgery . Dr. Greene has concluded that the film is a fake .
 Costella concludes that the Z-Film was drastically altered by optically cutting and pasting, frame-by-frame on a new background of Dealey Plaza filmed either just before or just after the assassination . In brief, Costella concluded that the new background was filmed either before or
 CNN's John Sutter confirms all of his conclusions about frame removal, the impossible head turns of secret service agent Greer and the false spray of blood and eruption from the president’s head .
 Costella, with expertise in photographic blur analysis, also discusses other areas of the film showing forgery and much more . Costella has expertise in photography blur analysis . He also discusses the use of forgery in the film .
 Analysis of sprocket holes in the film and the area between them is further evidence of a forgery . Included in this is an analysis of the sprocket hole analysis .
 He concludes, as I did, that the hasty work of the conspirators was a desperately executed, botched job . It was done fast enough to keep up with the controlled releases in Life Magazine, he says .
 The greatest political crime in all USS. history was the biggest political crime of all time . But, nonetheless, with the help of others in government and elsewhere, the conspirators succeeded long enough to live .
 Many officials in our government must have known about it, it's thought . And, when we extend this reasoning further, many officials in government must've known . Many officials must have knew about it.
 Johnson browbeat Earl Warren into a cover-up by using false national security reasons . We do know that he browbeat Warren into covering up the scandal . We also know that Johnson browbed Warren into the cover up .
 William Matson Law interviewed FBI agents James Sibert and Francis X O’Neill on November 22, 1963 . O'Neill witnessed the entire autopsy conducted at Bethesda Naval Hospital .
 Mr Law’s book has amplified what I wrote in Bloody Treason, and David Lifton's work in his book, Best Evidence . Mr Law's book has amplified what he wrote, and Mr Lifton’�s truly heroic, pioneer work in Best Evidence,
 Mr Sibert sent him a copy of Noel Twyman’s book Bloody Treason as a token of thanks for the interview .
 Twyman’s book brings to the fore questions concerning the shipping casket versus the ornate display casket, body alteration, the forged X-ray and autopsy pictures, etc. The book also discusses the forged autopsy pictures and body alteration .
 I have looked carefully at my conclusions in Chapter 32 written over twelve years ago about the JFK assassination . The JFK assassination was JFK's assassination . I have concluded that the assassination was a mistake .
 "I have nothing to change now except that my cases about Lyndon Johnson and forgery of the Zapruder film have only gotten stronger," he says . He says he has no plans to change the situation .
 The assassination of President Kennedy was about survival, power, and dangerous secrets . President Kennedy's assassination was about surviving, power .
 It was a backlash against the Kennedy brothers for what they were intent on accomplishing . The Kennedy brothers were trying to take over the White House from the Kennedy family .
 Noel Twyman: "All the while ran blood, great Caesar fell. Which all the while ... ran blood" Noel wrote .
 Then I, and you, and all of us fell down, whilst bloody treason fourish’d over us. Then I ... fell down. Whilst bloody treason . Fourish'd . over us . Then I fell down .
 Mark Antony in Julius Caesar, William Shakespeare, is an advocate for the prosecution . He writes as a prosecutor who is convinced of the guilt of the accused but must present a case to the jury .
 "I state clearly up front where I am coming from and what I believe. In other words, I state clearly ... what I'm coming from," he said .
 "I look for good solid reasons from the start, which will instruct me how to sustain their attack," says Stuart Lancaster . "Good solid reasons" will instruct him how to maintain their attack, he says .
 Michel de Montaigne's new book opens in Paris, France . He writes to give a simplified picture of the crime before plunging into complexities that must follow .
 This method will be used for the book as a whole, and for each chapter . This method is used for both the book and the chapter .
 "I believe the reader will appreciate that there is a constant struggle, in absorbing this vastly complicated material, to separate the forest from the trees"
 An account describing the forest alone is insufficient; an account that is believable needs trees . An account of the forest is not enough to be believable, it needs more trees .
 The truth of the Kennedy assassination cannot be explained just with broad concepts . Kennedy assassination can't be explained by broad concepts like broad concepts, author says .
 It needs hard, scientific-forensic evidence, authentic documents, and reliable testimonies to establish proof of the basic allegations . The case needs hard-scientific-forensics evidence and authentic documents .
 The book has been designed so that the reader can go along with me as I try to untangle—and, yes, possibly so/ve—the crime of the century . The book is designed to be a guide to the reader as part of the book's journey .
 "I found the writing to be an incredible adventure and a learning experience beyond my expectations," says author . "The writing was an incredible experience," she says .
 I trust that the reader will, at least part, share these rewards with me . The reader will be able to read the rewards of this book .
 The book proceeds on many parallel tracks—sometimes maddening, sometimes confusing—but what I found to be necessary if I were to have any hope of achieving a complete picture, says author .
 The first part, Prelude, develops an hypothesis based on superficial evidence . The second part, Murder and Cover-Up, develops key forensic-scientific evidence, including medical evidence .
 The third part, Gangsters, Cops, and Spies, develops evidence concerning organized crime, the Dallas police, the CIA, and military intelligence . The book also develops evidence about organized crime and Dallas police .
 The fourth part, Right-Wing Extremists and Power Politics, develops evidence concerning the military-industrial complex, right-wing extremists in the U.S. and abroad . Eastern European immigrants, and anti-Castro Cuban exiles, also develop evidence .
 The fifth part, Conspiracy and Cover-Up in Washington, D.C., develops evidence concerning the Secret Service, J. Edgar Hoover, and Lyndon Johnson . The sixth part of the book is a book on conspiracy and cover-up .
 The final chapter is a summing-up and presents a theory of the assassination based on what I learned and discovered . The last chapter will be a conclusion to the assassination theory .
 There is no longer significant historical controversy as to the question of whether or not John F Kennedy was assassinated by a conspiracy .
 This was confirmed by the House Select Committee on Assassinations in 1979 . This was based on its simple conclusion that there were at least two gunmen . The committee concluded there were two gunmen in the attack .
 The scientific evidence available to the committee indicated that it is probable that more than one person was involved in the President’s murder . The committee said that it was probable that it would be possible to believe that more people were involved .
 "It demands a reexamination of all that was thought to be true in the past," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "And it demands a new look at the past"
 The committee’s investigation of Oswald and Ruby showed a variety of relationships that may have matured into an assassination conspiracy . Further, the committee's investigation of the relationships showed that . The committee also showed that Oswald's relationship with Ruby was a relationship that may not have matured .
 Oswald and Ruby turned out to be “loners,” as they had been painted in the 1964 investigation . Neither Oswald nor Ruby were "loners," as they were painted in 1964 investigation into the 1964 shooting .
 Committee unable to identify other gunman or nature of the conspiracy . Committee says it was unable firmly to identify the other gunman .
 This conclusion was based on the evidence that Jack Ruby stalked and killed Oswald and was connected to organized crime . Ruby was accused of being involved in organized crime in the killing of Oswald . This conclusion is based on evidence that Ruby was involved with organized crime and stalked Oswald .
 On the question of conspiracy, the evidence was also compelling, the author says . "The evidence is also compelling," he says .
 The Warren Commission and the FBI investigations of conspiracy were so seriously flawed that their conclusions of no evidence of conspiracy could not be given any weight . The Warren . Commission and FBI investigations were so flawed they could not give any weight to their conclusions .
 There was scientific evidence, as well as human testimony, of two gunmen shooting at the President in Dealey Plaza . But most important, there was also human testimony from the two gunmen .
 The Committee was aware that the most plausible explanation for the murder of Oswald by Jack Ruby within forty-eight hours of the assassination was to silence him . It took into account the evidence of significant associations of both Oswald and Ruby with groups and individuals with strong motivation to assassinate the President .
 The Committee voted to reverse the verdict of history . While it could not identify the other conspirators, the Committee voted for a reversal .
 Jt. Jt found that President John F Kennedy was killed as a result of a conspiracy . Jt . found that he was killed in the assassination of President Kennedy .
 The Congress of the United States actually did officially declare that John Kennedy was killed as a result of a conspiracy . The Congress declared that the president was killed in Kennedy's assassination in 1963 .
 Abraham Lincoln was not killed just by the half-mad actor John Wilkes Booth acting alone . Booth was not the only actor to kill Lincoln . Lincoln was killed by Booth alone .
 Lincoln was killed as a result of a conspiracy that included Booth and other conspirators . Booth and others came very close to killing Secretary of State William Seward .
 Polls show 80 to 90 percent of the American people do not believe the findings of the Warren Commission . Polls consistently show 80-90 percent of Americans do not think of the findings .
 A diligent search for the truth in Kennedy’s assassination does prevail among a relatively few inquisitive souls in the U.S. and throughout the world . Whatever the answer to that question, a diligent search is still on .
 They want to know whether agencies or elected officials of the federal government were part of an assassination conspiracy . The federal government is accused of being involved in the assassination of President George W. Bush .
 In the case of the Kennedy assassination there was a complex web of motivations, human frailties, and sinister ambitions . The Kennedy assassination was the result of a series of human foibles and human failings .
 At that unique period of American history we had a vice president of extraordinary ambition and ruthlessness who loathed the president and his brother . At that time, the vice president was an ambitious and ruthless politician .
 The FBI director was a fanatical, all-powerful director of the FBI who had held the position for thirty-five years . He had allowed organized crime to grow to enormous power .
 Both the vice president and the director of the FBI had been severely compromised by organized crime . The vice president, FBI director and FBI director had been compromised, prosecutors say .
 Anti-Communist paranoia and racial fears had reached a peak of explosive intensity . Added to this was right-wing extremism . Anti-communist paranoia, racial fears were at a peak in the 1980s .
 A radical clique of people within the military and the CIA had come to believe that they were the sole possessors of the truth . And in 1963, they were in the midst of a 'radical clique'
 This group devotes their entire professional lives to fighting the evils of fascism and, later, communism . This group had become almost a cult, devoting their lives to anti-communist causes .
 They had slowly transformed from people like you and me into people who believed that the ends justified the means, no matter how abhorrent, they said . They were slowly transformed into people like yourself and me . They believed that ends justified means, even though abhorrent .
 These people became partners and personal friends with the Mafia; they became partners with the worst Nazi war criminals . They experimented in Manchurian Candidate techniques using LSD and other drugs, combined with hypnosis and psycho-electrical behavioral modification .
 They had essentially unlimited funds to conduct research on assassination methods and schemes . They had developed the art of assassination to what they called a 'pure science' and 'a pure science'
 They had participated in or been instrumental in the assassination of foreign leaders, the Church Committee says . The Church Committee said they were involved in or were instrumental in assassinations . The committee said they had been instrumental to the assassination .
 Congo , Patrice Lumumba; Dominican Republic, Rafael Trujillo; Chile, General Rene Schneider; South Vietnam, Ngo Dinh Diem. Congo .
 CIA and military intelligence became a world unto itself, answerable to no one . In short, the CIA and . military intelligence . intelligence became . answerable . no one, according to the CIA. CIA .
 For over twenty years they had been given a free hand, all the money they needed, with few questions asked or rules applied . For more than twenty years, they were given a 'free hand' for over 20 years . For over two decades they had given them free hand .
 In their minds, they were the elite, and men of adventure and patriotism . In the minds of the British elite, they thought they were a hero .
 A young millionaire playboy president came along and threatened their very existence, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "It's a good thing for America, but it's not good for the world"
 People experience their present naively, as it were, without being above to form an estimate of its contents . They have first to put themselves at a distance from it . The present, that is to say, must have become the past before it can yield points of vantage from which to
 Sigmund Freud considered the possibility that John Kennedy was assassinated by a conspiratorial group . Freud: "It was not difficult for me to consider the possibility"
 'I soon found it very difficult to deal with what I discovered when looking at the depth and horror of the conspiracy. But I soon found . It was difficult to cope with the depth of the . conspiracy .
 It became apparent that it involved many people and was incredibly bizarre. It became obvious that many people were involved in the bizarre incident .
 To gain perspective, I went back to examine 1963 and compare what I thought was going on in the United States, at that time, with what we now know was going to be going on .
 The Office of Strategic Services, predecessor of the CIA, had a long-term relationship with Mafia chieftains such as Lucky Luciano and Meyer Lansky to do the CIA’s dirty work .
 Organized crime and the CIA were almost indistinguishable in many respects, writes CNN.com's John Sutter.com.com . Organized criminals, drug traffickers, and murderers were partners in crime, he says . Organised crime and CIA were 'almost indistinguishable'
 This alliance had grown to encompass a cult of retired military officers, all of whom had the common enemy --communism -- as a facade to conceal what I will argue were their true motivations—greed and lust for power . The cult of former military officers had a common enemy, communism
 These were secrets unknown to the American public; this gave the Mafia a stranglehold on the CIA and key officials in government . The Mafia was able to keep the secrets of the CIA from the public eye for decades .
 Even by today’s standards, it is shocking to realize that in 1963 the president of the United States was carrying on sexual affairs with women . Marilyn Monroe, Ellen Rometsch, Mary Pinchot Meyer, Judith Campbell Exner, Judith Exner and Sam Giancana
 The JFK affair with Exner was documented in dozens of telephone calls to the White House and by the Senate Select Intelligence Committee in 1975 . Exner's affair with JFK was documented by dozens of phone calls to White House .
 Exner was acting as a courier between Kennedy and Giancana, allegedly delivering money for political payoffs in the 1960 presidential election . While carrying on the affair with John Kennedy, Exner acted as an agent for Giancanella .
 The gravity of the affair was compounded when Robert Kennedy also had an affair with Marilyn Monroe . Marilyn Monroe was dropped by the president after she had been dropped by her father .
 Mary Meyer kept a secret diary about her affair with John Kennedy . She would be mysteriously murdered a few months after his assassination .
 President Kennedy’s affair with Marilyn Monroe culminated in what would have been an unprecedented scandal had the truth become known . The affair would have led to unprecedented scandal .
 Marilyn Monroe either committed suicide or was murdered 1 just hours after she was visited by the president’s brother, Robert. Marilyn Monroe was either killed or murdered . Marilyn Monroe's death occurred hours after being visited by Robert.
 J Edgar Hoover was a closet homosexual, which the Mafia knew about . Hoover had been corrupted with financial favors from the Mafia, and was closet homosexual . Hoover was hiding behind a facade of moral integrity and patriotism .
 Vice President Lyndon Johnson had involvement in large-scale criminal activities in Texas with master con man Billie Sol Estes, and in other criminal activities with his ; , 8 protégé and aide, Bobby Baker, in Washington, D.C. and sinew . Robert Kennedy
 Jimmy Hoffa, president of the Teamsters Union and partner with the Mafia, is under fire . Carlos Marcello, Mafia chieftain in New Orleans, Sam Giancana, Mafia leader in Chicago are also under fire for Mafia ties . Jimmy Hoffman was president of Teamsters
 If the Kennedys were to succeed in destroying the Mafia, they unwittingly would destroy a worldwide apparatus of criminals, interlocking spy agencies, and businessmen whose power and scope defy the imagination .
 It helps me to keep a perspective if I reflect back to 1963 on the extreme hatred, jealousy, awe, and fear that John Kennedy instilled in the right wing of U.S. politics at that time .
 He was an electric personality who incited the complete range of human instincts . He was a "electric personality," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: He was "electric"
 Kennedy appeared invincible with a 59 percent approval rating in the polls . Kennedy's approval rating is 59 percent .
 In the eyes of most Americans, Kennedy had just faced down Nikita Khrushchev in the Cuban missile crisis . In the world, Kennedy faced down the Soviet Union in Cuba .
 There appeared to be no doubt that he was going to be re-elected by a landslide . President Barack Obama was expected to win re-election in November .
 With the exception of a rising animosity in the south, and a hate campaign by a few right-wing extremists, he was riding high with the American people and was a worldwide hero . The American people were riding high in the U.S.
 It was little known that he was in conflict with the CIA and the military regarding the fight against communism, the Vietnam War, and arms procurement .
 He had fired Allen Dulles and his top two men, General Charles Cabell and Richard Bissell . He had stripped the head of the CIA assassination operations, William Harvey. He had also stripped of power William Harvey .
 Plans had also been formulated to remove Lyndon Johnson from the ticket in 1964 and, after the election, to retire J Edgar Hoover . Both of these men would then become powerless to defend themselves when their personal secrets and collusion with organized crime were revealed .
 From the point of view of John Kennedy’s enemies, they could easily rationalize him as a political crook, a coward, a hypocrite, and a disgrace to the office . Kennedy's enemies would rationalize his actions as a traitor and a coward . Kennedy was a
 Those who were threatened by the Kennedys feared that a Kennedy dynasty would pass the office on to the family for generations . Those who threatened the Kennedy dynasty feared it would pass on to generations .
 Nobody like John and Robert Kennedy had ever come along; they were seen as recklessly pursuing personal goals in the guise of righting all wrongs and correcting all evil, while intent on destroying their opponents . The Kennedys are seen as reckless and likely to succeed if not stopped by
 The Kennedy brothers, as a dual entity, were young, ruthless, cavalier, and naive in believing they could accomplish anything they set out to do and have anything they wanted . The brothers were young and ruthless and naive .
 Tragically, they had gravely underestimated the strength and potential for the violent reaction of their enemies . Tragically they had 'gravely underestimated' the strength of the reaction to their enemies'
 All the elements had fallen into place to bring together a realistic plan to assassinate the young president and cover up the crime . What they did not know was that all of the elements were in place .
 A lethal backlash against the Kennedys was Set to occur on a sunny November afternoon in Dallas, Texas . It was set to occur in a Dallas suburb .
 President Kennedy speaking to a crowd in Fort Worth in the early morning of November 22, 1963, a few hours before he was assassinated . SS President Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, in 1963 .
 On his left is Lyndon Johnson, who would become president a few hours later . On the left is LBJ's wife, the future president of the U.S.
 She said she met him in Austin on New Year’s Eve and was “real concerned about it because everyone in Dallas was talking about he was responsible for the assassination . She said, “I met him on New Years Eve and I was real concerned that it was real
 Jack Ruby had come out openly and said that Lyndon Johnson was the cause of it. And again, Jack Ruby said that . Jack Ruby was an openly involved member of the Ruby gang .
 There is no doubt that he concealed evidence from the Warren Commission on CIA involvement in Mafia-CIA plots to assassinate Fidel Castro . However, there was no doubt there was evidence that the CIA was involved .
 Allen Dulles was the only member of the Commission who might possibly be suspected of deliberately participating in a cover . Judge Burt W Griffin, who was a counsel to the Warren Commission, wrote that Dulles had the knowledge to mastermind the assassination .
 Marilyn Monroe with John and Robert Kennedy is the only known photograph of her with both Kennedy brothers . Marilyn Monroe was photographed with the brothers in the early 1960s .
 J Edgar Hoover with Clyde Tolson, his second-in-command at the FBI and always at his side . Hoover and Tolson were both FBI agents and FBI director in the 1950s and '60s . Tolson was the FBI's second in command at the time of the
 They shared vacations in exclusive resorts in Miami Beach, Florida, and La Jolla, California . Others were paid for by others such as Clint Murchison of Dallas, Texas, friend of organized crime .
 The gossip mills in Washington, D.C., and La Jolla accepted as established fact that they were homosexuals . The gossip millers in both Washington and San Diego accepted the fact .
 Exner made sensational revelations about President Kennedy . In her book and later in interviews and national television appearances, Exner revealed much more .
 She revealed that she was Kennedy’s mistress for 2 2 years . She also served as a liaison and courier between the president and mobster Sam Giancana .
 She has stated that she had a brief affair with Giancana after her relationship with Kennedy ended . She also has stated she had an affair with the former couple .
 Mobster Sam Giancana helped Kennedy win elections in Chicago and West Virginia . The mobster helped Kennedy help Kennedy win election in Chicago, West Virginia.
 Giancana later felt betrayed when the Kennedys turned the full power of the Justice Department against him and organized crime . The mob boss felt betrayed by the Justice Dept. He felt betrayed .
 He was murdered a few days before he was scheduled to appear before the United States Senate Church Committee . The senator was murdered days before appearing before the committee .
 French—An unexpected stroke of policy; a bold seizure of government, executed suddenly and often accompanied by violence; literally, stroke of state . French was executed suddenly, often accompanied with violence . French is a bold seizing of government; often followed by violence .
 Conspiracy is secret agreement among several people; joint activities against someone or something in order to obtain certain, definite political goals . Conspiracy is a secret agreement to obtain the goals of political purposes . Britannica World Language Dictionary .
 John Kennedy was shot when several shots rang out while he was riding in an open limousine on Elm Street at Dealey Plaza at 12:30m. Kennedy was hit by several shots while riding in a limo .
 He was taken to Parkland Memorial Hospital and pronounced dead at 1:00m. He was then taken to a nearby hospital .
 Witnesses also observed and smelled gun smoke and heard gun shots coming from behind a wooden picket fence on a grassy knoll along Elm Street . Witnesses say they heard shots from behind the fence on the knoll behind a fence .
 The entire sequence of the shooting was filmed in almost perfect fidelity by an amateur photographer, Abraham Zapruder . The film was shot in New York City .
 The Secret Service took possession of the film within a few hours after the assassination . The film was taken by the Secret Service within hours .
 Texas Governor John Connally rode in the same limousine in front of John Kennedy . Connally was the governor of Texas at the time .
 The railroad signalman saw two men standing near the picket fence just before the shots were heard . The men were seen standing in front of the fence, the signalman says .
 As the gunfire erupted he saw a flash of light or smoke at the spot where the two men were standing, he said .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was found on the second floor of the building . Oswald had been shot in Dallas, Texas, in the early hours of the attack . Oswald was one of the most prominent figures in the Dallas area to have been assassinated .
 Oswald was identified as an employee by the manager of the building and was let go . Oswald was immediately identified as a worker by the building's manager . Oswald has been identified as the man responsible for the shooting .
 Oswald's description of a suspect was broadcast over police radio that roughly resembled Oswald . Within 15 minutes after the shooting, a description of the suspect was posted online . Oswald was shot in the head in the early hours of September 4 .
 The station wagon circled the block and came back to the front of the building where it picked up another man running down from the grassy knoll . The same station wagon circling the block came back and picked up the man .
 Inside, on the sixth floor, they found a rifle and three spent shell cartridges . Inside, they discovered a rifle, three spent shells and a spent shell .
 Hard evidence would soon show that more than three shots had been fired . But hard evidence soon showed that more of the three shots were fired .
 Oswald captured by Dallas police in the Texas Movie Theater . Oswald was captured at about 1:50m. Dallas police captured Oswald in the theater . Oswald's capture was captured by the Dallas police .
 The police testified that there was a struggle with him and that he pulled out a revolver and attempted to shoot . The police said he pulled it out of his hands and pulled out of a revolver . Police testified that he tried to shoot himself .
 Oswald allegedly shot and killed Tippit at about 1:15m. and then proceeded on foot to the Texas Movie Theater . Oswald allegedly walked to the theater and shot the actor in the head .
 Parkland Hospital doctors said Kennedy had been hit by a bullet with an entry wound in the front of his throat . Parkland hospital doctors announced that Kennedy was hit by the bullet . The president was shot in the throat .
 The next day a photograph was published in a Dallas newspaper showing a man picking up a bullet slug found in the grass to the rear and left of the presidential car at the time of the shooting .
 This bullet was given to a civilian, presumably an FBI agent, and has never been seen since . It was given by a civilian to the FBI, who has never seen it since .
 This evidence of shots from the front or side was compelling proof that Oswald could not have acted alone . Oswald acted alone, therefore that there was a conspiracy, the author says .
 A bullet was found on a stretcher in the basement of Parkland Hospital . Sometime between 1.00m. and 2:00m., a bullet was discovered on a hospital stretcher .
 It was in almost perfect condition, with no measurable loss of weight and only slightly deformed . It was almost completely deformed, but it had no measurable weight loss and was in perfect condition .
 This bullet would later be alleged by the Warren Commission to have wounded Connally in three places and shattered his rib and wrist bone . Connally was shot in the head by a bullet believed to have shattered his ribs and wrist bones .
 No notes taken at the time of the interrogation are known to be in evidence . No notes were taken during the interrogation . The case is not known to have been solved .
 Newsmen were given a brief access to Oswald when he was taken before cameras and microphones after he was charged . Oswald was taken into custody on the first day of his trial .
 He insisted in a low voice that he was innocent in the death of Kennedy . He appeared composed and managed an occasional smile as he insisted .
 He acted surprised that he was being accused of being Kennedy’s assassin . He muttered that there was a plot against him .
 On November 24, Oswald was shot and killed by Jack Ruby . Ruby was a Dallas nightclub owner and associate of organized criminals . Ruby shot Oswald in the head in Dallas, Texas .
 Oswald’s murder occurred while he was being transferred from the Dallas police station to the county jail . Oswald was surrounded by dozens of policemen under tight security . Oswald's murder occurred during his transfer to the Dallas jail .
 Dallas police and FBI received phone calls warning Oswald would be shot during transfer . This occurred even though the Dallas police had earlier received telephone calls warning that Oswald would shoot .
 Telephone records found in Ruby’s apartment revealed that he had Mafia connections . An unusually large number of telephone calls had occurred between him and Mafia figures and hit-men in the weeks before the assassination .
 Oswald was not found to have fired a rifle on November 22 . Paraffin tests on his cheek did not show he had fired a gun . Oswald was in custody of the Dallas police when he was found .
 There was a semblance of a palm print lifted earlier by the Dallas police that was identified by them as belonging to Oswald . Oswald's palm print was lifted by Dallas police earlier this week .
 Oswald was soon shown in a photograph found in his garage showing him holding the rifle . Oswald was shown in the photograph holding the gun in a garage . Oswald is shown holding a rifle in the photo .
 Photo was almost immediately branded to be a fake composite by photographic experts and later by Scotland Yard and Canadian experts . Scotland Yard, Canadian experts and photographic experts branded the photo almost immediately as fake composite .
 Within hours after the assassination, information came pouring out from the FBI concerning Oswald . Oswald was found dead at the scene of the assassination in Dallas, Texas .
 He defected to the Soviet Union in 1959 and then returned to the United States about two years later with a new bride he had married while in Russia . He had defected in 1959 but returned to U.S. with new wife he had had married in 1959 .
 Before going to the Soviet Union, he had been in the Marine Corps . He defected immediately after having received an early discharge, on the basis of his mother allegedly being ill .
 Oswald spoke fluent Russian although he had not finished high school and had no known formal training in the language . Oswald was not fluent in Russian but had no formal training and spoke fluent English .
 A few months after the assassination of Kennedy he was accused of having attempted in April 1963 to assassinate General Edwin Walker, a right-wing extremist . He was also accused of trying to kill General Walker, who was a right wing extremist .
 He also had been a pro-Castro political agitator . He traveled to Mexico City in September 1963 to visit the Soviet and Cuban consulates .
 Oswald and two other men (who appeared to be Cubans and claimed they were part of a left-wing, anti-Castro Cuban exile group) visited her apartment in Dallas two months before the assassination . Silvia Odio's story was confirmed by her sister, her father,
 Odio, one of the Cubans made a comment about Oswald being a crazy ex-Marine talking about assassinating Kennedy . Odio said Oswald was a crazed ex-marine talking about killing Kennedy .
 The time that the three men were at her apartment appeared to conflict with a time when Oswald was believed to have been in Mexico and was two months before Kennedy was assassinated . Oswald is believed to be in Mexico at the time of Kennedy's assassination .
 This created the suspicion that someone was impersonating Oswald, trying to set him up as a patsy connected to Cubans . If not that, he was in fact in a conspiracy with leftist anti-Castro Cubans, he may have been involved in a plot .
 Dallas police and the FBI announced the assassination was committed by a lone gunman, Lee Harvey Oswald, and that Oswald was a Communist . Oswald was later revealed to be a Communist, according to the FBI and police .
 About one week after the assassination, a presidential commission to investigate the crime (The Warren Commission) was created by the new president, Lyndon Johnson . The Warren Commission was created to look into the crime .
 The instruction given to the Commission, in essence, was to put to bed any questions regarding the possibility of a conspiracy so that the country could get on with its business . The instruction was to 'put to bed' any questions .
 The FBI was given the sole authority by Lyndon Johnson to conduct the investigations . The FBI, under director J Edgar Hoover, was under the control of the FBI .
 All other investigations throughout the nation were ordered by Johnson to cease . Johnson ordered all other investigations to cease by Johnson .
 The Commission included Allen Dulles, who had recently been fired as director of the CIA by John Kennedy . Dulles was fired as CIA director by Kennedy in 1962 .
 The Commission published a report ten months after the assassination stating that Jack Ruby had no substantial connection with organized crime and had acted out of grief in killing Oswald . Despite increasing evidence and doubts continuing to indicate the likelihood of a conspiracy, the Commission concluded that Oswald was probably a lone assassin . Oswald
 President Lyndon Johnson ordered that the files concerning the assassination be sealed in the National Archives for seventy-five years . The report also concluded that there was no evidence of a conspiracy from within or outside the United States .
 The Commission was never able to explain the mysterious two Oswalds . The Commission never was able to come up with a motive for Oswald's murder .
 Not once in the Commission report was the possibility even suggested that the Mafia or any member of the U.S. government might be involved .
 The news media and the American people took the bait that Oswald was the lone assassin, although the Commission had not specifically said so . Oswald was not the sole assassin, but the Commission did say so .
 The Warren Commission Report was received with open approval by the media establishment and by the American public . The Warren Report was at first received with approval from the media and the public .
 The media did not question the fact that the chief beneficiaries of the assassination—Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover— had taken control of the entire investigation . The media didn't question the idea that the main beneficiaries had taken over the investigation .
 The Commission report was soon attacked by a few brave reporters, writers, and skeptics . But the Commission report is soon attacked .
 Oliver Stone painted John Kennedy as a hero who was killed for standing up to the military industrial complex . Stone portrayed Jim Garrison, a New Orleans district attorney who had attempted to prove a conspiracy, as a mild-mannered family man .
 Stone had Kevin Costner speculate that Lyndon Johnson and the military industrial complex were behind the assassination conspiracy to escalate the Vietnam War . In the closing scenes of the movie, Costner speculates that Johnson was behind the conspiracy .
 The news media went into what seemed to be a frenzy of attacks on Stone . Stone was attacked by the news media for his comments .
 They painted him as a conspiracy nut, a distorter of historical truth, and perhaps un-American or even mentally disturbed . They said he was un-Americans or mentally disturbed. They said they were disturbed by his views .
 The result was more confusion and bewilderment, with few knowing what to believe . The result of the election was more confused and bewildered than usual .
 Stone had made a valiant and powerful attack on cherished illusions, thus triggering the inevitable reactions when illusions are threatened .
 It was in late 1991 that I began a serious attempt to understand for myself what had happened in the Kennedy assassination . I began to understand the assassination in the late '70s, '90s and '80s . It was the first time I had ever seen a person who had
 I decided to write a short paper on the subject, but was soon involved in a quagmire that would take far more effort and willpower to work through than I possibly could have imagined . The author of this article is happy to clarify that it is not the first time he has written
 To conceive, plan, and carry out a sophisticated conspiracy to assassinate the president of the U.S. requires a cold-blooded, deliberate decision of awesome proportions .
 Only a group with enormous power, capability, and resources would even consider such a move . Only a small group of people with such power would have considered it .
 It seems most reasonable to assume that the assassination was conceived by powerful men who were not crazy, but, on the contrary, were realists . Therefore, it seems most rational to assume they were not mad .
 First, the group would have to believe that they could get away with it .
 This means that the plotters knew that no matter what could go wrong they were in a position to suppress evidence, avoid prosecution, and keep the Kennedy family silent . The plotters also knew they could suppress evidence and avoid prosecution . This means they were able to avoid prosecution and suppress evidence
 This indicates that the essential ingredients of their plan would be control of the presidency and Congress, and blackmail material on the Kennedys in the plotters’ possession . The plotters would want to control the presidency, Congress and control the White House .
 A group as calculating as the plot has revealed itself to be indicates that the conspirators were very sophisticated, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says the plot was very calculating, and that the group was very sophisticated .
 The plan would have been aborted before it got started unless they felt absolutely certain that it would succeed . The plan was likely to be aborted before the start of the project, but not before it was launched .
 Second, the plotters must have been very confident of their capability to carry out the mechanics of the plan . Second, they must be very confident that they can carry out their plan, the author says .
 Within the group were professionals—skilled at planning and executing major assassinations . This meant that within the group of professionals were professionals . The group was highly skilled at planning, executing and executing assassinations.
 This points to the CIA and the Mafia, or possibly others who had access to a top professional assassination planner and assassins . The CIA and Mafia may have been involved in the assassination planning process .
 There must have been a powerful, overwhelming motivation in the prime leaders of the conspiratorial group. Third, there must be a powerful motivation for the group's leaders .
 For others it means the capacity to carry on in an all-consuming pursuit of power and money . For others, it means carrying on in the all consuming pursuit of money and power . For some it means being able to continue to pursue power, money .
 To be shorn of power and money to this type of man (with the added threat of imprisonment) would be symbolic castration and a psychological end to life, says author .
 This theory of human needs was developed by the great psychologist Abraham H Maslow . Maslow's theory is based on a theory he developed by Abraham Maslow, Abraham's Maslow.
 His theory is that normal people organize their lives by instinctively ranking their needs from most important to least important . Lay's theory: Normal people rank their needs in order to get the most important things done . Lay: "I want to make sure that I don't have to worry about my
 Since it's never possible to satisfy all their needs at one time, the most important ones are satisfied first . Since it is never possible . It is not always possible to . satisfy all the needs at once, it is always possible .
 Human needs visualized as being in a five-tiered structure in which the needs at the base are the strongest . Human needs are visualized in the five-tier structure .
 I see in Maslow’s theory the theoretical underpinnings of what I hypothesize were the primary motives for assassinating John F Kennedy . That is, the basic need of the prime conspirators for survival for survival .
 The perception of a threat to one’s survival (or other needs) could be as important as the reality . As a caveat to Maslow's theory, it seems apparent that it seems .
 For example, ultra-right-wing extremists might feel that they were being direly threatened by John Kennedy when in fact they were not . Kennedy was not. Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 The plotters might be motivated to join an assassination plot out of their paranoiac fears . But, nevertheless, they may be motivated by their fears, they might be .
 jealousy and envy could have played a secondary part . Now let's consider that jealousy and jealousy could have been a secondary issue .
 Maslow wrote that as much as we don’t want to admit it, there is a considerable portion of hostile envy in many of us . We view excellence, beauty, charisma, and superior intelligence in others, he wrote .
 Certainly we love and admire good men, saints, saints—honest, virtuous, clean men . We love them, but we admire them, and we love them very much more .
 Any reading of history will turn up plenty of examples, or perhaps even I could say that any such historical search might fail to turn up a single exception throughout the whole history of mankind . The world's most famous person has never been found to be a man .
 We surely love and admire all the persons who have incarnated the true, the good, the beautiful, the just, the perfect, the successful, the ultimately successful . We are proud of all the people who have been incarnated as the true .
 They also make us uneasy, anxious, confused, perhaps a little jealous or envious, a little inferior, clumsy, clumsy . And yet they also make people feel uneasy and anxious, but also make them uneasy .
 "They usually make us lose our aplomb, our self-possession and self-regard," says Simon Cowell . Cowell: "They make people lose their confidence, their confidence and their confidence"
 "The greatest people, simply by their presence and by being what they are, make us feel aware of our lesser worth, whether or not they intend to"
 John and Robert Kennedy were in the process of inflicting these injuries on a group of powerful men . "It is compelling to me that the Kennedy brothers, John and . Robert, John, Robert ... were inflicting these . injuries on powerful men," he writes .
 They had used some of these men to gain power and were now throwing them overboard . They had been using them to gain some of their power and now they were now being thrown overboard .
 The Kennedys were going to get rid of all the bad guys in a hurry by handing them their heads on a platter . The Kennedy family was going to hand the heads on platters, but they didn't .
 They had set out to dismantle the combined forces of the national security state and organized crime . They had planned to do so to take advantage of the security state . They also wanted to take on organized crime and national security .
 Spoiled by the enormous political and financial power at their command, they thought they were invulnerable . Spoiled by their enormous political, financial power, they believed they were invincible . They thought they would be invincible .
 The Kennedys believed they were destined to lead the free world for at least 16 years . They believed they would be able to do so for the first time .
 The Kennedys, young and ambitious, lived and ruled at the edge of disaster . They ruled the country at the brink of disaster.
 On the one hand, they courted publicity as few presidential families had done in the past . On the other, they took enormous risks in both their public and personal lives .
 The risks were made even more chancy by the publicity they drew and the sort of enemies they had . The risks are made more serious by the risks they drew, especially by the way they were made .
 In reviewing their careers, we observe that the Kennedy brothers continually courted disaster . The Kennedy brothers constantly courted disasters, including the Kennedy family .
 Joe Kennedy, Jr., courted disaster when he volunteered for a virtually suicidal mission in World War II in a desperate effort to outdo his brother Jack’s alleged heroics in the Pacific . Joe Kennedy Jr. was the brother of Jack Kennedy .
 John F Kennedy’s relationships with Judith Campbell and powerful Mafiosi Sam Giancana and Johnny Rosselli, who had been hired by the CIA to kill Castro and were, at the same time, being hounded by brother Bobby .
 In pursuing these relationships, Kennedy was laying himself open to potentially catastrophic blackmail . Kennedy's actions could be catastrophic blackmail, the White House says .
 Robert Kennedy’s involvement in the assassination plots against Castro and his affair with Marilyn Monroe were courting disaster and he must have known it . Robert Kennedy knew his affair was going to be a disaster, and he knew it .
 The reckless, self-serving behavior of John Kennedy could have led the conspirators to lose all respect for him, says author . The only way to get rid of the threat of the Kennedy brothers was by assassination, he says .
 This is not to say that Kennedy was killed for his reckless and immoral behavior, but rather that it gave blackmail material and a rationale for recruiting lower-tier plotters . The prime conspirators’ motive, in reality, was their own selfpreservation and lust for power; i
 One of the most outrageous examples of the extreme recklessness of the Kennedys is the brothers’ affairs with Marilyn Monroe and the tragic ending . The brothers' affairs with Monroe ended in tragic tragedy .
 It exploded so violently that if revealed (and believed by the American people) would very likely have ended both of the brothers’ political careers . If revealed, it would end both of them’s careers .
 Some have speculated that it resulted in the murder of Marilyn Monroe, by orders of the Kennedy brothers themselves, after she threatened to expose their affairs and government secrets .
 Another hypothesis is that the Mafia murdered her, perhaps under the orders of the CIA, to silence her from telling of CIA/Mafia plots to kill Fidel Castro . Or to bring media attention to the affair and create an implosion of scandal upon the Kennedys .
 There is, with little question, evidence that conceivably could implicate the Kennedy brothers in the murder of Marilyn Monroe if one is only inclined to suspicion .
 The Kennedys had the motive to have Marilyn murdered, because she was threatening to tell all and thereby ruin them forever . It does not stretch my imagination to suspect that a nod was given by the Kennedy brothers to the CIA or the FBI to handle the problem .
 Noguchi observed a very fresh bruise in the lower back area and bruises on her arms . Evidence of foul play was in indications of violence, Nogsuchi said .
 More telling indications were that someone had administered an injection of Nembutal into her rectum . The injection was likely to have been administered by someone in the woman's rectum, police said .
 Los Angeles police chief William Parker said to have been a massive overdose of sleeping pills . Experts said it would have required oral ingestion of more than seventy capsules in less than ten minutes . The cause of death was said by police to be a 'massive overdose'
 Biographer Anthony Summers in 1964 had one of the world’s foremost forensic scientists, Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter was a forensic scientist .
 The barbiturate levels in Monroe’s blood should have produced a moderate residue of capsules in her stomach, but none was found there . None of the capsules were found in the stomach .
 Marilyn would have had to gulp down pills "within a matter of minutes," UCLA psychiatrist says . Robert Litman, the UCLA psychiatrist who headed a suicide prevention team in Los Angeles, says Marilyn would've had to take the pills .
 If she had taken a few pills at a time, she would have been unconscious before she could have ingested the amount needed to achieve the level of barbiturates in her bloodstream .
 Marilyn's psychiatrist was interviewed by Los Angeles deputy district attorney John Miner within days of her death . Ralph Greenson, Marilyn’s psychiatrist who was present at her home shortly after her death, was questioned by Miner .
 Like many aspects of the Kennedy assassination, this story defies explanation . The story is so bizarre, so unbelievable, and so complicated that it defies explanations . Like many other aspects of this story, the JFK assassination is so unbelievable that it can't be explained .
 She had a short sexual affair with Robert Kennedy, according to multiple sources . She had an affair with him from multiple sources, including from her family .
 The Kennedy brothers decided to end their affairs with her after it became apparent that it could bring down their administration . The nation’s bedroom spy, J. Edgar Hoover, let it be known to the Kennedys that he had the goods on them .
 When Marilyn was told by the Kennedys that it was over she reacted with anger and threatened to call a press conference to expose all . Marilyn threatened to expose the affair to the public .
 Robert Kennedy was persuaded to come down from a vacation in Northern California to Brentwood in Los Angeles to calm her down . Marilyn lived in Brentwood, where Robert Kennedy lived, where Marilyn lived . Robert Kennedy persuaded Marilyn Kennedy to come home from vacation .
 Robert Kennedy visited with Marilyn Kennedy, left her unplacated, and within hours she either committed suicide or was murdered . The evidence as to which is inconclusive, but weighs toward murder .
 After Marilyn died, there was a massive cover-up, probably conducted by the Los Angeles police and assisted by the FBI, in which all evidence in Marilyn’s home that could incriminate the Kennedy brothers or embarrass the CIA was removed .
 At least a three-hour delay after her death before the police were notified . This resulted in at least three hours before police could be notified of her death .
 By simply going with the above well-documented items, we have a sensational and extremely disturbing series of events that implicated the Kennedy brothers in either the suicide or murder of a famous movie actress . The Kennedy brothers were being dumped by the actress after their having had sexual affairs with her .
 We must keep in mind that it was the president of the United States and his brother the attorney general who were having adulterous sexual affairs with a famous Hollywood movie actress . The details and evidence of the death were covered up .
 The implications of this are horrendous and potentially far-reaching in understanding of the JFK assassination, the author says . The implications are 'horrific' and potentially 'far-reaching'
 A perfect rationale presented itself for recruiting those who were needed in the conspiracy, but perhaps had not yet been approached . The plot was a perfect rationale for recruiting .
 In looking at John and Robert Kennedy’s fatal character flaws, I am not at all proposing that they did not have honorable intentions for the good of the nation . I am . not alluding to the fact that they had honorable intentions, I'm not proposing .
 John Kennedy’s deep psychological problems (womanizing to a pathological extreme) may have had, and probably did have, a significant part in the assassination . I am suggesting, however, that their inclination to corruption and hardball politics may have played a significant role in the Kennedy assassination
 Anthony Summers wrote that Professor Robert Blakey, former chief counsel of the HSCA, saw this flaw in Kennedy’s character as one that may have been fatal .
 We can also safely assume that the CIA knew; and of course the Secret Service knew . The Secret Service also knew, and the CIA also must have known .
 The Kennedy family would be placed in a position in which they would never be willing to press for an investigation of the crime for fear of their secrets being exposed . Better yet, the Kennedy family could never press for a probe into the murder of their daughter .
 The CIA or FBI may have ordered the murder of Marilyn Kennedy to clean up the mess created by John and Robert Kennedy, even if not instructed to do so by them . Now imagine taking this one step further .
 Time is running out with the 1964 presidential election only one year away . Time was running out for the President of the United States .
 Once JFK was re-elected nothing short of impeachment would have legally removed him . Lyndon Johnson was going to be dropped before the 1964 election and therefore would not become president if JFK were assassinated after the election . Johnson would not be in a position to cover up the plot, or suppress the
 President Johnson had time to orchestrate a cover-up with a presidential commission, establish his administration, and demonstrate his capability to be president . The plot had to be done by the end of 1963 to give him time .
 J Edgar Hoover had an abundance of incriminating material regarding the Kennedys’ sexual exploits, probably including all the salient details of the Marilyn Monroe affairs . Hoover was not in a position to use it because Hoover himself was vulnerable to exposure of his homosexuality and his ties to organized crime
 Once JFK was re-elected, he might very well have called Hoover’s bluff and forced him to retire . Hoover must have feared this, and Hoover feared this .
 It was absolutely necessary that Kennedy be eliminated before the 1964 election so that Hoover’s friend, Lyndon Johnson would become president and re-appoint Hoover . Hoover's friend, Johnson, became president and Hoover was re-appointed Hoover .
 Exposing the Kennedys would have ruined them, but also ruined Hoover and Johnson . Hoover, Johnson, Hoover and LBJ would have been ruined if they'd been exposed .
 Both Hoover and Johnson must have known that the Kennedys would not be run out of office without a fight which would have ended in catastrophe for everyone involved . Hoover knew that a fight would not have ended without catastrophe for all involved .
 It would be indispensable to the Mafia that their man Lyndon Johnson become president after John Kennedy's assassination of John Kennedy . They could depend on Johnson to cover up the crime and remove Robert Kennedy from power .
 This could never happen if John Kennedy were to be reelected in 1964 after he had replaced Johnson as vice president . John Kennedy replaced Johnson in 1964 as Vice President .
 There are plenty of reasons—unique to the LBJ-Hoover-Mafia scenario—why a decision to assassinate John Kennedy in 1963 would have been made rather than blackmail him or expose him to the public .
 The timing of the assassination, as related to the singular requirements of LBJ, Hoover, and the Mafia, explains many things . LBJ and Hoover, as well as Mafia, were the prime targets of assassination .
 Jt was staying in power in order to survive that drove the prime conspirators to their act, says Jt. Jt . The prime conspirator wanted to stay in power to survive .
 A key ingredient was the conspirator s conviction that they had the political power and resources to be certain that they would not be brought to justice for murdering the president of the United States. A key element was the .
 The conspirators also knew that the Kennedy family would be forced to remain quiet because of the brothers’ involvement in a multiplicity of scandals, of which the conspirators had evidence . The Kennedy family was forced to stay quiet because the brothers were involved in multiple scandals, according to the
 An important insight could explain why John Kennedy was not removed from office by exposing his scandalous behavior . John Kennedy's scandal was not exposed by exposing himself to scandal, the author says .
 Such revelations would inevitably have brought down both Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover along with the Kennedys . Such revelations inevitably would have brought them down .
 Only by assassinating John Kennedy in 1963 would have solved the problems for Johnson and Hoover . Only by assassination of Kennedy would have been solved for Hoover and Johnson, Hoover .
 The Kennedys did not have a realistic sense of limits, author says . That will remain a mystery for others to unravel, but it can be said .
 Their father Joe had instilled in them an unbridled ambition and a belief that they could have anything they wanted—seize power, and, in the name of good .
 In retrospect, I see the Kennedy brothers as young, misguided, reckless, and naive, albeit having the good of the nation in their hearts and intentions . The Kennedy brothers were young and misguided, but not reckless .
 Given the circumstances and politics of the time, they had overstepped the practical limits of presidential power and privilege . The White House has been accused of overstepping the limits of its power .
 "They were to be removed from power by the same forces they were intent on crushing," says the British Prime Minister . They were to remove them from power, he said .
 John and Robert Kennedy's enemies were powerful enemies of the Kennedy family in 1963 . They were known to have existed in 1963, but they were not as powerful as they were today .
 Marcello had illegally deported him to Guatemala; later, after great ordeal and humiliation, he surreptitiously returned to the U.S. He had illegally returned to Guatemala .
 At the time of the assassination, the young attorney general was in the process of deporting Marcello again in a trial being conducted in New Orleans . He was about to be deported again when he was assassinated .
 Marcello hated Bobby Kennedy and had stated in 1962 that John Kennedy would be killed . He also had stated that Bobby Kennedy would also be killed by John Kennedy .
 Marcello also had a connection to Oswald, whose uncle was a lieutenant . Oswald's uncle was also a lieutenant, and his uncle had been a lieutenant in Italy .
 Hoffa threatened Bobby Kennedy’s life and had made inquiries and spoken repeatedly about having him assassinated . Hoffa had threatened to kill Bobby Kennedy, Bobby Kennedy .
 Trafficante declared in 1962 that “Kennedy would be hit” before the 1964 election . Trafficante, a close associate of Carlos Marcello, declared in 1964 that ‘Kennedy’d be hit.’
 Trafficante and Lansky were kicked out of Cuba when Castro took over and kicked them out . Trafficante had suffered severe losses in his gambling operations when he was kicked out .
 They shared a common motive with anti-Castro Cubans who felt betrayed by Kennedy in the Bay of Pigs fiasco . They were among those who wanted Kennedy to blame for the failed Bay of the Pigs War .
 A suspect because he had been betrayed by the Kennedys who took his favors and then turned on him . A suspect . He was a suspect because of his favors, then a suspect, he says .
 Giancana was a prime target in Robert Kennedy’s war against organized crime . He was the prime target of the Kennedy administration's war on organized crime.
 He was a major Mafia chieftain, covering all territory west of the Mississippi . He was known for his role in the Mafia .
 It was common talk that Hoover would be fired soon after John Kennedy was elected in 1964 . Hoover would have been fired after JFK's election . Hoover was the president of the U.S. House of Representatives in 1964.
 Hoover hated Bobby Kennedy; hated Martin Luther King, whom the Kennedys supported; and was very close and friendly with Lyndon Johnson . Hoover was very friendly with LBJ; he was close to LBJ .
 Hoover allowed himself to be compromised by the Mafia and Texas oil men in accepting free rent of a vacation bungalow in California, tips on fixed horse races, and sweetheart investments . Hoover had accepted free rent in California and tips on horse races .
 It must have been very disturbing to Hoover to witness the Kennedys’ unprecedented effort to bring down organized crime, which inevitably would have exposed Hoover . Hoover would have been exposed if he had exposed him to organized crime . Hoover: "Kennedys' unprecedented effort against organized crime
 The last discussion that John Kennedy had with his secretary, Evelyn Lincoln, before leaving for Dallas was that Johnson would be dropped from the ticket for the 1964 presidential election .
 Johnson was in deep trouble with potentially a prison sentence if the full facts were uncovered concerning the Bobby Baker and Billie Sol Estes scandals . This was because Johnson had become a political liability and was in trouble .
 Hoover's corrupt connections to the Mafia, Dallas political figures, and the Texas right wing, like Hoover’s, would be exposed if the Mafia were brought down . Hoover's connections to Dallas politicians, the Mafia and the Dallas right wing would also be exposed, Hoover's .
 Dulles, along with Charles Cabell and Richard Bissell, had been fired by Kennedy . Dulles and Cabell were fired from Kennedy's administration .
 Kennedy vowed to “blow the CIA to smithereens” after the next election . Kennedy had vowed to blow the CIA ‘to smitty’ens’ after the election . Also vowed to kill the CIA’s “to smithhereens
 Dulles had many loyalists in the CIA, including the infamous E Howard Hunt and Richard Helms . Hunt and Helms were among Dulles' loyalists .
 Army intelligence was under control of generals with extreme right-wing ideologies and strong connections to the military-industrial complex . Added to this complex brew was army intelligence, which was in competition with the CIA for covert operations .
 William Harvey was a legendary, pistol-packing, harddrinking master theorist and covert operator . Harvey was also a master theorist, gun-packing master theorist . Harvey died at the age of 92 on December 31, 1981 .
 Harvey was in charge of the CIA-Mafia group to assassinate foreign leaders . Harvey had become personal friends with the Mafia’s Johnny Rosselli .
 Harvey hated Robert Kennedy because Kennedy had stripped him of power after he sent unauthorized commando teams into Cuba at the height of the Cuban missile crisis . Harvey hated Kennedy with a passion because he had been stripped of power .
 There were many thousands of spies, agents, and operators in the CIA and military intelligence .
 Many were in fragmented, competing rogue groups, perhaps containing even Soviet moles, operating essentially on their own agendas, and penetrated by other agencies of the U.S. government .
 Their liaison with the Defense Department was Major General Edward Lansdale . Lansdale was the liaison with Major General Lansdale.
 Many hated Kennedy because they felt he let them down by not providing air cover in the Bay of Pigs invasion . Many of them hated Kennedy for letting them down in the invasion .
 They believed he was going to make peace with Castro and betray them . They also believed that he was making peace with the Castro family and betraying them .
 In fact, John Kennedy was in the process of doing just that at the time he was assassinated .
 David Ferrie was first turned up by the FBI and later targeted by Jim Garrison in his investigation in New Orleans . Ferrie is one of many people who was involved in the anti-Castro effort . He was later targeted in Garrison's New Orleans investigation .
 David Ferrie was also a close associate of Mafia chieftain Carlos Marcello and a contract agent for the CIA . He was an associate of Oswald and associate of Clay Shaw who was, in turn, a right-wing radical .
 Right-wing extremist groups such as the John Birch Society, the Minutemen, White Supremacists, and some Texas oil men. Some Texas oilmen. Some oil men .
 Anti-Communists and fanatics looked at Kennedy as being soft on communism and leading the country to socialism . Kennedy’s pursuit of civil rights legislation and his support of Martin Luther King .
 President Kennedy would be withdrawing our troops from Vietnam as soon as he was re-elected . The word was out that Kennedy would withdraw our troops .
 Milteer was known, by a Miami police informant, to have outlined in advance the details of the assassination of President Kennedy . Police informant says he knew about the assassination by Miami police .
 Hunt, a right-wing fanatic and oil man, sponsored black-border ads vilifying Kennedy during his trip to Dallas . Hunt was a strong financial supporter of Lyndon Johnson .
 The Texas right wing would have been in an ideal position to bring Lyndon Johnson into the plot and control events in Dallas, Texas, in the 1960s .
 They knew Johnson well, and probably had him in their pockets, perhaps even more than did the Mafia . They knew each other well, perhaps more than they did the mafia . The Mafia was well-connected to Johnson .
 Clint Murchison was also a financial supporter of Lyndon Johnson as well as George Lincoln Rockwell’s American Nazi party . He also supported the American Nazi Party .
 David Ferrie and Carlos Marcello were also rabid, active right-wingers . Marcella and Ferrie were also active right wingers . Ferrie was a rabid right winger .
 The right wing had powerful allies within the CIA and military intelligence; and the military and military reserve . The CIA, military intelligence, and military and reserve also had strong allies .
 They were allies with ex-Nazi groups in Europe and allied with OAS terrorists . They also had anti-Communist allies in extreme elements of European intelligence and Israel’s Mossad .
 John and Robert Kennedy and the Mafia were involved in an all-out plan to destroy Castro . The Mafia was involved in the assassination of Castro Castro .
 This included assassination attempts using the Mafia and anti-Castro Cubans, and extensive CIA operations planned and executed against Cuba out of Miami and New Orleans . The CIA operations were planned and being executed in New Orleans and Miami .
 It also included an ultra-secret project to overthrow Castro from within Cuba . The project included a secret project to oust Castro from inside Cuba .
 On the day of the Kennedy assassination, the CIA was in a meeting in Paris, France, passing an exotic weapon to an assassin to murder Castro . In fact, on the very day of JFK's assassination, CIA was meeting in France to pass a weapon to kill Castro .
 Castro had warned that the attempts of the U.S. to assassinate him would not go unanswered . Castro has warned that attempts to kill him will not go unpunished . Castro had said that the assassination attempt would go unanswered.
 Kennedy humiliated Khrushchev in the Cuban missile crisis . Some historians now believe the crisis was the beginning of the end of the Soviet Union's leader's career .
 President Kennedy defeated Richard Nixon in 1960 for the presidential election . Nixon believed that Kennedy had bought the election in Chicago with his father’s money .
 Few know that Nixon had an extensive history that went back into the early 1950s in connections with mobsters . Also, few know that he had connections with the mobsters in the early '50s .
 Nixon was reputed to have received $500,000 in cash from Carlos Marcello as campaign contributions . Nixon received the most of the money he received from Marcella .
 Nixon’s organized crime contacts continued even after he resigned the presidency in disgrace . He played golf with mobsters such as Allen Dorfman at the La Costa Country Club in California .
 Nixon's experience in assassinations went back to the late 1950s when he was President Eisenhower’s man for coordinating CIA assassinations and covert political murders . Nixon was the CIA director for assassinations in the 1950s .
 Nixon was deeply involved with the CIA in anti-Castro activities when he was vice president . Nixon was the right-wing choice for president and was involved in the CIA's efforts .
 I listed the means to carry out and cover up the crime, which would have been necessary for the conspiracy to be successful . But before doing that, I listed a list of the means of carrying out the crime .
 This could have been achieved only through the cooperation of J Edgar Hoover . This was only possible through cooperation of the FBI .
 There had to be a way for the conspirators to be certain that Hoover would suppress or destroy critical evidence, and that there would not be a serious investigation of the crime . The conspirators were certain there would be no serious investigation, the author says .
 As will be detailed later, Hoover was compromised by organized crime and subject to blackmail . Hoover was subject to blackmails and blackmail from organized crime . Hoover had a history of blackmailing, blackmailing and lying .
 If they did not know what Lyndon Johnson’s reaction would be, they would have assumed that he would react unpredictably or would have turned the full power of the federal government against the conspirators to uncover and convict them .
 Lyndon Johnson must have been part of the plot to include him in their group, or they had to know he was in their pocket . The conspirators probably would have given him advance knowledge of the plan, but they must have included him .
 Without this, there would have been an outcry from Congress, the American people, and the news media that Johnson and Hoover would not have been able to contain, says Hoover . Hoover and Johnson would have had to contain the outcry .
 Deception was obtained by the creation of the illusion that the assassination was carried out by either a person, or a group, connected to communism, with a plan that a designated patsy would be shot while escaping the scene . The plan was designed to create an illusion that a person
 This would seem to have been necessary to handle the situation after the assassination to allow the real assassins to escape and Oswald to be killed attempting to leave the scene . The real assassins escaped and Oswald was killed trying to escape .
 Jack Ruby would have been able to kill Oswald on national television while surrounded by dozens of policemen . Ruby's control would have also been necessary for Ruby to walk into the Dallas police station basement with exquisite timing .
 He was part of the mob’s operations in Dallas to control the police through bribes and favors . The mob controlled the police in Dallas, Texas .
 Ruby was also connected to Carlos Marcello in New Orleans, had been active in Cuban gunrunning activities and drug trafficking . Ruby had been an FBI informant developed by the CIA and military intelligence .
 A sophisticated conspiracy would not logically have used an inexperienced rifleman with whom the conspirators had no previous experience . A sophisticated conspirator would not have used such a rifleman, he says .
 This implies that the group would have had access to known and trusted professional assassins . This suggests that they would have access to professional assassins, according to the group .
 The Mafia and CIA qualify; the extreme right wing had close ties to the Mafia and the military . The right wing also had ties with the military and the Mafia . The mafia and CIA are the ones to qualify .
 A plan for the professional assassins to escape would also have been a necessary ingredient of the plot . A plan to escape was also necessary ingredient for the plot, according to the author .
 Secret Service had control of Kennedy’s body from the time of the shooting until burial . Secret Service was in charge of Kennedy's body until his burial .
 They were intimately involved with the initial investigation in Dallas, Texas . They were involved in the initial police investigation into the shooting .
 With Lyndon Johnson, they had the means to control the motorcade route . With LBJ, the government was able to control motorcade routes .
 As a first priority, the plotters would have needed to know that they had control of the Secret Service . The Secret Service would have been the target of the attack .
 Before the assassination, Lyndon Johnson had first-hand access to the Secret Service . Before becoming president, he had full control of the Secret Services .
 He also was involved in the planning of the Dallas trip along with his longtime friend and cohort John Connally . Connally established the parade route to pass through Dealey Plaza, an ideal spot for an assassination by crossfire .
 The CIA and military intelligence are an obvious link to the Secret Service . The CIA is a major intelligence agency . The Secret Service is a key part of the CIA .
 One would expect that the assassination of the president by a suspected Communist would trigger a massive reaction by U.S. intelligence . Any conceivable plotters would feel the need to have control of United States intelligence, he says .
 In addition, I surmised it would have been very desirable, probably absolutely necessary, for the conspirators to know that they would have support from the industrial-military-media establishment in 1963 . In addition to the fact, it would be very necessary, probably necessary, to know
 The extremely reckless personal behavior of the Kennedy brothers and John Kennedy’s perceived inept handling of the Bay of Pigs crisis, as well as his perceived anti-business policies, could well explain the willingness of the established power structure not to demand a solution .
 The fact that the U.S. government, along with the Kennedys, was planning to assassinate Fidel Castro could serve as a basis for a cover-up for national honor and security purposes . Also, the United States government could cover up the assassination of Fidel Castro for national security
 The instinct of bureaucratic institutions to suppress and deny conspiracies of any kind, large or small (because it threatens the ally of entrenched power— the status quo) could be depended on by sophisticated conspirators to come into force upon the assassination of a president in an internal or external plot .
 The plotters needed to know in advance that by assassinating the president they would gain effective control of the entire government of the U.S. before they would have rationally pursued to finality .
 "I felt I must conclude that the assassination was by a small group of fanatics, similar to the Lincoln assassination," he said . Otherwise, he said, he felt it was a group of small fanatics . The assassination was similar to Lincoln assassination .
 The logic says that if a pattern of planning can be shown involving a variety of sophisticated people, then the plot inevitably must have reached all the way to the top of the government . Otherwise it would not have been carried out, otherwise it would be carried out .
 It would be pointless for a sophisticated conspiratorial group to assassinate the president of a country unless they planned to take over the government . Put another way, it would not be a sophisticated group to kill the president unless they wanted to take control of the government.
 It would only be an act of spite or revenge which would be irrational, not the characteristic of a sophisticated group . Otherwise, it would be only a act of revenge or revenge, not a crime .
 It follows that the sophisticated group would let the vice president know their plan in advance so that he would be fully prepared to act as required to seize power and contain the crime .
 I decided that as I examined the evidence I would look for signs of a comprehensive, broad-based plan involving professionals as opposed to a narrow conspiracy involving fanatics . Therefore, I decided to examine the evidence as I looked at the evidence, and I would be looking for signs that a
 A sophisticated group would include and be controlled by key individuals drawn from such organizations as the CIA, the Mafia, the military, the FBI, high government officials, powerful businessmen, and extremely wealthy individuals . All of whom were threatened or felt threatened by the Kennedys, all of whom
 A basic premise of this book is that entire organizations were not involved . Only key individuals, not necessarily those at the top of the hierarchy, were involved in the scandal .
 A fanatical group would include and be controlled by individual white supremacists, Minutemen, anti-Castro Cubans, rabid anti-Communists, and the like . White supremacists, Cubans and anti-communists could be fanatical groups .
 "My hypothesis was that control of the plot would be by the sophisticates if they were involved at all," he said . "I thought control of this would be controlled by sophisticates"
 "One of my major goals now became to determine the nature and specific makeup of the conspiratorial group," says the author of the book . "I want to know the nature of the group," he says .
 I would start with the assumption that not all of Kennedy’s enemies were part of the conspiracy . Only a few select and key individuals were in a position to mastermind the plot and cover up the crime .
 The remainder of Kennedy’s enemies would be only too happy to watch from the sidelines . Kennedy's enemies would also be happy to sit back on the sidelines.
 Robert Payne eliminated Nikita Khrushchev and Fidel Castro from the list because they did not have control of the FBI, the CIA, or Lyndon Johnson . Robert Payne, The Life and Death of Lenin 7 .
 I rejected the idea that either of them masterminded and carried out the assassination of the president of the United States because their chances of getting caught would have been so great and the consequences would be utter catastrophe for them .
 With the worldwide security and police apparatus of the U.S. of the United States, they would have been flushed out in short order and they must have known it, he says . They would have known they were going to be flushed out, he adds .
 As to Richard Nixon having been a principal in a conspiracy, I saw little to indicate it, despite his involvement with the Mafia . Richard Nixon had little evidence of his involvement in the Mafia, says historian John Avlon .
 Kennedy had a run at the presidency later against Lyndon Johnson, but that hardly seemed motivation to kill Kennedy . Kennedy was assassinated in June 1963 .
 Nixon, however, could have known about it beforehand and should be examined later, he says . Nixon's actions could have been a good idea, but should have been examined later .
 Milteer’s statement before the assassination implied to me that some of the right-wing extremists were at least aware of the plan and some of its details . Milteers’ statement implied to be aware of plan and details of assassination .
 The apparent inclination of some of the conspirators to brag about it in advance could explain this . It could also explain why some of them bragged about the attack .
 Milteer’s statement did imply that right-wing extremists were somehow in a circle of knowledge about the details of the assassination . The statement indicated that they were part of a larger plot, but Milteeer did not .
 Jimmy Hoffa had the survival motive but, by himself, did not have the capabilities to execute the plan and to cover it up . "Jimmy Hoffa's plan was not to be executed and to be covered up," he says .
 But he could very well have known about it, even initiated it, and been a part of a Mafia conspiracy . He could have been a member of the Mafia conspiracy, he says .
 Unless Johnson was duped, he appeared to have been a major figure in the cover-up, having been in charge of the Secret Service that illegally seized all the evidence and took it to Washington . Johnson, along with J Edgar Hoover, had carefully hand-picked the Warren Commission,
 LBJ was in the best position to control the cover-up, says CNN.com's John Sutter . LBJ's motivation was strong, he says, because of his strong motivation and the fact that he was in control of the cover up .
 The military chiefs, although at odds with Kennedy, were not in a life-and-death struggle with him . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968, but the military chiefs were not fighting him .
 It seemed implausible that the top military chiefs as a group could have become involved in a plot to assassinate their president; this seemed possible but, I thought, improbable . Their power certainly was being challenged, and there was a struggle with Kennedy over military procurement .
 One or two of them, or a retired chief, could conceivably have been brought into the plot, and this was considered as a secondary possibility . However, one or two or one of them may have been in the plot .
 The CIA was subordinate to the National Security Agency which also included the Defense Intelligence Agency and Army and Navy intelligence . The CIA is subordinate to other intelligence agencies such as the Defense and National Security agencies .
 It was difficult then, and still is, to distinguish operationally between the CIA and the military, then-CIA . The CIA and military were involved in operations in the Vietnam War .
 "Any considerations of the CIA should include the military," he says . Therefore, I thought that any considerations should be made by the military .
 What minimal combination of the five categories of suspects could have met the seven means requirements of the seven requirements of: 1. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 4 . 5. 5 . 5 . 6. 6. 7. 7 . 7. 5: 5. 7
 Hunt and/or the Dallas police conceivably could have directly ordered Ruby to shoot Oswald . It seemed unlikely that Hunt or Dallas police could have ordered Ruby shot Oswald .
 The CIA/Military was indispensable in all scenarios because without their cooperation, a coup and cover-up would be impossible, and the plot had all of the characteristics of an elaborate CIA/military intelligence covert operation . The Secret Service was indispensable if for no more than to let down their guard
 Of course, there was always the possibility of blackmail of LBJ and Hoover to extort their cooperation, but it seemed that a sophisticated group of plotters would not depend on blackmail after the fact . Perhaps blackmail before the fact, but then LBJ would become an integral part of the
 Hoover and LBJ would likely have been brought into the plot before the fact to assure that all bases were covered, author says . LBJ likely would have also been brought in to ensure that the plot was complete .
 Hoover could possibly have been relied upon to fall in line because of the Mafia having compromised him . But with LBJ in the conspiratorial group, Hoover may possibly have fallen in line .
 LBJ was LBJ in his circle of friends in the White House . LBJ is considered a national security risk, but that risk would seem acceptable to the plotters once they had LBJ .
 This represents the entire investigative and prosecuting capability of the U.S. government with the possible exception of congressional investigating committees . This is the only way to find out what the government has done .
 All the Mafia had to do was get the CIA involved and have the CIA recruit the Secret Service and LBJ, and it would have had a perfect conspiracy . CIA/Military—Secret Service—Mafia-Mafia—LBJ .
 The foregoing is a working hypothesis that would have to be tested before conclusions could be reached . It is not the first time that the hypothesis has been tested .
 "I decided, for the most part, to follow the scientific method in testing the hypothesis. Drawing on my past career as an engineer, I decided to follow a scientific . method," he says .
 By this process I realized that it was likely that the hypothesis would have to be modified, or would fail, or other combinations emerge . By the end of the process, the hypothesis was likely to be revised, or failed .
 Based on preliminary research, a conspiracy including the CIA/military, the Mafia, the Secret Service, and Lyndon Johnson, seemed the minimal combination that would work . There were, of course, other possibilities .
 I now paused to conceptualize a possible scenario that would fit the broad outline of the evidence and reasoning thus far . I now pause to think of a scenario .
 "In a sense, this is a way of testing a theory and is compatible with the scientific method," says the author of the book .
 It is also a way of attaining a broad perspective before becoming immersed in the minutiae. It is a way to avoid being immersed in minutia.
 Albert Einstein engaged in what he called “mind experiments” to conceive of his theory of relativity, later to be tested with his analyses and calculations . Albert Einstein's theories were later tested with calculations and analyses .
 Many years later dramatically demonstrated by scientists to be true in actual measurements . And many years later, it was proved by scientists that it was true .
 If one cannot conceive a plot that fits the evidence from the imagined point of view of the criminals, then perhaps the theory is not valid . I reasoned that in conspiratorial crimes, if one cannot imagine a plot fit the evidence, then maybe the theory would not be valid .
 Trial lawyers do what they do when presenting their case to a jury . Jury wants to see a theory of the crime to go along with the evidence, which must fit into the theory .
 I thought it would serve the additional purpose of giving the reader a preview of the broad picture to come, so that the significance of details in subsequent chapters could be more readily grasped . And, as mentioned, I thought the reader would be able to read the full picture of the story .
 I found it helpful to list several key ingredients of the plan which appeared to be indicated simply by the evidence that was thus far available in my analysis . The plan appears to be in place by the end of the year .
 The plan must have had a single individual who was designated to put it together and direct the operation . The plan would have had to be put together and directed .
 It did not seem plausible that such a complex project would have been directed by a committee . The project was a 'complex project' that would have required a committee of experts .
 This did not preclude a group of individuals who gave their input, or some other B35] individual who helped conceive the basic concept . "This did not necessarily preclude [B35] individuals giving their input," the author says .
 The one individual who put together the operational plan together I called the Mastermind . The Mastermind was the one who put it together, he said .
 It also seemed possible that the original plan was not to make it appear to be a single gunman; but rather an obvious conspiracy linked directly to Fidel Castro . The singlegunman concept of the Warren Commission would have evolved after the fact .
 The plan appeared to create the illusion that it was the work of Communists to divert suspicion away from right-wing extremists . The plan was created to create an illusion of the Communist Party .
 Any appearance that it was a coup by forces within the U.S. was out of the question . Any appearance of a coup in the United States was out the question, he said .
 Oswald was found dead in the basement of a Dallas jail . The plan apparently did not seem to include silencing Oswald in public in the jail .
 It seemed that the plan was to pin the crime on Oswald and kill him while he was leaving the scene of the crime, or to spirit htm away where he would later be eliminated without anyone knowing .
 Above all else, the plan must succeed on the first try . There would be no turning back after it was put into motion . The plan must be perfect with all bases covered, with contingency plans .
 "I asked myself how these essential ingredients of the plot could have been conceived by the people on my list of suspects," he says . The plot was conceived by people on his list of potential suspects .
 What follows is one of several possible scenarios that seemed plausible . What follows was one of a series of possible scenarios .
 There will be plenty of time in the chapters that follow to retreat from this scenario if evidence does not support it .
 I imagined that the initial idea of assassinating the president was hatched by two chieftains of organized crime . They approached a wealthy right-wing extremist who then approached an ex-senior officer of military intelligence to join in the plot .
 The group approached a disgruntled officer in a rogue cult of military intelligence who hated the Kennedys with a passion . This group in turn approached a rogue officer in military intelligence . This officer was a disgruntled member of the group .
 He was designated to be the mastermind and to put together and execute a plan . He was tasked with putting together and executing a plan for the terrorist attack .
 The mastermind would be given access to all of the money and technical resources that he needed . He would then have access to the funds and resources he needed to make the plan .
 The money would come from wealthy right-wing extremists and organized crime, the mayor says .
 I pictured the plan being presented by the mastermind to the prime conspirators at a secret meeting . The mastermind presented the plan to the Prime Minister at a meeting .
 In accordance with your instructions, I will today outline a plan to remove John Kennedy from office and replace him with Vice President Lyndon Johnson . The plan is outlined in accordance with the instructions of gentlemen .
 "We all know that we have tried to accommodate the Kennedys but, arrogantly, they have not listened," says David Cameron . "We have tried ... to accommodate them," he says .
 If the Kennedys are left unchecked we can't be assured that everything for which we have worked our whole lives will be destroyed . Many of us will end up in the penitentiary. We can't wait to see what we've worked for .
 The Kennedys are intent on changing the entire direction of the country . They want to change the nation's direction . They are determined to do so .
 "They are caving in to the Communists and dismantling the military establishment," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin's government is dismantling the country's military establishment .
 "We know, based on our source in the National Security Council, that we may have to make a decision soon for a preemptive nuclear strike against the Soviets," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 We know, beyond a doubt, that Kennedy will not have the spine to pull the trigger . We also know that he won't have the courage to pull a trigger .
 Our nation could well be annihilated by a Soviet first nuclear strike while our “profile-incourage” president bites his nails . Our nation is at risk of being wiped out by a nuclear strike by the Soviets .
 "We should realize first and foremost that our action will be considered to be the crime of the century. To begin, we should realize that . Our action will not be considered considered the crime the century," the author says .
 If Kennedy should live after an attempt to assassinate him, we must assume that the full power of the federal government would be unleashed and our plot would be uncovered . The plot was uncovered in the Kennedy assassination attempt .
 Once we start there is no turning back, we must be prepared to take whatever subsequent steps are necessary to cover up the crime and seize complete control of the nation . Therefore, once we start we must take whatever steps necessary, including cover-up of the crime . We must seize complete
 We also must realize that a perfect assassination, although theoretically possible, seldom achieved, is seldom achieved . We must also realize that the perfect assassination is rarely achieved, even though theoretically possible .
 We must have a plan in place to cover up unforeseen events that may occur. Thus we must have plans in place, says President Obama .
 Lyndon Johnson will become president and it can confidently be predicted that he will be disposed to join our group if approached with an ingenious and well-thought-out plan .
 "They have repeatedly humiliated him, made him the butt of jokes, and he knows that they are going to dump him from the ticket in the next election because of the criminal problems he has gotten himself into," he said . "He knows that . He knows that he is going to
 "If his problems go on unchecked, he will quite probably be sent to the penitentiary," he says . If he continues to have problems unchecked he will probably face prison .
 Lyndon has been obsessed with becoming president since anyone can remember . Lyndon has a long history of obsession with being president . He has a history of becoming president .
 "His entire life has been marked by his willingness to do anything or to commit any crime in order to get elected or cover up his indiscretions," says Hillary Clinton . Clinton: "He's always been willing to do whatever he can"
 "There is absolutely nothing he will not do to satisfy his insatiable lust for power," says Obama . "There are absolutely nothing that will not satisfy him," he says .
 Although he has recently shown liberal tendencies, we know that he believes in nothing except power . We know that in reality he believes that he wants to be in power .
 "He will have no choice but to do our bidding because he has compromised himself with us so completely," he said . He will have 'no choice' to do his bidding because of his 'compromise'
 Our friends in the Outfit have given him enormous bribes, have carried out some very extreme operations for him, the NYPD says . "We know every bit of dirt on him," the NYPD chief says .
 We know that Edgar hates Jack Kennedy and absolutely loathes Bobby, who has repeatedly humiliated the old faggot . Edgar hates Bobby and hates Bobby for repeatedly humiliating him .
 He has forced him to greatly increase his paltry activities against the Outfit . He has been forced to increase his activities against him .
 The president is going to dump Edgar after the next election, and all of the old hypocrite’s secrets will be uncovered . In addition to the president, we all know that the president will dump Edgar Edgar .
 The president knows that regardless of the dirt that Edgar has on him, he has even worse dirt on Edgar. President Obama knows he has more dirt to come from Edgar.
 Hoover will not be a problem and will go along with our plan, he says . For these reasons we can be assured that Hoover will be not a problem, he adds . Hoover will also go along, he said .
 With Lyndon in our plan, and Edgar on board, we will have complete control of the investigative and prosecutorial capabilities of the entire federal government, he says . So, with Lyndon, Edgar, and our own intelligence operations in charge, it will be more effective .
 Congress will not be a problem because, with Edgar’s secret files and our own incriminating information on key members of Congress, we will have them firmly in hand . Edgar's secret files will be kept in the hands of Congress members, he says .
 As we well know, the military-industrial establishment is very concerned about the Kennedys and will be happy to see them gone . As well as the military, the government is very worried about the Kennedy family .
 President Obama failed to show the courage needed to make his program a success, but because he didn't think it would provide him with a great political coup during his first few months in office . The program failed to be a success because it didn't have the courage to make it a success
 He stuck his finger in the pie by agreeing with some of his advisers to change our plans at the last moment, but when the going got rough he chickened out . He said: 'When the going went rough he 'chickened out'
 The operation against Castro would probably fail, knowing that the operation would fail, knew that the U.S. would be seen as a coward by the American people . Now I must confess that we went ahead anyway, knowing the operation . The intention of trapping Kennedy into a major military action
 Kennedy’s supposed victory over Khrushchev in the Cuban missile crisis was a sham . Kennedy agreed not only to remove our Jupiter missiles from Turkey and Italy, but also never to invade Cuba again, he says .
 He never insisted on finalizing a formal agreement with Khrushchev, never enforced on-site inspection to see that the missiles were ieinved and, in fact, they were not removed and remain in Cuba . Then, to make matters worse, he never enforced an inspection of the
 There is only one alternative, and we may rest assured that the military-industrial establishment will look the other way after the assassination . The assassination will pressure the news media to get the assassination behind us .
 As far as the Kennedy family is concerned, they can't fold up and go away . "They can't be expected to fold up," says CNN's John Sutter . The Kennedy family has a long history of high-profile scandals .
 They will not want the world to see the full truth about Jack and Bobby’s peccadillos with their Hollywood movie star .
 The Kennedy family has so many secrets they want to keep that they will do nothing now or forever to investigate the asbacswabon . We will have the Kennedys by the balls once President Jack has been eliminated, author says .
 As to the American people, we know that they live in comfortable illusions, shielded from the reality of the real world . We also know that the U.S. lives in an illusion of the world, as well as the people of America .
 An official story will be presented to them shortly after we take over the government . We can be assured that they will accept an official story, says minister .
 A Presidential Commission’s report will describe the assassination as the act of a lone nut, or with an accomplice, backed by Cuba or the Soviets . This story, in the form of a report, will be published by the Presidential Commission . The report will likely conclude that the
 We will design the cover so that we will have flexibility to use either the lone-nut scenario or, even better, an assassination conspiracy by Cuba as an excuse to invade it and, once and for all, get rid of Castro .
 The threat of nuclear war with the Soviets is a ruse to intimidate government officials to cooperate in a cover-up, if the need should arise . These flexible contingency aspects of the plan insure that Lyndon can use the threat of a nuclear war to intimidate officials .
 With our man Lyndon becoming president, armed with foreknowledge of the assassination, he will appear as a strong and steady hand to guide people through their shock and grief .
 The American people will be only too eager to deny the reality—on that we can depend . The U.S. can depend on the fact that the president is in the midst of a crisis .
 William James and Sigmund Freud wrote essays on the subject of illusion and denial . William James is handing out reprints of some essays by Freud and James .
 As you know, our behavioral research has fully confirmed these concepts. As we know, this is a good example of human behavior . We are happy to share this information with the world .
 This phenomenon of the masses, in which they need to live in a comfortable illusion, spoon-fed by pleasant information from the government, will form the foundation of our deception plan for the aftermath of the assassination . The deception plan will be the basis for the assassination plan, says Dr.
 Once our ‘official’ story is accepted, it will forever be in the minds of the masses . Once accepted, the story will not be able to be renounced by them unless led to do so by a future government .
 "We intend to keep control of the key levels of government and the Department of Justice for the foreseeable future," says President Obama .
 Future administrations will not have the motive or need to change i 38 . We must not fall into the trap of believing that we can get away with a sloppy plan because there are limits to how much we can cover up .
 "We must create a plan that is so ingenious, so creative, and so cunning that there will be, in all probability, nothing to cover up," he says .
 This meticulously crafted plan will be very helpful in bringing aboard the top officials and the top professional assassins that are mandatory to make the plan absolutely foolproof . The plan is designed to make it foolproof and to bring aboard top officials .
 For sure, we do not want the American public for one moment to think that it was a conspiracy originating in the United States . For that reason, poisoning of the president is out; it would obviously be branded as an inside job and therefore a domestic conspiracy . It would also be branded
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com/Travel next Wednesday .
 These methods would be too easily traced and have too much possibility of going wrong . The methods would not be easily traced, they would have to be used in the future . These methods could be used for the first time in a long-term experiment .
 For example, poisoning attempts have been made on Fidel Castro and Patrice Lumumba . They have failed miserably. For example of poisoning attempts, they have failed to succeed .
 Other attempts by lone assassins on heads of states have worked only if the lone assassin was truly a lone nut and not part of a conspiracy . Other attempts to assassinate heads of state have failed to work .
 It is obvious that we cannot depend on an untrained or unstable recruit to do the job . We cannot rely on untrained and unstable recruits to succeed us in the UK .
 We will not be able to recruit the world-class professionals we need if we do not have a plan that they believe will allow them to escape. Also, from my experience, we will not have to recruit a world class professional if we don't have a solution .
 I have thought about this long and carefully, and have produced a plan that may appear complicated, but I am sure you will see is quite workable . I have produced an idea that may look complicated but I'm sure it will workable, I say . I'm not afraid to
 These three phases will be compartmentalized . Media and Government Cover-up Project Manager cover-up Disinformation Project Manager . Disinformation project manager will be project manager .
 Only the project manager will know who is in charge of each phase and the ultimate details of the operation, but he will not know the identity of anyone on the committee except me . The project will not be able to reveal who is behind each phase of the project .
 This will have the desirable benefit of you being entirely divorced from the operation except for your specific roles in the committee . This will benefit from the fact that you are not in charge of the operation .
 Hoover and Johnson will not know the details of the plan or the identity of members of the committee . The committee will not be able to reveal the details or the identities of members .
 They will know only that it is going to happen and that their primary roles will be to contain the ensuing investigation . They will only know that it will happen and they will be trying to contain an investigation into it .
 The patsy will be fingered immediately by fabricated evidence that will be irrefutable . The case is likely to be solved immediately, with fabricated evidence fabricated by the government .
 "We have recruitment procedures to insure that Lyndon and Edgar can be brought into the plot and inextricably linked without their knowing more than they need to know"
 "Once he is eliminated, no one except those present here today will know who we are or know the master plan of our operation," he says . "We will not be able to tell anyone else about our plans," he adds .
 None of you will know who did the actual shooting or the people involved in the operations; and none who carried out the mechanics of the plot will know . None of the people in the operation will be able to tell who was behind it, or who financed it . And none of you
 In our plan Kennedy will be shot with a rifle, apparently from a tall building, while he is riding in an open limousine . The plan is based on a plan to shoot him in a high-rise building .
 With Lyndon in a position to arrange political trips and parade routes, we can reasonably be assured that a suitable opportunity can be found within the next six to eight months . We hope to find a suitable job in the coming months .
 If necessary, Texas could be the starting point of the political campaign this fall . Perhaps Miami will be a good location, or Chicago, or Los Angeles .
 We must have this over with before the end of the year to give Lyndon time to consolidate his position before the 1964 election . Of no small importance, this must be done before the election .
 In order for our professional assassins to believe they will escape, we need to have it appear that two shots are coming from one direction . The real shot by the professional is coming from another, using one of our state-of-the-art silenced weapons .
 This means that we must recruit a patsy; we will locate him near the fake assassin’s post, and he must be someone who can be linked to the shooting . This is where we will find him, and the killer will kill him . The killer must be linked
 A few years ago the CIA set him up with a legend as a Communist defector . The CIA set up him up as a defector, he says .
 "He is young and gullible enough to be duped into becoming our fall guy," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "He's not a fool, but he's a fool. He's a good liar. He is a fool."
 Oswald being both CIA and FBI gives us an insurance policy for these agencies whose first impulse is to cover up their embarrassments . The advantages of Oswald being Oswald is obvious, the advantages are obvious . It gives us the insurance policy of these agencies who are embarrassed .
 They will see immediately that the truth of the plot would destroy their organizations and themselves, writes CNN.com's John Sutter.com.com . The truth would destroy themselves and themselves .
 Our plan will include a disinformation scheme in the months before the assassination to make it appear that Oswald is a fanatic who is connected to Fidel Castro . Our plan is to make Oswald appear to be connected to Castro, the author says .
 Most people who will conduct this disinformation scheme will not know its real purpose . Most of the people who . will . not know the real purpose of the . disinformation scheme .
 They will think they are creating bona fides for our patsy to be a double agent in Cuba . They will be thinking they're creating bonafides for ourselves, they say .
 The details of this will be worked out later but will include making it appear that he attempted to assassinate a prominent right-wing figure . He talked of killing Kennedy on several occasions, that he tried to make contact with the Soviet and the Cuban consulates in Mexico City before the assassination .
 Oswald will not know he is being set up as part of the operation . This will be done with Oswald actively participating but not knowing that he is set up . Oswald will be actively participating in the operation, not knowing he is part of it . Oswald would be the first person to be
 These disinformation methods, of course, are commonplace; we have used them several times before, says CNN.com . "These disinformation methods are commonplace, but we have had them before," he says .
 By using Oswald, who is a CIA agent and has been subject in mind-control experiments, we have a double advantage . Oswald is a former CIA agent who has also been subject to mind control experiments . Oswald has been a subject to experiments by the CIA .
 Using anti-Castro Cubans to set him up will provide us with an extra layer of deniability . The CIA will be forced to participate in the cover-up; and, second, using the anti-Cuba Cubans will give us with extra deniability, he says
 Oswald will be induced to purchase a rifle through the mail that can easily be traced to him . Oswald will also be induced by inducing him to buy a rifle . Oswald's actions will be followed by the assassination of President Lincoln Lincoln .
 We will plant this rifle in a “sniper’s nest” in a tall building overlooking the motorcade route . The rifle will be planted in a "sniper's nest" in a high-rise building overlooking motorcade routes .
 The first two shots will be diversionary shots and come from the rear of the camera . The other two will come from a different angle .
 Secret Service agents and witnesses will turn around and momentarily see a rifle sticking out of the window, diverting their attention from the front where the professional assassin will be located . The first diversionary shot will be the first .
 "The professional assassin in the front will shoot to kill with his first shot," says the assassin . "Professional assassin" is a professional assassin .
 If for some unforeseen reason he should miss, we will have a third assassin as a contingency back-up . The assassin will be located in the rear of the motorcade, but in a different building from the fake assassin .
 A fourth rifleman will be in the front, probably at the same location as the second rifleman . As an even further contingency, in case the third rifleman misses, we will have a fourth man in the back .
 It is extremely unlikely that the first shot from the front will not do the job . The first shot is expected to be the first of the first to hit the back of the head .
 We will insist on our sharpshooters passing the test with perfect precision for at least one hundred times in succession before we proceed with the plan . We plan to set up a secret training camp to simulate exactly the conditions of vehicle speed, angles, and distance .
 For recruitment of professional assassins, I plan to bring in trusted people from overseas, from our terrorist connections there . For recruitment, I will bring in trustworthy people from abroad, from terrorist connections . I hope to recruit more professional assassins .
 "They are without doubt the best in the business and have a system of disinformation methods that make them virtually untraceable," says CNN's John Defterios . "Without doubt, they are the best," he says .
 "I anticipate that our United States associates in the Outfit will furnish local personnel for handling the police and other minor assignments as needed" "The Outfit" will provide local personnel to handle the police .
 We will use our own trusted intelligence professionals as field coordinators . We will have them in a central location that we control, with the necessary electronic communications, says President Obama .
 To be discussed later, I will develop an entire back-up plan with equal care and thought, to be carried out on the same day, in the same city, in case our base plan should have to be aborted .
 I think we all realize that once our plan goes into operation, there is no turning back. Once our plan is complete, we assemble all of our professional assassins, spotters, and coordinators in one city, there will be no turning .
 "We must kill Kennedy that day and have Lyndon become president," author says . "We cannot take the chance of a leak, considering all of the people necessary to make our plan work," he says .
 "We absolutely must be in a position to suppress and control all evidence once Kennedy is gone," says White House spokesman .
 Only with Lyndon as president and Hoover as head of the FBI will that be possible, says Hoover . Hoover was head of FBI in the 1930s and '60s . Hoover would have been president of the United States, Hoover would be president .
 A prime factor in selecting the city where the assassination will take place is selecting the location of the assassination . Control of the evidence is crucial to our plan .
 Some city in Texas might end up being our best possibility . Texas has a long history of coroners for hire and it's Lyndon’s territory .
 By law in Texas the autopsy and evidence must stay in Texas, even if it is the murder of the president . Also, by law in the state of Texas, the autopsy is allowed to be carried out .
 "It will be necessary for us to have some minimum level of control of the local police in the city that is selected," he said . "In that same vein, it will be . necessary to have . some minimum of control" of local police, he added .
 "Once Hoover is aboard, the police in all of the proposed locations, particularly in Dallas. This, you realize, is no problem because our partners, once Hoover is onboard, have control of the police," the president says .
 There are numerous other details that will have to be worked out, such as bullet and shell casing plants and linking of bullets to the fake assassin's rifle .
 "These are routine matters that we have employed many times in our previous operations," says CNN.com . But these are "routine matters" that have been used in previous operations .
 Two last items, important ones, are that we need to work out a way to control the physical evidence and create laxity in the protection of the president . The president will be protected from prosecution .
 "I have in mind bribing key personnel in the Secret Service to see that we have control of these two items," he said . "I'm not going to be surprised," he added .
 Secret Service personnel who guard Kennedy have become disenchenchanted with him . Secret Service staff have become 'disenchanted' with him, sources say .
 "They have lost all respect and are sick of covering for him in his outrageous and reckless escapades," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 These bribes, along with the money required to hire professional assassins, will take a large amount of cash . These bribes are often bribes, and the money needed to hire a professional assassin .
 Although this may seem excessive, we must remember that the payoff will be a thousand fold . We must remember this may be excessive, but remember that it will pay a thousand times .
 "It should not be a problem with the resources available to us through our wealthy backers and our hidden funds," says the film's creator .
 "We should consider having a complete military takeover of the government in case our plan should blow. Also, I should add, we should consider . Also, he should add . We should consider a complete . military takeover .
 I'm working on some thoughts of how this could be put into action on a contingency basis . I’m working on how it could be used as a contingency .
 The plan will include the threat of nuclear war with the Soviets as an excuse for martial law . Basically the plan will be included in the plan . The plan is based on the idea of a nuclear war .
 As mentioned, we will be in a position to blame the assassination on the Cubans or the Soviets . We will be able to blame them for the death of Fidel Castro .
 The people who planned and participated in the assassination, although “rational,” must have been driven by desperation combined with an acute case of arrogance and overwhelming personal ambition . The planners must have had to be very much accustomed to conceiving and carrying out complex, bold plots .
 Key conspirators' motivation was self-survival to prevent themselves from being annihilated by the Kennedy brothers, whom they hated . My hypothesis is that the primary motivation of the key conspirators was one of self-preservation .
 In the following chapters I will summarize the results of my investigation of the assassination of John F Kennedy . The following chapters will cover the assassination in the final chapters .
 We will see if the foregoing scenario fairly describes the events and circumstances and is borne out by the evidence . The case will be heard in court on Monday .
 If not, a scenario will be developed that does fit, without clinging to previous assumptions . The scenario will not fit, but it does, if not, it does fit .
 If the perfect crime is defined as one in which the criminals all got away with it, then the assassination of John F Kennedy was the 'perfect crime' The perfect crime was defined by the definition of the crime of the Kennedy assassination .
 "The reason they got away with it is that they had the power to control the investigation and to seal away any evidence that they could not destroy, change, or manipulate," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 As a general guideline, I decided to look for things that appeared to have gone wrong which might reveal the nature of the plot and the identity of the conspirators . I looked at things that seemed to be going wrong, such as the fact that the plot went wrong .
 Oswald was supposed to escape and be eliminated, or be shot trying to escape, but the plan went awry . Oswald was meant to be eliminated and be shot, but he was instead shot by the White House .
 "I reasoned that the things gone wrong must have created enormous problems for the conspirators," he said . "They must have had enormous problems," he later said .
 By following these leads, it might be possible to reveal the nature of the conspiracy . Follows these leads in an attempt to find out the truth of the plot .
 "My next step would be to develop precise methods of evaluating the evidence," he says .
 “Goddamn the Kennedys,” I heard Clyde Tolson say to Hoover . ‘Goddam’s’: ‘Kennedys.’ ‘I heard Clyde . Tolson said to Hoover. ‘The Kenned
 I urge the reader to bear with me in this chapter concerning the use of evidence . My Thirty Years in Hoover’s FBI 9 QUESTIONS of Evidence .
 This is a very important subject if we are to keep our bearings while maneuvering through the JFK assassination quagmire . This is an important subject for us, and it's important to remember .
 In attempting to understand the evidence in this case, I was confronted with the dilemma of how to interpret the massive amount of information that is available in millions of pages of documents .
 It was soon apparent that a methodology was needed to sort the most pertinent material down to a manageable quantity and evaluate the quality and importance of each item . The methodology was necessary to sort out the most relevant material down .
 I was obliged to accept the reality that no evidence, in this or any other complex crime, is of absolute certainty . I was forced to accept that . No evidence of the crime, or of other complex crimes, can be of absolute . certainty, he said .
 There is always some uncertainty—doubts can be raised about any item of evidence if one is willing to search long enough . There is also some uncertainty about whether the evidence is true .
 Their first order of business is to create doubts in the minds of the judge or the jury . Their first task is to 'create doubts' in the mind of a judge or jury .
 In practice, many lawyers, even prominent trial attorneys, unabashedly manufacture doubt out of thin air, to the point of lies, obfuscating facts . The jurors are overwhelmed and their verdict is based on sentiment and emotions, says John Sutter .
 This can lead to hung juries or acquittals, even in cases that are replete with irrefutable evidence of guilt . This can also lead to hang juries, even if there is evidence of innocence .
 Even Pulitzer Prize-winning authors such as Norman Mailer become confused when facing the mountain of conflicting evidence that has accumulated in JFK assassination .
 If one’s answer is to come out of anything larger than an opinion, it is necessary to contend with questions of evidence . If one's answer comes out of something larger than opinion it must contend with evidence .
 Evidence produces, sooner or later, a counterinterpretation to itself in the form of a contending expert in a court of law . For it is in the nature of evidence to produce a counter interpretation to itself .
 Mailer confesses that he resorted to mere opinion in his massive book on Oswald . Mailer here is leading up to confessing that he used mere opinion to write .
 All he provided were fanciful avenues of escape for those who cannot logically refute the evidence of a conspiracy . All that he provided was a fanciful escape from those who can't logically refute evidence of conspiracy .
 Mailer came up with the nonsense that he thought there was a 75 percent chance that Oswald acted alone . In the end, Mailer said he believed there was 75 percent of a chance of Oswald acting alone .
 Mailer said Oswald would never have been convicted in a jury trial if he, Mailer, were defending Oswald . Mailer then hedged and said that Oswald would not have been found guilty if Mailer were defending him .
 It therefore becomes necessary to develop means of dealing with the evidence, it is necessary to deal with it, it says . It is not the only solution to the problem of the situation .
 After some thought, I concluded that despite its flaws and shortcomings, the method of presenting and evaluating evidence that has been developed over many generations in our legal system is the best that we have, he said .
 It has been forged out of the heat of debate between adversaries, guided by our constitution, and grapples with reality . It is a democracy, it is guided by the Constitution, and grappling with reality, it has been said .
 It uses scientific evidence combined with opinions, intuitions, circumstances, circumstances and eyewitness accounts . It also uses opinions and intuitions .
 Virtually anything that can help to understand the crime can be brought to bear, if the judge permits . The judge is expected to make a decision on whether to bring the case to court .
 A purely scientific method by itself has the shortcoming that there is always doubt, says Dr. Andrew Hammond . "There are always doubts," says Hammond .
 The scientific method does not deal with the moral dilemma and agony of the juror . Juror has to weigh the evidence, overcome the doubt, and reach a decision in which somebody will be set free or punished .
 Our legal system combines logic, argumentation, fairness, and scientific knowledge in a debate between advocates . The debate is between advocates and opponents of the law .
 Legal concept of best evidence says only the clearest and most credible evidence should be presented by an advocate to prove his or her case . Only to the extent necessary to make the case; all other evidence is discarded .
 There is a point at which one must stop considering every scintilla of evidence that presents itself; otherwise the case can never be made; it will collapse under its own weight . The case can be made but it can collapse under the weight of evidence .
 This concept, simple in principle and so essential if I were to hope to complete a readable book, proved to be very difficult to apply to the JFK assassination because there is a super-abundance of evidence . This concept was difficult to use because of the overwhelming evidence .
 "I found, time . again, the painful necessity of stopping short of tying each chapter into a neat package, with no loose ends," says author . "It's the pain of not tying each book together into a tidy package," she says .
 There wi// be loose ends, which I shall identify as clearly as I can . Thus there wi // be loose end, which shall be identified as clearly, I can.
 photographic evidence is generally considered better evidence than oral testimonies . For example, photographic evidence can be used to prove a person's innocence .
 It is possible to tamper with photographic evidence to the extent that the deception is virtually undetectable . But, of course, it is possible .
 Evidence that has been forged, by those who are prime suspects in the crime, is tantamount to proof of their guilt . And as will be seen as critical in this case, evidence will be critical in the case . The prime suspect's forged evidence is seen as proof of his guilt
 Oral testimony given under oath, under cross-examination, is generally considered better than interviews or written statements . Oral testimony under oath is given under better scrutiny than interviews, written statements or interviews .
 The first and freshest oral testimony is generally better than later testimony, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The first testimony is considered superior—but not always . Sometimes memories really do become more factual with time with time .
 Scientific evidence backed by experts is generally considered better than oral testimony . Yet scientific evidence can be tainted by the biases or dishonesty of the scientist making the case .
 It takes a soul-searching, analytical person capable of change and of suspending many conflicting ideas in the mind for extended periods of time . It takes an analytical person to be able to suspend conflicting ideas from the mind in a long time .
 "In using legal methods of evaluating evidence, I want to dispel any notion that I hold an illusion that a legal trial will ever take place," he says .
 Most of the alleged participants in this crime are now dead, so a trial cannot take place . Only a few subordinates are still living, and only a few still living . Most of those accused of the crime have died .
 Much of the evidence would be held inadmissible because the “chain of possession” rules have been violated in many instances . Also, the ‘chain of . possession’ rule has been violated, and much of the . evidence would not be allowed to be considered in
 What is at stake is historical truth. hope I will convince the reader that historical truth is a very important subject for the long-term survival of the nation .
 I don’t think I have to argue that it is extremely perilous to our nation if a political group can, by assassination, bypass a democratic election for the presidency; and, worse yet, if they can get away with it, it will be dangerous to the nation . I
 As earlier noted, the vast body of evidence and information concerning Kennedy’s assassination requires great reduction and selection to bring it to an understandable level . The vast amount of evidence must be reduced to a manageable level .
 I drew on what I consider to be the best of these references and further condensed that work . I drew upon what I think are the best references to this work .
 "I conducted my own investigations and research in the National Archives in which I discovered new, important documents," she says . "In addition, I conducted investigations and . research in . the National . Archives"
 I was fortunate to find and develop original material, including analysis of the motion pictures and photographs taken at the scene of the crime, and interviews with key witnesses and government officials who are still alive .
 FBI reports, Secret Service reports, and documents from the CIA were used as they became available under Freedom of Information Act lawsuits and Acts of Congress .
 Witnesses have been interviewed on television and radio programs in which witnesses have been recorded and recorded . One further source of evidence is the hundreds of hours of interviews with witnesses .
 "The vast amount of this material should not be taken lightly in view of the fact that the government of the United States has never allowed the American people to witness a serious trial with the best evidence, and a legitimate judge and jury to weigh it"
 It became apparent to me that I needed to know much more about legal rules of evidence and judicial procedures . I'm glad to learn more about the legal rules and procedures of the trial .
 Most of what I needed to know was in Gilberts Law Summaries by John Kaplan and Jon R Waltz . I borrowed law books from an attorney friend and found that most of what was needed was in law books .
 I found that there are two basic types of evidence as distinguished from forms of evidence . I found there were two basic kinds of evidence, one form of evidence and two forms .
 The first type of evidence is direct evidence, sometimes simplistically termed ‘eyewitness evidence, which proves a proposition directly rather than by inference . The other type is indirect evidence .
 It is evidence of a related fact from which the existence of an ultimate fact can be inferred . The ultimate fact is that it is based on the fact that it exists from which it can be said .
 Circumstantial evidence is far more prevalent in courtrooms than many realize . Circumstance evidence is often more prevalent than you think is .
 For example, fingerprints are circumstantial evidence, as is DNA analysis . The evidence can vary from this virtually irrefutable evidence to broad evidence encompassing motive, means, and opportunity .
 There is a very wide spectrum of circumstantial evidence that can be admitted by the judge . The judge will decide whether to admit the evidence against the prosecution .
 Legal scholars consider “circumstantial evidence’s superior to testimonial evidence because circumstances are very difficult to forge . In direct testimonies people can lie or be telling what they believe to be the truth, yet have gross misconceptions .
 There are many ways in which experienced criminals or professionals can create illusions of certainty of evidence when it is, in fact, a fraud . Government intelligence, such as government intelligence, can create .
 This applies in particular to conspiracies where careful advance planning took place and, worse yet, in which, literally, magician’s tricks were employed . This applies especially to those involved in the assassination of President Obama .
 The law is inclined to admit broad circumstantial evidence in conspiracy cases . For these reasons, the law is also inclined to allow the use of broad evidence in the case .
 The rules excluding evidence relate to circumstantial evidence . Most of the rules exclude evidence relating to evidence . The rules are based on circumstantially evidence .
 Jurors like to see a plausible, cohesive theory of both broad and specific aspects of the crime . In cases of conspiracy, juries like to hear a plausible and cohesive theory . The jury will decide whether to convict the suspect in the case of conspiracy .
 First is testimonial evidence given by a witness; second is tangible evidence—exhibits or tangible things that may be offered for consideration . Third is testimonial evidence; first is testimony from a witness, second is evidence of tangible evidence .
 Tangible evidence is divided into real evidence and demonstrative evidence . Real evidence is the “real thing” for example the murder weapon, bullets, a movie film of actual events, a written document, etc. Demonstrative evidence is not the real item involved in the case
 Admissibility of evidence in court is determined solely by the trial judge . The trial judge decides whether to allow evidence to be admitted in court .
 The weight and credibility of evidence are up to the jury to decide . On the other hand, the weight of the evidence is up to be decided by the jury .
 Unless objections made, almost any kind of evidence can be received in court . Unless objections are made, most of the evidence in court can be heard in a trial .
 The most often rejected evidence by the judge is broad circumstantial and hearsay evidence . The judge often rejects hearsay and broad circumstance evidence .
 Hearsay is generally found non-admissible, but it is not widely known that there are numerous exceptions . Hearsays are generally found not to be heard in the United States .
 In these situations, the public policies rejecting hearsay evidence are simply outweighed by other policies favoring its admission, the author says . The author says the public policy on hearsay is often overruled .
 There is no single theory or rationale that will explain all of the exceptions or harmonize one with another . "There are no single theories or rationale" that can explain all the exceptions, he says .
 The test of admissibility should be whether the hearsay is such that the trier can put a reasonable accurate value upon it as evidence of the matter it is offered to prove, Morgan wrote . Morgan observed, “The test of hearing is whether direct testimony of the declarant
 The number of exceptions to the hearsay rule is by no means fixed or rigid . It is not a fixed rule or rigid, but it's by no way fixed .
 Confessions by the accused are not hearsay, according to the Federal Rules . Confessions are hearsay by an accused person, the rules state . Confession by the accuser must be recorded in court .
 Most courts regard an extrajudicial confession as hearsay, since it is offered to prove the truth of the matter confessed . Majority view: Most courts, however, regard an . extrajudicial . confession as a hearsay .
 Like an admission, its probative value outweighs any hearsay objections, and hence it is admissible under a longrecognized exception to the Hearsay Rule . The admission is an admission to the court, not a hearsay objection .
 The rules governing confessions are significant in the JFK case because of numerous witnesses to confessions or near confessions by mobsters . Sam Giancana, Santo Trafficante, Jr., Carlos Marcello, and possibly others are discussed in later chapters .
 The legal term reasonable doubt is a very important concept in evaluating evidence . It is an important part of evaluating evidence in the case of a criminal conviction . The judge says reasonable doubt was reasonable doubt .
 /t is not a mere imaginary or possible doubt, but a fair doubt based on reason and common sense . A reasonable doubt is a doubt growing out of the testimony, the lack of testimony, or the unsatisfactory nature of the evidence, is a reasonable doubt .
 It is such a doubt as to leave your minds, after a careful examination of the evidence, in the condition that you cannot say you have an abiding conviction . [41] amounting to a moral certainty of the truth of the charge made against the defendant. [41.]
 The reasonable-doubt standard is considered by the legal system to be the highest standard . The reasonable doubt standard is the highest level .
 It is an attempt to make certain that the scales of evidence are decisively balanced against the accused before he or she can be convicted of a criminal offense . The scales are set to be balanced against each other before a criminal conviction can be made .
 I noted that the reasonable-doubt standard is intended to cut both ways . The reasonable-dual doubt standard is meant to be used both ways, but it doesn't cut both .
 The accused should not be convicted if there is a reasonable doubt of the truth of the charges or the validity of the evidence . But, on the other hand, the accused shouldn't be acquitted because of imaginary or possible doubts that can always be concocted in any issue . The JFK case
 Critics of proconspiracy evidence have demonstrated that they will stop at nothing to create “reasonable doubt’ out of imaginary doubt to avoid facing the truth of a conspiracy . Over the years, critics of pro-conspirpiracies have proven that they .
 Despite overwhelming doubt of the validity of the Warren Commission’s arguments for a lone gunman, proWarren Commission people have kept possible doubts of a conspiracy alive for almost thirty years by using imaginary doubts or discrepancies .
 This is true of virtually every item of evidence that has been developed, it has been claimed . This has been proven to be true of almost every piece of evidence, it is said .
 It is immediately attacked and dissected, and shadows of doubt expostulated, keeping the minds of the American people in a state of confusion, says President Obama .
 Scientists know it is impossible to prove anything beyond any possible doubt . Scientists know that it is difficult to prove that anything is beyond any doubt .
 Even Newton’s law is still a theory and, in fact, was proven ‘wrong” by Albert Einstein . Einstein proved “wrong’ by proving ‘newtunes’ law wrong .
 There is always uncertainty about any item of evidence, perhaps infinitesimal, but always there is some degree of uncertainty, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Jurors confuse a remotely possible doubt with a reasonable doubt, thus we have hung juries or outrageous acquittals . For these reasons, reasonable doubt can often backfire on the prosecution because jurors are not capable of comprehending the nuances of the concept .
 Preponderance of the evidence is a legal concept that is an alternative to reasonable-doubt standards . It's a legal term that is alternative to the standard of reasonable doubt . It is used in the United States by the Supreme Court in Washington .
 It is generally applied to civil cases in which only a weighing of evidence is necessary . It is used in civil cases where only the evidence is needed .
 If the scales of justice tip one way or the other, the accused may be declared guilty or innocent . The case is not decided on whether the accused is innocent or guilty .
 One trial attorney says preponderance-of-evidence standards should be applied to the JFK assassination because the crime is so important to the nation and because conspiratorial crimes are so difficult to solve . Another attorney has pled a case before the United States Supreme Court .
 We have available three levels of proof for forming our judgments or lay opinions in the JFK case . The JFK case is the subject of a series of questions about the government's actions .
 It has been extremely difficult for individuals without prosecutorial powers to solve the JFK case . The JFK case has never been solved .
 Most of the real progress that has been made is by use of testimonies and evidence gathered by the Warren Commission, the Senate Intelligence Committee, and the House Select Committee on Assassinations .
 Government bodies were unwilling to carry forward, or were blocked by the government bureaucracy from investigating the government itself .
 The body of evidence, when examined as a whole, met preponderance-of-evidence standards . Therefore, I decided that it was reasonable and justifiable to use the standards in those instances .
 The law says that a person is presumed innocent until found guilty in a court of law . The law also says that the law does not allow people to be presumed innocent .
 This is a concept only applicable in a courtroom . But it should be realized that this is only applicable to the courtroom . It should be a concept that only applies to a courtroom.
 It doesn’t mean that an individual has to follow the same rule—only the law is so constrained, only the law . It doesn't mean that a person must follow the law, it means that they follow it .
 As individuals, we have the right to form our own judgments at any point in time we become convinced, one way or the other . As individuals we can't be convinced one way of the other, we can make our own decisions .
 In the case of the JFK assassination, we are not compelled to accept the proclamations of politically motivated tribunals . And, in the . case, we certainly are not . compelled to . accept the . proclamsations of the . JFK assassination . We are not
 As I studied the Warren Commission Report and its twenty-six volumes, and later the HSCA Reports, it soon became apparent that neither the Commission nor the Committee had used a standard of discipline to control its efforts .
 They had disregarded legal concepts and even disregarded the most tried-and-true methods of classic criminology . They had completely disregarded law concepts, they said .
 As congressionally authorized bodies they were free to impose impossibly high standards when it came to establishing proof of conspiracy, particularly if it involved the federal government . The case was brought before the House of Representatives in 2009 .
 At the same time they were free to accept ridiculously low standards when it came to establishing the loneassassin hypothesis . They were also free to reject the idea of a loneassinassin .
 They were also free to disregard any evidence that did not fit into their political agenda, or bury it in the National Archives for seventy years .
 "This only underscored my determination to apply appropriate standards, insofar as possible, to my analysis of the evidence," he said . "I'm not satisfied with the result of the verdict," he added .
 This is the greatest murder mystery in American history, if not of all time. This is a murder mystery . This is an American history of murder, murder .
 It is best approached as an intellectual puzzle, the solving of a mystery, in a manner that is as objective as one is capable of . It's best to approach it as a puzzle, but it is best to be objective, the author says .
 My first goal will be to develop clear and convincing forensic and scientific evidence that there was, in fact, a conspiracy that assassinated John F Kennedy .
 The fact of a conspiracy may be taken for granted by many, but my research forced me to conclude, reluctantly, that it was necessary to take a fresh look at the basic foundation of the evidence .
 Only then could I develop broader circumstantial evidence of the master conspiracy . Only then I could find out more about the master conspirators' plans .
 Although what follows is arcane, it is very critical because it points distinctive arrows in the direction of the prime conspirators . What follows is an arcane, but critical, look at the evidence .
 This will have the goal of laying a minimal foundation that there was a conspiracy consisting of at least two people . This will be a minimal effort to establish that there were two people involved in the conspiracy .
 It will be the first step in building the proof of a major sophisticated conspiracy involving several people, says the author of the book . The book will be published in the U.S.
 The Zapruder film will be used in this chapter only as supporting evidence of shots that occurred and as one of the constraints on the Warren Commission . The Warren Commission will use the film as evidence of the events that occurred .
 The Zapruder film was altered while in the hands of the FBI, therefore implicating the U.S. government in the conspiracy . The chapter that follows will provide evidence that the FBI altered the film . The film was edited by the FBI and the United States government .
 The evidence that there was more than one gunman at Dealey Plaza can be extremely complicated and requires a considerable analytical effort if one wants to understand it in its ultimate detail and subtleties . The evidence is extremely complicated .
 If one is willing to accept a common-sense view, it need not be all that difficult, it can be easy to do .
 Over thirty doctors, nurses, medical technicians, and Secret Service personnel saw a large exit wound in the rear of Kennedy’s head, which could only have been caused by a shot from the front, and one wonders why any more evidence is necessary . Add to this the testimony of
 Nothing more would probably be required in a legitimate trial in a courtroom before an intelligent, unprejudiced jury . The answer is that nothing more would be required . Nothing more is likely to be required before a genuine trial .
 A more in-depth understanding is required for a crime of the profound magnitude of this presidential assassination, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: The assassination was a profound crime of a profound magnitude .
 We will plunge into the extensive evidence, with its nuances and complexities, that devastates the idea of the lone assassin . So we will now plunge into an extensive evidence of the evidence .
 The groundwork will be laid for deducing from the evidence at Dealey Plaza, the amazing composition of the master conspiracy . By so doing, it will lay the groundwork for dedicating the evidence from Dealey .
 An overview of the evidence examining virtually all of the gunshots can be achieved by reviewing the following table . The Number of Bullets is the number of shots fired by the gunman .
 This is a summary of the tangible and testimonial evidence of shots, bullets, or fragments of bullets that struck either Kennedy, Connally, or inanimate objects . The evidence is based on the evidence of Kennedy's shooting victims .
 These bullets could possibly be the cause of, or have resulted from, the above list of ten shots .
 Two bullet fragments were reportedly removed from Kennedy’s body during the autopsy, and a third fragment was claimed to have been lodged in his skull . Also, in this same category, two bullet fragments .
 For the single-gunman hypothesis of the Warren Commission Report to be valid (using the evidence provided to them by Hoover’s FBI) there can be only three shots, based first on the evidence presented that only three “empty” cartridges were found . For the .
 Warren Commission accepted that an assassin would not have, in any believable scenario, picked up one or more cartridges and left three . It was accepted by the Warren Commission that an assassination would have been unlikely to have happened .
 A second criteria of the Warren Commission that must be met for their lone-gunman hypothesis to be valid is that the time between shots must be 2.2 seconds or more, based on the minimum time established by FBI tests to reload, quickly aim, and fire .
 A third criteria of the Warren Commission was that the Zapruder film was an infallible instrument for measurement of the time spacing between the shots . The Warren Commission said the film was infallible to measure the spacing between shots .
 In this chapter I will use only the first criteria of shot count to make my initial case, along with the evidence of the angle and depth of the wounds . This chapter will focus on the angle, depth and shot count of wounds .
 The second criteria will be discussed in the following chapter, but will not be used as conclusive evidence . It is my contention that frames were removed from the Zapruder film, making all timing evidence questionable . The Commission's third criteria invalidates the Commission’s third criteria .
 Almost all ballistic evidence and earwitness testimony at the crime scene must be viewed skeptically in a highly sophisticated conspiracy, such as might be carried out by those having knowledge of or access to government intelligence .
 CIA and military intelligence agencies had developed the use of such exotica as miniature machine guns with silencers and other sophisticated assassination methods . This makes almost anything possible .
 "It greatly complicates the issue if we are seriously to consider that individuals from military intelligence or the CIA were involved in the conspiracy," he says .
 Over the past thirty years there have been endless debates over how to prove that there was more than one gunman at Dealey Plaza .
 The simplest way I found was to narrow down the foregoing list of ten shots to an absolute minimum . The simple way to do this is to narrow it down to a minimum of 10 shots .
 If that number exceeds the criteria of three shots, there must have been a second gunman . The Commission’s criteria is that three shots must be fired at least three times .
 JFK’s wound in the throat: a small round hole, initially described by the attending physicians at Parkland Hospital, including Dr. John Sutter . JFK's wound was initially described as a small, round hole .
 I will concede that all five could have been caused by one bullet, although this is by no means a certainty . All five could be caused by a single bullet, but this is not a certain .
 JFK’s back wound, as matched by the bullet holes in his jacket and shirt . JFK's back wound is matched by bullet holes on his jacket, shirt and jacket . JFK was shot in the back by a sniper sniper .
 JFK was assassinated by at least at least two people . JFK's assassination was a conspiracy of two people, according to a conspiracy theory . JFK was killed by two conspirators .
 With this seemingly irrefutable evidence of a second gunman, one might ask how the Warren Commission arrived at three shots . The Warren Commission concluded that three shots were fired, but that was three shots fired .
 "They said, quite arbitrarily, that shots 2, 3, and 4 were all caused by one bullet. They said quite arbitrarily," they said, that . They said that .
 John and Nellie Connally's back wound is indisputable evidence of the low, shallow back wound, as well as myriad other items of evidence . To do this they had to ignore the indisputable . evidence, including the timing evidence in the Zapruder film, and the
 The bullet found on the stretcher in Parkland Hospital was the bullet that shattered Connally’s rib and wrist bones, despite the fact that the person who found that bullet disputed their assumption of where he found it . The bullet was in an almost perfect condition, with no measurable
 The Commission needed only two shots to account for the minimum conceivable wounds on both Kennedy and Connally . They had one shot to spare . By combining shots 2, 3, and 4 into one shot, the Commission now needed two more shots .
 All the shots were attributed to fragments from fragments from the fatal head shot, or the one shot that had missed . They explained away all the remaining shots by attributing them to fragments of the head shot .
 When these possibilities ran out they simply ignored the evidence by not mentioning it in their report . They simply ignored it in the report . The report did not mention it in any way .
 By making all these arbitrary assumptions, Arlen Specter had set the ground rules, Specter set the rules . Specter: By making these assumptions, the rules were set by Specter . He says Specter's "ground rules" were set to be set up .
 From that point forward, the seemingly irrefutable evidence became obfuscated . The evidence was obfuscated by the president of the U.S. government .
 The evidence of the location and nature of the back wound would be the crucial test in establishing proof that Arlen Specter’s hypothecations were without any foundation whatsoever .
 The bullet would have exited from JFK’s chest, but there was no evidence of a wound in the front of his chest . There was no sign of a gunshot wound in front of JFK's chest, according to autopsy .
 Line C-D is the path of the bullet required for it to exit from the throat if it entered at point “X” and passed through the body . The bullet's path would be the path required to exit the throat .
 Autopsy showed that the wound did not pass through the body . But probing of the wound in the autopsy showed that it didn't pass through body .
 The path was obviously not possible unless a bullet were fired from the trunk of the limousine, or from street level . But there was no evidence that such a shot occurred .
 This obviously requires that there be an entrance wound in the back of JFK’s neck, about five inches higher than evidenced by the bullet holes in the clothing . JFK's neck must be five inches above the bullet hole in his clothing, the author says .
 There was no such wound observed by personnel at Parkland Hospital or any other witnesses . No such wound was observed by anyone at the hospital or other witnesses.
 John and Nellie Connally testified adamantly that Kennedy was hit by a bullet and, an instant after that, John Connally was shot by a separate bullet . In addition to the testimonies of Kennedy and Connally, the testimonies are of great importance .
 Their testimonies nullify the Warren Commission’s hypothesis that the same bullet which struck Kennedy in the back also struck John Connally, and therefore evidence of a second gunman . Their testimonies, in themselves, nullifies the theory of a conspiracy theory .
 Bullet holes in clothing of gunshot victims are considered prime evidence in forensic science . JFK's jacket and shirt were riddled with holes in bullet holes .
 Kennedy had a custom-made jacket and shirt, and photos taken during the actual crime showed them to be in a normal position on his back . This applies in particular, in this case, where Kennedy had to have his shirt and jacket in the correct position .
 In Gerald Posner’s highly publicized book Case Closed, Posner had a serious problem dealing with the evidence of the bullet holes in the jacket and shirt .
 He lamely inserted this footnote for a paragraph entitled ““The Neck Wound:” There was also some question as to why the location of the entry wound at the rear base of the neck is several inches higher than is indicated by the bullet holes in his suit jacket
 Photographs taken during the motorcade show the President’s jacket was often bunched and riding up his back .
 Measurement of holes in clothing is not an accurate means of determining precisely where the bullet entered the body . Measurement is not a precise measure of the holes in the clothing .
 At no point near or at the possible time of the occurrence of the back wound do photographs show the jacket bunched, let alone the shirt . At least one photo shows no sign of the jacket being bunched .
 No one has ever produced a single photograph or film showing the jacket bunched except possibly after the fatal head wound when Kennedy had collapsed . We should keep a large amount of bunching —five inches —and with the shirt bunching the exact same amount as the jacket .
 When I learned more about the back brace, it became apparent that the notion that it pushed up the clothing to the extent required was without merit . The idea that it pushes up clothing is without merit, the writer says .
 Warren Commission Report details Kennedy's back brace . I referred to Warren Report and easily found all one needs to know about it .
 It was only six inches wide and only waist high, no higher than the navel . It was just six inches high and six inches long .
 Posner's footnote is the total argument of lone-gunman proponents to deal with the bullet holes in Kennedy’s clothing . Posner: "Lone Gunman proponents" argue that the holes are in Kennedy's clothing .
 The truth is that there has never been a credible argument to dismiss the photographs of the bullet holes in the jacket and shirt . There has been no credible argument that the jacket is bullet-riddled with bullet holes .
 The bullet holes in the clothing do, in fact, show the true location of the back wound . "The bullet holes" in the clothes show that the bullet holes are in fact where the wound was made .
 Secret Service agents wrote reports concerning the location of the back wound . Eyewitness Testimonies Concerning Location of Back Wound . Secret Service agent wrote reports on location of wound .
 President Obama sat in limousine open convertible . President was seated in the right rear seat of his limo . President's limo was in the rear seat .
 At the moment I looked at the back of the President I heard another firecracker noise and saw the shot hit the President about four inches down from the right shoulder . The President was hit by the shot, which hit him four inches from the shoulder .
 I was requested by ASAIC Kellerman to come to the morgue to once again view the body . The body was found in a morgue in the early hours of December 31 .
 When I arrived the autopsy had been completed, ASAIC Kellerman, SA Greer, General McHugh and I viewed the wounds . When I . arrived the . autopsy had . been completed and ASAIC . Kellerman said the wounds were the wounds of the victim .
 "I observed a wound about six inches down from the neckline on the back just to the right of the spinal column," the doctor says . The wound was six inches away from the back of the back .
 Attendants of the Joseph Gawler Mortuary were at this time preparing the body for placement in the casket . Attendants were also preparing the corpse for placement .
 Humes located an opening which appeared to be a bullet hole which was below the shoulders and two inches to the right of the middle line of the spinal column . Humes found the hole two inches from the left of the spine .
 Humes with the finger, at which time it was determined that the trajectory of the missile entering at this point had entered at a downward position of 45 to 60 degrees . The missile entered at such a point, the trajectory was determined to be at least 45 degrees downward .
 The missile traveled a short distance inasmuch as the end of the opening could be felt with the finger . Further probing determined that the distance traveled by this missile was short distance .
 FBI agents clearly documented the location of the back wound as “below the shoulder,” the opening shallow—no more than a finger length—and the bullet entering at a downward angle . In this single report, the opening was shallow and the bullet entered at a downwards angle .
 Anna Marie discovered a newly released document from the National Archives which was discovered by Anna Marie . This evidence was reinforced in a new document which was released by the National Archive .
 James Sibert sketches of the location of the back wound that he observed in the morgue . HSCA interviewed Sibert in 1977 . Sibert's sketches were found in the interview with him .
 This evidence leaves no doubt as to Sibert’s view of the location of the back wound . Sibert said the wound was in the back of his back . The wound was found by Sibert in a hospital room .
 Note in the sketch on the left that the back wound is well below the collar line . Note that the wound was well below that collar line. Note that it is not the same wound that was inflicted on the victim .
 Sketch shows back wound well below neck wound, remarkably similar to line C-D in my sketch of the geometry of the wounds . Of particular note is the sketch on the right showing the back wound .
 In adult, normal-size humans this is invariably about five or six inches below the neckline . The bullet holes were found in Clinton Hill’s clothing, which matched the location of the holes in the clothing .
 Admiral Burkley was the only medical person present at the crime scene who was also present at Parkland Hospital in Dallas and was present during the entire time of the autopsy at Bethesda . He was never called to testify before the Warren Commission, despite having been the only person who was present at
 Even the Warren Commission was on record, buried in the National Archives, indicating the location of the back wound as being below the elevation of the throat wound .
 TOP SECRET, dated January 27, 1964, was the transcript of a meeting held by the Warren Commission . It was obtained in a Freedom of Information lawsuit by Harold Weisberg .
 Mr Rankin: There is a great range of material in regard to the wounds, and the autopsy and this point of exit or entrance of the bullet in the front of the neck, and that all has to be developed much more than we have at the present time .
 We have an explanation there in the autopsy that probably a fragment came out the front of the neck, but with the elevation the shot must have come from, and the angle, it seems quite apparent now, since we have a picture of where the bullet entered in the back, that the
 The above statement, standing alone, casts severe doubt on the validity of the Warren Report, if not invalidating it . Shaw & Harris, Cover-Up, 63, is a law firm that specializes in corporate law .
 Autopsy pathologist being cross-examined in a court of law . The testimony of an autopsy pathologist is being taken into account in court . It is the first time a pathologist has been cross-examination in a trial .
 In a rare case, one of the autopsy pathologists at Bethesda, Pierre A Finck, was crossexamined under oath concerning Kennedy’s back wound . Finck was a pathologist at Bethesda . Ina rare case , Finck had to be questioned under oath
 This was in a trial of the State of Louisiana v Clay L Shaw during the famous Jim Garrison trial in New Orleans . This was during the infamous Jim Garrison case in which he was convicted of murder .
 I obtained a copy of the transcript from the National Archives, dated February 24, 1969, in which Dr. Dr. Martin was interviewed by Dr. Richard Nixon . The transcript is dated from a transcript from a National Archives interview with Nixon in 1969 .
 This is further confirmation that the back wound was shallow and therefore did not penetrate through to the throat . Wounds are different in one case from another, and I did not aee .
 At no place in Posner's book does Posner dare mention the statements of Secret Service agent Clinton Hill, FBI agents Sibert and O’Neill, or Admiral Burkley’s death report .
 He did know—and he knew that his case for the lone gunman would be destroyed if he included these testimonies . He knew that he did know, and he knew he would have to include these testimonies to the gunman .
 Posner’s case, like that of the Warren Commission, is clearly untenable . Posner's case is like those of Warren Commission and Posner .
 The importance of the location and nature of the back wound cannot be overemphasized . The location of the wound can be said to be critical .
 A simple count of the irucible number of gunshots proves beyond a reasonable doubt that there were at least two assassins at Dealey Plaza at the same time . That evidence alone, combined with a simple count, proves beyond reasonable doubt—that there were two assassins shooting at Kennedy .
 Oswald’s rifle would have been fired only three shots fired . Oswald's rifle is believed to have been the only one shot fired from Oswald's gun . Oswald was killed in the September 11, 1917, assassination .
 A new document, found by Anna Marie in the National Archives, throws severe doubt on the three-empty-cartridges premise .
 When I received this, it appeared to be most important evidence indeed . When I got this, I thought it was the most important piece of evidence indeed. It was a most important moment in my life .
 There were only two empty cartridges when the bullets were fired, the author says . "How ironic, I thought, after all these years of arguing and controversy over the magic bullet and the number of shots," he says .
 This FBI document and photograph were never shown to the Warren Commission, author says . This document and photo were never, insofar as I have been able to determine, shown to Warren Commission .
 I had known about these documents in Shaw’s book but had decided to leave them out of this book on the basis that there were possibly other explanations for the change from 2 to 3, such as a simple correction .
 Shaw’s book has been given a “best evidence” rating by the FBI . Shaw says the photographs and a corroborating report in FBI agent Williams’ handwriting elevated the evidence in Shaw's book to a ‘best evidence'
 For 30 years, this accumulation of evidence of a conspiracy had been buried and suppressed in the National Archives under the guise of national security . For thirty years, the evidence of this . had been suppressed under the . guise of . national security, the . National Archives says .
 It is difficult to imagine how different history would have been made available to the public .
 The Warren Commission Report and Gary Shaw’s book have been released . I decided to dig further into the Warren Report to see what else is available .
 Strangely this had been overlooked by everyone, or it had been seen and dismissed for some reason . Strangely, this had not been seen or dismissed by everyone .
 Dallas Deputy Sheriff Luke Mooney was the person who discovered the cartridges on the sixth floor . Mooney's testimony was recorded in court on Tuesday .
 Mooney's testimony shows how the Warren Commission’s conclusion of three empty shells is flawed . His testimony deserves inclusion here to show how Commissioner Ball, in his questioning of Mooney, arrived at the Warren .
 He was the first officer that picked them up, as far as I know, because I stood there and watched him go over and pick them up and look at them . "Yes, sir," he said. "I stood there ... I stood . There was no doubt that he was
 As far as I could tell, J couldn t even tell what caliber they were, because I didn t get down that close to them . J couldn't even tell, because he couldn't get down to them, so I didn't even get down close .
 "That is just about the way they were laying, to the best of my knowledge," he says . "They were laying," he adds .
 "I do know there was—one was further away, and these other two were relatively close together—on this particular area," she said .
 CNN.com: "This one and this one looks like they are further apart than they actually was. But these cartridges are actually closer to each other than they were actually was."
 For 30 years there was a photograph in the Warren Commission Report apparently showing only two empty shells and one round of live ammunition and it seemingly had never been observed by anyone . I could not believe my eyes—for thirty years, there was an image in the report that had apparently never been
 She said she was surprised to see that this was a round of live ammunition . She did not know of anyone who had noticed it before or written about it .
 Gary Shaw had written that only two empty cartridges were turned over to the FBI by the Dallas police . Gary Shaw’s book found that, although not mentioning the photograph in the Commission Report showing two empty shells and one live round, he had written only two .
 It also appeared that this information had been glossed over and suppressed because it would have devastated the conclusion of the Warren Commission of a lone gunman, which was linked to three empty cartridge cases, based on what the FBI said .
 I wondered how an honorable man such as Joseph Ball could have gotten himself involved in such a transparent scheme . Ball is accused of trying to cover up his involvement in a corrupt scheme .
 After completing the above writing, yet another document would surface on June 27, 1994 that added credence to the conclusion of only two empty shells . The document was published in 1994 .
 Warren Commission used two spent hulls, not three, as was used by the Warren Commission to “make’t its case for a lone gunman . Note that two hulls were used in the case for the lone gunman were not used as evidence .
 I thought surely no more evidence could ever be necessary to put away forever the Warren Com-mission’s single-bullet fabrication, I thought . The Warren Commission was responsible for the World War II bombing .
 The first shot hit Kennedy, the second shot hit Connally, and the third hit Kennedy . Connally was killed in the shooting . Kennedy was killed by a single shot .
 Two of the shots fired at the President were splintered...but they had characteristics on them so that our ballistics experts were able to prove that they were fired by this gun . The third shot which hit the President...he was hit by the first and the third...second shot
 The third shot is a complete bullet...and that ruled out of the President’s head...it tore a large part of the head off...and, in trying to massage his heart at the hospital...on the way to the hospital, they apparently loosened that and it fell
 This is indisputable proof that on November 29, 1963, J. Edgar Hoover and Lyndon Johnson knew that Connally and Kennedy were hit by separate bullets . Therefore, therefore, they knew that the Warren Report was a fraud when it was later issued .
 "I asked myself what could have been the chain of events that led to this obvious alteration and suppression of evidence," says the author of a new book .
 The initial plan was for three shots to do the job, but it was not necessary that it appear to be a lone assassin . The initial three shots were intended to kill the assassin .
 "It was intended to look like a conspiracy originating in Cuba," the president says . "On the contrary, it's intended to be a conspiracy," he says. "It's not a conspiracy. On the contrary," he adds .
 The third shot would be fired from the front-right and meant to be the fatal shot . The final shot would have been fired at the scene of the shooting .
 Two empty shell cases to match Oswald’s rifle were either planted on the sixth floor or fired from the rifle . With this advance plan, two empty shells were planted on sixth floor and fired from Oswald's rifle .
 The conspirators then signaled for a fourth shot from a second location at the rear, to be certain of a fatal shot . The conspirator signaled for the fourth shot to be made sure of the fatal shot, police say .
 That was the fatal shot that hit Kennedy in the right-front temple, tearing out a gaping hole in the back of his head . #24 3. 3. The fatal shot was the shot that killed Kennedy . The fatal bullet was fired by President Richard Nixon .
 Zapruder film of the assassination was sent to J Edgar Hoover on November 23 . Acopy of the Zapruders film of JFK assassination sent to Hoover on Nov. 23 .
 By that time, the decision had been made to drop the original plan and go to the lone-assassin story . The decision was made to change the original story .
 Connally told Johnson that separate shots hit Connally and Kennedy . This is why he said separate shots were fired at Connally, Kennedy . Connally was killed in November 1963 .
 Only two empty cartridges had either been planted or fired from Oswald’s rifle, and since photographs had been taken and reports prepared to that effect, this evidence had to be suppressed, destroyed, or forged . Since only two empty . cartridges had been planted and fired, the evidence had
 A few weeks after Hoover talked with Johnson, the Commission would discover, after analyzing the Zapruder film, that if the film were to be used as timing evidence it would have been impossible for Oswald to have fired all three shots in the time between the shots .
 The only way the Commission could resolve this was to make the arbitrary assumption that the bullet which struck Kennedy in the back passed through Kennedy’s throat and went on to inflict all the wounds on Connally. The bullet that struck Connally was thought to have hit Kennedy's throat .
 Commission used up one more bullet as causing JFK’s fatal head wound . Commission then used up another bullet to cause JFK's fatal head injury . Commission used one bullet as cause of JFK's death .
 Two bullets could explain all the wounds inflicted on both Kennedy and Connally . They were now at the point where two bullets could, with their fabrications, explain all of the wounds . The president and vice president were shot in the head .
 There was only one bullet left over after police found three empty cartridges . Police say they altered evidence in their possession showing three empty .
 This convenient rationale could be used to partially explain the evidence of other shots . It could also be used as a reason to explain other shots in the film .
 Commission does not know whether first shot or second shot was one that missed . Commission says it did not know if first shot missed was the one that did .
 This is how it was left in the Commission’s final report and where it stands today . And this is where it stood today .
 Mooney testified that there were three empty shells in his testimony . The Commission guided Mooney to state that there was no empty shells . Mooney's testimony was guided by the Commission .
 The alteration and deception to conceal the fact of only two empty cartridges were ordered and carried out . Thus the alteration and . deception was ordered and . carried out, according to the author of the book .
 Only later would the timing evidence in the FBI firing test and Zapruder film force the Warren Commission into its ridiculous magic-bullet hypothesis . The Warren Commission's magical bullet theory is still valid .
 Mary Ferrell says three empty cartridges were shown in Commission Exhibit 512 . Ferrell: "Three empty cartridges are shown in Exhibit 512"
 There is a darkened area around it and the cartridge appears to be bent . There is also an area of darkness around it .
 The authentic photo and forged photo slipped through to the Commission . Both the authentic and forged photos slipped through .
 FBI tried to fabricate evidence to create the illusion that Oswald acted alone after the original plan had gone badly wrong . It shows a pragmatic but botched attempt by the FBI, in concert with the Dallas police, to create an illusion .
 LBJ and Hoover made it work . LBJ made the investigation work . Hoover and LBJ led the investigation .
 There is much more evidence to prove that there was more than one gunman . The gunman had the power to tailor the investigation to suit his needs .
 Certain officials in U.S. government considered it absolutely indispensable that evidence of more than one gunman be suppressed, distorted, or destroyed .
 If the evidence had not been suppressed or distorted it seems inescapable that outrage would have arisen in the American public, and a complete investigation would have been demanded . If the foregoing evidence had been suppressed, the public would have demanded an investigation .
 "The citizens of this country would not have been satisfied until a second gunman was found," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "We are not going to be satisfied with this," he says .
 Government officials were compelled to resort to even more extreme measures to cover up the crime, some that were so bizarre and so ghoulish as to defy imagination . As will be discussed in the following chapters, the government officials will be compelled to use extreme measures in the cover-up .
 In a court of law before an impartial and intelligent jury, it would seem that no further evidence would be required to prove a conspiracy of major magnitude . In a trial, the jury would seem to be able to find out if there was a conspiracy .
 This evidence, one should confidently feel, would meet reasonable-doubt standards; arguments to the contrary would cease . This evidence would be met with reasonable doubt, the author says .
 There remains a small but influential scattering of people, articulate and intelligent, who write papers, stand on lecture platforms, and righteously defend the fabricated story of the lone assassin . To this day, thirty-three years later, there remains a .
 Journal of the American Medical Association has launched a campaign publishing articles attacking what it derisively calls the Conspirati . Polls show only 13 percent of the U.S. population believe the Warren Commission Report .
 For more analysis of evidence supporting the conclusion that Connally was struck by a separate bullet, please study the Zapruder frames in the following chapters and in the color photos .
 Included in the captions are arguments of proponents of the lone-assassin hypothesis .
 Also included is the story of the alteration of the Zapruder film by the conspirators in a desperate attempt to conceal evidence of a second gunman . The film was altered in an attempt to cover up evidence of the second gunman.
 Secret Service agent Glenn Bennett testified that when Kennedy was hit a hole appeared in his back about four inches below the shoulder line . A hole appeared four inches down the back of Kennedy's back, Bennett testified .
 The same location of the back wound was observed and shown on diagrams by witnesses present at the autopsy . Witnesses present at autopsy said the wound was seen on diagrams .
 Note that Kennedy’s jacket is not “bunched up” as claimed by Gerald Posner . Note that JFK's jacket isn’t “unchched up,” it was not ‘uncommitted’
 Very clear photographs of the fit of Kennedy’s jacket are shown later in this book .
 The bullet holes in Kennedy’s jacket and shirt in Exhibits 10-7 and 10-8 accurately locate the back wound . It reduces to absurdity Gerald Posner's argument of a “bunched up” jacket and . shirt .
 FBI Agent Sibert’s sketch shows location of back wound, neck wound, and head wound . FBI agent Sibert sketches sketch of back, neck, back, head wounds .
 This shows the location of the back wound well below the collar line . This is in agreement with the bullet holes in Kennedy’s jacket and shirt, and testimonies of other witnesses . This shows that the wound was in the back .
 Photos show bullets fitted with an accelerator or “sabot,” a small plastic device which allows a smaller caliber slug to be fired from a larger shell casing .
 Using a device with a full charge of gunpowder in the shell casing, the smaller slug will have increased velocity . Using such a device, a gunpowder charge can be used to increase velocity .
 The smaller slug also could have been previously fired and recovered, resulting in ballistic markings which match the original weapon and not the 30.06 which fired the "sabot"’ slug .
 A “sabot’” can be used for a “meat shot’; that is to fire a bullet at low velocity that does not penetrate the body, but is a marker found in the body that will trace back to a rifle from which the bullet
 Photo B shows bullet in sabot inserted in 30.06-caliber cartridge case . Photo A: Bullet was inserted into sabot inserted into cartridge case by sabot . Photo B: Bullet is inserted into case and placed in sabot .
 In Photo A, a man thought to be an FBI agent is seen bending over to pick up an object . In Photo B, he is thought to have been a member of the FBI .
 Photo B is a close-up of the man’s hand reaching for an object appearing to be a bullet . Photo A photo shows the man reaching for the object . Photo B shows a man reaching out for the bullet .
 A dent in the chrome windshield trim of the president’s limousine is evidence of a bullet fired from the rear . Evidence of shots striking the president's limo was found in the vehicle .
 Secret Service Chief James J Rowley wrote a letter to the Warren Commission in which he stated that the damage was on the car before November 22, 1963 . Yet Secret Service chief wrote to the commission that he said the damage had been on the vehicle before that date .
 This damage is clearly not visible in any photos taken before the sbooute at aye yet to come to light .
 Also observed by witnesses after the shooting, and clearly not visible in the Zapruder film before the shooting . Not visible in film before, but clearly not seen in the film .
 Bullet mark on curb of Main Street, as photographed on the afternoon of November 22, 1964 . Section of Main St curbing removed by the FBI in July 1964 .
 Bystander James Tague was hit in the cheek by a bullet fragment . He was hit by the bullet fragment in the face of a bystander .
 Kennedy’s jacket showing an alleged bullet hole 5'D2 inches below the collar line in the back . Kennedy's jacket was found with a bullet hole in his back . The bullet hole is 5.2 inches above the collar .
 This matches the location of the wound spotted on the autopsy drawing and as described by Secret Service agent Clinton Hill . Clinton Hill described the wound as the wound seen on autopsy drawing .
 James Humes was convinced to raise it up to neck level in his written report after it was discovered that the location did not match a downward trajectory through the neck wound, which was required for the Warren Commission conclusions that John Connally was struck by the same bullet .
 Kennedy’s clothing was never delivered to the autopsy pathologists, a gross violation of procedure . Kennedy's clothing never was delivered to pathologists . Kennedy was never given the clothing he was wearing .
 This hole is 5'D2 inches below the collar line and almost exactly matches the location of the hole in Kennedy’s jacket shown in Exhibit 10-7 . The hole is almost exactly the same size as the hole found in his jacket .
 Proponents of the Warren Commission hypothesis say Kennedy’s jacket was hiked up at the time of impact . Proponents say this is because Kennedy's jacket was raised up when it hit .
 Zapruder film and photo taken at the alleged time of impact shows jacket was not hiked up . But the film shows that the jacket did not rise to the surface .
 They could not explain how the shirt could also have been hiked up by such a large amount without it having been folded over . Further, they could not have explained how it could have been raised up without folding over .
 Bullets Found That Were Traceable to the Alleged Rifle Compared to a Bullet Fired through the Wrist of a Cadaver . Bullets Found that were Traceable were traced to the alleged rifle . Bullets found that were traceable to an alleged murder weapon were found to have been fired through
 Bullet CE 399, found on a stretcher in the basement of Parkland Hospital in Dallas, Texas . On the left, bullet CE 399 was found on the left of a hospital stretcher .
 It has never been established that it was Connally’s stretcher . Connally's stretcher was not Kennedy's, it was never established that Connally was carrying it .
 The rifle could have been fired into tubes filled with cotton or into a tank of water . But that could easily have been accomplished by firing the rifle into long tubes of cotton .
 This is evidence of a conspiracy with sophisticated advanced planning having taken place well before the assassination, says the author of the book . "This is evidence that the assassination was planned well before," he says .
 Warren Commission Report Base of bullet CE 399, showing minor distortion and area where some metal was missing . Warren Report: Bullet CE 399 was shot in the head of a man who died in 1995 .
 Rifle markings of these two fragments positively matched Oswald’s rifle, but tests were unable to determine if the two fragments were from the same bullet .
 The fragments also could have been plants because the limousine had been examined by a variety of security people, including Dallas police, before it was returned to Washington .
 The bullet fragments could have been planted in the White House basement after the limousine was returned . Or, for that matter, the Secret Service could have planted the fragments in the basement .
 We must keep in mind that once we consider the possibility that the Secret Service was involved in the assassination, these unthinkable things become thinkable . As bizarre as this sounds, we must keep an eye on the possibility .
 Pristine Bullets found on Dallas Stretcher, Compared to Two Fired into Long Tubes Filled with Cotton . Two fired into long tubes filled with cotton .
 The bullet in the center is the bullet purportedly found on John Connally’s stretcher . The bullet is believed to have been found on Connally's stretcher in Texas .
 The other two bullets were fired from Oswald’s rifle into long tubes of cotton . It is difficult to tell the difference between these bullets and the one in the center . Oswald's bullet was fired from his rifle into a long tube .
 Because of manufacturing variations, all bullet weights are approximate . It is not possible to determine the exact weight loss of a fired bullet without knowing its exact weight prior to firing .
 "I cannot accept the premise that this bullet thrashed around in all that bony tissue and lost only 1. to 2.5 grains of its original weight," the author says .
 See Exhibit 10-9A for example of bullet fired into the wrist of a cadaver . See Exhibit . 9A . for example .
 At first it appeared that a positive link had been made by the HSCA . But the credibility of the tests was severely diminished when it was revealed that the fragments were not traceable back to having come from bullet CE 399 . The fragments were found in a hole in the heart of
 For some reason, the sheet below, verified by Kennedy’s personal physician, Admiral Burkley, was kept secret . The sheet was later obtained under a Freedom of Information lawsuit .
 Admiral Burkley was present at the scene, on the flight returning to Washington, D.C., and at the autopsy . He was never called to testify before the Warren Commission, despite having been present .
 Anna Marie found eight similar photos from the same set found by Anna Marie in the National Archives . This photo is one of eight similar images found in the same National Archives set . Anna Marie's photo was found in a similar set of photos .
 By the Commission’s own criteria, if there were not three empty bullet hulls then there must have been a second gunman, the Commission says . The Commission's own criteria is that there must be three empty bullets in each of the hulls .
 Dr. Tiprit at ( Yethodiat Horsitel ty Dr. Dr. “aul Moollebets button ( at 11 pa.m.’) ‘aul Mools’ button (at 11 pa.) ‘auul Moolool
 Jerry Will whe pove ft ft te Det, Faker. rrtel frapnente taken from body of Mire. Jerry Will . Jerry Will. Will. Faker . Will .
 Audrey Pell, Opereting rees noree,to Geverner Connally ae Tod Nolen, D.P.5., to Cept.5. Audrey Pell .
 Frits, to Crime Live reund 6,5 ( Feetvered ty Tept, Sheriff Luke Mooney at { hil Sin, 62% floce, southeast window, found by Dep. .heriff Mooney . Frit . Mooney. Found by Dep .
 The cartridge in the lower circle appears to be a crude attempt of forgery to conceal that it was live ammunition as apparently shown in Exhibit 1014 . The cartridge appears to have been made of a cartridge made of live ammunition .
 Zapruder: "I just felt that somebody had ganged up on him and I was still shooting the pictures until he got under the underpass. —I don’t even know how I did it."
 I have elected to stay with the frames in the original Bloody Treason because of their higher fidelity, and they were not subject to errors made in the MIP conversion process . But even today, I've elected to . stay with . the frames .
 Costella’s edit corrects for pin-cushion effects at the sprocket holes, and wrong frame numbers . Costella inserts missing frames that were lost in MPI process .
 Any changes that I have made in the captions are highlighted and in brackets . Any changes are made to reflect the content of this captions .
 The total film, lasting about twenty-six seconds, shows in startling fidelity the assassination of a beloved and idolized president of the U.S. It was filmed in a startling fidelity .
 Film shows the facial expressions of Jacqueline Kennedy and John Connally . The film shows the expressions of Kennedy and Connally in disbelief .
 It even shows a small red spot appear on the back of John Connally’s jacket as he crumples after being struck .
 The film reveals evidence of a conspiracy that, by deduction from the chain of possession of the film, leads to the conclusion that the highest government officials must have been involved in the film .
 Many of the American people have seen only a few of these frames, and generally those of very poor quality . Yet the great majority of the U.S. people have not seen the frames, they say .
 The Zapruder frames were first analyzed by me using Canon color copies that I made from 35mm slides of the film, which I had obtained from David Lifton, author of Best Evidence on the Kennedy assassination .
 I made a set of slides and print copies of all frames from the film positives . I made the slides and prints copies of each frame .
 I compared each frame with those printed in the Warren Commission Report to be certain I was dealing with the same evidence that was used by the Warren commission . I compare each frame to those printed with the Warren Report .
 The Zapruder family estate handled by James Silverberg, Esq., obtained rental copies of selected frames and a continuous film strip copy made from the professed original 8mm film now held in National Archives .
 I was limited by James Silver-berg to publishing only twenty-six frames, subject to a royalty fee . I was only allowed to publish 26 frames of this image .
 The reader is urged to study the frames and their captions and the referenced exhibits . The frames and captions are shown in this article .
 It cuts across almost all chapters in the book and should be read with that in mind . The book is available now on Amazon.com .
 The material is graphic and shocking but nevertheless requires careful scrutiny for those who want to understand the prime forensic evidence in the assassination . It is graphic but still require careful scrutiny to understand .
 JFK was first hit either just before or after he passed behind the freeway sign . JFK was hit either before or before he passed or after passing behind the sign .
 Zapruder film, when projected on the screen, does not show the limousine slowing down or stopping, contrary to the sworn testimonies of credible eyewitnesses . The film was shot in New York City, New York, in the early 1940s .
 The Zapruder film does not show the fatal blowout of the back of JFK’s head described by doctors and nurses at Parkland Hospital . JFK's head was blown out by a blowout described by the hospital staff .
 Additional evidence of frame removal in the film is indicated by John Connally’s position in the limousine shown in the Moorman photograph . Additional evidence that frame removal was indicated by Connally's position .
 At no frame in the Zapruder film does Connally appear in this position . Connally appears in no frame during Zaprud film .
 The fact of frame removal from the film makes it possible for one gunman from the rear to have had time to fire the fatal head shot and to fire a separate shot that struck John Connally . John's head shot was fired from the back of the scene .
 By referring to the color photo section, we can evaluate the validity of the foregoing conclusions . The color photo sections of this article are shown .
 Exhibit 11-1 shows the timing of the critical events leading up to the fatal shot at Zapruder frame 313 . This is based on the assumption that the film has not been altered or frames removed, an assumption that I will argue is invalid .
 This chart is based on the assumption that the Zapruder film has not been altered or frames removed . It is presented here for analytical purposes only . The chart is presented for analysis only .
 Refer to color photo section for analysis of the Zapruder frames and tests with athletes which prove the validity of the conclusion that the film was altered . The film was taken from the original copy of the original film .
 The crucial point to consider is the maximum rotational speed to which the athletes were capable of accelerating their heads and shoulders, as compared to Greer as shown in the Zapruder film . Greer's head and shoulders can be accelerated at maximum speed .
 Maximum angular velocity of Greer is double that of Dawson and three times that of Marler . Greer's maximum angular velocity is double the velocity of Dawson, Dawson and Marler. Greer has the highest angular velocity ever recorded .
 Greer would have required four times the energy of Dawson, and nine times that of Marler . Greer's energy would have been four times as much as Dawson .
 One explanation for the slower speed of Marler compared to Dawson is that Marler was seated in a convertible automobile, thus being more restrained or anchored on his bottom . Dawson was seated on a stool and could spin around more readily . Marler's speed was much slower than Dawson's,
 We will examine, in depth, how the forgery of the Zapruder film could have been accomplished, and who most likely did it . We will now examine how it was likely to have been done .
 "I would say that’s me. Yes; 1 was there and I would say this couldn’t be anybody else," he said .
 Many who believe that there was a conspiracy cite the rapid backward acceleration of Kennedy’s body in the Zapruder film after the fatal head shot as prime evidence of a bullet striking from the front or right . Others cite the measurement of time between shots in the film as proof that
 If frames have been removed from the film, that evidence is put in question, on all sides of the controversy . But, if frames were removed from film, the evidence will be put into question .
 As for myself, for years I never questioned the authenticity of the Zapruder film . "I never questioned myself, I never doubted the authenticity," says Bob Greene .
 This was only after I obtained a high-quality copy of the film and examined it frame by frame in enlarged prints, in light of all of the other pertinent evidence I could identify . This was not the first time I had examined the film, but it was enlarged to examine it frame
 The missing frames could have been introduced by a mechanical defect in the camera, causing it to randomly skip frames . A mechanical defect could have caused the missing frames to be introduced by the camera itself .
 Most people with whom I discussed this—including an experienced motion picture editor and an eminent motion picture technologist’s ~—-scoffed at the thought . Most people in the film industry said they didn't want to use the idea .
 But, nevertheless, I thought that the possibility should be dealt with by independent, formal, scientific analysis before proceeding . The possibility of a nuclear bomb being detonated in the UK should be examined by experts .
 Failure Analysis, Inc., Inc., an engineering and scientific firm in Menlo Park, California, helped analyze a duplicate of the Bell and Howell camera that Zapruder had used to take the movie . Failure Analysis is an engineering firm that specializes in analyzing film photography .
 The company became involved in the controversy of the Kennedy assassination when it agreed to do a study for the California Bar Association in which it developed arguments, pro and con, for the lone-gunman hypothesis .
 Most people know about Oswald's work is only from those who want to prove Oswald acted alone . Oswald was assassinated in November 1963 . He was killed by a bomb blast at the White House in September 1963 .
 Failure Analysis, Inc. had developed both sides of the evidence . Failure Analysis Inc. developed the evidence, which is not generally known .
 Roger McCarthy, had arbitrarily taken the side that there was more than one gunman . Roger McCarthy had arbitrarily decided to take the side of the issue .
 Inasmuch as his company seemed to be very balanced and objective, I felt I could approach him with a request for a proposal to do a proposal for a . proposal to . do a failure analysis on Zapruder’s Bell and Howell camera .
 She told me that they had decided not to become further involved in the Kennedy assassination controversy because it was costing them too much money . She said they decided to stay away from the controversy .
 Gerald Posner called their firm inquiring about their work and had talked only with their scientist who had taken the side of the lone-gunman hypothesis . It was interesting that Posner had called the firm's scientist to ask about their research .
 The next thing they knew, Posner’s book came out using their material to try to make his case . Posner's book was published in the fall, and Posner used it to try and make his point .
 McCarthy had taken the side that there was more than one gunman; but, nevertheless, they were not going to get involved further . McCarthy took the side of the argument that there were more people in the area .
 One point she did make, however, which proved to be quite revealing, was a suggestion by Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter suggested that Dr. Toni Morrison should have been a doctor .
 White spot appears on the grass just above the limousine . More information might be gained by studying the white spot in the grass .
 I had seen that white spot before and had considered that it might be a good index point for measurement of limousine speed, but had done nothing about it . I had considered it as an index point of speed but did nothing .
 I was surprised to see that it was a straight line, indicating no abrupt changes of the limousine speed with respect to the white spot, which one might expect if frames had been removed . The white spot indicates no sudden changes in the speed of the vehicle, which might have been
 The fact that this was essentially a straight line did not prove whether frames were or were not removed, but it did prove that there was no random skipping of frames . It was essentially an essentially straight line .
 If frames had been skipped randomly there would have been at least one distinctive upward jog in the time-motion line on the graph . The reason for this is that if frames had skipped randomly, there would be an upward jiggle .
 There were no random skipping of frames caused by a camera malfunction . So here, without spending several thousand dollars, was proof that there was no random skip of frames .
 I wondered if it were proof that no frames had been removed at all . But I also wondered if there had been no frames removed from the picture .
 The graph shows an almost perfect uniform rate of advance , indicating that there was not random skipping of frames due to a mechanical defect in the camera . The graph was almost perfect . It shows that the camera was not skipping .
 It does not prove whether or not there was a deliberate removal of frames in a consistent pattern by the conspirators .
 "I imagined the limousine standing still, having come to a complete stop. I imagined it standing still," said the author .
 I imagined none of the limousine’s occupants were moving and that there were no moving objects in the background . Further, I imagined that none of these people were moving or that no objects were moving .
 In this case, the camera could skip frames and it would not be noticed when projected on a screen, or in a frame-by-frame viewing, only if precisely all of the frames in which the limousine was standing still were somehow miraculously skipped by the camera .
 If the camera had not precisely skipped all of the missing frames, there would be a horizontal jog in the line . The camera skipped some frames, but not all of them were skipped, the camera skipped them .
 The possibility of the camera precisely skipping all the missing frames was, of course, nil . The film was shot in New York City, New Jersey .
 In this case, if there were a random skipping of frames it would show up in jogs upward from the straight line, at least in one spot on the graph . In the case, the jogs are upward from a straight line .
 Any excessively rapid motion in the film would stand out as appearing unusual because there would be a sudden jump . If they had removed frames in a consistent pattern, say two out of every four frames, or . four out of . every five frames, then the time/motion graph would be
 The two foregoing scenarios fit exactly the case we have in these frames . The two scenarios fit the case of these frames.
 The limousine appears to be moving slowly, perhaps very slowly, or standing still . The limo is moving slowly .
 There are no moving objects in the background except people who are standing still or moving very slowly . There are also people who stand still or move slowly .
 At this point, I had satisfied myself that frames had been removed by the conspirators, and I saw that they had an impossible situation . At this time, I was satisfied myself . I saw the situation was impossible .
 They could remove frames to delete incriminating evidence and get an apparent uniform speed of the limousine . But they could not conceal excessively rapid movements of passengers in the limo .
 With technology available in 1963, it would have been impossible to recreate the film . That would have required an almost complete recreation of the film which, with the technology available at the time, would probably be impossible .
 Their attempts to forge the Zapruder film would ultimately be discovered . The film would be discovered in the film's final stages .
 Their only hope now was to suppress the distribution of the film, print only limited frames or poor-quality copies . They hoped the forgery would not be discovered until the conspirators were long gone . The conspirators' only hope was to hide the film from the public .
 Zapruder film was never shown to the public in complete detail . Life magazine pried out of the hands of Life magazine by District Attorney Jim Garrison in New Orleans .
 I then examined the film for the frames around Z302 and Z303 using the same technique . The film was shot in Z303 and Z302 .
 The limousine showed an almost perfectly uniform motion, but the rapid turn of Greer, turning backward between Z302 and Z303 with his head in sharp focus, revealed that frames had been removed in a consistent pattern .
 A turn as rapid as Greer’s would result in a severe motion blur of his head in the photograph . Now I considered that calculations should prove, to a mathematical certainty, that a . mathematical certainty that a turn as . rapid as . Greer's head would have a
 This is obviously impossible, but let’s go on with the blur calculations . It's obviously impossible to say what happened to the blur .
 Zapruder’s Bell and Howell camera had a shutter speed of 1/18 frames per second . The actual exposure time was 1/30 second, according to Dr. Dr. John Defterios .
 To calculate blur, one simply has to calculate the distance that a point on a cylinder would travel in 1/30 seconds . The distance is the distance the point on the cylinder would have to travel in a short time .
 Since any point on the cylinder would travel the same distance, all points would be a blur . All points on a cylinder would be blur . The cylinder is a cylinder that travels the same length as any point .
 There is little or no motion blur in Greer’s hairline above the forehead . Greer's hairline is above the headline .
 The head and shoulder turn must have started and finished in the .0213-second period when the shutter was closed, for that single frame . The possibility is so far-fetched as to be ridiculous that it's impossible .
 The beauty of this discovery is that scientific laboratories and white-frocked scientists are not needed, scientists say . It's a good idea that scientists and laboratories are no longer needed, they say .
 Anybody who has an 8mm movie camera or a video camera with frame-by-frame playback can easily prove it .
 Pick any number of select subjects and tape them making head turns as fast as they can . Pick a few select subjects to make head turns and film them as fast possible .
 "I know of no other evidence in the Kennedy assassination that is so convincing and so easily demonstrable," author says . "No other evidence" in Kennedy assassination is convincing, he says .
 In point of fact, as noted in Chapter 11, this test was duplicated by an independent researcher, Charles Marler .
 He took motion pictures at 18 frames per second with an 8mm camera . His son Chad, an athlete with a green belt in karate, sat in a convertible automobile, turning his body .
 Numerous eyewitnesses testified that the limousine had slowed down drastically or had come to a complete stop . Zapruder film shows a virtually uniform speed during this time period . Limousine Slows Almost to a Stop .
 There is a long list of eyewitnesses who say the limousine either slowed down, swerved to the curb, or stopped completely . Witnesses say the driver swerved or swerved in the direction of the vehicle .
 I selected a few testimonies in the Warren Commission Report to demonstrate the credibility and obvious authenticity of these sworn testimonies . I select a few of the testimonies to prove the credibility of the Warren .
 "He picked up a little speed along here, and then seemed to have fallen back into line," he says . "I would say 10 or 12 miles an hour in this area," he adds .
 Mr. Truly. heard an explosion, which I thought was a toy cannon or a loud firecracker from west of the building . Mr Truly. thought an explosion was a . toy cannon . He thought it was an explosion .
 "I realized that I thought it was a gun, a rifle of some kind. And immediately after two more explosions, which I realized that . Immediately after two explosions, he realized that he thought that he had a gun .
 The President’s car swerve to the left and stop somewheres down in this area . The President's—/ saw the Presidents car swerving to the . left and stopped .
 "That is the last I saw of his car, because this crowd, when the third shot rang out, began screaming and falling to the ground," he says . "They began screaming," he writes .
 People in front of me and Mr Campbell surged back, either in terror or panic. And the people in . front of myself and Mr . Campbell surged . back, or in panic or panic, he said .
 "They just practically bore me back to the first step on the entrance of our building," she says . "I'm not going to let it go," she adds .
 The crowd in front of me kind of congealed around me and bore me back through weight of numbers, and I lost sight of it . The crowd kind of conspired around me, but I didn't see it again, he says .
 Two shots hit Kennedy first and then the other one hit the governor, says Jim Chaney . Chaney says Kennedy was hit first, then the second one hit governor .
 The chief of police didn't know anything about this, and he moved up and told him, and then that was during the time that the Secret Service men were trying to get in the car . At the time, after the first shot rang out, the car stopped completely, pulled to
 Mr Truly was standing out there, he said it stopped. Now, I have heard several of them say that, Mr Truly . Now, he has heard several . Several of them . say they were standing . out there and Mr Truly said it .
 "Yes, sir; that it had completely stopped, and then for a moment there, then they rushed on out to Parkland. Yes, sir," he said . "Then for a few moments there, they rush on out."
 Harkness was a Dallas policeman standing in the plaza area south of Elm Street . He was standing near Elm Street when he was killed .
 When I saw the first shot and the President’s car slow down to almost a stop— Mr Belin. When I . saw the . first shot, the President's car . slowed down to a stop, he said . Mr Belingin said .
 When I heard the first shot and saw the President’s car almost come to a stop and some of the agents piling off the car, I went back to the intersection to get my motorcycle . When I . heard the . first shot, I saw the . President's car almost
 When President Kennedy straightened back up in the car the bullet hit him in the head, the one that killed him and it seemed like his head exploded, and I was splattered with blood and brain, and kind of a bloody water . Yes; when President Kennedy .
 President Obama's motorcade passed through downtown Dallas, experiencing an exceptionally warm and friendly greeting . A rifle shot was heard by me; a loud blast, close by, was close by .
 "I have handled firearms for fifty years, and thought immediately that it was a rifle shot," says veteran gunman . "It was not the first time I heard a gunshot," he says .
 After what I took to be about three seconds, another shot boomed out . After about one-half the time between the first and second shots, a third shot was fired . To me, to me there seemed to be a long time .
 After the third shot was fired, the cavalcade speeded up, gained speed rapidly, and roared away to the Parkland Hospital . The cavalcade sped up after the shooting, gaining speed and gaining speed rapidly .
 The film shows the limousine passing by without slowing, stopping, or swerving . Yet, by merely looking at the Zapruder film with the casual naked eye, it is obvious that the film shows it .
 I was now convinced that frames were indeed missing and that skipping of frames had not been caused by a mechanical defect in the camera . I was also convinced that skipping frames was not a mechanical problem .
 frames had been removed by the conspirators to conceal evidence . Beyond a reasonable doubt, frames were removed from the scene of the shooting .
 I decided to set that issue aside for the moment while I examined the chain of possession of the film . Perhaps it would lead me to the conspirators, perhaps it would find them .
 The evidence concerning chain of possession of the Zapruder film was almost all from eyewitness testimonies or interviews of eyewitnesses . The film was taken from a copy of the film, which was taken in the days of the day .
 Exhibits 12-2A, B, and C show a summary of the key events in the chain of possession . Exhibit 12-1A, A, C, B and D show the key moments in possession of the property .
 Abraham Zapruder films assassination; returns to his office in state of shock . Zapruders films assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy in New York .
 Secret Service agent Forrest Sorrels meets with Zapruder and requests copies of film . Secret Service agents meet with film's creator and request copies of the film .
 Zapruder refuses to give film to police; insists on government representative . Zapruders refused film to give to police, insisted film be given to government representative. He was killed in June 1945 .
 Four film positives developed at Eastman Kodak after three reversal duplicates developed at Jamison Film Company . Jamison developed using Kodachrome II camera stock furnished to Jamison by Eastman . The film positives were developed after three reverse duplicates were developed .
 Schwartz interviewed by Richard Bartholomew and Noel Twyman, 11/21/94 in Dallas; interview with Bruce Jamison 12/26/94 . Schwartz was a member of the Dallas Cowboys, who played in Dallas, Texas .
 Zapruder and Schwartz deliver one copy of the film to Secret Service office in Dallas with understanding that it was to be sent immediately to FBI headquarters in Washington, D:G.. by courier jet plane . The film was sent to FBI HQ in Washington D.G.
 Richard B Stolley of Life magazine contacts Zapruder; asks to meet to view film . Life magazine's Life magazine asked to meet with film at 9m. Zapruders agreed to meet at 9 m.
 Secret Service inspector Thomas Kelley obtained copy of film from Sorrels . November 23, 1963 . The Secret Service received film in exchange for information .
 It was returned to the Secret Service office in Dallas on December 4, 1963, where it was retained .
 National Archives document released 6/12/94 8:00 a.m.: Stolley meets with Zapruder one hour early to view film, along with Secret Service agents . Shackelford citing memo of Sorrels to Thomas J Kelley; and National Archives memo
 Richard Stolley took Zapruder’s original and a copy when he left his office at 10m. on November 23 . Shackelford cites Richard Stlley in Esquire that Stlle took ZapRuder‘s original .
 Jackson was “so upset” by head wound sequence that he proposed all rights be purchased from Zapruder and withheld from public viewing . Jackson was "so upset" by the head wound sequences that he wanted all rights to be purchased .
 Life publishes issue showing selected frames from Zapruder film . November 29, 1963 Life published issue showing selection of frames from film . Life issue shows selected frames of film .
 October 2, 1964 Life publishes issue showing fatal head shot, but again not showing frames 302, 303, 315, 316, 317 . Life published issue showing head shot but not all frames .
 Photograph of 8mm Zapruder film spool received at FBI lab in Washington, D.C., on November 27, 1963 . 8mm film spools received at the FBI lab .
 Abraham Zapruder shot his film at 12:30m.; afterward, in a state of shock and confusion, he returned to his office, only one-half block from the scene .
 From that point on it becomes somewhat murky as to what happened to the film, depending on whose testimony one wants to believe . The film was shot in the 1980s and '90s .
 This interview was arranged for me by Erwin Schwartz’s nephew, Richard Bartholomew, who is a researcher and writer on the Kennedy assassination . This interview is an interview with Erwin .
 We conducted the interview at Vincent’s Seafood Restaurant in Dallas .
 Two Dallas policemen with shotguns demanded the film, Schwartz said . Schwartz said when he arrived, two Dallas cops with shotguns were there demanding the film .
 Zapruder refused to give it to them, saying that he only gave it to government officials . He said he only wanted it to be given to the government, not the public .
 Secret Service agent Forrest Sorrels arrived and Zapruder agreed to work with him in giving up the film . Shortly after that, the film was pulled from the screen .
 Eastman Kodak is the best place to get the film developed in Dallas, Texas .
 Zapruder, Schwartz, and Sorrels took the film to Eastman Kodak and had it developed . The film was then taken to the Kodak studio in New York City .
 Sorrels received a phone call and then told Zapruder and Schwartz that he would have to leave them, and asked if they would do him a favor and get three prints made . During that time, he received a call from the White House .
 Sorrels took the film to Jamison Film Company in Dallas for reversal duplicate copies to be made . The reverse duplicate copies were necessary before more positive prints could be made at Eastman Kodak . After discussions, the decision was made to take the film back to Dallas .
 Schwartz and Zapruder took the original positive copy to Jamison Film and had three reversal duplicates made . At about 6m. on November 22, Schwartz took a reversal copy of the film .
 Jamison representative sign a statement that they would make no more than the three reversal duplicates . Jamison says they would only make three duplicates of the three reversals .
 Schwartz and Zapruder then took the reversal duplicates back to Eastman Kodak where three additional positive prints were made . Three more positive prints made, making a total of four positive prints of the original film .
 Abraham Zapruder's film was sent to FBI headquarters on late November 22 or early November 93 80 . That was important information because it has generally been accepted that Eastman Kodak developed not only the original copy of the film but also all of the work .
 Jamison Film enters the scene in the process of bringing the film to the public eye . Jamison has been in possession of the film for more than a decade .
 No bootleg copies were made of the three reversal duplicates . But later, in a lengthy telephone conversation with Bruce Jamison, he became convinced that all Jamison did was make the three reverse duplicates, all the time .
 The notion that Eastman Kodak had done all of the work on the film is primarily from Forrest Sorrels’ testimony to the Warren Commission . The notion was primarily from the testimony of SorrelS’s testimony .
 He was the special agent in charge of the Dallas operations for the Secret Service . He was a special agent for the Dallas area .
 Mr Zapruder's office was in a building at the corner of Elm and Houston, on the east side of Houston, and across the street from the court house building there, and up to the office of a Mr Zaparuder, they have a dress manufacturing place there .
 He was there with another man connected with the business there, and apparently some magazine representatives there . And he was there also with another person connected to the business .
 He said that he didn’t know how in the world he had taken these pictures, that he was down there and was taking the thing there, and he says, “My God, I saw the whole thing.” He said he didn't know how he had
 Mr Zapruder asked if it was possible for us to get a copy of the films . And so I asked him if he would it be possible to get it, he said .
 Mr Zapruder and Mr McCormack went to the Dallas Morning News Building, which is about three blocks from Zapruders’s building, three or four blocks from there, with the idea of getting those films developed right away . Mr McCormacks and Zaprudes went to
 The Dallas Morning News called Eastman Kodak Co. and said they would get right on it right away . WFAA, WJAA and WKFAA were unable to handle the situation . The Morning News was able to get the news to the Eastman's Kodak
 "We got a police car, and went right on out to the Eastman Kodak Co., and went to Eastman's Co. "While there I met another gentleman who had seen some still pictures, and I arranged with him for us to get copies of those."
 Sorrels mentions “another man connected with the business there was Erwin Schwartz’s . Also mentions ‘another man’ whom we now see was Erwyn Schwartz. Also mentions another man .
 Zapruder’s testimony: Wesley Liebeler questioned him about the development of the film . The film was shot in New York City, New York, New Jersey, in March .
 One we have sent to Washington the same night and one went over for the viewers of the FBI on Ervay Street . One went over to Washington, one to Washington and one to the viewers . One was sent over to the FBI in Washington .
 The Secret Service told me to dispatch it by Army plane or I don't know what they had done with it . It was supposed to have gone to Washington and one of them, I believe, remained with Mr Sorrels .
 "He came to my office quite a few times to show them to different people," he said . He came to his office several times, he said. "He was very impressed with them," he added .
 A copy of the film was sent to the FBI on November 23 by the Secret Service . This is confirmed in a recent document I obtained from the National Archives showing that .
 Now we have something appearing to be sinister that enters the picture . It is not the first time we have seen a sinister twist in the story .
 Hunt family had purchased the original of the Zapruder film is not incompatible with any of the foregoing testimonies . Hunt family bought the film from the Hunt family, which is not compatible with the film .
 I had ruled out that a bootleg copy could have been purchased by the Hunt family from Jamison Film or one of its employees . The Hunt family could have purchased a copy of the film at Jamison .
 Life magazine’s Richard Stolley obtained two copies from Zapruder the next day . He sent the original to Chicago and, presumably, also sent the duplicate copy .
 One possibility that seems open for Rothermel to have obtained a copy would have been from inspector Thomas Kelley, or someone else in the Secret Service office on November 23 .
 Hunt could have obtained this copy, had a duplicate made, and later returned it to the Secret Service in Dallas . It was sent to the FBI laboratory in Washington, D.C., on November 27, 1963, on November 30 .
 Hunt must have obtained his copy the next day, then returned it to the Secret Service within four days . Hunt returned the copy of the book to the secret service within the next few days .
 This would mean that Rothermel was mistaken when he said he purchased a copy on the evening of November 22—it was more likely November 23 . This would be the first time he bought a copy of the book .
 Life’s representative, Richard Stolley, finally got through to Abraham Zapruder at around midnight on November 22 . After many phone calls, Life's rep finally called Abraham Zaparuder to him .
 The next morning, Stolley arrived at 8m., an hour early, to meet with Zapruder . The next day, he arrived at the time of 8m. to meet the next morning .
 Stolley and some Secret Service agents viewed the film on what he described as a rickety projector . He said the film was shown on a projector on a "rickety" projector .
 Stolley later wrote that in viewing the film he saw the fatal head shot with Kennedy’s brains being blown out . Kennedy's brains were blown out in the film, he wrote .
 After viewing the film, Stolley entered into negotiations with Zapruder to purchase print rights . The film was shot in New York City .
 He started with an offer of $15,000 and within ten minutes had settled for $50,000 . Within ten minutes he had settled on the offer of more than $50K .
 Zapruder would later testify to the Warren Commission that Life magazine paid only $25,000 for the film . At the time of his testimony, he had entered into a contract to receive a total of $150,000, including all rights, he said .
 Zapruder testified that he turned the original over to Stolley for Life magazine’s use . The original was used by Life magazine's use .
 The original was then sent by courier to Life's Chicago office, where it was studied on a Moviola projector and ten black-and-white prints were made . Stolley: "On November 23, the original was sent by . courier to . Life .
 Jackson was “so upset” by the head-wound sequence that he proposed all rights be purchased from Zapruder and the film withheld from public viewing . Jackson was "so upset" by the film he proposed it be withheld from the public viewing of .
 An additional $100,000 was added to Zapruder’s contract, making it a total of $150,000 . The contract is now worth an additional $200,000.
 On November 29, 1963, Life published an issue showing selected frames from the Zapruder film . Life published the images in a special issue of Life magazine .
 On October 2, 1964, Life published a issue showing the fatal head shot, but again not showing frames 302, 303, 316, 317 . Life published the same issue with a photo of the head shot of the victim .
 Not until thirty years later were the rapid head turns noticed, although close scrutiny does show them in the Warren Report prints if one looks for them . Not until 30 years after the rapid turn turns were noticed .
 We will ask it and if you would rather not answer it—the Commission feels it would be helpful . The Commission will ask the question .
 I received $25,000, as you know, and I have given that to the Firemen's and Policemen's Benevolence with a suggestion for Mrs. Mrs. Robinson . Robinson: "I have given it to Firemen’s and . Policemen’
 $25,000 was paid and I have given it to the Firemen's and Policemen’s fund . Mr Zapruder. $25k was paid . $25K was given to the Police and Firemen’�s Fund .
 "I got letters from all over the world and newspapers," he says . "I mean letters from . all over . the world," he adds . "It was a very exciting experience," he said .
 It was all over the world—I am surprised— that you don’t know it,’s not like to talk about it too much. ‘It was all around the world’ – I am surprised. That you don't know it—I don�
 Zapruder: 'I haven't done anything, the way I have given it, at a time like this' Zapruders: "I haven’t done anything at this time."
 Zapruder, it would seem, was simply unable to admit that he had gotten so much money for his few seconds of film of the assassination of the president of the United States. He had been given a $10,000 reward for his film .
 The point is that Zapruder was not telling the truth and, moreover, he was promoting a false image of himself . The point of the point is, however, that he wasn't telling the . truth, but the truth is not the truth .
 There is no substantial reason to believe that the balance of the testimony was not truthful, at least as Zapruder remembered, or as questions were asked . Therefore, it casts doubt on other segments of his testimony, but there is no reason to doubt the balance .
 Zapruder probably hedged only on the question of how much money he was paid for . He said he didn't want to reveal how much he received .
 There is also reason to question FBI agent Forrest Sorrels’ truthfulness . Forrest is a former FBI agent and FBI agent .
 Still photos in the Warren Commission Report reveal that Sorrels returned to Dealey Plaza . The photos were taken in the days before the assassination .
 Sorrels was either lying or greatly confused about what happened that afternoon . Sorrel: "I'm not sure what happened to me. I'm sure I'm not going to be able to blame it"
 Those who question Paul Rothermel’s statements should equally question statements of Zapruder and Sorrels . Those who questioned Rotherm's statements should also question Zapruders' statements, says historian .
 One of my objectives was to see if the opportunity were present for conspirators to delete frames from the film . One of the objectives of the film was to find out if conspirators were present .
 If frames were altered after Life received its copy, then it would seem indisputable that Life must have known about it or have been involved in it . Life must know about the altered frames, it seems .
 Film could have been edited and frames deleted before Life received its copy . It is extremely unlikely that it was possible for the film to be edited and deleted .
 As long as the conspirators had control of all of the other copies, their secret would remain intact among themselves . The conspirators' secret would keep their secret among themselves.
 The Zapruder film was altered while it was in the hands of the FBI or others . But, in my opinion, it is more likely that one or two individuals within Life were privy to knowledge of the altered film .
 I am not alleging that Life, as an organization, was part of a conspiracy to murder the president . To make it clear, I am . not alleging . that Life . as a . organization, as well as Life, is not . part of an attempt to kill the president,
 Henry Luce and his wife, Clare Boothe Luce, were deeply involved in the financing of anti-Castro operations in the Caribbean and were involved in right-wing and anti-Communist activities in 1963 .
 Jackson could have been enlisted by the CIA to avoid exposure of national security secrets, not necessarily being involved in a conspiracy to assassinate the president . Jackson could not have been involved in an assassination plot .
 What I am writing here are my opinions, based on analysis of the information that I have developed . What I'm writing here is my opinion of the situation in the world .
 When I first started looking for missing frames, I examined my 35mm copy of the negative of the film for splices . The film was shot in 35mm and was shot on 35mm .
 'I did not know how films were edited and frames removed. But at that time I did know how film was edited,' she says . 'I didn't know how frames were removed,' she adds .
 "I learned more when I talked to a senior film editor, Leon Carrere, and showed him the work I was doing," he says .
 He took me to a bookstore in Hollywood where I obtained several books on film editing, and he pointed out how frames are removed from film . He pointed out to me how frames were removed from films .
 One method is to cut the film and make either hot overlaying splices or butt splices, which are easily detected . Hot overlays are often hot overlays or butt overlays .
 Another method (not easily detectable without the original to compare to) is to use an optical printer in which the film is not cut .
 An optical printer projects through one copy of the film over to a blank negative . Only the selected frames that are to be left in the film are transferred to the negative .
 Mr Carrere told me that this is common practice for editing films, and was common in 1963 . He said it was common practice to edit films in the era of film editing .
 He examined the Zapruder frames and agreed that frames had been deleted, resulting in the rapid head movements .
 He said it was commonplace in editing films to delete scenes or speed up scenes by deleting frames or rearranging frames . He added that editing films is commonplace to delete frames or to rearrange scenes .
 Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall employed Lee Harvey Oswald for a few weeks in early 1963 . It was the firm which employed Oswald in the summer of 1963 .
 This film lab did a considerable amount of aerial reconnaissance film development work for the U.S. government . The lab was used to develop aerial reconnaissance films for the United States government .
 Whether or not this firm had an optical printer at that time I have not determined, but it seems safe to assume that they did . In particular, top-secret work. in particular .
 I'm not alleging that Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall was involved in the conspiracy . Again, I am not . alleging that he was . involved in . the conspiracy.
 The capability might have been available in the city of Dallas to edit the film for removal of frames . I am only pointing out that the capability might be available in Dallas .
 If we get into attempting to determine whether or not mysterious blobs could have been matteinserted or painted in to simulate JFK’s head wounds, it is another matter .
 Mr Carrere told me this would probably have taken considerably more time than was available on the night of November 22, 1963 L6H .
 The Zapruder film may have been shot in the days before Life took over . But for the moment I simply want to show that frames were deleted from the film . I want to explore whether it was possible that frames have been deleted .
 If Abraham Zapruder was not involved in the conspiracy, it would have been necessary for the conspirators to conceal what they were doing, or intimidate him into not telling all he knew about possession of the film .
 Zapruder kept the film the night of November 22 . It would have been necessary for the plotters to forge the film and then substituting a forged copy .
 Erwin Schwartz told Bartholomew and me that Zapruder took all the copies home with him . Erwin . Schwartz said he took the copies with him and took them home . The copies were taken from the book .
 Richard Stolley had written that he thought the film was kept in Zapruder’s safe overnight at his office . Richard Stlley said he thought it was kept overnight at the office . The film is believed to have been kept in the safe overnight .
 The film was reviewed the next morning by Secret Service agents and Richard Stolley of Life magazine . Life magazine also reviewed the film the next day .
 Witnesses said they saw the limousine either slow down or come to a stop . The accident occurred in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 I also asked him to describe what he saw at the instant of the fatal head shot . He also told me what he thought of the moment he was shot to death .
 I also asked him if he saw the explosion of blood and brains out of the head. "I asked him what he saw," he said. "He said it was a blast of blood," he later said .
 "We went over this several times with him to be certain that he was clear on this point. We went over it several times," he said .
 Schwartz's statement that the blood and brains went back to the rear and left was completely consistent with all of the eyewitnesses who said they saw the rear of Kennedy’s head blow out and brain and blood go to the . rear .
 Dallas motorcycle policeman Bobby Hargis’s testimony that he was riding to the rear and left of the limousine and was splattered with blood and brains . It was also consistent with Dallas motorcycle officer Bobby . Police say the shooting was consistent with motorcycle officer's testimony .
 A large bone fragment was found to the rear and left of the point of the fatal head shot . It was identified as being occipital bone from the rear of Kennedy’s head . It is also consistent with the location of a large bone .
 The original Zapruder film was released in the U.S. at the end of the day . The original version of the film shows the explosion of blood and brains in a direction opposite what we now see on the film . A witness says he did not see the limousine
 Schwartz did not observe anything different from what he had originally seen when he saw the Oliver Stone film JF‘K . Also, interestingly, when Schwartz saw the movie JF'K he apparently did not notice anything different .
 The blood and brains went backward over the left shoulder instead of forward and upward as is shown in the Oliver Stone film, which is the Warren Commission version . But now he was telling us that the blood went backward .
 The point here is that it seems quite plausible that observers of the Zapruder film would not be able to detect the subtleties that we are talking about . The point is that observers would not have been able to .
 It took thirty years before anyone noticed Greer’s rapid head turn . This thought is reinforced by the fact that it took 30 years to notice .
 "It takes a very close scrutiny, frame by frame, to detect these subtleties," he says . "It's not easy to say, but it's very hard to do," he adds .
 Zapruder’s film could have been looking at a copy of the original and not notice these subtleties . Therefore it is plausible to me that those who viewed the film on Saturday morning could have seen the subtleticities .
 The forgeries could have been completed afterward and no one would have known the difference . Even the technicians at Life magazine as they processed and published the film . Life magazine staff would not have known if the forgeries were made .
 If the forgery of the film was done in Washington D.C., it would most likely have been necessary for someone at Life to cooperate with the government . Life published frames of the fatal head shot .
 These frames were not published until ten months after the assassination of JFK .
 H L Hunt was extremely curious about the assassination and wanted to stay on top of events . It could be explained simply that he wanted to keep up with events . Hunt could have been interested in the assassination .
 Hunt may have feared that he would be targeted as a suspect in the Kennedy assassination because of his venomous series of public attacks on John Kennedy . Hunt's venomous attacks against John Kennedy may have been the result of his attacks .
 Hunt did have an unaltered copy of the Zapruder film, he certainly had a very valuable piece of evidence because he would have blackmail proof that the government had altered the film . Hunt did not have a copy, but he had blackmail proof .
 By now I had learned enough about the chain of possession of the Zapruder film to know that it was riddled with possibilities for deviousness .
 Hunt could have succeeded in purchasing a bootleg copy . Frame removal could have been accomplished overnight while the copies of the film were allegedly in Zapruder’s home or office .
 The film was altered in Washington, D.C. when more time was available . It's not known if the film was shot at the White House .
 The scenario of altering the film in Dallas, although possible, appeared too convoluted and loaded with doubt, whereas alteration of the film after it left Dallas was very plausible, it appeared too .
 Orville Nix was standing on the opposite side of Elm Street from Abraham Zapruder . Nix had been standing opposite the opposite of Zapruders' side .
 The Zapruder film had been altered by removal of frames within the segment of frames that I examined . I wondered what the Nix film would show . The Nix Film has been released .
 I reasoned that if it had not been altered in a similar fashion to the Zapruder film it would show a slowing down or stopping of the limousine . If the testimonies of the eyewitnesses were correct, the car would have slowed down or stopped if the film had been altered
 I obtained a set of slides of the Nix film and made prints on a Canon laser copier . I obtained the slides and made them into prints using a laser printer .
 The Nix film is of very poor quality and of limited use in any analysis . However, it did provide a means of calculating limousine speed .
 I had hoped to see an abrupt change in the rate of speed as was described by the eyewitnesses who said they had seen the limousine come almost to a complete stop at or near the time of the fatal head shot .
 This indicated that the Nix film had also been altered to make it more or less match the Zapruder film . Nix had also altered the film to match the film itself .
 This compared to the speed of the limousine in the Zapruder film of about 11 miles per hour . This is compared to a speed of 11mph in the film of the same speed .
 I wondered if this difference was of significance or simply due to an inability to calculate the speed accurately using the somewhat crude measurements . I wondered whether this difference is of significance .
 The quality of the Nix film is so poor that it is not possible to make good judgments about body movements, rapid head turns, or explosion of the head .
 The fact of uniform speed of the limousine, as shown on the Nix film, was confirmed when I obtained documents from the National Archives which showed that photographic analysts had used multiple-exposure techniques .
 Also they had calculated the speed at 8. miles per hour compared to my 9.m. miles . Speed was calculated at 8 miles per . miles .
 We now had the speed of the limousine in the Nix film at 22 percent slower than in the Zapruder film . We now have a speed of 22 percent faster than in Zapruders film .
 The next step was to determine at what geographical location the Nix film could have been altered . The film was shot at Nix Studios in London .
 Pictures of the Pain by Richard B Trask is an excellent history and chronology of the Nix film . I found an excellent chronology in a new book by Trask .
 In the book the author had meticulously documented the chronology of the Nix film . The film was shot in London and set to be released in November 2014 .
 Orville Nix voluntarily turned his film over to FBI agent Joe B Abernathy on December 1, 1963 . Nix requested the film be returned immediately .
 FBI field office had a copy of the film made at Jamison Film in Dallas, Texas . The FBI has received the Nix film .
 The FBI had about three days to work on the film if they altered it . Therefore, the FBI could have about 3 days to alter the film .
 Orville Nix contacted the FBI office in mid-March 1964 and requested an additional print . Nix called the FBI in March 1964 to request a print of the book .
 Nix didn’t get his camera back from the FBI until June 2, 1964, after many requests . Nix received the camera back in June 1964, but it wasn't until June 1 .
 Orville Nix was never called as a witness to the Warren Commission . He had a clear view of the fatal shot and of the grassy knoll area . Nix never was called a witness .
 He had stated that he thought the shot came from behind the grassy knoll . He said he thought it was from behind a grass-covered knoll.
 It made sense to me that if the Zapruder film had been altered, then the FBI would have altered the Nix film to make it compatible as much as possible . The FBI would then have altered Nix to make the film compatible .
 The alteration of the Nix film would have been even more undetectable than that of the Zapruder film because the film was of such poor quality—details could not be observed . The alteration would be even more noticeable because the NIX film was not of such quality .
 Its alteration would simply have been to remove frames and create a uniform speed of the limousine . The alteration would have been simply to remove the frames .
 If one can believe that Zapruder film was altered, then it is an easy step to believe that the Nix film was also altered . The film was released in 1945, but was never released .
 The proof of alteration of the Zapruder film is to me beyond a reasonable doubt . And the proof of altered of the film is beyond reasonable doubt, he says .
 "The alteration of the Zapruder film took place while in the hands of the FBI, not in Dallas," the author says . "Now, examination of all of the evidence led me to the conclusion that the alteration ... took place in Dallas, Texas, not Dallas," he says
 The forgery of the film would have required extensive special-effects film techniques . The FBI is believed to have been involved in the creation of the fake film .
 A mysterious blob appears on the front of Kennedy’s face, and there is an explosion of matter directed upward and toward the front, but the film shows no matter erupting toward the rear, which is in conflict with the testimonies of many eyewitnesses .
 Robert Groden, a promoter of the authenticity of the Zapruder film, had pointed out that a third film, shot by Marie Much-more, could possibly contradict his conclusion that the film had been altered . Marie Much more could contradict that conclusion .
 Muchmore was moving to a new vantage point on Elm Street when the shots were fired . Muchmore says he was moving from a vantage point when the shooting occurred .
 Due to its brief sequence on Elm Street, it offers no corroboration or contradiction of the Zapruder film . The film was released in 1941 .
 The few frames shown in the Warren Commission Report are not enough to reach a conclusion . The report was released by the Commission of Investigation into the death of President Obama .
 From the beginning, as a matter of diligence, I had felt that I should investigate the process and mechanisms by which the forgery could have been accomplished, he says . "From the beginning of this week, I have felt that he should investigate," he writes .
 A key point in film editing is that it is very unlikely that the 8mm film would have been altered without first enlarging it to at least a 16mm format or, preferably, 35mm .
 This was pointed out by retired chief engineer of Moviola Corporation, the leading manufacturer of film editing machines .
 I obtained this information from James Silverberg, attorney for the Zapruder family estate . Silverberg is attorney for Zapruders' estate .
 His law firm has been responsible for all legal and contract matters concerning the film .
 Silverberg established that the film was Kodachrome II by inspection of the markings on the “original” (now in preservation in the National Archives) Silverberg told me he had established that .
 Close examination of Zapruder frames shown in the Warren Commission Report in Volume XVIII show Kodachrome II identification markings . Also, close examination of the frames show the identification markings of the film .
 All three steps could have been accomplished with an optical printer in conjunction with a Moviola machine, author says .
 I now wondered if the original film in the National Archives was, in fact, circa 1963 film stock . The film stock was manufactured at a time compatible with November 22, 1963 . The original film was released in 1963 .
 Ryan told me they would reveal the date of manufacture of the 8mm film by Eastman Kodak . Ryan told him they would also reveal the release date of the film .
 Edge markings were a series of Greek letters, periods, slashes, and alphabetical letters . The edge markings were created by the artist .
 The film came from a large production roll manufactured by Eastman Kodak in 1961 . Ryan says the film was from a production roll made by Kodak . Ryan: "It's a roll of a large roll made in 1961, and it's a good memory"
 This date would have been compatible with Abraham Zapruder shooting his film on November 22, 1963 . He also told me that this date would also have been the date of November 22- 1963 .
 There were only three independent film laboratories in the U.S. in 1963 that could have processed Kodachrome II film . Ryan told me that, as far as he remembers, there were only 3 independent film labs in the United States in 1963 .
 He explained that the process was very complicated, involving many steps and requiring special equipment .
 Neither the FBI nor the CIA had the capability to process Kodachrome II film, he said . He also said that there was not an independent laboratory in the Dallas area that had that capability . The FBI and CIA were not equipped with that capability, he added .
 If Eastman Kodak had been involved in the final step of the forgery, it could have been accomplished in only three private laboratories in the United States. This seemed to be potentially important information because, if I ruled out Kodak having been involved, then it could be accomplished in
 He said he would check his records and let me know if these were the only laboratories and their exact locations . He said: "He said he will check his . records"
 Ryan by way of introduction by Peter Silverman, George Kendall and Robert Casey . Ryan was introduced to him by Peter by Peter and George Kendall .
 This chain of introductions is typical of the way a network of sources and expertise is developed by those interested in investigating a complex subject that has a wide base of information .
 In the JFK assassination, there was a keen interest and willing helpfulness from almost everybody I contacted. In particular, I contacted almost every person I contacted .
 "People wanted to know and understand what happened in this dreadful, horrible murder of the president of the United States," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "We are here to find out what happened," he says .
 "The mystery continues, after thirtythree years, to puzzle and challenge our sensibilities," says the author .
 When I became focused on the Zapruder film and saw the high probability that it had been altered, I felt it would be very important for me to find a consultant or individual who was nationally recognized as a technical expert in motion picture films .
 "It was not until February 14, 1995 that I drove up to Los Angeles to meet with him personally," he says . "I was not in a position to meet him personally"
 "He offered no other changes or corrections in this chapter, which I consider significant," he said .
 He was with Eastman Kodak Company in Hollywood, California, from 1947 to 1986 . He held various engineering positions, including regional director of engineering services .
 He has received numerous awards, honors, and commendations, including an Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences Medal of Commendation .
 He is a Fellow of the British Kinematograph Sound and Television Society . He also works for the British Film and Television Association .
 A Life Fellow of the Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers . A recipient of the prestigious Herbert T Kalmus Gold Medal, for outstanding achievement in color motion pictures .
 Ryan’s credentials include authorship of several books, technical papers, and articles on motion picture technology . Ryan has authored several books and articles .
 At the time, he was retired from Eastman Kodak and was active as a consultant in his field .
 Ryan was a short education on the processes and equipment that would have been required for the alteration of the Zapruder film in 1963 . Ryan was given a look at the equipment needed to alter the film in order to get the film .
 I was interested in the state of technology at that time as well as the availability of the necessary equipment, how special or unique it was, and what entities or organizations would have had such equipment at the time . I was also interested in technology as it was available and available .
 Ryan would be willing to state some of his opinions on whether or not the Zapruder film had been altered, although earlier I had decided that I would primarily be seeking technical expertise on processes and equipment .
 He would rather rather rather than give some opinions on the authenticity of the film itself, it would be most welcome .
 Ryan outlined the process for editing 8mm Kodachrome II film that would have been required in this case . It involves making an enlargement to 16mm and editing, editing, and then reducing back to 8mm on 8mm film .
 From the information he gave me I constructed a process flow diagram which is shown in Exhibit 12-5 . The diagram is shown below .
 Optical printer for enlarging 8mm to 16mm or 35mm or reducing 16mm to 8mm . Optical printer can be used to print 8mm or 16mm, or reduce 16mm .
 Ryan had checked in his files and found that there were relatively few independent laboratories available in 1963 that could have done the 8mm/16mm optical printing . Ryan had found that the printing was possible in 1963 . Ryan: "There are relatively few labs available that can have done this in
 Calvin Laboratories in Kansas City and Hollywood Valley Film Laboratories in Los Angeles are no longer in business . Also there were Calvin labs in Kansas and Hollywood Laboratories in L.A.
 Ryan thought Colburn Laboratories was still in business in Chicago, being run by George Colburn’s brother, Robert Colburn . Ryan thought that Colburn Labs was still running in Chicago .
 The Technicolor Company in Burbank, California, at one time had the capability to process Kodachrome II film . He also told me that the technology was available at one point .
 Until the mid-1950s the technology was not made available from Eastman Kodak for independent laboratory licensing other than at their own laboratories . Kodachrome process technology in 1963 was not available until the mid-'50s .
 Ryan repeated that only a few companies had purchased the technology from Eastman Kodak at that time . Ryan said only a handful of companies had bought Kodak technology from the company .
 He said equipment could have been purchased piecemeal to assemble the process, but he said he could see no reason why anyone would want to do that .
 Ryan pointed out that Kodachrome II process is relatively complicated compared to the process for Ektachrome film . Ryan said it's not the same process that was used to film Ektacrome film, but it's more complicated .
 Kodachrome II process takes nine different steps requiring special equipment, as opposed to only five steps for the Ektachrome process . The Kodachromatic process takes less than five steps to capture photos .
 No government facilities had Kodachrome II processing in 1963 or even today . Ryan: "No government facilities" had such processing facilities . Ryan says no government facilities still have processing facilities in the United States .
 I had assumed that the National Photographic Interpretation Center, the FBI, or other government agencies would have such equipment . I had always assumed that such equipment would be available .
 Only Eastman Kodak and a few licensed private laboratories could have done the final step of development back to Kodachrome II film stock . The film stock was developed back to Eastman's original film stock in the 1960s .
 Ryan and I thought this would narrow down considerably the entities that could have altered the film . Ryan: "Ryan and I wanted to narrow down the list of people who could have changed the film"
 The /ast step in the process involved the need for Kodachrome II processing capability, perhaps . But on further discussion I suggested that inasmuch as only the . /ast . process involved a need for the . process, perhaps whoever did the forgery ended up with Kodach
 Ryan asked if he felt that Eastman Kodak or a commercial laboratory would have taken particular note of the film . Ryan: "I don't think it would have been taken special care of" Ryan .
 At one time there were government regulations on pornography which required photographic processors to inspect the film they were developing, but by 1963 those had long since been abandoned .
 He said any lab would probably take a roll of 8mm film and simply develop it without even looking at it and give it back to the owner .
 laboratories had contracts for secret and confidential work with the government . They would normally process whatever package of materials sent to them without looking at it .
 This left the field almost wide open for altering and processing the Zapruder film . In sum, this left the film's subject matter open for editing .
 The only narrow slot in the field would be the laboratories mentioned earlier for enlarging 8mm film to either 16mm or 35mm film .
 I wondered if there would be any point in contacting these companies to see if they had received orders in 1963 or 1964 for processing or enlarging film, or returning enlarged film back to 8mm .
 It was too long ago and it would probably be a fruitless effort of investigation . It was probably too late ago to be investigated, but it would be fruitless, it's too late to investigate .
 There is no reason to believe that some government film laboratories did not have the capability to enlarge 8mm film on optical printers . Also, there was no reason why some government laboratories didn't have the . capability to . enlarge films .
 Ryan about the capability in 1963 for special-effects film editing such as that now available with modern computer technology . Ryan: "The ability in 1963 was the capability for special effects film editing that is now available"
 Digital computer capability to create special effects similar to what is now being done was not commercially available in 1963 . He said that as far as he knew, digital computer capability was not commercialized in 1963.
 It was not until 1973 that this type of computer equipment was developed, using rudimentary digital equipment . The first computer was developed in the 1970s, using primitive digital equipment.
 It was under development at Hughes Aircraft Company in Culver City, California, in 1973 .
 Even in 1973 it would have taken a room full of digital equipment to do what is now being done on a desktop computer in special-effects editing . Ryan noted that even in 1973, even in that era, it would take a room to do the same thing .
 The critical frames of the Zapruder film that I had been studying had been studied by Ryan Ryan . Ryan: "I had to study the critical frames"
 Ryan, I asked him again about this, if he had more thoughts on the subject . Ryan: "I asked him if he has more thoughts of the subject. Ryan, you can't wait to hear what you think about it. It's time for him to tell us what he
 Ryan asked Ryan if there was any other reason that could explain the blur of background figures in 302 . Ryan asked if there were any other reasons for the blur .
 Zapruder said he had thought of this but could not think of a logical reason as to why these figures would be blurred . He said he was panning his camera to keep up with the limousine, thus blurring the background figures .
 I asked him if it would be possible in special effects to create this blur of the background figures . The blur of background figures was created by special effects in the film .
 He said yes, but he had thought about that and could think of no logical reason why anyone would want to do it . He said: "Yes, but I could not think of any logical reason"
 The mysterious blobs on JFK’s face and in the successive frames after the fatal head shot are seen in the next frame . JFK's death was captured on the night of his assassination .
 I asked if this could be explained in any way other than alteration of film. I asked for this explanation from the film's director .
 He spent some time looking at the series of frames, thinking that he might be able to find possibilities of light reflection from adjacent objects or surfaces .
 He looked at Jacqueline Kennedy’s head or hands as a possibility of light reflection as well as parts of the limousine .
 traveling matte insert techniques were in use in the film industry as early as the 1930s, but it was done with manual techniques as opposed to the current digital computer techniques .
 This came as a surprise to me because I had just about concluded that it had been done with traveling matte inserts based on my previous research . This is not the first time I have seen a traveling matte insert .
 He said special effects can be made to appear three-dimensional when viewed stereoscopically . He said that painted special effects . can be . made to look 3-dimensional .
 David Mantik is working on a new project on the Zapruder film . Mantik's new project is a new film based on the film . He says Mantik will be able to use the film in a new way to tell the story .
 He told me that his work was now essentially done on the Kennedy xrays . He said he was pursuing what he thought would be additional scientific proof, beyond my work, of alteration of the Zapruder film .
 Mantik’s work involved photographic information between the sprocket holes, as was published in Life magazine . Mantik's work was published between the holes and the holes of the holes .
 His question was whether an optical printer would capture that information . His question to me was whether a printer would be able to capture that data .
 I promised him I would check into that while he was away for the summer on a medical exchange program to New Zealand . He was away in New Zealand on a summer break .
 Ryan and he was certain that optical printers for the 8mm film were available to capture all the information on the film, but suggested that he call Robert Coburn in Chicago who would be able to provide a completely authoritative answer .
 Optical printers in those days could capture all of the information on 8mm film between the sprocket holes and even beyond the edges of the film if one wanted .
 Mr Coburn's company enlarged Zapruder film for Life magazine in the days following the assassination . Coburn says the film was enlarged for the magazine in days after the shooting .
 He replied that he did remember that his firm enlarged an 8mm film for Life concerning the JFK assassination . He said he couldn't recall if it was the Zapruder film .
 I asked him if there would be any records available that would show work they did for Life. Life.com . He said he hopes there will be no records of their work .
 He said no; his company was no longer in existence, had gone out with the end of the era of 8mm film . All such detailed records had been disposed of, he said .
 Charles Marler suggested that we meet with Dr. John Sutter in San Diego . Dr. Sutter: "When I returned to San Diego, I received a telephone call from Charles . Marler" He says he's been in contact with the author of the novel .
 David Mantik and Jim DiEugenio look over our research on the Zapruder film . The film was released in the wake of the Kennedy assassination in 1968 .
 Mantik’s summer home in Idyllwild, California, is in the San Jacinto Mountains . Mantik's summer home is his summer home there . He has been married to three generations of women .
 The Meeting at Idyllwild was February 24, 1995 . The meeting took place at Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. The meeting was held at the Dr. King's home in Idyllwood, California .
 We spent the day looking at the Zapruder slides, high-resolution blow-ups, graphs, and other items of my research material . We had a lively discussion of the JFK assassination evidence .
 Mantik, and I should get together among ourselves to make a final determination of the accuracy of our own observations . Mantik: "I should make it clear that Mantik's observations are correct and accurate"
 Mantik had obtained copies of the same slides from the National Archives that my challengers were examining . Mantik showed them to me, and he showed them the slides to me .
 Marler and I had carefully confirmed that the slides we were looking at were accurately numbered . Marler: "We had carefully checked that the slide numbers were accurate and that they were accurate"
 We had confirmed that the slides agreed with what was shown in the Warren Commission Report . The slides agree with what the Warren Report showed .
 As noted previously, I also confirmed that the slides upon which our analysis was based were in proper sequence, comparing them to a copy of the original film strip provided to me by Zapruder's attorney .
 In any event, we spent the day at Idyllwild brainstorming various aspects of the Kennedy assassination, looking at slides .
 Marler and I had calculated angles and speeds for William Greer’s head turn were correct . We disagreed on several aspects of the assassination evidence as to the plotters, but unanimously agreed that the angles were correct.
 Three weeks after the meeting in Idyllwild, Marler wrote to me that Dr. Marler had committed suicide . Marler's suicide was a suicide attempt, she says .
 The frames had never appeared in Life or any national publication . To my knowledge, these frames never appeared on Life .
 I noted that it was indeed a peculiar coincidence that this critical frame would be misnumbered . The critical frame was misnumbered, and the frame is misnumbered.
 Only by accident did I make the discovery of the rapid head turn at 317. It was only by accident that I made the discovery .
 Harold Weisberg had not noticed the rapid head turn at 317. He had been on the track at 317 seconds . Harold had also not noticed that the head turn .
 I wondered if the frames that would reveal the forgery of the Zapruder film had systematically been kept from the American public over the years . The frames most starkly reveal the film's forgery had been kept secret from the public .
 Only poor quality prints were published in the Warren Commission Report . Only poor-quality prints were released in the report .
 This is evidenced by the impossibly rapid head turn of the limousine driver, William Greer . This is shown by the incredible speed of the driver's head turn .
 Test subjects included a top amateur athlete and a professional athlete . The test subjects were tested by amateur athletes and professional athletes .
 The most rapid head turn of the athletes measured in our tests was only 50 percent as rapid as Greer’s feat . Even when cued for the turn in advance, the most rapid turn in the athlete measured in tests was Greer's feat .
 Had his head turned as rapidly as indicated by the altered film, it should appear as a blob in the motion picture . Had he turned his head rapidly, it would have been a blob .
 The film shows the limousine moving forward at a uniform speed of 11 miles per hour . Yet the film appears to show the vehicle moving at just 11mph . The film was shot in New York City, New York .
 Experience tells us that the limousine could not have decelerated from 11 miles per hour to a complete stop in 1/18 second . Viewing the motion picture film, in motion, shows the limouine moving uniformly through the scene .
 The Zapruder film was altered to eliminate evidence of a fatal head shot, fired from the front . The film should have shown the eruption of material from the back of Kennedy's head that should have appeared in the film .
 Numerous eyewitnesses testify that at the time of the fatal head shot there was an eruption of material backwards from Kennedy’s head . Witnesses say material from Kennedy's head erupted backwards from his head .
 motorcycle policeman Bobby Hargis testified that he was riding to the rear and left of the presidential limousine and, when Kennedy’s head was hit, it exploded and he was splattered with blood and brain . Also testified that, in addition to the testimony, motorcycle policeman
 The Zapruder film does not show the eruption of blood from the rear of Kennedy’s head . But the film doesn’t show the death of Kennedy . Kennedy was shot in the back of the head by the White House .
 Only by removal of frames by the plotters would the eruption from the rear of the head be absent from the film . Only by removing frames from the movie, the eruption would have been absent .
 There is a slight possibility that the Zapruder film could have been altered overnight in Dallas by other conspirators, but even in that unlikely event the altered film would have had to have been substituted for the copy that was sent by special plane .
 There is no scenario that does not implicate the FBI in the film alteration . The FBI has been involved in the alteration of the film .
 Any time segments calculated using the Zapruder film should be considered to be minimal times . At the very least, any time segments using the film are considered minimal times.
 In fact, alteration of the Zapruder film demonstrates the extreme need of the conspirators to conceal the fact of a shot from the front . The film was altered in order to cover up the fact that a shot was shot from a front .
 We will now go to the amazing evidence of deception in the autopsy of the president’s body at Bethesda Naval Hospital in Washington, D.C., at the very heart of government .
 Schaeffer never published his finding, but had copyrighted an article about it . He never published the article, but published it in a book .
 Schaeffer did not conduct tests as to how rapidly athletes or others could turn their heads . Schaeffler did not test how fast athletes could turn heads .
 The discovery was 'intellectually satisfying to me that this totally independent discovery had been made'
 Zapruder film of the assassination shows the limousine traveling through Dealey Plaza at a constant speed . Senator Ralph Yarborough, who would later testify that the presidential limo came to a stop at the time of the shots, would testify later .
 Mary Ann Moorman took famous photograph of presidential limousine from the same side that she took her famous photograph . Richard Tullius Collection t 92 .
 Note the position of John Connally with respect to his wife Nellie and Jacqueline Kennedy . Note the difference between the two women .
 In the Moorman photograph, Connally is on a line directly between Nellie and Jackie .
 The presidential limousine in Dallas on the day of the assassination was driven by the president . Richard Tullius Collection: The limo was a presidential limo .
 The bottom photo was taken at Love Field as the limousine joined the motorcade . The bottom of the photo is taken at the Love Field scene .
 Secret Service agents William Greer and Roy Kellerman are the driver . The Secret Service agent is seated in the driver's seat . The driver is seated next to the driver, and Secret Service Agents Roy and William Kellerman .
 These photos show a wealth of information, later to become important in understanding the evidence . These photos were later used in the discovery of the remains .
 Critical frames showing the rapid head turns were a special process from my copy of the 35mm film 35mm to large 8 x 10” photos which were then scanned .
 The sound of the first shot indicated to be at approximately this pomt by Betzner photo and Willis photo . One photo taken before and one after shot was shown to be taken at the time .
 At this point, Kennedy is blocked from the alleged sniper’s nest by tree foliage . Kennedy was shot at the scene of the shooting .
 D.D.S. Michael West, D.S., says the first shot was probably fired at frame 152 . West: The first shot likely fired at the scene of the shooting was probably shot in frame 152.
 The Warren Commission concluded that Kennedy was hit after he passed behind the freeway sign . Kennedy was struck by a freeway sign in the early 1960s . He was hit by the sign, but was not killed .
 For my purposes here, I will go along with the Warren Commission conclusion . For my purpose here, it will be a matter of principle .
 Both his right hand and left hand are starting to reach for his throat . Both his left hand and right hand are now reaching for the throat .
 The right hand is already at throat level and is above the left hand . Note that the right hand already is already in the throat level .
 Note that Connally’s right lapel appears to puff up or flip out in frame 224 . Connally's lapel is seen puffing up or flipping out or puffing .
 A bullet passed through Kennedy's neck and pierced Connally's chest, exiting through his lapel at frame 224 . Michael West says this is evidence of a bullet passing through Kennedy’s neck and exiting through the lapel . West: This is evidence that a bullet had passed through
 This argument is not consistent with the fact that Kennedy had already been hit by frame 224, otherwise he would not be seen reacting in frame 224 . This argument does not appear to be consistent with Kennedy's reaction to being hit .
 There is always a slight delay in manifest physiological response in one part of the body after getting hit by a bullet . The reaction to a bullet hitting a person in the body is delayed longer than it would otherwise occur .
 The fastest human reflex known to science is 40 milliseconds—one blink of the eye . The fastest reflex known as a human reflex is known to be 40 milliseconds .
 Posner would have us believe that within a blink of an eye Kennedy was hit by a bullet and his right arm had raised to clutch his throat . Yet Posner said that within the blink of the eye Kennedy had been hit by the bullet .
 An eyelid is of miniscule weight compared to the weight of a hand and an arm . The reaction of the much heavier mass of a . hand and arm is much slower than the reaction of an eyelid .
 His left hand and arm are also reaching up but are at a lower position than his right . His left arm and right hand are reaching up .
 The arms and hands are at approximately the same position as in the preceding frame 224 . The arms, hands and legs are at about the same positions in the previous frame .
 The left hand, seen directly below the right hand, is seen reaching upward . It is also clear that the left hand is reaching upward, reaching out .
 As in frame 224, John Connally is now turning to his right, as he testified to the Warren Commission . Connally testified to Warren Commission, testifying in Texas .
 Connally's head in terms of her testimony to the Warren Commission will be apparent in subsequent frames . Connally’s head will be obvious in subsequent frame .
 Connally is turning back to his left, after hearing a shot, but he is not aware that Kennedy has been hit . Connally was not aware Kennedy had been hit by the bullet . He was turning back after hearing the shot .
 Connally continues to look straight ahead after frame 224, where Gerald Posner claims Connally was hit and Mrs. Connally looks straight ahead . Connally is seen looking straight ahead in frame 224 of frame .
 His right hand is held up to shoulder height holding the brim of his hat . He is holding his hat with his right hand up shoulder height .
 Posner claims that they remain “locked’s position” until the fatal hit at frame 312/313 . Posner says they remain in “Thorburn's Position’ until the final hit, which released the ‘locked” position .
 Kennedy’s arms are not locked in position, as would be required for him to be in the Thorburn Position . Kennedy is not in Thorburn position, but his arms are in the position of a Thorburn .
 Kennedy reacted instantaneously and Connally had a slow reaction, the president says . Kennedy reacted instantly, Connally did not, he says, and Kennedy did not .
 The Thorburn Position states that Kennedy is reacting to a bullet passing through or near his sixth cervical vertebra, causing him to reflex “instantaneously” into the position shown above .
 Connally has just begun to turn to her right so that her angle of vision encompasses both Kennedy and Connally . Connally was turning to his right when Kennedy began to turn . Kennedy's angle of view is that of Connally and Kennedy .
 This is the first time she has turned to look back, as she testified to the Warren Commission . She testified before the commission, testifying before the Senate .
 It was probably at this frame, or in the preceding frame, that she saw that Kennedy had been hit . She was probably in the frame at this time of the shooting, when Kennedy was hit .
 His right hand becomes a blur, possibly indicating that it has been hit . The incident occurred in the middle of the first half of the World Cup .
 His right shoulder begins to drop, indicating that he has been hit in the back of the shoulder . The right shoulder is shown to indicate that he was hit by a punch .
 Connally has turned so that her angle of vision encompasses Kennedy and Connally . Kennedy has turned her back so that she can see Connally and Kennedy .
 She sees that Kennedy has been hit but not yet aware that her husband has been struck . She is not aware that she is aware of the impact of her husband .
 It was just sort of nothing, the expression on his face, and he sort of slumped down. He slumped down, he said, 'It was just a sort of ... nothing,' he said .
 Connally would not have heard the sound of the shot until about one to two frames after frame 234 . Connally's shot would have been shot in the middle of frame 234 of the broadcast .
 She would not have seen the motion of John Connally’s shoulder until one to two frames later, even though he had already been hit, due to the large mass of his shoulder accelerating slowly . She would also not have been able to see the motion until one or two frames
 Connally is looking to her right; both Kennedy and Connally are within her angle of vision . Connally and Kennedy are within the angle of view of her .
 First I heard the shot, or a strange loud noise, back behind us . Then, I heard a strange, strange noise from behind us. Then I heard it all over again. It was like a gunshot .
 President's throat is gripped by his throat, says CNN's John Sutter . "I turned to my right and saw the President gripping at his throat," he says . "Then next I turned to his right, saw him gripping at my throat," Sutter says .
 I must have been looking right at him when it hit because I saw him recoil to the right... so you see I had time to look at the President after he was already hit, then turn and see John hit by a second shot . I saw the President react to the second shot
 The change can be seen best by noting the red patch behind him which was identified as a bunch of red roses lying on the seat next to Mrs. Mrs. Robinson . The change is best shown by noting a red patch of red flowers lying next to him .
 The alleged assassin’s rifle took a minimum of 2.2 seconds to fire and reload with the bolt-action rifle, there must have been a second gunman . Therefore, inasmuch as the alleged assassin's rifle took about 2.5 minutes to fire, the second gunman
 If frames were removed in this segment, the hypothesis that Connally and Kennedy were hit by the same bullet becomes even more ludicrous . Moreover, if frames are removed, it would be even more absurd .
 Connally’s testimony and photos contradict the contention that Connally was hit in frame 224, because she looked back only once, starting at frame 234 . Connally's testimony and these photos contradict her testimony and her testimony .
 It was at this point that she saw Kennedy clutching at his throat, after which she said she saw her husband struck . It was this time that she said Kennedy had tried to take control of her husband .
 Kennedy's arms are now lowered well below their maximum position in frame 232 . Kennedy’s arms now are now well below the maximum position they were in .
 Posner: They have not been locked in the ‘Thorburn Position’ as claimed by Posner . Posner says they are not locked into the “Thorburn position’s’.
 Secret Service oath is to use his body to shield the president . But only now he looks back, with no indication whatsoever to make any physical move to protect the president or the governor .
 Kellerman was interviewed by FBI agents Sibert and O’Neill on November 27, 1963 at the White House . Kellerman’s interview with the FBI took place in November 1963 .
 Kellerman told the FBI that when the shots rang out he turned toward the rear and “observed President Kennedy with his left hand in back of him appearing to be reaching to a point on his right shoulder . In the interview Kellerman said he turned to the rear of the president
 Zapruder film shows Kennedy raised both hands sharply toward his throat when he was wounded . Kennedy did not extend his left hand behind his back reaching to a point on his right shoulder . At the time he made this statement, he apparently did not have access to the film, which shows
 If Kellerman was telling the truth, it lends evidence that the Zapruder film was altered by removing frames which could have shown Kennedy with his left hand in back of him . Kellerman says the film could have been altered by removal of frames .
 Note the blur of the legs of the two women standing on the left and the woman in the background . Note that the blur is the result of a photo taken by the photographer .
 Zapruder is panning his camera to match the speed of the limo because the picture is in relatively sharp focus . This indicates he is trying to keep his camera in sharp focus to match speed of limo .
 This is a turn of about 105° in one frame, or 0.0546 second, a rotational speed of 1,923 degrees per second . The speed of this turn is 0.0646 seconds . This is the fastest speed of a turn in a frame .
 The fastest known human response is the blink of an eye which is the equivalent to only one frame on Zapruder’s camera . The blink of a human eye is equivalent to one frame of Zapruders’ camera .
 Tests using young, top athletes as subjects could not find rotational speeds in turns of even 50% of the speed that Greer exhibits .
 The head should be a complete blur at a rotational speed 1,923 degrees per second . Head should be flying at a speed of 1.923 degree per second at the time .
 If Zapruder had jiggled his camera, both the background figures and the limo would be out of focus . This cannot be explained by camera jiggle, says the author .
 This corresponds roughly to the amount of blur in the legs of the women in 302, thus confirming that the limo is moving very slowly or standing still in 303 . The blur in 302 indicates that the women's legs are moving slowly .
 The blurs in Z303 can be explained as a combination of background figure motion, limo speed and camera tracking deviation . Dr. John Costella believes that the blurs are caused by the effect of the camera tracking .
 Ryan’s statement to me—that the lmo was standing stilH—cannot be scientifically supported, he says . Ryan‘s statement that the lm was standing stillH was not scientifically supported . Ryan: ‘I’m sorry. Ryan�
 Ryan, no longer living to defend himself, was simply giving his opinion from the view of a senior, experienced motion picture technology expert . He never intended to imply that the limo was exactly standing still, or that the background figures were not in some motion or camera jiggle .
 Greer’s head turns are evidence of frame removal, says Costella . Costella is in agreement with me that Greer's head turns were evidence that frame removal is evidence .
 Inasmuch as the whole frame is composite or composites, it is almost meaningless except when compared to other frames . The whole frame frame is a composite or composite, and it's almost meaningless .
 He clearly was looking at Kennedy during the fatal shot, yet he testified that he did not see it . He was clearly looking at the Kennedy when he was shot, but he testified he didn't see the shot .
 Mary Ann Moorman snapped a photograph with her Polaroid camera . The photo was taken at about this point, or a few frames later, in front of the camera .
 Forensic blood spatter expert Sherry Pool Gutierrez considers it to be back 67 spatter from a bullet entering the right temple . Pool Gutierrez: Spatter from the left temple appears to be consistent with a bullet hitting the temple .
 The limousine is moving forward at an apparent speed of about 11 miles per hour, based on the assumption that none of the frames has been removed from the Zapruder film . The limo is moving .
 The complete stopping or slowing of the limousine was observed by thirty-six (ee of these, twenty-one said the limo stopped completely) Yet, the majority of the respondents said they saw a complete stopping .
 Note that the head of the driver, Secret Service agent Greer, is turned around about 150° looking at the president at the instant of impact .
 Even if we accept the Warren Commission’s hypotheses that the first shot could have occurred at frame 225, there still would have been 5.15 seconds’ delay in Greer’ reaction time . Greer's reaction time could have been more than five seconds long .
 Greer is still looking back, observing the aftermath of the fatal head wound . Greer was shot in the head with a fatal wound to the head . He is now in a coma in hospital .
 A strange blob appears on the right side of Kennedy’s face, partially obscuring her face . The blob appears to be a blob that obscures Mrs. Kennedy's face . Kennedy's daughter is also partially obscured by the blob .
 In the following 48 frames, this blob will inexplicably move around on the side of Kennedy’s face, changing size and shape . In the video, Kennedy's face will be shown moving around on a side of his face .
 There is no visible wound in the back or top or side of Kennedy’s head . Kennedy was shot in the head with a gunshot wound .
 Witnesses confirm that the face was unharmed, yet this photo shows something appearing to be blood or matter originating from his right cheek . Witnesses say that the man's face appeared to be unharred .
 If that were the case, there should be an equally large portion of Kennedy’s scalp missing in this photograph and subsequent photographs . However, if that were to be true, the scalp should be missing in the photograph .
 It is obvious in examining subsequent photographs that this is not the case. It was obvious in . examining subsequent photos that this . was not the . case.
 The top and side of Kennedy’s scalp is intact, according to the video . The top of the scalp is still intact, and the side of his scalp is also intact .
 In frame 335, it appears that the right top front of Kennedy's scalp may be missing, but that is simply sunlight shining on Kennedy’s head at the particular angle in which it is positioned .
 It is possibly some other phenomenon, such as a crude attempt by the conspirators to insert false evidence using film special effects techniques . It is possible some other technique, such an attempt to use film specialeffects techniques .
 Governor Connally started to fall when he was hit by two shots, CNN's John Sutter says . "After the second shot, I glanced over my right shoulder and saw governor Connally start to fall," he says .
 Just so that my eyes over, caught the Governor, I could see, J couldnt see the President. Just so so that . I could . see, he couldnt . see the president . Just so . that his eyes over caught the governor .
 He has made a 115° turn in one frame—0.0546 second—from the preceding frame . He made the move in just one frame . The move was made in the second frame .
 This is an extremely rapid movement considering that the blinking of an eye takes about .06 seconds . This is extremely rapid . The blinking of a blinking eye takes an eye time only about a second .
 See Exhibits C-2, C-3, and C-4 for time-motion test results using top athletes as subjects .
 This rapid turn of Greer’s head and body is explained by frames having been removed . Greer's rapid turn and body can be explained by removing frames .
 One reason the conspirators might have wanted to speed up the film was to minimize the evidence of the delay in Greer's reaction in accelerating the limousine .
 Bystanders have testified that the limousine had come almost to a complete stop at the time of the fatal head wound . The driver was pronounced dead at the scene of the accident .
 Another reason would be to delete incriminating evidence (of blow-out of Kennedy’s skull to the rear) on the frames that were removed . Another reason for removing frames is to delete evidence on Kennedy's skull, which was removed from his skull .
 Time-motion tests using a step-frame video camera and an 8mm motion picture camera show that the rotational speed of Greer’s turn is more than double that possible by athletes .
 The rotational speed in Greer’s turn here is 2106 degrees per second, equivalent to 5.85 complete revolutions per second . Greer's turn is the equivalent to a complete turn of five complete revolutions a second . The speed of the turn is 2.85 degrees
 None of the athletes tested could equal 50% of Greer's speed, even when cued to snap their head and shoulders as rapidly as possible .
 Look closely and you will see her white gloved hand behind a flap of scalp and hair . Look closely, you can see the hand behind the flap of hair .
 Kennedy said she was looking to the left and heard “those terrible noises.” Kennedy said that she heard the noises from the left side of the crowd .
 All I remember is seeing my husband, he had this sort of quizzical look on his face, and his hand was up, it must have been his left hand . And all I remember was seeing him having a quizzical, quizzical face . He had raised his hand, and
 "I could see a piece of his skull and I remembered it was flesh colored. remember thinking he just looked as if he had a slight headache. And I just turned and looked at him, I could see him,’s skull . Remembering the incident, "I just
 This is dramatic, tangible evidence of an exit wound in the rear of the head, corroborated in vivid detail in the above photo . The wound was found in the head of a man who was killed in a car crash .
 About 30 other witnesses’ descriptions and testimonies are in agreement with Mrs. McClelland’s description of the rear head wound observed at Parkland Hospital . About 30 others witnesses' descriptions of the head wound are also in agreement .
 Secret Service agent Clinton Hill says he ran to the limousine immediately after the fatal wound . Hill is a Secret Service officer who helped Clinton Hill get into the limo . Hill says she saw the wounded man in the limosine .
 Dr. Kennedy’s eyewitness testimony, Dr. Clinton Hill's eyewitness testimony and Dr. Dr. George W. Kennedy's testimony will be aired on CNN.com Live .
 Mrs. McClelland's and Parkland Hospital personnel’s eyewitness testimony, and an actual photograph of the flap of scalp with Mrs. Mrs.. .
 Kennedy is attempting to put a piece of skull back in place in the back of the head . Kennedy was the first person to try to put the skull back into place in his head .
 The presence of an exit wound in the back of the head is tantamount to proof of a gunman in the front and therefore proof of an alleged conspiracy . This is not the first time a gunman has been shot in the head with a gunshot wound .
 He put his hand to his forehead and fell in my lap . And then he sort of did this: Put his hand on his forehead, fell in his lap .
 "You know, then, there were pictures later on of me climbing out the back," he said . "I'm not afraid to climb out of the back. You know, I'm not scared," he added .
 Clinton Hill, the Secret Service agent whose hand you see on the left, thought she was trying to retrieve part of her husband’s head . Clinton Hill was hit by a bullet in the head during the attack .
 This photo was taken on the opposite side of Elm Street from where Zapruder stood . This photo shows the opposite of the famous photo taken in the same place .
 He can be seen standing on the concrete abutment in the upper right-hand corner of the photograph . He is seen standing in the lower right-left corner of this photograph .
 Note on line A-B that John Connally is in a position on almost a direct line between his wife Nellie and Mrs. Mrs. Connally . Note that he is in almost a . position on a direct . line between the two .
 He is leaning backward against the left-hand side of the limousine, and appears to be completely out of the jump seat . He appears to have been leaning back into the car .
 This is strong evidence that a block of frames was removed from the Zapruder film at or near the time of the fatal head shot . The film was taken from the film in the days leading up to the death of the first man .
 The reason it is apparent that a block of frames has been removed is that it would have taken several frames for Connally to have moved from his position in the right-hand jump seat to where he is shown in the photograph .
 If frames were removed here, then of course this would not be frame 314 . This would not have been frame 314, but frame 314 is 314 .
 This might be true, but my focus is on Connally’s position in the limousine . Connally's position is said to be in a limo, but it's not clear why .
 Each photo is equivalent to 1/30 seconds, the equivalent to 0.61 Zapruder frames . Each photo was taken during a time of 1.30 seconds .
 Motion picture frames, taken with an 8mm movie camera at a shutter speed of 18 frames per second, of a twenty-year-old athlete .
 The above tests were conducted to determine the maximum speed that could reasonably have been expected for William Greer, or others, to turn their heads under the emergency conditions at the moment of the assassination .
 The test for Dawson was made using a Sony model CCD F-40 video camera . The camera has the feature of step-frame playback at 30 frames per second .
 The test for Marler was made with an 8mm movie camera at 18 frames per second . The test was made using a camera at an 18 frame rate .
 These tests show that neither of the athletes was able to achieve any more than 50% of the speed that Greer turned his head starting at Zapruder frame 315 .
 Subjects were instructed to turn their heads and shoulders as rapidly as they possibly could to look straight ahead upon an audible signal . Subjects were told to turn heads, shoulders and shoulders  rapidly as possible as possible .
 The video and films were played back and visual estimates were made of head position at each frame in the playback . Head position was made of visual estimates made of each frame .
 Of all the evidence, the U.S. government’s involvement in a cover-up in the autopsy of John F Kennedy is the most torturing and complex . Robert A Caro, The Path to Power, is the author of Caro's The Path To Power .
 It is loaded with contradictory testimonies, recanted statements, some evidence that is accurate, some that is obfuscated, and some that has been altered; but it is very important . The evidence is not always accurate, but it's very important, says CNN.com .
 If the vice president, the director of the FBI, and the Secret Service were involved in the conspiracy, it's possible anything is possible . If the CIA and military intelligence cooperated in a cover-up, it could be possible, he says .
 This cabal would have been in a position to manipulate or control everything; and by the time of the autopsy, things had gone terribly, desperately wrong in their plot .
 I can well imagine that nothing would be too extreme in their actions to conceal the momentous crime they had just committed . I'm not sure what would be the most extreme crime in the world of crime .
 As I contemplate the words that will follow I feel that I will reach the point where every reader will be seized with utter disbelief . I feel it will be the point of utter disbelief when I write this article . The author of this article has never been published .
 President Kennedy's body was stolen from Air Force One, prosecutors say . It's alleged that the conspirators enlarged the bullet exit wound in the lower rear of the skull to make the wound extend to the top and right side of skull .
 By performing these operations, they obscured the direction from which the fatal head shot occurred . The operation obscured the location of the fatal shot .
 The body was delivered to the morgue at the rear of Bethesda Naval Hospital . They then delivered the body to a nearby morgue .
 While all of this was being done, they deceived the public and virtually everyone in government to conceal the momentous crime that had been committed . While all the . public was being . deceived, the . government . was trying to conceal a momentous . crime .
 For purposes of analysis, I was obliged to simplify the evidence—sort out the best evidence without being dishonestly selective . The evidence was the best of the evidence, but not the best that could be found .
 The president's body was put aboard Air Force One in Dallas in a bronze ceremonial casket; the body was wrapped in a sheet . Allegation 1: The president was wrapped up in a bed in a casket . Alleged that the president was put in the casket in a
 When the body arrived at the morgue it was in a plain shipping casket and a zippered, military-style body bag . The body was found in a military-like body bag at the Bethesda Naval Hospital .
 It arrived at the morgue before the Kennedy party arrived in a Navy ambulance . The ceremonial bronze casket that had left Dallas was transported by the Navy . The casket arrived at a morgue shortly before the party arrived .
 This is the basic starting point in developing the evidence, it would prove that the body had been removed from the casket in which it left Parkland Hospital in Dallas, Texas . This is a starting point for developing the . evidence, which would prove the body .
 When the president’s body left Dallas there was a wound in the back of the head that measured approximately three inches in diameter . The wound was three inches long and three inches wide .
 When the body arrived at Bethesda Naval Hospital, this wound had expanded to a large gaping hole measuring approximately seven inches by five inches . The wound had been expanded into a large, seven-inch-by-five-inch hole .
 The wound observed in Dallas was mainly in the right lower rear region of Kennedy's head . The wound was seen in Dallas, Texas .
 The wound observed in Bethesda extended from the top of the head near the hairline down to the back of the . head, mainly on the right hemisphere, to a point approximately one to two inches above the hairlines of the neck .
 Surgery had been performed on the head, in secrecy, which enlarged the wound . Surgery had to be carried out on head, and surgery enlarged it . Surgery was performed on head .
 When the president's brain was first received at Bethesda in the body bag and shipping casket, the brain was almost completely missing . The brain was also missing when the body was first sent to the hospital .
 A wound in the front of the president’s neck was surreptitiously enlarged after the body left Dallas, and before it was delivered to the Bethesda morgue, to make it appear to be an exit wound . It was an entrance wound to make the wound appear to
 The autopsy report prepared by the Navy autopsy pathologist at Bethesda was changed after the autopsy was conducted and after the body was taken to the White House, under pressure from officials to conceal evidence of more than one gunman . The autopsy was changed, after the report was published, after it was
 It will be argued here that proof of all of these allegations is not necessary to establish the complicity of employees and officials of the government in the cover-up of the assassination of President Kennedy, if not in the assassination itself .
 Only proof of two or three of the allegations, in combination, will be required to prove guilt . That is, only proof of a combination of allegations, will not be required for guilt .
 This is similar to prosecuting attorneys’ methods, in which they do not place themselves in the position of having to prove a few of their allegations to get a conviction . The reason being that if all allegations had to be proven there would be precious few criminal convictions . This is like prosecuting
 What we must deal with here is an incredibly complex problem of uncovering a shell game, carried out by agents of the federal government . Their objective was to deceive the American public into believing that there was only one gunman who killed the president, says CNN's John Sutter .
 To achieve this deception, it was necessary that they conceal the fact that there was an exit wound in the back of the president’s head . In which case a conspiracy would have been revealed of such magnitude that it would not have been possible to cover it up .
 I found it useful to prepare a chronological time graph, drawn to scale, of the major events . The graph is a chronological chronicle of major events in the world's history .
 The advantage of plotting events to a linear scale is that it shows large time gaps and bunching of events . Plotting events is a way to show how the events are connected .
 He was pronounced dead at 1:00m. after having received a tracheotomy (a small incision in the neck to insert a breathing device)
 Kennedy’s body left Parkland Hospital in a bronze-colored ceremonial casket . Kennedy's body was placed in a casket at the bottom of the casket in a gold-colored coffin .
 The body was placed on a plastic sheet in the casket and wrapped in sheets . It was placed in a plastic casket in a casket .
 Aubrey Rike was an ambulance attendant at Dallas at the time; and his statement has been confirmed by his assistant, Dennis McGuire . This fact has been affirmed many times on national television and in taped interviews .
 The fact of the body being wrapped in sheets was confirmed by Dr. Dr. John Defterios . Also confirmed that the body was wrapped up in sheets, he said .
 When Kennedy’s body was in Dallas, a wound about three inches in diameter in the lower back of the head was observed; the remainder of his head and face appeared to be intact HH This was attested to by over twenty-five witnesses including all of the doctors, nurses
 The body was taken from Texas to Washington, D.C., over the objections of Texas authorities . Texas authorities say it violated state law by taking it to Washington .
 Jacqueline Kennedy's body was seized after a prolonged argument with Dallas authorities . The plot had gone awry, and/or because of the plot, it was seized .
 The casket was forced from the hands of the Dallas authorities and wheeled to a hearse, then driven to Love Field with Jacqueline Kennedy . Air Force One took the casket to the airport, where it was put aboard Air Force 1 .
 He was already president, by law, and the swearing-in ceremony was not necessary . The swearing in ceremony was unnecessary .
 The presidential plane arrived at Andrews Air Force Base in Washington, D.C., at 6:00 a.m.
 Jacqueline Kennedy and Robert Kennedy departed from Andrews Air Force Base in a gray Navy ambulance and accompanied the bronze casket to Bethesda Naval Hospital . At 6:10 p.m. Kennedy's funeral was attended by his wife and husband .
 At approximately 6:40 to 6:45m., a black hearse (not the gray Navy ambulance) arrived at the rear of Bethesda Naval Hospital at the morgue dock . Strangely, at approximately 6.40 to . 6:50m., at approximately .
 The casket has been called a “shipping casket,” common to types used to ship bodies around the country . It is a common type of casket used to be used for shipping bodies .
 The shipping casket was received by First Class Petty Officer Dennis Davia Lt who was chief of the day of the hospital at that time .
 Paul O’Connor, who was a Navy corpsman on the autopsy team at the time, told me in 1993 during a three-day interview that the casket was brought into the morgue within 30 to 40 seconds . Dennis David confirmed that fact to him .
 The shipping casket was immediately opened and in it was the president’s body in a military-style, zippered body bag . President's body was placed in the bag .
 The body was removed by first opening a zipper the full length on the front of the body bag . Startlingly, as testified by O’Connor and confirmed by x-ray technician Jerrol Custer i (who was present), there was little or no brain inside Kennedy�
 O’Connor said there was a huge, gaping hole, seven inches by four inches, in the back and top of the head . The brain was almost completely gone except for a few fragments, he said .
 It should be noted that no surgery had been performed on Kennedy’s head at Parkland Hospital in Dallas . When the body left Dallas it was in a bronze ceremonial casket, the head was wrapped in a towel .
 When the body left Dallas, approximately two thirds of the brain was still intact, and there was a hole only in the back of the head which was about three inches in diameter . Also, when the body was left, there was only a three-inch hole in the head .
 At 6.55m. the Kennedy party, in the gray Navy ambulance, arrived in front of Bethesda Naval Hospital . At 6:55m., the party arrived in an ambulance at 6:50m. ET .
 Military officers confer at the door of the ambulance for a few minutes . Military officers conferred at the scene of the incident .
 Just before 7:05m., Dennis David (who had just seen Kennedy’s body delivered to the rear of the hospital about twenty minutes before) walked to the front of an office on the second floor . Dennis David was standing in an office at the time of the incident .
 He was looking out the window when he saw the Kennedy motorcade with a Navy ambulance arrive . Jacqueline and Robert Kennedy get out of the house and go through the front door .
 The truthfulness of Dennis David’s statement is greatly enhanced by the fact that he did not have to remember actual times . Dennis David's statement was enhanced by fact he didn’t have to recall actual times, he said .
 David had to recall only the sequence of first seeing the black hearse arrive with the gray shipping casket with Kennedy’s body in it . David recalls walking to the front of the hospital, looking out the window, and seeing the Kennedy motorcade arrive .
 There is no doubt by anyone that the bronze casket was in the Navy ambulance when it arrived at the front of the hospital at 6:55m. There is also no doubt that it was in an ambulance at 6.55m .
 At about 7:05m., when Jacqueline Kennedy was entering the hospital through the front lobby, she was passed in the lobby by Navy x-ray technician Jerrol Custer . Custer was carrying exposed x-rays of JFK’s body that had already been taken .
 This despite the fact that JFK’s body was supposedly outside in a bronze casket in the Navy ambulance . This is despite JFK's body supposedly being kept in a casket . JFK's casket was supposed to be outside in an ambulance .
 Jerrol Custer exposed x-ray films of JFK’s body when he passed Jacqueline Kennedy coming through the lobby at the front of the hospital . Custer had already exposed the x-rays of JFK's body .
 Dennis David had already unloaded the body in a shipping casket and delivered it into the morgue . He also saw Jacqueline Kennedy get out of the Navy ambulance and go through the front door . Dennis David was delivering the body to a morgue when he saw Kennedy's body .
 Kennedy’s body had been taken from Air Force One, when it was under the exclusive control of the Secret Service, and, by extension, under the control of Lyndon Johnson .
 At approximately 7:05m., after the Kennedy party had left the ambulance and entered the front of the hospital, the Navy ambulance drove off with the bronze casket in it .
 There was a "chase" of the ambulance by a casket team in a pick-up truck who had been waiting to carry the bronze casket into the morgue . The ambulance was chased by a team waiting for the casket to be taken to the hospital .
 They followed the Navy ambulance thinking that it was going to drive to the rear of the morgue where they would perform the ceremony of carrying in the casket . They followed it thinking it would drive to rear of morgue to perform ceremony .
 They had two fruitless trips to the rear of the hospital and finally returned to the front . They had been searching for the hospital for two hours .
 At 8:00m. the bronze casket was delivered to the morgue by the casket team . At 8 a.m. local time, the bronze coffin was delivered by the team at 8:30pm .
 The bronze casket was opened in the morgue with official parties present . The head of the autopsy team, Dr. Dr. Michael Lister, was present .
 Kennedy’s aide General McHugh and a casket team member, James Felder. Boswell. Felder . Boswell: Kennedy's aide general McHugh. McHugh: Kennedy was Kennedy's friend and confidante .
 If it is presumed that Kennedy’s body was in the casket, we have a major conflict in the evidence, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "If it is assumed that Kennedy's body was . in the . casket"
 Witness says Kennedy's body was in the bronze casket when it was opened in the morgue . Witness James Felder says Kennedy’s body was inside the casket at the time of his death .
 This implies that it was not the bronze casket or, if the body was in the bronze . It was not Kennedy’s body, it was the body of Kennedy .
 At approximately 8:15m. the ‘first incision’ was made, according to a report prepared by FBI agents James W Sibert and Francis X O’ Neill, who were present at the autopsy . The autopsy was carried out at approximately 8.15m
 Report: “surgery had been performed on the head” when the body arrived at Bethesda . They also noted in their report that ‘surgery’ had been done on the body .
 The body had been in the morgue since 6:45m., almost four hours, with the autopsy team present all that time . The autopsy team was present at the time of the death .
 This would become the official position of the U.S. government from then until this writing . The position would become that of the United States government .
 Not once has the government budged from this position; neither have Dr. Dr. Martin. Martin . Martin says the government has not budged on the issue .
 Humes had not yet written his report (that would be done the next day, after which he burned his original notes) nor had he or Dr. Dr. Humes or others had yet written their report . Humes himself in his report to the Warren Commission .
 Boswell examined the photographs taken during the autopsy . They had only examined the x-rays superficially on the viewing screen in the autopsy room . Boswell said the autopsy had only been performed superficulously .
 Witnesses who observed the brain both at Parkland Hospital and at Bethesda Naval Hospital said a large portion of the brain was gone . A supplemental autopsy report would later state that the brain weighed 1500 grams (an above-normal weight for a human brain)
 Body was prepared for burial by personnel from Gawler’s Funeral Home who had been sent to the hospital .
 Secret Service agent Roy Kellerman took all of the autopsy and x-ray films and delivered them to the White House . The autopsy was the work of a White House agent, Robert Bouck .
 At 3:56m. the body was taken to the White House, accompanied by the Kennedy party and Secret Service agent William Greer . The body was accompanied by a party of Kennedy party members and a Secret Service officer .
 The Secret Service maintained possession of the films in the White House for 17 months before turning them over to the control of Robert Kennedy, with other autopsy materials, on April 26, 1965 .
 Kennedy’s brain in a stainless-steel container, and microscopic slides of tissues . Kennedy's brain was placed in a container in stainless steel container .
 This material would be retained in a footlocker by Evelyn Lincoln, who now had an office in the National Archives . This material was kept in the footlockers of Lincoln's office .
 Lincoln turned over the footlocker to Robert Kennedy’s personal secretary . Lincoln then turned it over to the personal secretary of Kennedy's widow . Lincoln was assassinated in 1968 .
 It was in the control of Robert Kennedy until October 31, 1966, when it was opened at the National Archives . It was discovered that the brain and the tissue slides were missing .
 It seems safe to assume that the container for the brain was never opened by the Kennedys . The container for brain was probably never opened .
 The autopsy pathologists did not see the autopsy photographs until three years after the autopsy . Autopsy pathologists had to wait three years to see autopsy photographs .
 It will now be helpful to review excerpts from a three-day interview I conducted with Paul O’ Connor that cuts across all of the foregoing issues .
 O’Connor's story was first revealed to the public in David Lifton’s Best Evidence . O‘Connor’�s story was revealed in the book Best Evidence, which was first published by Lifton .
 Lifton provided me with a transcript of his taped interview with O’Connor to compare with my interview . Lifton also provided a transcript for his own version of the interview .
 O’Connor’s first interview was conducted by the HSCA in 1978, but incredibly was buried in the National Archives until 1994 . O'Connor's first interview with the National Archive was conducted in 1978 .
 Neither O’Connor nor any of the enlisted personnel who were involved in the autopsy were called to testify before the Warren Commission, or even asked for written statements . O'Connor and enlisted personnel were not asked to testify .
 They were sworn to secrecy under threat of imprisonment in federal penitentiary . They were all sworn to anonymity under the threat of being imprisoned .
 Not until 1978, when released by Act of Congress, did they start talking . The film was released in 1978 .
 He was one of the five full-time members of the autopsy team at Bethesda Hospital . He was part of the team at the time of the death .
 Army Colonel Pierre A Finck was brought into the team as a consultant at the request of Dr. J Thornton Boswell, who was in co-charge of the team . Dr. Pierre Finck is a former Army Colonel who was a consultant .
 Paul O’ Connor and Navy corpsman James Curtis Jenkins assisted military doctors . Humes, Humes and Jenkins worked with Paul O' Connor in the U.S. hospital .
 O’Connor attended the Kennedy assassination and O'Connor's incredible experience . During the next three days we talked about the assassination and his incredible experience.
 O’Connor’s previous testimony with the HSCA and in other interviews is consistent in detail and content with his previous testimony . All that is related to the case is consistent with O'Connor's previous testimony, and in his other interviews, he says .
 I am using my interview because it is far more extensive than the others . I'm using this interview because of the extensive number of interviews it has been conducted .
 At the time of the autopsy O’Connor had been in the Navy four years and was twenty-two years old . He was 22 when he was killed .
 Prior to serving at Bethesda Naval Hospital he had been at Guantanamo Naval Hospital during the Bay of Pigs invasion . He had medically treated the Cuban freedom fighters when they climbed over the fence in panic as the invasion disintegrated .
 O’ Connor had been part of a Marine task force assigned to invade Cuba during the Cuban missile crisis . Also, he was part of the task force that invaded Cuba during that crisis .
 His contingent was just off the coast of Cuba ready to land when the crisis was resolved and the invasion canceled . The invasion of Cuba was canceled .
 O’Connor was a very seasoned and experienced young man in November 1963 . O'Connor was an experienced and seasoned young man . He was a seasoned and inexperienced young man.
 O’Connor and Curtis Jenkins had assisted in over sixty autopsies . Jenkins had gone through the training program for pathology technicians at Bethesda Naval Hospital . O'Connor and Jenkins went through the program to become pathology technicians .
 From the age of 14 until he joined the Navy, he had been a general helper in a funeral home . O’Connor had many years’ experience working with dead bodies .
 The point is that it is very unlikely that Paul was thrown into a state of shock and blind confusion when the president’s body arrived at the morgue . The president's body was found in the president's office on Friday .
 In his interview with Paul, he repeatedly exhibited that he had a very clear head and was not subject to exaggeration or flights of fantasy . In the interview, Paul said he had been very clear of exaggeration and flights of imagination .
 Paul told me that shortly after President Kennedy’s autopsy he had gotten married . Paul said he was married shortly after the president's autopsy .
 His wife, who was pregnant when he left, gave birth to their baby while he was still serving duty in Vietnam . The baby was born while he served duty in the country .
 He was hit by a mortar shell and flipped end over end into a ravine . He was there only a few months before he was killed in a mortar attack .
 He suffered a severe back injury and was sent home to the U.S. where he was discharged from the service with a permanent disability . He suffered from a back injury . He was discharged after being sent home from the United States .
 He then worked as a deputy sheriff for the next seven years in general crime work, which included crime scene investigations . He then returned to his home in Florida and worked for seven years .
 Paul’s back injury became worse and worse until it forced him to retire in the late 1970s . Paul's back injury was so bad that he had to retire from playing in the sport .
 CNN's John Sutter says he flew from Miami to Washington, D.C., against his wife's wishes, to fly to Washington . Sutter: "I'm not going to die, but I'm going to live in the U.S. House of Representatives," he says
 "He told me that he had promised he was going to grant me this interview and he didn’t want to back out on his promise. He said that he didn't want to . back out of his promise," she said . "He said he had told me he had
 Paul was wearing an electric stimulator during the next three days to diminish his back pain . Paul wore the stimulator to diminish back pain for three days .
 He appeared tired and gaunt, but his mind was sharp, which will be evident as I relate his interview . He appeared very tired, gaunt but he appeared to be sharp, despite being tired .
 After meeting at the airport, we had lunch at the hotel where we talked for a couple of hours . We had lunch in the hotel, where we discussed for a few hours .
 Paul Twyman was in the morgue awaiting the arrival of the president when helicopters were heard outside . He says he and others heard helicopters outside of the hospital waiting for the president to arrive .
 We were all in the morgue, preparing for the body to come in, when we did hear helicopters flying overhead. Well, we were all . Well, they were all preparing to the body of the body, when .
 One landed at the north side of the hospital and one landed in the rear someplace, very possibly the officer’s club parking lot .
 Dennis David and his crew intercepted a black hearse pulling up to the loading dock of the hospital; and they took out what was a pinkish-gray shipping casket . The crew intercepted the hearse and took it out of the dock .
 A shipping casket is used if the person dies in one part of the country and they put him in this casket and ship him to another part of country where he is subsequently put into a nicer casket . The person is then moved to a nicer place in the country . A
 "It was more like a cheap commercial casket, nondescript and not ornate or anything like that. It was more than a cheap casket," she said .
 Kennedy's body was found in the shipping casket, when it was taken off the hearse, had Kennedy’s body in it . CNN.com: "So explain to me why you believe that the shipping . casket had Kennedy in it?"
 It was a matter of maybe 30 or 40 seconds between getting the casket out of the hearse and getting the body into the morgue in casket . Well, it was just a matter .
 The casket was brought in with Dennis David and Dennis David . Then the group of men that brought it in left immediately . Then we opened the casket .
 O’man: Twyman: O'Connor: O‘Connor: A sheet wrapped around his head. A sheet . A sheet. wrapped around . his head . O'Man: O'.Connor: Twynyn: O.'Connor: ‘O�
 "Then you saw it in the body bag but with the sheet around the head," she said . "And then you saw ... it in a body bag, but with a sheet on the head. And then ... it was in the bag, she said. "It was a body
 Aubrey Rike had said that the head was wrapped ina towel, and you saw it wrapped in a sheet . And Aubrey . Rike said that Aubrey. Rike's head had been wrapped in . a towel, but it was wrapped . in a towel .
 The sheet was unwrapped by myself; and I think Boswell or Humes helped me unwrap it . The sheet is unwraped by myself, and I don't remember who helped unwraping it .
 They took the sheet and threw it over in the corner against the wall, which we had to clean up later on, and I was standing right at the head where I observed a huge gaping hole in the side of the president’s head . The sheet was thrown over against the
 It went from above the hairline on the right side through the parietal and the occipital area and down and around to the right temporal area of the skull . The skull was so large that it went up and down to the left side .
 "I had never seen anything like it in my life. And what astounded me is when I looked at it," she said . "What astounded us is when we looked at [the]," she said. "I've never seen nothing like it"
 The skull that was supposed to be attached to the skull was all fractured to pieces too . We noticed when we lifted him onto the table that the rest of the skull had been fractured too, too .
 "Like somebody takes a hard-boiled egg and drops it on the floor; thousand of fractures to it," he says . "It's like somebody takes somebody's egg and breaks it up in a million ways," he adds . "There are thousands of fractures in the egg,"
 You had to part the scalp back, and pull the hair out of the way, and you could look into the cranium . You needed to part your scalp back and pull it out the way .
 There was a lot of talk and ambient noise, so it was hard for me to pick up anyone talking . There was also lots of ambient noise in the crowd, but it was difficult to hear .
 O‘Connor: O’Connor: Twyman: O'Connor: And that was this jagged wound. O'Conner: The war is over and over, but it’s over .
 Looking at Exhibit 13-7, up at the top in the left-hand corner, there is a flap of scalp folded back . The scalp is folded back, and the scalp is shown to have been removed .
 There was probably a handful of macerated brain tissue which, if it was put together, would constitute maybe a quarter of the brain .
 These pictures were taken before the actual autopsy started . The autopsy was not complete until after the autopsy was complete .
 Jacqueline and Robert Kennedy arrived with the ambulance at the Bethesda front entrance at 6:55m. We’ ve already discussed at lunch how Jacqueline arrived at lunch .
 At 7:05m, Jerrol Custer is carrying x-rays, with an FBI agent or Secret Service agent escorting him . Custer was carrying the x-ray at the time .
 Jerrol Custer came back to the morgue after returning from a trip to see his dead body . Custer was the last man to see the body of Custer, who was killed in 1877 . He was the only man to come back to see Custer .
 Jackie Kennedy just walked in the front of the hospital, Jackie Kennedy's father says . Jackie Kennedy walked into the morgue and said guess who I saw, and I said who's that .
 The ambulance pulls up front with the ambulance with her in it with the bronze casket . Now I didn’t think that much about it until years later when we started to figure how this time fit in with the fact that we have the body back here already in the morgue
 As a matter of fact, he was on his way up with an arm-full of exposed x-rays to get them developed .
 In other words, it was emphatic, that's what brought it to your attention forcefully that this had happened. In other . words, that’s what prompted it to be emphatic. That's what it was . that this . had happened, that brought it . forcefully
 Dennis David said he saw the casket arrive in the black hearse 20 minutes after seeing the motorcade arrive . The other thing is that Dennis David has said that he saw not only her come in, but also her come into the hospital .
 Twyman: O’Connor: O'Connor: Right. Right. O'Conner: Right . O'conner: The former president of the United States.
 He saw Robert and Jacqueline Kennedy get out of the ambulance and come in and he didn’t know the times but he knew that one was well after the other. And he saw Robert . He said, “He didn” know that one of the times was well
 He saw her come in well after he had seen the hearse and casket arrive in the back of the back, and then if I tie that into what you tell me—that it was just 30 or 40 seconds after he saw that casket taken out of the black hearse
 "I questioned what sort of logic or proof there was that Kennedy’s body was actually in that shipping casket that Dennis David observed when it was unloaded and they took it into the morgue," David said .
 When you leave the loading dock and go into the hospital, your first left turn is the morgue . The morgue is the first place you go to see if you're going to die .
 It would only take you about a few seconds to off-load that casket and rush it in. It would take you a few minutes to rush it into a casket .
 I am just trying to think of some reason, no matter how remote, that an empty casket came in . I'm not sure how remote it came in, but I'm trying to find a reason .
 The body arrived in a commercial shipping casket as opposed to the bronze casket in which it left Dallas . The body was transported to the funeral home in Dallas .
 The body arrived in a zippered body bag as opposed to being wrapped in a sheet when it left Dallas . The body was wrapped up in a body bag when it arrived at the scene .
 The body arrived at the rear of the Bethesda hospital in a hearse before the Navy ambulance arrived at front of the hospital with the bronze casket . The casket was placed in the back of the hearse in a bronze coffin at the hospital .
 Corroboration of Statements of O’Connor, David, and Custer . Other Navy enlisted man on the autopsy team was James Curtis Jenkins .
 David Lifton interviewed Jenkins in September 1979, after he had first interviewed Paul O'Connor . Lifton first interviewed Jenkins after first interviewing Paul O’Connor .
 Lifton had hoped to confirm the “body bag” story but Jenkins couldn’t remember how the body was wrapped . Lifton: "Body bag’s story is not true" Lifton hopes to confirm it, but Jenkins can't remember how it was wrapped
 Jenkins’ recollections did not exactly dovetail with O’Connor’s, but there were no significant discrepancies . Jenkins described the wound as a hole that extended toward the rear and, in his opinion, had the appearance of an exit wound that struck from the right front
 Jenkins asked if that could have been the one-fourth of the remaining brain that O’Connor acknowledged . Jenkins: O'Connor acknowledged that he remembered putting a brain in formaldehyde .
 O’Connor agreed that it might have been, but said that he himself did not remember removing any brain from the cranium . O'Connor said that it may have been .
 The fact that different eyewitnesses remember different things or slightly different things is, of course, widely recognized in criminal investigations . Different eyewitnesses may have different recollections of events in the same circumstances .
 Jenkins did not remember a body bag when he was killed, the author says . He concluded it should not be surprising Jenkins didn't remember a bag .
 O’Connor was up close to the body when the body bag was unzipped . Jerrol Custer had confirmed that there was a body bag . O'Connor was the first person to see the body of the victim .
 Captain John Stover, commanding officer of the Navy Medical School, had remembered there was a body bag . Also, years later, Captain Stover had remembered the body bag.
 There is more corroboration of the decoy ambulance and therefore the credibility of O'Connor's, David's, and Custer’s accounts . O’Connor, David, and . Custer's accounts are corroborated .
 Chief petty officer was stationed at Bethesda on the night of the autopsy . Donald Rebentisch of Coopersville, Michigan, was a chief petty officer at the scene .
 Lifton’s interview was conducted before the local paper, the Grand Rapids Press, was about to publish a story that Rebentisch had told them . Lifton was interviewed before the paper published a story .
 Dennis David helped unload the first casket, an ordinary shipping casket . He provided corroboration for Dennis David’s account by recalling that it had arrived at the back before the gray Navy ambulance .
 Rebentisch said that after unloading the first casket, he went upstairs to the lobby area of Bethesda where he saw Mrs. Mrs. Reitzitz . Rebentish said he saw her in the lobby of the hospital .
 New evidence corroborates Paul O’Connor’s statements and the statements of Dennis David and Jerrol Custer . New evidence also corroborates Dennis David's statements . O'Connor and Custer's statements are corroborated by other witnesses .
 This evidence is a document sifted out of the millions of pages in the National Archives by researcher Anna Marie Kuhns-Walko . This evidence was sifted from millions of thousands of pages .
 Richard A Lipsey dated January 18, 1978 that had been buried in secrecy for 16 years . Lipsey was found to have been murdered in 1978 in a car crash in New Jersey .
 The interview was conducted by HSCA staff members Donald Andrew Purdy, Jr., and T Mark Flanagan, Jr. The interview had been conducted by staff members .
 The Select Committee on Assassinations interviewed Richard Lipsey because of his presence at the autopsy of John Kennedy . Lipsey was interviewed by the Select Committee because he was present at John Kennedy's autopsy . The committee interviewed him because he attended the autopsy .
 Lipsey began the interview by mentioning that he signed a document in his office about one week after the assassination which forbade him from revealing any information about the autopsy . Lipsey said he signed the document a week after his assassination .
 Committee said it wished he would respond on a voluntary basis and that it was the Committee’s opinion that no harm would occur .
 He came to Washington, D.C., when he was selected as an aide to General Wehle . He was selected to be a general aide to the German general .
 Wehle’s office will handle ceremonial military functions in Washington . He said that Wehhle's office would handle all ceremonial military function in Washington.
 Lipsey said he and Wehle met the body at Andrews Air Force Base and placed it in a hearse to be transported to Bethesda Naval Hospital . Lipsey: The body was transported to a hospital in Bethesda, Maryland, where it was taken to be treated .
 Lipsey mentioned that he and Wehle then flew by helicopter to Bethesda and took JFK into the back of Bethesda . Lipsey said that they then flew to Bethesda to take JFK to the airport .
 It is not completely clear whether the body was transported to Bethesda Hospital in a helicopter or a hearse . The body is believed to have been transported to the hospital by a helicopter .
 The two interviews corroborate each other in that Lipsey mentions a decoy hearse at the front of the hospital . Lipsey says he was in the hospital at the time of the shooting .
 The "decoy" appears to be the Navy ambulance carrying the Kennedy party and the bronze casket, without Kennedy’s body in it . The “decoy” seems to be a Navy ambulance with the party, the casket .
 In 1978 the HSCA, appointed by the U.S. government to investigate the crime, had not revealed this obviously important evidence . And now, in 1994, we find that in 1978, it had not been revealed this obvious evidence .
 It seems that the foregoing accounts from nine credible, corroborating witnesses would convince a jury of proof of a conspiracy to steal Kennedy's body for sinister purposes .
 Aubrey Rike & Dennis McGuire: -Saw body placed in bronze ceremonial casket in Dallas . -Accompanied bronze casket to Air Force One and saw it put aboard . Aubrey saw body wrapped in sheets and placed on a plastic sheet in the bronze c
 Saw body wrapped in sheets and placed on plastic sheet in bronze casket . Saw body wrap up in sheets before placing plastic sheet on casket in bronze coffin .
 Kennedy waiting for the elevator in the lobby of Bethesda hospital after he saw unloading of the shipping casket in the rear of the hospital . Kennedy's funeral was held at the hospital in Bethesda, Maryland .
 "We have here multiple witnesses, all credible, all telling stories that all fit into a cohesive, air-tight , . case," she said . "I have no idea what happened to me. We have multiple witnesses"
 The body was stolen to conceal the fact of a conspiracy that would have been revealed by the nature of the president’s wounds, and/or the presence of bullet fragments in the president's body or brain that would not have matched the rifle that Oswald used . Oswald's rifle would
 The president's body was removed from the bronze casket before Air Force One left Dallas . We must remember that the president’s body was taken from the casket . The president was buried in Dallas, Texas .
 It is difficult for me to imagine that such a plan was cooked up within two hours after the president was murdered. So it seems that it must have been planned in advance of the assassination. /t is .
 Paul O’Connor testified of the status of the president’s body when it arrived at Bethesda Naval Hospital . The president's body was transferred to a Naval hospital in Bethesda, Maryland .
 O’Connor testified about the condition of the brain when he first saw Kennedy’s body . I would look for scientific or forensic evidence to corroborate his testimony, he says .
 A key part of his testimony was that almost all of the brain was missing . The man's testimony said he had almost all the brain missing . He testified that he suffered from a brain injury .
 O’Connor stated that except for a small portion of lacerated tissue, the brain was completely gone . The brain is completely gone, except for small portions of tissue, O'Connor said .
 O’Connor conceded that he did not make a thorough inspection of the inside of the cranium . He conceded that perhaps as much as one-fourth of the total brain was still remaining .
 O’Connor’s statements have been corroborated, at least in part, by Jerrol Custer, who stated that he could have put both of his fists down into the open wound in Kennedy's head . Custer's statements were corroborated by O'Connor's
 Photographs of the brain in the National Archives are in sharp disagreement with the testimonies of at least four doctors at Parkland Hospital . They described the condition of the massive wound at the rear of the president’s head as having large quantities of cerebellar tissue and other brain matter
 Autopsy photos show the condition of the brain as shown in the autopsy photos . Let us examine the condition in the brain of the deceased .
 Exhibit 13-8 is an exact drawing of a top view of the brain from one of the autopsy photos . Exhibit shows the brain's top view from an autopsy photo taken from the brain .
 David Mantik has examined all seven of the photographs of the brain in the National Archives . Mantik assured me that this drawing is an accurate representation of a top view of brain as it appears .
 The cerebellum has a surface of narrow, parallel grooves in contrast to the remainder of the surface of the brain which is relatively smooth . Cerebellum is the brain's surface, with narrow grooves .
 Doctors observed the head wound at Parkland Hospital in Dallas . The significance of this visually obvious difference that distinguishes the cerebellum is realized when we examine the testimonies of doctors .
 Parts of cerebellar tissue had been blown out of the back of the head and were extruding from the open wound . Their statements all agree in . testifying to the fact that parts of . cerebella tissue had . been blown . out .
 Four of these testimonies were excerpted from the Warren Commission Report . The testimonies were part of the Warren Report .
 There was a great laceration on the right side of the head , causing a great defect in the skull plate so that there was herniation of great areas of the brain, even to the extent that cerebellum had protruded from the wound . Marion T Jenkins was a
 The wound that I saw was a large gaping wound, located in the right occipitoparietal area . Charles J Carrico was a member of the Royal Family .
 "I would estimate to be about 5 to 7 cm in size, more or less circular, with avulsions of the calvarium and scalp tissue," he says .
 "I believe there was shredded macerated cerebral and cerebellar tissues both in the wounds and on the fragments of the skull attached to the dura."
 The right posterior portion of the skull had been extremely blasted . Robert N McClelland was at the head of the table during the tracheotomy .
 It had been shattered, apparently, by the force of the shot so that the parietal bone was protruded up through the scalp and seemed to be fractured almost along its right posterior half, as well as some of the occipital bone being fractured in its lateral half . This sprung
 There was a large amount of bleeding which was occurring mainly from the large venous channels in the skull which had been blasted open . The bleeding was caused by the damage to the large veins in the skulls .
 I then examined the wound in the back of the president’s head. William Kemp clark #® . William Kemp . Kemp . clark .
 This was a large, gaping wound in the right posterior part, with cerebral and cerebellar tissue being damaged and exposed . This was the result of the damage to the cerebella tissue .
 Photographs of the brain in the National Archives show no damage to the cerebellum .
 The above testimonies, sworn under oath by experienced medical doctors who observed the head wound, clearly and unambiguously describe extruded and damaged cerebellar tissue . The injuries were caused by a head wound .
 Photographs of the brain in the National Archives are not of Kennedy’s brain . If their testimonies are correct, and there is no reason to believe they are not, then the photographs of the . brain are not .
 The most obvious reason is that Kennedy’s real brain had been re-moved before the body arrived at Bethesda Naval Hospital . The most important reason is the fact that the real brain was moved .
 The president's brain may have been so mutilated by a bullet or bullet fragments exiting from the rear of the skull, or by hurried dissections on the part of conspirators—to remove bullets and bullet fragments from the brain, that would have revealed the true nature of the president�
 Dallas Parkland Hospital is a Dallas-area hospital with a history of emergency room visits . The emergency room was full of doctors, including Dr. Dr. Paul Anderson, who treated patients .
 Crenshaw wrote: "From the damage I saw, there was no doubt in my mind that the bullet had entered his head through the front, and as it surgically passed through his cranium, the missile obliterated part of the temporal and all the parietal and occip
 The wound Expert corroborated that the photograph of the brain in the National Archives labeled as Kennedy’s brain is, in fact, of someone else . The wound expert said the photograph was of Kennedy's brain was provided by Dr. Dr. John MacArthur .
 Robert Livingston in a presentation that he gave at the ASK Conference in Dallas, Texas in November 1993 . Livingston was a member of the American Society for Science and Technology Conference .
 It simply cannot be true that the cerebellum could have been seen extruding from the occipitalparietal wound . The same brain can be seen in superior and lateral photographs, and depicted in a drawing .
 The photographs and the drawing of the brain in the National Archives are those of some brain other than that of John Fitzgerald Kennedy 3) There is much more to be said about the missing brain. A conclusion is obligatorily forced, therefore .
 The JFK assassination is perhaps the most ghoulish example of destruction of evidence by government in the JFK assassination . The government destroyed evidence of the assassination .
 One very suspicious item is a notation in a supplementary autopsy report that the brain weight was 1500 grams . The brain weight is 1500 grams, according to the autopsy report . It is not known why the report was published .
 1500 grams is an above-average normal weight for a human brain . The brain weighs 1500 grams, an average of around 1500 grams .
 One-third of the brain had been blown away in Dallas, as evidenced by statements of doctors at Parkland Hospital and also as dramatically indicated in Zapruder film . All three of these doctors signed their name to a report stating that the brain weighed 1500 grams .
 David Mantik has pointed out that this could not have been a simple mistake in the identity of a body part report . Mantik: 'This could not be a simple error. It was a mistake'
 At the time the report was prepared, the only organ being examined was a brain . The report was published at the time .
 This report was presumably prepared two weeks after the autopsy had been completed . The autopsy was presumably completed two weeks before the autopsy was completed .
 On April 26, 1965, the Secret Service transferred the autopsy materials to President Kennedy’s secretary, Evelyn Lincoln, then at the National Archives . The autopsy materials were then transferred to the White House in a stainless steel .
 She obtained a footlocker within one day to which she transferred the materials . She kept the footlockers in a security room in her office for about one month .
 The footlocker, with keys, was then turned over to Robert Kennedy’s personal secretary, Angela Novello, Lincoln says . Lincoln: The key to the key was then handed over to Novell, Kennedy's personal secretary .
 Evelyn Lincoln presumed that it was moved to another part of the archives . She said that she had no more direct contact with the material .
 HSCA document indicated that the footlocker was removed from the National Archives by Robert Kennedy’s representatives and later returned . Robert Kennedy's representatives removed it from National Archives and returned it .
 On October 31, 1966, the footlocker was officially turned over to the National Archives . It was discovered that the brain and tissue slides were missing . The brain was found to be missing .
 The HSCA concluded that they probably were probably disposed of or otherwise made inaccessible by Robert Kennedy .
 This was based in part on the speculation of Kennedy’s attorney, Burke Marshall . This is based on speculation that Kennedy was involved in the shooting . Kennedy's attorney Burke Marshall said Kennedy was not involved in any of the shootings .
 Marshall opined that Robert Kennedy wanted to avoid future public display of the brain . Marshall: Robert Kennedy feared future public displays of brain would be public . Marshall said Robert Kennedy was trying to avoid public displays .
 Others speculate it was to avoid future public disclosure that President Kennedy had Addison’s disease and had kept it from the public .
 If there was a brain in the container, it not that of President Kennedy, as indicated by the evidence in this book, says author . Ironically, if there is a brain inside the container is not the brain of Kennedy .
 If Robert Kennedy did in fact dispose of the brain and tissue slides, he was destroying prime evidence of a conspiracy . If he did, he would have destroyed prime evidence .
 The president’s body was removed from the casket in which it had been transported and placed on the autopsy table, at which time the complete body was wrapped in a sheet and the head area contained an additional wrapping which was saturated with blood . The head area of the president�
 Following the removal of the wrapping, it was ascertained that the president’s clothing had been removed . It was also apparent that a tracheotomy had been performed, as well as surgery of the head area, namely the top of the skull .
 All personnel with the exception of medical officers needed in the taking of photographs and x-rays were requested to leave the autopsy room and remain in an adjacent room . All personnel requested to remain in the room during autopsy .
 Surgery had not been performed on the top of the head at Parkland Hospital . Only a small incision had been made in the throat wound for the purpose of inserting a tube .
 Sibert and O’Neill later stated they were quoting statements of the autopsy pathologist in their report . Sibert later stated that they were quotes from the pathologist .
 Corroboration of accuracy of the accuracy of a statement about surgery in the head was, in part, provided by Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter said the surgery was a success .
 Perry asked if any surgery had been performed at Parkland Hospital in Dallas . Perry was in Dallas the next day at Dallas and asked him if any of the surgery was performed .
 Simple logic tells us that if surgery had been performed on the top of the head when the body arrived at Bethesda, it must have been performed sometime between the time the body left Parkland and when it was taken into the Bethesda Naval Hospital .
 This of course leads to the conclusion that surgery was performed when the body was in the possession of the conspirators, after they had removed it from the casket placed aboard Air Force One .
 This all dovetails with the statements of Paul O’Connor and Jerrol Custer that the brain was almost completely missing when the body arrived at Bethesda . The photographs of the brain in the National Archives are not of Kennedy’s brain, but rather a substitute brain .
 We now arrive at the question of the size of the head wound observed at Bethesda Hospital compared to that observed at Parkland Hospital . The size of a head wound was not the same as that of a wound seen in the head injury at the other hospital .
 Doctors at Parkland Hospital and Bethesda Hospital gave statements of the doctors at Bethesda Hospital . The statements of Parkland and Bethesda doctors are compared to the statements of doctors at the other hospitals . Parkland doctors say the wound was caused by a head wound .
 This was corroborated by David Lifton in a November 1966 phone call to Dr. Lifton . Lifton was interviewed by Lifton on November 15, 1966, in a phone call from Dr. Richard Nixon .
 Robert McClelland, in his testimony to the Warren Commission, described a wound in the back of the head corresponding roughly to the numerical descriptions by Drs. Robert and Dr. Robert . Dr. Richard McCleilland .
 Three doctors at Parkland Hospital, who were attending to Kennedy, agreed that there was a wound of approximately 2 2 to 3 inches in size, located in the back of the head . The wound was located in a wound that was approximately 2.2 to 3 inch in size .
 Humes wrote, “There is a large irregular defect of the scalp and skull on the right involving chiefly the parietal bone but extending somewhat into the temporal and occipital regions. Humes .
 Dr. Humes’ dimension was partially corroborated in a sketch prepared by Dr. Dr. John Humes . The sketch was taken from a sketch made by Humes' friend, Dr. Robert Humes.
 Autopsy pathologist who was co-responsible for the autopsy is named as Dr. Boswell . Boswell was a co-worker at the scene of the shooting .
 He showed a portion of the skull labeled “missing” as 10 by 17 cm in size . The skull was labeled ‘missing’ by a section of the missing skull .
 Boswell is shown in a photograph of the large defect in the skull shown in Exhibit 13-7 . Boswell in the photograph is shown with a large defect that is thought to be caused by the skull .
 I made a dimensional outline of this wound by tracing over the photograph . I made the outline of the photograph by tracing it over the photo .
 There has been a controversy about the orientation of the large defect photograph in Exhibit 13-7 . The large defect photo was taken at the time of the photograph .
 A few have claimed it was solely at the top of the head , and turned around 180° from that described in the caption . Others have claimed the photo was at the bottom of the photo .
 John Stringer, Jr. took the photograph of Paul O’Connor . It is consistent with the orientation of the head when the photograph was taken by Stringer Jr. It is also consistent with his description of Paul .
 Three of the doctors at Parkland reported seeing a wound in the back of the head with a dimension of 2% to 3 inches . Drs. Three of those who saw the wound reported seeing it in the head .
 Humes’ description is grossly larger than the description of the wound by the doctors at Parkland Hospital . Humes' description is larger than that of the doctors who described the wound to Humes .
 If we take the largest dimension mentioned at Parkland which corresponds to an area of 7 square inches, we have a discrepancy of nearly three to one in the size of the wound observed at Bethesda . The smallest dimension at Bethesda corresponding to 19. square inches .
 This controversy exists even among those who believe that there was a conspiracy involving the federal government, including forgery of the motion picture films . This controversy still exists among some who believe there was forgery .
 The wound was enlarged by the conspirators sometime after they removed the body from the bronze casket in Air Force One, Lifton says . Lifton: "I agree with the view of David Lifton—that the wound was in fact greatly enlarged"
 Sibert and O’Neill’s report of surgery on the head . Paul O'Connor and Jerrol Custer’ statements of the essentially empty cranium when the body arrived at Bethesda . The evidence that the photographs of the brain are not of Kennedy's brain are
 The head wound had been enlarged in order for the conspirators to get at the brain before the autopsy . All of this is entirely consonant with the head wound having enlarged . The wound is said to have been enlarged .
 The flap of scalp obscured the wound at Parkland because of the wound . Those who wish to believe that the head wound was the same at Bethesda as it was at Bethesda are free to do so .
 It seems self-evident that the conspirators would not have gone to the extreme risk of stealing the president’s body, taking it to a secret location, and then smuggling it into the rear of Bethesda Naval Hospital . The conspirators must have had some drastic purpose in mind
 The Navy enlisted men have been willing to come forth, be questioned, appear on television, and be subjected to cross-examination by the public . The commissioned officers have not talked with anyone except under the most benign, controlled conditions from friendly government investigators, or from the Journal of the American
 Commander James Humes was assigned to supervise the autopsy of the assassinated president . The Moral Dilemma of Commander Humes is discussed in this week's CNN special . The moral dilemmas are discussed by Humes in a book called "Moral Dilema"
 Commander Humes was chief of pathology at Bethesda Naval Hospital . At that time he was chief pathology at the hospital . Humes is credited with saving the lives of many .
 He had performed relatively few autopsies, and none involving gunshot wounds . None involving gunshot wound wounds were fatal, he said .
 He presided over an autopsy that is now commonly recognized as being either fraudulent or the most bungled in all of history . The autopsy is now known as one of the most botched in history . It is now widely recognized as the most fraudulent or bungled autopsy .
 I have reached the opinion that they were the victims of intimidation and duplicity on the part of the executive branch of the federal government, he says . He says it was in the guise of a cover-up for national security purposes .
 There is evidence to support the contention that the Navy pathologists participated, perhaps unwittingly, in a cover-up and that it was intimidation from above that compelled them to do so . The Navy pathologist is believed to have been intimidated by the Navy .
 Lyndon Johnson’s incredible hands-on orchestration of a cover-up . Much more will be written in a later chapter concerning Lyndon Johnson .
 Pierre Finck is one of the three pathologists who conducted the autopsy of President Kennedy . Finck was the only pathologist who performed the autopsy . He performed the president's autopsy in 1963 .
 Notes were recently obtained by Anna Marie from the National Archives . Anna Marie obtained the notes from the national archives .
 Prosectors involved in Kennedy’s autopsy are still required not to release information to the press .
 Brig Gen. Blumberg, AFIP Director, calls me within two hours, notifying me of the same White House orders . Brig Gen Blumburg calls me by two hours after the White House .
 The wound of entry in the front of the neck required that the president had to have been assaulted frontally, this seemed to be a matter of utmost importance for the autopsy . The president had a wound that required that he had to be assaulted, the autopsy found .
 I telephoned from my home in Bethesda to the Bethesda Naval Hospital where the autopsy was to be performed . I therefore teleped from my . home in Maryland to the  hospital where the . autopsy was being performed .
 This was prior to arrival of the president’s casket from Dallas to Andrews Air Force Base .
 I was put though to the Officer of the Day who quickly provided me telephone access to Commander James Humes who was to head the autopsy team . Commander Humes was to be head of the team when the crash occurred .
 Humes said he had not heard much reporting from Dallas and Parkland Hospital because he had been occupied preparing to conduct the autopsy . Humes: "I don't know what's going on in Dallas, Texas, because I'm doing my job here"
 I told him about reports describing the small wound in the president’s neck, he said . The president's neck wound is described as a small wound .
 "I stressed that, in my experience, that would be evidence for a wound of entry. I stressed that ... that would not be evidence of entry," said the BBC presenter . "That would be a good thing for a person to come in, and that's not a bad thing
 "I emphasized the importance of carefully tracing the path of this projectile and of establishing the location of the bullet or any fragments," the doctor says .
 If the wound were confirmed as a wound of entrance, that would prove beyond peradventure of doubt that a bullet had been fired from in front of the president —hence that if there were shots from behind, there had to have been more than one gunman . I said, carefully
 1 wished him good luck, and the conversation ended . "The FBI wont let me. The FBI won't let me," he said .
 Livingston, unambiguously, before the autopsy started, said that the front neck wound was probably an entry wound . Livingston: "I think it was probably a neck wound. I think it's probably a wound that was probably caused by entry wound"
 Humes wrote that he learned about the neck wound the next day when he telephoned Dr. Dr. Humes . Humes said he learned of the wound the day after he learned he had been injured .
 Dr. Perry had described the wound as a “puncture wound” in the front of the neck, “approximately at the midline” Not only that, the wound was described as a puncture wound, but also a ‘puncture’ in the
 Humes did not probe or dissect the neck wound to determine its nature or direction . He was forewarned by an imminent medical scientist in a high position in the federal government at that time . Humes didn't dissect the wound, despite having been foretold by a high-ranking
 Although one may write this off as a slip of the mind under the extraordinary pressure of the moment, it is difficult to believe that Dr. George W. Bush was not responsible for his actions .
 Dr. Livingston, a fellow medical doctor in the U.S. government, had told him, in no uncertain terms, in a telephone call . Livingston said he had been told by a fellow doctor that the situation was serious .
 We can now add to the above the appalling incomplepleteness of the autopsy when it was declared to be complete in the early hours of the morning of November 23, 1963 .
 Had not determined path of the bullet that entered Kennedy’s back ( a cursory probe indicated only a finger-length depth of penetration) Had not located an exit wound from Kennedy's head; Had been denied access to Kennedy's clothing showing the bullet holes . Had not found exit
 A huge hole was found in the right side, back, and top of Kennedy’s head which they were unable to make sense of . What they had observed was a huge, gaping hole in his right side and back .
 Only the next day, after the fact, would Humes cobble together a report that would arbitrarily connect the back wound that was six inches below the collar line to the throat wound . The report would designate a throat wound as an exit wound when in fact it had been described as
 Humes burned his original notes recorded at the autopsy in the fireplace in his fireplace . The original notes were burned in a fireplace .
 Humes must have burned his notes to eliminate discrepancies with his final re-port . Discrepancies that would have, must have, been revealed had his original notes been retained .
 It is inescapable that if the clinical observations at Parkland and the autopsy evidence at Bethesda had been interpreted and reported accurately to the Warren Commission, it would have shattered the loneassassin hypothesis .
 A book could be written on the subject of Dr. Dr. John Sutter's case, Dr. Sutter says .
 There 1s little question that their actions and inactions speak of a cover-up, a concealment of facts, and a distortion of history . But suffice it to say, in my opinion there 1s . little question . There is little doubt that there is little question about a
 The autopsy report was tailored to support the lone-gunman scenario that was being railroaded through the government . I do believe they were somehow misled and intimidated from the White House, under the guise of national security .
 This position of the federal government on the autopsy, including the FBI and the CIA, has never been modified after thirty-three years of controversy, and after mountains of evidence to the contrary, the government has never changed its position .
 At this point, I was satisfied that all five of my initial allegations had been sufficiently proven to have a high probability of standing up in a court of law . At this time, I had been satisfied that the allegations had sufficiently proven .
 In an interview with Paul O’Connor in Washington, D.C., I questioned him about this . In the interview, I asked him about his views on the gay marriage issue . Paul O'Connor: "I'm not sure what I think about gay marriage. I'm
 He was adamant that the body had not been delivered to the morgue twice . He said it was delivered to a morgue in the same place twice .
 Lifton’s hypothesis that there had been a second casket opening with Humes, Boswell, and others present . This was in direct conflict with Lifton's hypothesis that the casket had been opened . Lifton: "There was no second opening with others present"
 Lifton’s hypothesis was that the casket switch had been made when all personnel were required to leave the autopsy room for x-rays to be taken . Lifton: The switch was made during a period of about thirty minutes of time .
 When he was ordered to leave the autopsy room he went into an adjacent anteroom where he stood observing everything going on . He said he stood “with his nose pressed against the window” in the connecting door . He says when he was told to leave he went to an
 O’Connor was certain that Kennedy’s body had remained on the autopsy table during the entire period . He was certain a body/casket shell game had not been going on, at least in the autopsy room .
 O’Connor: Twyman: O'Connor: O‘Connor: A plausible alternative to Lifton’s hypothesis . O'Conner: Lifton's hypothesis is a plausible alternative .
 The Navy ambulance had a bronze casket in it which was empty . The casket is believed to have been empty .
 The body was brought in a shipping casket from the rear of the morgue . The Navy ambulance was driven back and forth from the front to the rear for some reason .
 There were thousands of people on the grounds near the hospital that night, just onlookers . Thousands of people were there that night .
 "Now this may be a scenario that goes with what we are talking about --deception of the public," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Now it may be that may be the case that goes to what we're talking about—deception .
 "Of course we never saw anything like that because we were in the morgue. Yes, that makes sense," she says . "We were in a morgue"
 O'Neill kept out of the morgue at 7:07m. and Sibert and O’Neill kept quiet . We’ve explained, so far, the black hearse, the bronze casket .
 The bronze casket could have been brought in and put down and then taken right back out . The casket was put in and out of the hospital, but it could be brought in again and taken out again .
 The bronze casket was brought in for appearance and then taken right back out again . So that could explain why it was brought back for appearance .
 They bring in the bronze casket, it goes inside, it's opened, the body is taken out, the casket is taken back and put in the hearse and driven away . The body is then driven away from the scene in a hearse .
 In other words, it could explain the black hearse, shipping casket, bronze casket in, bronze coffin out . It could also explain why the black casket was transported to the funeral home .
 There is an explanation for the appearance of the in-and-out Navy ambulance . Anyway, I can see that there is a reason for it .
 Although the foregoing explanation seemed plausible, it still had flaws in it . Although the above article was plausible, there was still a question mark .
 Boswell, General McHugh, and a casket team member, James Felder, all witnessed the bronze casket being opened with a body in it that presumably was Kennedy .
 O’Neill stated that the ambulance stopped at the front entrance where Jackie and RFK disembarked to proceed to the 17th floor . RFK was taken to Bethesda, Maryland, where he was assassinated in 1968 .
 The ambulance then traveled to the rear where O’Neill, Sibert, Greer and Kellerman placed the casket on a roller and transported it into the autopsy room . The autopsy room was then transported to an autopsy room by the ambulance .
 O'Neill stated that he was present when various persons placed the body on the autopsy table . O’Neill was present at the autopsy and said he was at the scene of the incident .
 Doctors then proceeded to remove the sheet covering JFK's body and to photograph the body . Doctors then removed the sheet and photographed the body of JFK .
 O' Neill said he remained “right next to the body,” a distance of closer than two yards . O’ Neill: "I was right next to body. I was very close to body"
 I traveled from Andrews Air Force Base in the ambulance with the President’s body . I accompanied the coffin to the autopsy laboratory and saw the body removed and placed on autopsy table .
 Kennedy’s body was delivered to the Bethesda morgue twice, investigators say . "What we have here is testimonial evidence from credible witnesses that, when all taken together, lead to the conclusion," the investigators say. "We have a lot of evidence," they say .
 If I hadn’t interviewed Paul O’Connor, I probably would have accepted Lifton’s thesis that the body was delivered the second time in the bronze casket . Most of the key personnel had been ordered to leave the autopsy room while x-rays were being
 O’Connor’s testimony was so adamant and so convincing that I found myself in a dilemma . But he said, “I’m not sure what I really want to do,” he said .
 When the bronze coffin was delivered to the Bethesda morgue, the body in it was not that of John Kennedy, but a substitute body . The body in the coffin was not the president's, but the body of a substitute .
 O’Connor said during the autopsy he was able to see, through the door, part of the coffin placed there . O'Connor said he saw the coffin in the coffin during the Autopsy .
 O’Connor said it was peculiar that an Air Force major’s body would be delivered to Bethesda because they normally handled only Navy personnel . The body of the major was delivered to the hospital because it normally handles Navy personnel, he said .
 He had never recalled Army or Air Force personnel being sent to Bethesda . He said he had never heard of the incident .
 I suggested to O’Connor the possibility that when the bronze coffin was first brought in to the morgue, it was brought in . empty . The coffin was brought into the anteroom empty .
 The Air Force major’s body was placed in the coffin and it was then taken back out to the Navy ambulance where it was returned to the front of the hospital . Then, the body was then placed in a coffin and taken back to the ambulance .
 The bronze casket was then taken into the anteroom of the morgue, and opened for viewing . It was at this point where the ambulance was joined with the casket team and the ambulance .
 The coffin was then closed and later removed from the anteroom with the Air Force major’s body in it . The coffin then was then removed and closed .
 O’ Connor says it's possible that something like this could have happened from his vantage point during the autopsy . O' Connor: "It's possible" that something happened from the autopsy, he says .
 When I returned to California, I called David Lifton and ran the hypothesis by him . When I called Lifton, he ran it by running it by him.
 Paul O’Connor’s statement that the bronze casket could not have been delivered to the autopsy room while he was out and the x-rays were being taken . O'Connor: The casket was not delivered to autopsy room during the autopsy . O‘Connor
 I was now stuck with an incredible hypothesis—not only of the conspirators stealing Kennedy’s body from Air Force One and secretly performing an obliteration of evidence, by surgery on the head, but further, concocting a scheme whereby they were able to fool almost everybody by playing
 The body was delivered in a shipping casket to the rear of the hospital, while the Navy ambulance was parked at the front of it with an empty bronze casket in it . It was too much to contemplate, so I went back and examined the evidence .
 After carefully reviewing this evidence, I could think of no explanation of the second delivery of Kennedy’s body in the bronze casket other than that it was the body of someone other than Kennedy . The photographs of the brain that are now in the National Archives are not photographs of Kennedy
 For years I had pondered the fantastic evidence surrounding the autopsy . For years, I'd pondered whether it was true or not true .
 Zapruder film shows a highly sophisticated procedure to alter the film and delete frames . We have the spectacle of the conspirators seizing the film on the day of the assassination and engaging in a highly . sophisticated procedure . The film was shot on the same day as the assassination .
 We have the forgery of evidence concerning the number of bullets, the ghoulish spectacle of the conspirators at some secret location, widening the opening in Kennedy’s skull, and partially removing his brain to eliminate incriminating bullets . We have now the possibility that someone else�
 The idea of a conspiracy to assassinate the president of the U.S. was in itself unbelievable, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: The idea was unbelievable .
 "All of these actions and manipulations remained in a coherent body. But as evidence upon evidence piled up, all of them remained coherent," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 A crime to assassinate the president of the United States, in a conspiracy that went awry, would be bizarre to the extreme . The president's assassination would be a crime to the U.S. It would be 'bizarre'
 There was no doubt in my mind that the essential story of theft of Kennedy’s body and alteration of the head wound was true, but I was left with a sense of uncertainty about the intricacies of the delivery of the body to the morgue twice . Nonetheless, there was
 "I had hoped to develop a scenario in which they were all unwitting of the game that was being played on them," says the author .
 "Solving a crime does not require that every last detail and nuance be clarified with absolute certainty," says author . The primary conclusions in this chapter will be reinforced when we examine the work of Dr. Dr. John Sutter .
 David Mantik is a medical doctor, radiation oncologist, and physicist at Eisenhower Memorial Hospital in Rancho Mirage, California . Mantik says he is a radiation expert and radiation radiation expert .
 Mantik met Mantik in Chicago in 1993 at a symposium on the assassination . He later formed a close working relationship with him concerning his work on the x-rays of President Kennedy’s head . Mantik is credited with saving the lives of Kennedy .
 Timeline between Arrival of Air Force One at Andrews Air Force Base and “Formal” beginning of Autopsy . Timeline between arrival and beginning of autopsy . Timeline includes arrival of the plane and the beginning of the autopsy .
 Timeline from “Formal” Beginning of Autopsy to Delivery of Body, X-Rays, and Photo Negatives to White House . Timeline from "Formal" beginning of autopsy to delivery of body, X, and photo Negatives . White House.
 Humes officially announces results of autopsy—‘two shots from reas” 1:00 am FBI agents Sibert and — O'Neill leave the autopsy room . Kellerman delivers x-ray photos to Bouck 4:30 am Exhibit 13-4 .
 The statements above require careful study and are not presented as clear and convincing evidence of when a shift of the president’s body was made; it shows only possibilities . It shows only possible that the president's body was shifted .
 At this point it remains a mystery as to whether the body was hidden in a compartment aboard Air Force One and removed after the plane landed in Washington, D.C., or was flown back to Washington by a military or private plane .
 Craig Roberts has revealed that there was a large cargo compartment where the body could have been hidden underneath the floor where the casket was placed . The cargo compartment was accessible through a trap door under the carpeting .
 Layout of Morgue and Autopsy Room at Bethesda Naval Hospital . Showed Entrances and Exit of Shipping Casket and Body . Showing the entrance and exit of shipping casket .
 Witnesses saw the top of the President’s head as Observed by Witnesses at Bethesda Naval Hospital When the Body Arrived . The President's head was seen by witnesses at the hospital when he died .
 Paul O’Connor said that this was what he first saw when the body arrived at the Bethesda morgue in a body bag . Paul O'Connor said he was shocked to see the image of the body in the bag .
 When the scalp was parted, the huge gaping hole in Exhibit 13-7 was revealed, to the astonishment of those present . It was the first time the scalp had been parted .
 This very important photo shows the massive defect in the right side, back, and top of the president’s head .
 The rounded portion of the remaining skull in the back of the head is clearly visible . The rounded section of the skull was clearly visible in the photo .
 Paul O'Connor said that this is exactly what he saw at Bethesda Naval Hospital after parting and reflecting back the scalp . Paul O’Connor agreed that it is a photo of the back and top of the head . Paul said that he saw this photo at the hospital .
 At Parkland Hospital, doctors observed the brain extruding from a wound about three inches in diameter . The brain extruded from the wound, doctors said . Doctors said the wound was three inches thick .
 A photo shows an essentially empty cranium, without extruding brain, and a wound much larger than three inches . Yet this photo shows a photo of the empty skull with a three-inch wound . The photo was taken at a hospital in New York City .
 The brain was removed from the cranium sometime between Parkland Hospital in Dallas and when it arrived at Bethesda Naval Hospital . This evidence indicates that the brain had been removed from its cranium .
 This photo is a view of the rear of the head, looking at a downward angle . Paul O’Connor agreed with me that this photo was a view from the rear . O'Connor: This photo shows the head of a man with a lower angle .
 This was buttressed in an HSCA interview of John Thomas Stringer, Jr. on August 12, 1977 . Donald Andrew Purdy interviewed Stringer on August 11, 1977, by Donald Andrew .
 On the left is a drawing from the National Archives by Ida Dox of what is supposed to be John Kennedy’s brain, which was examined in the autopsy . On the right is a picture of what was supposed to have been the brain of John Kennedy .
 It is an exact rendering of a photograph in the National Archives, and has been authenticated as such by Dr. Dr. John Defterios . The photograph was taken from a photograph of a National Archives photograph .
 David Mantik examined both the drawing and the photographs in the National Archives . Mantik was the first person to examine both the drawings and photographs .
 Note the distinctive appearance of the cerebellar portion of the brain when compared to the right and left cerebral hemispheres . The cerebella is a part of the cerebral hemisphere of a brain .
 Several physicians attending Kennedy at Parkland Hospital in Dallas testified under oath that the large portions of the cerebellum were extruded or were blasted out through a large wound in the occipital bone in the back of the head . Yet this drawing shows a completely intact cerebellom .
 On the right is a midline view of a typical head and brain, which shows the location of the cerebellum in a vertical cross-section .
 A large piece of occipital bone was found behind and to the left of the presidential limousine on the day after the assassination . The piece was found on the same day as the assassination victim .
 All this evidence fits into a pattern indicating a fatal shot from the front, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "The evidence is consistent with a single shot being fired from front"
 On left: View of Kennedy’s brain from above . David Lifton weed weed S CEREBELLUM . On left, Kennedy's brain was viewed from above by Lifton .
 Outline of the Large Jagged Defect in the Back, the Right Side, and the Top of the President’s Head . The President's head has a large jagged hole in the back and right side of his head .
 Sketch was made by tracing over the original image used in Exhibit 13-7 . This sketch was made using a tracing of the original photo of Exhibit .
 The defect as shown here is much larger and more extensive than the wound described by hospital personnel at Parkland Hospital in Dallas . But the defect is not the same as that described by the hospital staff at Dallas hospital .
 Only one segment of bone was blown out, it was a segment of occipital or temporal bone . Jenkins said that only one piece of bone had been blown out in the accident .
 He noted that a portion of the cerebellum was hanging out from a hole in the right-rear of the head . He said it was part of a hole that had been in the head for several weeks .
 The massive size of the wound is considered to be evidence that the head wound was enlarged sometime between the time the body left Dallas and before it arrived at the Bethesda morgue . The wound is believed to have been enlarged sometime before the body was taken to the hospital .
 This is a top view of the skull, crudely showing a large defect that extends from the parietal region “somewhat into the temporal and occipital region,” as described by Dr. Dr. John Defterios .
 The dimensions of the “missing” bone agree closely with the dimensions of a large defect in the autopsy photo in Exhibits 13-7 and 13-9 . The size of the missing bone is similar to the size of one of the large defects .
 This was an attempt to illustrate the magnitude of the wound again. Well, this was a attempt to . illustrate the severity of the . wound again . Well, it was a chance to ... illustrate the . magnitude of that wound again, he said .
 It's 10 centimeters from right to left, 17 centimeters from posterior to anterior . And as you can see, it’s 10cm from right-to-left, 17cm from anterior to left . It was 10 cm from left to right, 17 cm from anterior .
 This was a piece of 10centimeter bone that was fractured off of the skull and was attached to the under surface . The skull was fractured into pieces of bone that were attached to under surface of skull . This was the skull fracture that caused the skull to fracture .
 There were fragments attached to the skull or to the scalp and all the three major flaps . The fragments were attached to skull or scalp or to scalp .
 Humes, in his autopsy report, wrote, “There is a large irregular defect of the scalp and skull on the right involving chiefly the parietal bone but extending somewhat into the temporal and occipital regions”
 In this region there is an actual absence of scalp and bone producing a defect which measures approximately 13 cm. in greatest diameter . The defect is a 13cm. in diameter . It is a defect measuring approximately 13cm in diameter.
 Sagutal suture aD protuberance ——a Mastod . Dotted lines added by author approximate the perimeter of the large defect observed at Bethesda Naval Hospital Dr. Dr. John Sutter .
 All of this is consistent with the photograph of the large irregular defect in Exhibit 13-7, and its dimensions shown in Exhibit 14-9 . All of the photographs of the defect are consistent with its dimensions .
 Paul O’Connor was one of the first to observe the defect . Paul O'Connor confirmed the orientation and approximate size and location of the defect was confirmed by Paul .
 When the body arrived at Bethesda, the wound was much larger, as shown above and in the autopsy photo in Exhibit 13-7 . The wound was larger when the body was taken to Bethesda .
 According to Humes’ testimony and autopsy report, the frontal bone was not involved in the incident . According to the autopsy, Humes' frontal bone did not play a part .
 Humes wrote that the skull hole involved ‘chiefly’ the parietal but also extended into the temporal and occipital bones, indicating that the wound was in the right rear of the head and surely was a wound of exit . The wound had been enlarged in secrecy by
 This bone fragment, measuring 2'D23 by 23, was found at the rear and to the left of the location of the presidential limousine when the fatal head shot occurred . It was found in the rear of the limo at the time .
 It was found by medical student Billy Harper the day after the assassination . It was discovered by Billy Harper, a medical student .
 Cairns examined it, along with another pathologist, and they both stated that it came from the occipital region of the skull . The skull is believed to have been found in a shallow grave .
 The fragment was photographed in the Methodist Hospital photographic lab . The fragment is believed to have been taken from a photograph taken in hospital .
 The Harper fragment is strong evidence of a shot from the front, perhaps explaining its strange disappearance . It was taken from the back of the Harper fragment . The fragment was found in a photo taken in the early 1900s in Harper, New York .
 If it were available today, it could have been analyzed and scientifically identified as to its location in the skull . The skull was found in a skull in the mid-1980s .
 Neither the Commission nor Specter ever saw any of the photographs or x-rays corroborating the autopsy report . The autopsy report was never corroborated by the Commission or Specter .
 The autopsy photos and x-rays, along with Zapruder film, were among the most carefully guarded and suppressed evidence in the JFK assassination . Gaeton Fonzi Investigator for Senate Select Committee on Intelligence and House Select Committee .
 Only when Jim Garrison started his investigation in 1967 did Life magazine reluctantly part with the Zapruder film . Only then did it become available to the public by way of bootlegged copies made in a lab .
 The autopsy photographs and x-rays were handled by the government . The word “shocking” is now almost a cliché, it aptly describes the manner in which the autopsy photographs were handled .
 Boswell were not allowed to examine the photographs, and were only able to superficially examine the x-rays before finishing their report on the weekend after the assassination .
 Roy Kellerman of the Secret Service retained possession of the photographs and x-rays . He turned them over to his chief, Robert Bouck, whose office was in the Executive Office building .
 It was not until three years after the autopsy that Humes and Boswell were called forth to examine them . The autopsy was the first of its kind .
 If Secret Service agent James K Fox had not somehow obtained a set of the photographs and x-rays, we might never have seen them .
 Fox obtained a partial set and made it available over the years until the dissemination was widespread . Fox obtained the set and distributed it to the public .
 It was only then when the cat was out of the bag, the government allowed access to the photographs and x-rays in the National Archives . Only selected medical persons who were approved by Burke Marshall, friend and attorney of the Kennedy family .
 In this chapter, I will examine the autopsy x-rays as they relate to certain autopsy photographs that are considered authentic, and as related to the Zapruder film . The autopsy pathologists at Bethesda and Parkland Hospital in Dallas, Dallas, will also examine the x-ray x
 David Mantik, Mp, 4, is a radiation oncologist at Eisenhower Memorial Hospital in Rancho Mirage, California . He is board-certified by the American College of Radiology . Mantik is also a radiation doctor .
 Mantik became interested in this subject in 1992 and began to analyze and experiment with x-ray techniques to examine the possibility that the x-rays taken of Kennedy in the autopsy had somehow been altered .
 He arranged to visit the National Archives and examine the original xray negatives . He examined the negatives at the National Archive .
 Over the years he has visited the National Archives six times, in each case pursuing his research and diligently making his precise measurements .
 He made thousands of measurements of the optical density of one-millimeterdiameter circles to survey x-ray negatives .
 Several hundred individual measurements were made for each negative, to quantify and chart a pattern on the film of its capacity to transmit light .
 Mantik experimented in his laboratory in Rancho Mirage to determine if it were possible to forge x-rays by making a composite from the original . He used overlays to create the appearance of bone or brain in the x-ray when, in fact, they were absent .
 He also experimented with x-rays of human skulls that were filled in quadrants with brain-equivalent tissue to confirm his estimates of missing brain .
 He analyzed the results of his optical measurements of the original x-rays in the National Archives . Concurrently with this research he analyzed the . results of the optical measurements he analyzed .
 Rather than attempting to go fully into the technical details of optical densitometry, I will present here only my simplified understanding of the subject, and only to the extent required to attain a rudimentary grasp .
 It is useless for the reader to try to delve into this x-ray evidence without at least a superficial knowledge of the subject . It is really somewhat useless for . The reader should be able to read the x-rays in this article .
 Mantik is working on a paper that he intends to publish, as well as a book . Mantik also plans to publish a book and publish a paper .
 He has been selfless enough to spend many hours with me and allow me to present a skeleton preview of what his finished work will reveal . He has spent many hours working on the project .
 His publications will, of course, provide more complete results .
 "I am doing here is applying his discoveries in an effort to achieve a synthesis with the larger picture of medical, forensic, and photographic evidence," he says . "What I am doing is trying to achieve the synthesis"
 Please refer to Exhibits 14-1, 14-2, and 14-3, at the end of this chapter . Optical Densitometry is a form of measurement that can be used in optical analysis .
 The reader will find it helpful to study the other Exhibits, 14-5 through 14-8, in which the evidence of photographic forgery is included .
 The term “optical density” is a measure of the opaqueness of x-ray film . The term is used to measure the quality of an x-rays .
 Optical density, also called OD, is expressed as the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of incident light to transmitted light through the film . Optical density is expressed in logarathm to base 10 . OD is expressed by logaritym to a base 10
 Clear portions of film have low optical density and dark portions have high optical density . Clear portions have low denser film denser than dark portions . Dark portions have higher optical density than clear parts of film .
 In looking at an x-ray of the head, we are concerned with brain and bone tissue for the most part . We are concerned only with brain tissue, not bone tissue, says Dr. John Sutter .
 On an x-ray positive print, bone and brain tissue will appear as white or translucent, and absence of brain and bone tissue will look black . The Kennedy x-rays show the absence of white or white brain tissue from a positive print .
 Strong white means much bone and/or brain tissue and very low optical density . Strong black means very high optical density and absence of bone and brain tissue . Strong white is strong white, black is strong black .
 An OD of 2.2. will appear quite dark on a positive print, and an OD of 0.0 will appear very white on a negative print . A 0.2 OD will appear dark on any positive print .
 Attenuation may be thought of as a dampening of the intensity of the x-ray, therefore a lessening of its impact on the film . Attenuated is thought to be less intense and less intense than the film itself .
 Bone has a higher attenuation of x-ray transmission than brain tissue of an equal thickness . Xray film BRAIN BONE 2S ——_» — y X-rays from > ———_> power source .
 In the head, there is a much greater thickness of brain than bone except on the outer edges of the skull when visualizing it from one direction .
 Visualize the head as a sphere of 3/8-inch thick bone with a six-inch-diameter brain inside 124 . Brain tissue is therefore 16 times the thickness of one side of the skull bone, and 8 times thickness of both sides .
 On the right and left side of the skull, the bone thickness through which the x-rays penetrate becomes much greater than the 3/8-inch thickness on the center line . X-rays can penetrate through bone thickness on both sides of skull .
 An x-ray positive print of a typical head would have a white ring around the periphery, with a center of varying shades of gray . From the foregoing, we can deduce that an x-rays positive print would have white ring .
 Examine of Exhibit 14-3, which is an x-ray of Kennedy’s head while he was alive, shows this to be true . Examine is an ex-President of the United States .
 An empty skull with no defects in it would appear as a bright ring with a dark center approaching black . On the other hand, an empty skull without defects would look as bright ring .
 Exhibit 14-1 shows a dark area F with a bright periphery indicating an intact skull in that part of the skull, but virtually devoid of brain matter . This is shown in part in Exhibit .
 As earlier noted, the dampening of x-ray transmission through a substance is measured as attenuation . The dampening is the attenuation of the transmission of an x-rays .
 For our purposes assume 2:1 for the attenuation ratio of bone compared to brain of equal thickness . For this purpose, we will assume that the ratio is 2:2 . For the purposes of this article, we are happy to clarify that this is not the case of bone atten
 Since the brain in the head at the center line of our diagram is eight times the thickness of two layers of bone, it would provide four times the attenuation of the bone . The brain would be eight times thicker than the thickest layer of the two layers .
 If one-half of the skull is missing, there is only one skull thickness that the x-ray is penetrating . However, if a skull thickness is too thick to penetrate, the only skull thickness can be penetrated .
 In that case, the brain would provide eight times the attenuation of the bone . The brain would have provided eight times as much attenuation as the bone in a bone .
 The absence of bone is not readily detected by the human eye if one is looking at the film through the maximum thickness of the head . The point here is that when . looking at an x-ray of the . head, the absence of . bone is . not readily . detected by
 The bone thickness becomes large relative to brain thickness . In moving from the center to the side, there is a gradual decrease in attenuation attributable to brain, and an increase in . bone, again making absence of bone not readily visible to the untrained eye .
 Only by using a sensitive instrument can reasonable, quantitative sense be made of x-rays, and the relative proportions of brain and bone tissue be estimated .
 Optical densitometer measures optical density in x-ray films . From this can be precisely calculated the light transmission through the developed film and correlated to authoritative standards of the related bone and brain tissue .
 The nature and size of brain tissues and bone tissues have been observed and documented for a wide range of cases . This is widely used and is standard practice in radiation oncology, in which the nature of brain tissue and bone tissue is observed .
 This instrument can also be used to detect other objects in the brain such as bullets, which have an extremely high attenuation of x-ray transmission .
 measurements can be used as a basis for calculation of approximate thickness of tissues or objects, or detection of one object superimposed on another object .
 There is a general misconception among the lay public and, curiously, among many medical doctors and even radiologists, that x-rays are sacrosanct; that they cannot be forged HOH . But Dr. Dr. John Sutter says Dr. Sutter is not a doctor
 Mantik has demonstrated that it is possible to forge an x-ray, at least one of 1963 vintage, if the objective is limited to concealing missing bone or brain tissues in one location . Mantik: It is possible that it could forge an X-ray from a 1963 vintage
 The final product is the original with the patch added 1044 . There is an alternative method to create a deceptive x-ray that Dr. Dr. John Defterios uses .
 Mantik has pointed out that that is to shield the body itself, in this case a portion of the head is shielded . Mantik: "That's to shield yourself, and then to take the x-ray, which will not show the hole inasmuch as it has been
 Mantik’s research, he favors alteration of the x-rays as the method most likely used by the forgers . Mantik's research suggests that alteration is the most likely method of forging the document .
 A variety of methods can be used to blend in the patch so that it is not readily detectable to the naked eye . The patch can be easily detected by a variety of techniques .
 The patch will be detectable by an optical densitometer unless the patch is done with infinitely scrupulous care and precision-blending techniques .
 The Right Lateral X-Ray appears to be a crude method for producing the right lateral head x-ray in Exhibit 14-1 .
 He discovered a patch used by the conspirators that was so opaque that it had an attenuation nearly equivalent to a head of solid bone . He had never before seen in any other x-ray of human heads, or in literature .
 The ratio of the optical transmission proved to be 1000:1 between the dark area F in Exhibit 14-1 compared to the white area F . In clinical practice this ratio is seldom greater than 2:1 .
 This startling deviation indicates that a very opaque patch on area P had been used to produce the right lateral x-ray . The right lateral X-ray was produced by an opaque patch in area P .
 Mantik first observed, the maximum ratio of light transmission from any dark to any light portion of the x-ray film was 3.89, with an average ratio of about 1.0.0 . Mantik: The maximum ratio . transmission of light to any . dark portion of
 He also examined x-rays taken of the parietal bone just behind the ear, in numerous skulls . The optical density at that location was almost identical to the optical density in area P in Exhibit 14-1 .
 Inasmuch as the parietal bone extends all the way across the head, it is equivalent to a head of solid bone, an impossibility for area P inasmuch a head has brain in it .
 Mantik had discovered that the right lateral x-ray of Kennedy’s head had been forged or otherwise produced in a crude attempt to conceal either missing bone or missing brain, or both, in that portion of the head .
 The fact of missing brain or bone in area P is in fact observed in the anteriorposterior x-ray shown in Exhibit 14-2 . Curiously, however, the fact of . missing brain . or bone is observed in an anterior . posterior X-ray .
 The Anterior-Posterior X-Ray is authentic, except for one small anomaly . The AP x-ray in Exhibit 14-2 is authentic . It is a great value of the AP .
 The portion that is not authentic is the bright circle labeled as “6.5mm object,” which appears to be a sliver of a bullet embedded in the outside of the skull on the back of the head .
 None of the autopsy pathologists at Bethesda, or others present, observed such an object, despite the fact that finding a bullet was one of their primary objectives . The autopsy pathologist at Bethesda said he did not see a bullet .
 Mantik suspects that this object may have been artificially superimposed on a much smaller authentic metal fragment in a composite forgery after the original x-rays were developed . Mantik also suspects that the object may be superimposed with a smaller metal fragment .
 Mantik interviewed Jerrol Custer, one of the xray technicians who was present at the autopsy . Custer was the technician who performed the autopsy on the victim . Mantik also interviewed the autopsy technician .
 Custer told Mantik that the day after the autopsy, a skull was brought to him, strangely, and he was asked to x-ray it while placing a bullet on the skull . Custer said the skull had been placed on the back of a bullet . Mantik said he
 Dr. Mantik said there was something very suspicious going on with regard to the x-rays . Mantik told Mantik that there was "something very suspicious" going on . The doctor said that Mantik had a "very suspicious" reaction to the tests .
 The AP x-ray in Exhibit 14-2 is consistent with the head wound photo . The photo is consistent in the photo of the wound . The AP photo shows a head wound in the wound wound .
 In the previous chapter, we established that the head wound photo is authentic, and that it is consistent with the descriptions of the wound by both Dr. and Dr. Dr. John Sutter . The head wound is authentic and consistent with Dr. Sutter's descriptions .
 The head wound is consistent with the description of the head wound described by Paul O’Connor. Boswell at the autopsy, and that it is consistent . Boswell said the wound was consistent with that of Paul O'Connor's description .
 The AP x-ray, the autopsy photo of the head wound, and the testimony by key witnesses at the autopsy are all consistent . The autopsy photo and testimony from key witnesses is all consistent, the AP says .
 The lateral x-ray is inconsistent with these items, at least in area P where we find the patch . However, it is not the only patch found in the area P .
 Mantik’s analysis is in my opinion almost completely consistent with the fundamental discoveries of David Lifton and all the other evidence that I have presented in this book, including evidence of missing frames in the Zapruder film, is consistent with Lifton's discoveries . Mantik's
 My conclusion that frames are missing in the Zapruder film was thoroughly discussed in preceding chapters . My conclusion was that frames were missing in Zapruders film .
 AP x-ray also shows that a blow-out in the back of the head had taken place . Now we have the AP X-ray which also shows . It is also revealed that the head injury had been caused by the blow .
 This again is corroborating proof that frames were deleted in the Zapruder film to take out the eruption of brain and skull material that should have, must have, appeared at the rear of the head at the time of the fatal head shot, had not frames been deleted .
 Many more frames must have been deleted from Zapruder film, which would have shown the blow-out of brain and skull in the right side and top of the head in Dealey Plaza .
 Alteration of the Zapruder film to that extent would have been impracticable by removing frames, because it would have required that all of the frames after the fatal head shot be removed . Alteration would have to remove frames from the film .
 "This would have created a major, uncorrectable, and obvious disturbance in the continuity of movement in the film," says the film star .
 It is the result of dissection of the head and removal of brain and skull material in a secret location, after the body left Dallas, as was first proposed by David Lifton . Rather than being dissectioned, the skull material was removed from the body .
 "I have found no scenario of events other than David Lifton’s that so completely and consistently fits the cumulative evidence in the Zapruder film, the autopsy photographs, and the autopsy x-rays," combined with virtually all of the testimonies of the dozens of witnesses .
 Kennedy’s body was secretly removed from Air Force One, taken to a secret location where the exit wound in the head was enlarged to obscure its nature and to remove incriminating bullet fragments . A large portion of the brain was removed from the brain . The body was then delivered to
 The ambulance that arrived at the front of the hospital contained the bronze casket, without Kennedy’s body in it . Kennedy's body was placed in the casket at the hospital .
 It is clear to me, beyond a reasonable doubt, that a massive attempt was made by persons in the federal government to alter the Zapruder film and autopsy photos and x-rays . The president’s body was all done to conceal evidence of a conspiracy, the author says
 President Kennedy was assassinated by a conspiratorial group of great power and ruthlessness . The crime was covered up by the executive branch of the United States government, starting within two hours after the assassination .
 The evidence is persuasive, convincing—indeed overwhelming—on both counts . The evidence should be persuasive and convincing .
 It seems that such drastic cover-up measures would not have been committed unless those in the government who covered up the crime were part of the plot . It seems, on its face, it seems, that such a cover up was committed .
 Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover were in charge of the investigation . Most likely, most likely, Johnson and Hoover were involved .
 Without a doubt, Hoover’s FBI was guilty of concealing, destroying, and suppressing other prime evidence; and Johnson most certainly would have been aware of the goings-on in the autopsy .
 If we are to remain objective, we must keep our minds open to the possibility that the cover-up by the United States government was carried out for some reason other than involvement of Hoover and Johnson in the assassination plot .
 In other words, the assassination and the cover-up could have been two distinct, unconnected operations . Perhaps for national security reasons, perhaps because of national security concerns .
 More evidence and analysis will be developed in the chapters to follow . The author's instincts rebel against that being true .
 Note: Very white area P indicating a composite forgery; very dark area F indicating almost complete void of brain behind intact right-front skull . National Archives BULLET FRAGMENTS .
 David Mantik to have been altered to conceal evidence of a blow-out of brain from the right hemisphere of the head through a hole in the rear of the skull .
 This was accomplished by either making a composite x-ray in which area P was masked to conceal the absence of brain or bone in that region, or by shielding that portion of the head when the x-rays was taken .
 Mantik believes that these are bullet fragments resulting from a shot from the front entering the right lateral forehead at the hairline . Mantik says the fragments are from a bullet fragment that hit the front of the shooter's head and the right side of the head .
 Optical density in area P is nearly equivalent to a head of solid bone . The optical density in P is almost equivalent to the density of a large bone .
 Dark area in area F has optical density equivalent to air or close to air . Area F has an almost complete void in that region . The dark area is almost completely void .
 Light transmission calculated from optical density measurements in area P and area F show an extremely abnormal ratio of P to F of about 1000:1, compared to what would normally be expected of no more than 2:1 . The ratio is 1:1 - the ratio of light transmission to light
 This x-ray in area P is inconsistent with the AP x-rays in Exhibit 14-2 and 14-4 . It's inconsistent with autopsy photo in Exhibit 15-4, and autopsy photo 14-3 . The autopsy photo is also inconsistent with photo of the autopsy photo .
 It is also inconsistent with the testimonies of the doctors at Bethesda and Parkland Hospitals and the testimony of Paul O’ Connor . The testimony is inconsistent with other doctors' testimony of the hospital .
 David Mantik to be authentic except for a 6.5mm sliver of what appears to be lead embedded on the outside of the skull in the back of the head . Mantik's skull was found to have been found with lead embedded in the skull .
 Paul O’Connor described a large amount of missing brain when the body arrived at Bethesda . Humes and Boswell, in which they describe the head wound, and it is consistent with the testimony of Paul O'Connor in which he described the body .
 Area P is not consistent with area P in the lateral x-ray in Exhibit 14-1 in that it does not show abnormal ratios of optical density from dark to light areas . Area P does not appear to be consistent with areas P in .
 It is consistent with the lateral x-ray in that it shows large portions of missing brain in the right upper hemisphere, down to at least the surface of the cerebellum, and also shows large . portions of . the left upper hemisphere . But itis consistent with . the lateral
 An important aspect of this x-ray is that, with the one exception of the bullet sliver, it is consistent with the large defect in the head shown in the autopsy photo in Exhibit 14-4 .
 Using optical density measurement from both the lateral and AP x-rays, Dr. Dr. J. H. Cevallos used optical density measurements . Dr. Hovallos measured the density of the lateral x-ray .
 Mantik estimates that the right side has very little brain remaining, and the left side appears to have about 60 to 65% remaining . Paul O’Connor said that only about 25% of the total brain remained when the president’s body arrived at Bethesda Naval Hospital . Mant
 Lateral X-ray of President Kennedy’s Head as Viewed from Right Side . Photograph of Premortem Lateral x-ray shows President Kennedy's head as viewed from right side .
 x-ray taken of President Kennedy shows what normal variations in optical density of a head should look like . Normal variations of optical density should be seen on the president's head .
 The lateral x-ray in Exhibit 14-1 shows an optical density in area P that is much less than that of the above . Compare this to the optical density of area P which is much lower than the above, indicating that Exhibit 14 is a forgery .
 This illustrates the difference in optical density of bone compared to brain when viewing the circumference of the circumference .
 Photograph of large Defect in Back, Top, and Right Side of President Kennedy’s Head, Taken during the Autopsy. Taken during autopsy .
 This photograph is repeated from Chapter 13 for convenience of reference . This photograph was repeated from chapter 13 of Chapter 13 .
 It is also consistent with Zapruder frame 335, insofar as a blow-out in the back of the head is concerned . It is not the first time the film has been shot in the head .
 The blow-out of the right side of the head shown in this photo does not show in the Zapruder film . It is corroboration that the head wound was enlarged at a secret location after the body left Dallas .
 D2 inch to 3 inch exit wound in the back of the head as described by 25 doctors, nurses, and technicians who witnessed it at Dallas Parkland Hospital and Bethesda Naval Hospital . 25 doctors and nurses witnessed the incident at the hospitals .
 It has never been conclusively established how this photograph could have been produced or where it was taken . It is obviously a deception of some sort .
 A possible explanation is that there is a hair piece being held in place to cover up the 2'D2 inch to 3 inch wound, with some airbrushing on the portion above the hairline . Some airbrushes may have been applied to cover the wound .
 The “bat wing” shaped flap above the ear is still intact . This photograph was taken before the reconstruction of the head by the undertaker .
 Compare this photograph to the top of the president’s head shown in Exhibit 14-6 . Compare this photo to the photo taken of the President's head . The president's head is shown to be shown at the White House .
 The two photographs were presumably taken in the same setting; yet it seems impossible that they are of the same head . The two photos were taken at the same time and taken in a different setting .
 Photograph of the top of the President’s head as Observed by Witnesses at Bethesda Naval Hospital When the Body Arrived . Witnesses at the hospital say they saw the President's head when he arrived .
 Paul O’Connor told me that this was what he first saw when the body arrived at the Bethesda morgue in a body bag . Paul O'Connor: "This is what I first saw was what I saw when I saw the body," he said .
 When the scalp was parted, the huge gaping hole in Exhibit 14-4 was revealed, to the astonishment of those present . It was the first time the scalp had been parted .
 Compare this to the back of the head photo in Exhibit 14-5, which also shows part of the top of the body .
 There is obviously no way that these two photos were taken in the same setting . The two photos are taken at the same time in different locations .
 There was only one photo session which occurred just after the body was delivered to the Bethesda morgue and before manipulations of the body were commenced . Humes, say that there was only a photo session .
 The photo in Exhibit 14-5 was made before the skull opening was enlarged and the brain partially removed by the conspirators . One possible answer is that there were, in fact, two photo sessions, the first taken at an interim secret location .
 In this scenario, the large hole in the back of the head could have been covered up by a wig, or a matte insert, or by airbrush used to conceal it .
 Full-Face Photograph of President’s Head, Viewed from Forward Right-Hand Side . Full-face Photograph of Head, viewed from forward right-hand side .
 Note that the throat wound is much larger than the tracheotomy incision described by Parkland Hospital personnel . Parkland hospital personnel describe the wound as larger than that described by hospital .
 The original wound was a very smalldiameter hole resembling an entrance wound, which was incised with a surgical knife to permit insertion of a tracheotomy tube .
 Mantik says this is the best evidence he has seen that the body was altered before it arrived at the Bethesda morgue . Mantik told me that this is best evidence that the victim's body had been altered before the morgue arrived at Bethesda .
 This photo is evidence that the wound was enlarged, or the photo painted over, to give the appearance of an exit wound . This photo shows that the wounds were enlarged or painted over .
 Tom Robinson, the mortician who prepared the body for burial, testified to the HSCA on January 12, 1977 that he had noticed this hole . Tom Robinson said he noticed the hole in the body when he was buried .
 He described it as a little wound, about 'D4-inch in diameter, on the right side of the forehead up near the hairline .
 Dr. Mantik: "This wound is in line with the trail of bullet fragments that we see in the x-ray in Exhibit 14-1, leading from front to back of the head"
 Note the wooden structure in the upper right-hand corner of this photo . Also note the wooden wooden structure that is visible in the photo .
 Paul O’Connor told me that there was no such wooden structure in the Bethesda morgue . Paul O'Connor said there were no such structures in the morgue at the time .
 This indicates that this photograph, along with some of the other autopsy photographs, was taken at an interim location where work was done secretly on Kennedy’s body before it was delivered to the Bethesda morgue . The photograph was taken in the interim location of Kennedy's body .
 Photograph of side of the President’s Head and Neck, Showing the Neck Wound and the President's Head Resting on a Metal Head Rest . Photograph of Side of President's head and Neck . Showing neck wound, showing the neck Wound .
 Paul O’Connor told me that the metal head rest shown here was not in use at the Bethesda autopsy room . Instead, contoured rubber chock blocks were used, he says . Paul O'Connor: "Metal head rest was not used in the autopsy room"
 Go back to Exhibit 14-7 which shows a wooden structure blocking the front door to the autopsy room . Also, go back to the photo . The autopsy room was blocked by the wooden structure, which blocks the door .
 No such structure was present at the Bethesda autopsy room during the autopsy . According to O’Connor, there was no such structure in the room at the time .
 This is evidence that the president’s body was intercepted before it arrived at Bethesda . The president's body is believed to have been intercepted at the time of his death .
 A mob murder is usually a methodical job, performed by a coordinated team of specialists . The arrangements for a typical mob contract are arranged by a team of experts .
 Up to 15 gunmen, drivers, spotters, and other backup personnel, plus several cars, are used on some jobs . Up to a dozen cars are used in some jobs, including some of the most recent .
 In this chapter evidence will be examined that implicates certain Mafia chieftains in the Kennedy assassination . Appendix 15: The Dallas Mafia and the Dallas Police are the subject of this chapter .
 At the same time we will look at the role of the Dallas police as likely co-conspirators, and at the motivation of certain Mafia chieftains to reach the momentous decision to join in a conspiracy to assassinate the president .
 Our premise here is that their motivation was primarily a matter of their personal survival, but mixed with no small amount of anger and desire for revenge against the Kennedys . Our premise is that they wanted revenge against their enemies, but also a desire for survival .
 Before delving into the details it will be useful to first ask ourselves whether or not it would have been feasible for the Mafia, acting within its own organizational capacity, to mastermind, execute, and cover up the assassination, in light of the evidence presented in previous chapters .
 The Mafia obviously could not have accomplished these things unless it had accomplices who were high government officials with enormous cunning and sufficient power to see that cover-ups of such a complex plot would be accomplished inside the executive branch of the U.S. government .
 Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover are alleged to have been accomplices of LBJ and Hoover . The author's thesis of this book is that these accomplices were, at a minimum, Lyndon Johnson .
 Whether or not these two were blackmailed into the cover-up, or pragmatically took advantage of the terrible event, remains to be seen as we progress .
 The Mafia simply did not have the capability to execute and sustain the cover-up, prosecutors say . They cite the argument, just noted, that the Mafia simply didn't have the ability to execute .
 The Mafia did not have the sophistication to set up Oswald as a Communist connected with Cuba and the Soviet Union, say experts . They also point out that the Mafia didn't have the . sophistication to conduct the disinformation scheme .
 These points may be well taken but, as will be argued, they do not take into account the Mafia’s capability to influence powerful ‘legitimate’ interests, including the vice president of the United States and the director of the FBI .
 I decided that I should examine the basic evidence for Mafia complicity before going into the broader evidence related to its penetration of world-wide ‘legitimate’ power structures .
 Mafia chieftains felt, justifiably, that their power and the existence of their organizations were being threatened by the Kennedys, as was their fear of imminent incarceration in a federal penitentiary . The Mafia feared imminent incarceration .
 Robert Kennedy launched an unprecedented program against organized crime in the U.S. in 1961 . The Mafia was behind the assassination of John Kennedy .
 By all documented evidence available, this amounted to no less than a crusade to do away with the Mafia . Sam Giancana, Carlos Marcello, Santo Trafficante, Jr., and their financier and cohort, Jimmy Hoffa, Jr. By all . evidence available
 President Kennedy appointed his thirty-five-year-old brother as attorney general . Acting on the demands of his father, President Kennedy had appointed his brother . President Kennedy's brother was appointed attorney general in 1963 .
 That must have been an unmistakable signal to the mob that the Kennedys, as a family, were out to get them . The mob was angry that they were being targeted by the Kennedy family . That was a signal that the mob was trying to get the family out of the
 Sam Giancana and Jimmy Hoffa had experienced their fill of Robert Kennedy when he was counsel to the McClelland Committee . Kennedy had personally attacked and humiliated both of them on national television . The two men had had their fill on Kennedy .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations did a thorough job of investigating the Mafia . The House of Representatives' investigation of the Mafia was thorough .
 In this chapter I will draw primarily on the HSCA Report, as well as the works of David Scheim, Robert Blakey, and John Davis in developing the basic data .
 Exhibit 15-1 includes graphical plots of the buildup of Justice Department activity against organized crime after the Kennedys took office . The Justice Department has been battling organized crime for decades .
 There was a 1,700 percent increase in days in court—from 61 to 1,081 . And there was also an increase in the number of people who went to court in 2012 .
 The above chart illustrates the dramatic increase of activity in the Department of Justice against the Mafia that took place during the Kennedy administration .
 These figures plummeted when Robert Kennedy was stripped of power by Lyndon Johnson, and J Edgar Hoover was again given full reign . The figures dropped when the Kennedy administration was in charge .
 If the Mafia’s objective in murdering the president was to get Robert Kennedy off their backs, they seem to have succeeded . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 The Kennedy brothers may have been intellectually brilliant but they were surely deficient in emotional intelligence . Kennedy brothers were perhaps not as emotionally intelligent as their brothers were .
 After all, they were very young and came from a sheltered background and had very little of life’s experience outside the lawns and clubs of New England, Washington, D.C., and the Court of St. Louis .
 "It appears that they did, indeed, deliberately pursue parallel paths of using the mob for favors while trying to destroy it," says CNN's John Sutter .
 It could be that the brothers just did not realize that this was dangerous in the extreme . The brothers may not have known that this could be dangerous .
 Whether or not he ordered that the arrangement between the CIA and the Mafia be stopped is uncertain .
 Of course, in and of itself, it is not proof of Mafia complicity in the conspiracy, but it is a building block; it shows motive . The material is not evidence that the Mafia was involved in the plot .
 Jack Ruby shot Oswald while he was in the middle of a circle of dozens of Dallas policemen . The conspirators’ cover was blown when Jack Ruby killed Oswald . Ruby’s connections with organized crime helped him kill Oswald .
 The plotters must have been in a state of high anxiety to go to such desperate measures, say the police .
 Ruby’s shooting of Oswald stands foremost in the minds of the American people . Ruby shot Oswald in the head in Dallas, Texas, in 1963 . Oswald was the only person to be shot by Dallas police officers .
 Oswald was shot to silence him because he had enough information to unravel the conspiracy, according to the Warren Commission Report . It has now been concluded, with the exception of a few remaining defenders of the report, that Oswald was killed to silence Oswald .
 G Robert Blakey, chief counsel of the House Select Committee on Assassinations, reached that conclusion . Blakey: "I'm not sure what happened to Mr. Blakey"
 The original plan of the conspirators, it would appear, was to have Oswald killed when leaving the scene, or later after flying him out of the country, and to pin the crime on him as a Communist and an agent of Cuba . Oswald's original plan was to be killed when
 Oswald captured, unharmed, by Dallas police . For reasons not fully understood, the plan went awry and Oswald was captured . Oswald captured by police in Dallas, Texas .
 Jack Ruby at first claimed to have shot Oswald out of sympathy for Jacqueline Kennedy and her children . Jack Ruby initially said he shot Oswald because he felt sympathy for the Kennedy family . Ruby shot Oswald in the head after being confronted by Oswald's widow .
 The committee also questioned Ruby’s self-professed motive for killing Oswald . Ruby told the Warren Commission that he did it out of sorrow over the loss of Oswald's widow and children . Ruby said he did the killing out of sympathy for the widow of Oswald .
 Ruby consistently claimed there had been no other motive and that no one had influenced his act . Ruby said he was not influenced by any of his actions .
 A handwritten note by Ruby, disclosed in 1967, exposed Ruby’s explanation for the Oswald slaying as a fabricated legal ploy . Ruby's explanation was revealed in 1967 in a handwritten note . Ruby was convicted of the murder of Oswald in 1963 .
 Tom Howard was an attorney who visited Ruby in jail less than three hours after he shot Oswald . Howard was Mafia-connected and had visited Ruby . Ruby shot Oswald in the head after the shooting .
 Tonahill later said, ““What Ruby wrote down disturbed me very much. ... I thought about it, walking all the way back to my hotel room.”
 Jack Ruby's confession would seem to be enough to convince a jury of his participation in a conspiracy . Ruby confessed to killing Oswald, but his story of why he killed Oswald was a lie . Ruby was convicted of killing Oswald in November 1963 .
 We need to go further in examining the evidence that the Mafia was deeply involved in the Kennedy conspiracy, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: The Mafia was involved in Kennedy's assassination, but it's not clear what happened .
 Jack Ruby’s contacts with the Mafia in the months preceding the assassination, and in the aftermath of his shooting Oswald Oswald . Ruby's contacts with Mafia in months before the assassination . Ruby was involved in the shooting of Oswald .
 The heart of the evidence is in telephone records of incoming and outgoing calls from Ruby’s night club from April through November 1963 . Ruby's night club was founded in 1963 .
 Exhibit 15-2 illustrates these calls with Jack Ruby as the hub of a network branching out to major underworld figures throughout the United States . Jack Ruby was the hub for a network of underworld figures in the U.S. and beyond .
 These gangsters were the head bosses covering the entire U.S. The gangsters covered the entire United States . They were also known as the "head bosses" of the United States.
 Giancana covered everything west of the Mississippi including Los Angeles, Las Vegas, and Dallas . He also covered Dallas, Dallas, and Las Vegas .
 Carlos Marcello had his own fiefdom in New Orleans which overlapped Giancana’s territory into Dallas . Marcella had his fiefdoms in New York, New Orleans and Dallas .
 Trafficante covered the southeastern United States, headquartered in Florida . Trafficante was Trafficante, which was based in the southeastern U.S.
 The dates and number of calls are shown on the spokes of the wheel . The arrows show the direction of the calls, either incoming or outgoing, and the dates and numbers are shown .
 In parentheses under each Mafia associate’s name is his immediate Mafia chieftain contact . In parentheses, each associate's immediate Mafia contact is his own Mafia contact .
 This diagram shows Ruby’s links with mob chieftains throughout the U.S. in the months before his assassination . Ruby was involved in the assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy in September 1968 .
 Hoover’s FBI lied that Ruby was not associated with organized crime . Ruby's death demolishes the lie perpetrated by Hoover's FBI .
 Exhibit 15-3 shows the buildup of these calls starting in May 1963, peaking out in early November . It then declined to virtually no calls from November 17 through November 22 .
 On April 23, 1963 the first news release came out concerning Kennedy’ trip to Dallas, Texas . Jt should be noted that on that day, the first press release on that date came out about the trip came out .
 It was shortly after that when Ruby’s activities began to accelerate and reach a frenzied pace . Ruby's activities then began to take on the role of the character .
 This chart shows toll calls from Ruby’s Carousel office phone . It was compiled from telephone records subpoenaed by the FBI and telephone bills found in Ruby's possession .
 The less frequent calls from his home phone are not included, as records for such calls prior to May 1963 are not available . Records for those calls are also unavailable .
 There are smaller gaps in his Carousel toll call records for the periods January 1-16 and March 2-April 9, 1963 . There are also gaps in the records between January 1 and March 3, 1963 and April 1, 1964 .
 Note the buildup of out-of-state calls starting in May 1963, after the announcement that John Kennedy was going to visit Dallas . The buildup of calls began after the Kennedy's visit to Dallas .
 It demolishes the lie bought by the Warren Commission that Jack Ruby was not meaningfully connected with organized crime . Ruby was a major figure in organized crime in the late 1960s and '90s .
 Telephone calls of particular significance are those between Nofio Pecora and Jack Ruby . The calls were made in the early 1930s .
 One of the telephone calls was from Pecora to Ruby on August 4 with a return call from Ruby on October 30 . The two telephone calls were made from August 4 to August 30 . Ruby was the first to make contact with Pecorora since August 4 .
 Oswald was thrown in jail in New Orleans for getting into a scuffle with anti-Castro Cubans . Oswald was throwing himself in jail while he was distributing pro- Castro Cuban literature .
 Emile Bruneau paid a small fine on Oswald’s behalf to get him out of jail . The records show that he was assisted in getting out of the jail .
 Bruneau had been closely associated with Nofio Pecora, who was one of two major associates of Carlos Marcello .
 Pecora was manager of Tropical Court trailer park in New Orleans . He placed a call on August 4, 1963 to Jack Ruby from his office phone in the trailer park . Ruby's call was made from the number in the New Orleans office of the manager .
 Pecora received a telephone call from Carlos Marcello on June 24, 1963 at the very same telephone at Tropical Court . The call was made from the same telephone as the call from Marcella five weeks later .
 This exchange of calls fits into an intense pattern of calls between Ruby and Mafia figures that occurred between April 23 and November 9, 1963 . Ruby and the Mafia figures were involved in an intense exchange of phone calls .
 Gruber’s police record of six arrests under two aliases in Illinois, Indiana, and California, with a conviction for grand larceny . An FBI report omitted from the Warren Commission Report and withheld even from National Archives files until 1970 . Gruber's police record includes six arrests
 Al Gruber was a friend of Ruby’s from Chicago where they had roomed together for a year . Ruby and Gruber were rooming together in Chicago . Ruby says Gruber is a great friend of the late comedian .
 In mid-November 1963, after a ten-year separation, Gruber paid an extended visit to Ruby in Dallas . In addition to the above contacts, other organized crime figures appearing in Ruby’s network of telephone calls reveal the depth and extent of his contacts .
 Baker maintained close and frequent contacts with notorious mobsters throughout the country . Baker maintained contact with notorious criminals throughout the U.S. Baker was known for his contacts with mobsters .
 “Barney,” with three of Baker’s phone numbers, was found in one of Ruby's notebooks . The name ‘Barney’ was found with three phone numbers . Ruby's notebook contains three numbers .
 Frank Caracci was identified in a 1970 Judiciary Committee hearing as a “Cosa Nostra involved” gambler and strip joint operator . He was identified as a gambler, operator and operator of strip joint operations .
 Glaser’s underworld clout was suggested by one incident in 1961, in which Jimmy Hoffa was displaced from the best suite in the Las Vegas Riviera Hotel to accommodate Glaser . The incident occurred in Las Vegas .
 Russell D Matthews was described in one FBI report as a burglar, armed robber, narcotics pusher, and murderer . Matthews has been described as a murderer, burglar and armed robber .
 He worked for mob-controlled Cuban casinos in the 1950s and 1960s . He later turned to Dallas underworld pursuits in the 1960s.
 Matthews was subpoenaed by a federal grand jury in 1974 concerning a reported contract to kill informants of corruption in the Houston Police Narcotics Division . In January 1974, Matthews was subpoenaed by a Houston grand jury .
 Lewis J McWillie, described by Dallas police as a “gambler and murderer,” served the Syndicate in several domains . He was described by police as an ‘ambler’ and ‘murderer and murderer’
 From September 1958 until May 1960, McWillie was manager of the mob-owned Tropicana Hotel in Havana . The hotel’s other top men included mobsters Giuseppe Cotrini, John Guglielmo, Norman Rothman, Willie Bischoff
 McWillie was finally forced out of Cuba in January 1961, along with the rest of the mob, with most of his assets confiscated . Most of their assets were confiscated .
 Their close association was exhibited during a week-long trip to Havana by Ruby in 1959, during which he saw McWillie frequently . Ruby's visit to Havana in 1959 was an example of their friendship .
 Ruby reported he once had four guns shipped to McWillie in Cuba . Ruby also reported that he had been sent four guns to the island nation .
 On May 19, 1963, Ruby had a revolver shipped from Ray’s Hardware Store in Dallas to McWillie in Las Vegas . The revolver was shipped to Las Vegas from a Dallas hardware store .
 Murray W “Dusty” Miller was the head of the Southern Conference of Teamsters in 1963 . Miller later became secretary treasurer of the Teamsters International . Miller was a member of the National Teamsters Union .
 Weiner had been involved in the mob’s Cuban operations . Like many of his other mob contacts, Weiner was involved with the Cuban operation . Weiner was also involved in many of the mob's other contacts, including Ruby .
 Weiner was often mentioned in FBI files with Jimmy Hoffa and union bigwig Allen Dorfman . Weiner was also active in the Teamsters, as demonstrated by his frequent mention in FBI file files .
 On October 26, 1963, Ruby placed a twelve-minute call from the Carousel Club, person-toperson, to Weiner in Chicago, Chicago . Ruby placed the call in person-to-person from the carousel Club to Weiner . Ruby was the first person to contact Weiner
 When questioned by the FBI three days after Ruby shot Oswald, Weiner refused to provide any information about this call . Weiner refused any information from the FBI when questioned .
 Yaras was one of a group of mobsters monitored by an FBI bug in 1962 . He was planning a murder contract in Miami and discussing previous killings . Yaras is one of the group monitored by the FBI in Miami .
 Bug provided transcripts detailing mob executions, later published by Life magazine, and saved the life of the intended victim . Bug provided grisly transcripts of mob executions . Life magazine later published the transcripts .
 Yaras served as a go-between for Carlos Marcello and Santo Trafficante . Yaras also served as an agent for Santo trafficante. Yaras was also a key figure in the Colombian government's government .
 Yaras had engaged in mob operations in Cuba . Like Marcello, Trafficante, Hoffa, and Ruby, Yaras were involved in the Cuban mob .
 Yaras told the FBI that he knew Ruby for about fifteen years in Chicago . Yaras related enough details about Ruby’s habits and personality to indicate more than a remote acquaintance, he said . The FBI says Ruby was killed by a self-inflicted gunshot wound .
 Yaras had no recorded contacts with Ruby in 1963, but a curious indirect link brings us full circle among Ruby’s associates . Yaras, who had no record of contact with Ruby, had no known contacts with him in 1963 .
 Jack Ruby exchanged calls with teamster thug Barney Baker on November 7 and 8, 1963 . Ruby and Baker were involved in the exchange of phone calls between 1963 and 1964 .
 A three-minute call was placed from the home phone of Baker in Chicago to a “Dave” in Miami, Florida . Two weeks later on November 21, 1963, at 6:17 m.m., the night before the assassination, Baker placed a call to a "
 Baker, as identified by telephone records, was Ruby’s old friend, syndicate killer Dave Yaras . Baker was identified by phone records . Ruby's old friend was the killer of the syndicate, who was also known as Ruby's friend .
 Ruby placed a ten-minute call person-to-person placed by Ruby on November 12 . Frank Goldstein in San Francisco confirmed the call was made by Ruby .
 Goldstein describes himself as a “professional gambler’s” The gambler says he is a professional gambler . Goldstein is also known for his contacts and contacts .
 Many of the calls in Exhibit 15-1 may have been simply to tip off the recipient that Ruby would be placing a call from a pay phone later . Ruby may have called the recipient to warn them that he was going to call from the pay phone .
 Ruby is reported to have met with Johnny Rosselli, Sam Giancana’s man in Los Angeles and Las Vegas, at two small motels in Miami sometime in October 1963 1201 . It was during this same period that Ruby again traveled to New Orleans, between October
 Johnny Rosselli, Mafia hit man graduated to a top Mafioso operative, was Sam Giancana’s right-hand man in the plans of the CIA to assassinate Fidel Castro .
 He became a friend and drinking buddy with William Harvey, the man in charge of ZR/RIFLE, the CIA program to assassinate foreign leaders . Harvey became a close friend of Harvey, who oversaw the program .
 Rosselli had met with Harvey Harvey at his home in Washington, D.C. in June 1963 . Harvey died at the age of 50 in August 1963 .
 Rosselli was found cut into pieces and stuffed in an oil drum that floated to the surface in a Florida intercostal waterway . His body was found in the late summer of 1976; he was killed in 1976 .
 "We are building a very powerful body of circumstantial evidence that links the Mafia to the JFK assassination," author says . Jack Ruby was a Mafia operative, according to the author . Ruby was an operative for the Mafia, according according to CNN.com .
 Ruby’s silencing of Oswald was ordered by someone, probably the mob, to prevent Oswald from testifying because Oswald would have blown the case wide open . Ruby's silencing was not, as he initially claimed, done out of impulse and emotion for Jacqueline .
 Common sense tells us that the conspirators did not plan to have Oswald executed on national television . Oswald's execution was likely to have been national television, not national TV .
 It appears that things went terribly wrong and Ruby was ordered to correct the mistake . Ruby was reportedly ordered to fix the mistake after it went horribly wrong .
 Carlos Marcello, Mafia chieftain in New Orleans, was illegally deported to Guatemala by Robert Kennedy . Robert Kennedy deported him illegally to Guatemala in order to get him back to New Orleans .
 In 1963, before the assassination, Marcello uttered his famous death threat about John Kennedy . In 1963 he threatened to kill Kennedy, but was not killed .
 Marcello was involved with the CIA in the attempt to assassinate Fidel Castro . He was involved in the assassination attempt to kill Fidel Castro in Cuba .
 In 1992, Marcello was the only person still alive who was a major conspirator in the assassination of John Kennedy . He was still alive in 1992, and is believed to be the only survivor of the Kennedy assassination .
 He resided in New Orleans but was in the advanced stages of Alzheimers disease and uncommunicative . He was in an advanced stage of Alzheimer's disease .
 Johnny Rosselli was close subordinate of Sam Giancana . He was a close friend of the Italian politician .
 Shortly after he testified the Church Committee, Rosselli was chopped into pieces and stuffed in an oil drum in the late summer of 1976 .
 Santo Trafficante Jr, Jr, is a Mafia chieftain in Florida . He was a member of the Mafia in the state of Florida .
 Trafficante was reported to have made a death-bed confession to his attorney, Frank Ragano . Trafficante is believed to have confessed to the crime to Ragano on his attorney .
 Jimmy Hoffa was Teamsters president who had close ties with the Mafia . Teamsters union president had ties to the Mafia, including Mafia ties to organized crime .
 Hoffa reportedly put up the first money to finance the JFK assassination . Hoffa put up money to pay for the assassination of JFK .
 Guy Banister, Carlos Marcello, Oswald, and Clay Shaw are close associates of Guy and Carlos . Ferrie .
 He mysteriously committed suicide within three days after news reporters revealed that he was named by Jim Garrison as a major player in the conspiracy . Jim Garrison committed suicide after being named by Garrison as major player .
 Jim Garrison obtained indictment and prosecution of Clay Shaw for conspiracy with David Ferrie and others to assassinate John F Kennedy . Garrison was famous district attorney of New Orleans, who in 1967 obtained the indictment .
 The trial collapsed when insufficient evidence was presented to link Shaw conclusively into the conspiracy . Shaw was found guilty of murder but not guilty of attempted murder .
 Shaw was acquitted by the jury, but evidence of conspiracy developed by Garrison in his investigation has proven to be close to the mark . Garrison's investigation has proved over the years to be a reliable source of evidence .
 Garrison did not seriously implicate the Mafia or the Dallas right wing in his investigation . Garrison didn't seriously incriminate the Mafia in the investigation .
 Clay Shaw, New Orleans businessman and homosexual, was prosecuted by Jim Garrison . He was convicted of sodomy and sodomy charges in New Orleans .
 Years after Shaw’s acquittal, it was revealed by the CIA that Shaw and Ferrie were CIA agents . Shaw was acquitted of being a CIA agent .
 Shaw was closely linked to David Ferrie and Oswald . Conclusive evidence later developed by the House Select Committee on Assassinations that Shaw was linked to Ferrie .
 Shaw was a member of the board of directors of Permindex, an Italian-based corporation that was a CIA front and was linked to French OAS terrorists . State Department document shows that Shaw was member of board of board members of CIA fronted company PermIndex .
 A CIA document, released in 1996, revealed that he was closely “associated” with the CIA from 1948 to 1956 . He was closely linked to the CIA between 1948 and 1956, a document revealed in 1996 .
 Carlos Marcello made a death threat against President Kennedy in 1962 . He even described how it would be done in a letter to Kennedy .
 Marcello’s anger could have constituted a motive for the assassination . Marcella could have been angered by the assassination of Marcelli .
 Witness: New Orleans Mafia leader had been quite specific about the manner and method of his revenge . Witness: He had been specific about how and how he would get revenge .
 Marcello became enraged at the mention of Robert Kennedy’s name . Edward Becker, a former Las Vegas promoter who had lived on the fringe of the underworld, told of a meeting in September 1962 .
 Blodgett had employed Becker on occasion in 1962; he said that he believed Becker’s account . Becker's account was consistent with the account of Becker's experience .
 The HSCA severely criticized the FBI for trying to discredit Becker’s story and for failing to investigate leads that would have confirmed it . Becker's story was investigated by the FBI, but the FBI failed to confirm it, it said .
 Marcello's association with David Ferrie is one of many links to the Kennedy assassination . Both Ferrie’s connections to Oswald were also with Oswald, writes John Avlon .
 Ferrie was brought to public attention by Jim Garrison in his celebrated case in 1967 . Three days after Ferrie’s name became public, he was found dead of an alleged cerebral hemorrhage .
 Eladio del Valle was murdered in Miami within a day or two after Ferrie’s death . Among those who were murdered in the wake of Ferrie's death was a Miami native Elaadio Del Valle .
 Marcello’s connections to David Ferrie are extensive and well documented . He has a long history of connections to Ferrie, including his connections to the late actor .
 Ferrie worked for Marcello as a pilot and worked for his attorney, G Wray Gill, as a research assistant . Ferrie also worked for Gill as an assistant to Gill .
 Marcello also was listed as a sponsor for a service station that Ferrie operated in 1964 . Ferrie ran the service station in 1964, when he died .
 David Ferrie was a rabid anti-Communist and a homosexual with a penchant for boys . He was associated with the Cuban Revolutionary Council and Guy Banister, a private detective, ex-FBI agent, and reputed high leader in the Minutemen .
 Ferrie was also associated with Clay Shaw, a New Orleans businessman who was a homosexual, a CIA operative . Shaw was also connected with worldwide, extreme right-wing organizations, including Permindex, allegedly a CIA company .
 Ferrie was a frequent associate of Oswald, having been seen with him around New Orleans many times by numerous witnesses . He was seen with Oswald many times in New Orleans, New Orleans .
 Oswald was a former cadet in the Louisiana Civil Air Patrol commanded by Ferrie . Oswald was also a former member of the Louisiana civil air patrol .
 Two photographs have recently been discovered showing the two together . Two photographs of the two have also been discovered .
 Oswald's connections to Marcello include the fact that Oswald’s surrogate father and uncle, Charles Merret, was a lieutenant . Ferrie and other figures in the Garrison investigation, including Clay Shaw, had indeed worked for the agency #41 .
 Oswald received money from a man who was later discovered to be a top lieutenant of Carlos Marcello—Joe Poretto—in the Town and Country restaurant . The FBI informer says Oswald got the money from Poretto in April 1963 .
 The FBI questioned Anthony Marcello shortly after the assassination but then dropped the inquiry . The FBI also dropped an inquiry into the assassination of George Kennedy .
 It was also the address of Guy Banister’s office and next door to the office of Jim Braden, a Mafia operative who was arrested in Dealey Plaza immediately after the JFK assassination .
 Garrison certainly knew about Carlos Marcello, who was the biggest mobster in New Orleans . Garrison knew about the biggest New Orleans mobster . Garrison was a New Orleans native .
 Some suspect Garrison was blind to the Mafia connection because he had been compromised by them . Garrison was a CIA operative who was compromised by the Mafia, some say . Garrison is believed to have been a CIA agent .
 Others suspect Garrison was a shill for the mob and that his entire investigation was a ruse to direct attention to the CIA and away from Marcello . Garrison is accused of being a CIA shill .
 Of all the investigative work done in the JFK assassination, few have withstood the test of time as well as Jim Garrison’s . Garrison was strangely silent on the Mafia, although he was strangely silence on Mafia .
 Garrison’s case was a central part of a visit by Oswald, Ferrie, and Shaw to Clinton, Louisiana, in August-September 1963 . Garrison's case is part of the case against Oswald and Ferrie .
 Oswald contacts with anti-Castro Cubans were known at the time of the 1964 investigation . Allegations of additional Cuba-related associations surfaced in subsequent years . Oswald in Clinton, La, in 1964 .
 Oswald reportedly appeared in August-September 1963 in Clinton, La., where a voting rights demonstration was in progress . Oswald reportedly attended a demonstration in September 1963 . Oswald is believed to have been a member of the Ku Klux Klan in Louisiana .
 The reports of Oswald in Clinton were not, as far as the committee could determine, available to the Warren Commission . One witness said he notified the FBI when he recognized Oswald from news photographs .
 Clinton sightings did not surface until 1967, when they were introduced as evidence in the assassination investigation being conducted by New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison . In fact, the sightings didn't publicly surface until that day .
 One suspect, David W Ferrie, a staunch antiCastro partisan, died within days of having been named by Garrison . The other, Clay L Shaw, was acquitted in 1969 .
 Garrison had been criticized for questionable tactics . The committee proceeded cautiously, making sure to determine the credibility of its probe .
 The committee found that Clinton witnesses were credible and significant . The committee also found that the Clinton witnesses are credible and important .
 They each were interviewed or deposed, or appeared before the committee in executive session .
 The committee's judgment was that the committee was telling the truth as they knew it . While there were points that could be raised to call into question their credibility, it was the judgment of the committee that they were telling truth .
 There were six Clinton witnesses, among them a State representative, a deputy sheriff and a registrar of voters . Six Clinton witnesses were interviewed by Clinton supporters .
 The committee synthesized testimony of all of them, since they each contributed to the overall account, the committee was able to piece together the sequence of events .
 In the summer of 1963 it was targeted by the Congress of Racial Equality for a voting rights campaign . In the late summer, 1963, it was used as a polling place for voting rights .
 Oswald first showed up in nearby Jackson, La., seeking employment at East Louisiana State Hospital . Oswald is a former inmate of a mental institution in Louisiana .
 Witnesses gave physical descriptions of Oswald that matched that of Oswald . Other observations of the witnesses substantiate their belief that he was, in fact, the man they saw .
 For example, he referred to himself as ‘Oswald,’ and produced his Marine Corps discharge papers as identification .
 Oswald was accompanied by two older men, Ferrie and Shaw, witnesses said . Witnesses said they saw Oswald accompanied by older men . Some witnesses said that Oswald was with two other men, Shaw and Ferrie .
 Evidence of associations between Oswald, Ferrie, Shaw, and Banister that have been reported over the years have developed into an iron-clad case . If the witnesses were not only truthful but accurate as well in their accounts, they established an association of an undetermined nature between Ferrie
 James DiEugenio, author of Destiny Betrayed and specialist on Jim Garrison and the New Orleans evidence, presented extensive documentation that he has recently developed of the trip by Oswald, Ferrie, and Shaw to help Oswald get a job in a state mental hospital .
 This trip was corroborated by forty-five witnesses, corroborating by 40, witnesses . The trip was a very strange event, says CNN.com's Rob Greene .
 Carlos Marcello had contacts with the CIA that could have provided him with the expertise to plan and carry out the Oswald impersonation schemes . David Ferrie, Carlos Marcelo and David Marcella are all believed to be involved in the schemes .
 Marcello was involved and played a role in the 1961-1963 CIA/Mafia plots to assassinate Fidel Castro . He played a key role in a plot to assassinate Castro .
 Marcello had a close friend in Washington, a lobbyist by the name of Irving Davidson, who served as an unofficial lobbyist for the CIA on Capitol Hill . Davidson also served as a lobbyist to the CIA, who worked for the government .
 Davidson had contacts with almost anyone in the CIA, and with J Edgar Hoover . Davidson also had contact with J. Edgar Hoover, FBI and CIA .
 David Ferrie could have cooked up the scheme to provide an Oswald impersonator to go around Dallas, as in the rifle range and the MercuryLincoln dealership incidents . It is possible, and should be considered seriously, that Ferrie himself could have created the scheme .
 Ferrie could also have sent Oswald or an impersonator to Mexico City to make contact with the Soviet and Cuban embassies there to implicate Oswald .
 One might conclude that Carlos Marcello could have singlehandedly been the mastermind behind the conspiracy . David Ferrie, other CIA-linked rogues, and Mafia minions Jack Ruby could have worked with the mad genius . Jack Ruby was Jack Ruby's accomplice .
 Marcello’s associates in Dallas could plausibly have worked with right-wing businessmen and the Dallas police to control events there . The Dallas police could have helped control events in the area .
 I would say that it is not likely that such extreme steps would be planned before the fact . But plausible if done after the fact when Oswald was captured, throwing everything into a cocked hat .
 Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover would have agreed to the forgeries of the Zapruder film and autopsy x-rays unless forced to do so by a botched plot of which they were a part . In other words, it seems impossible that LBJ and J. Edgar Hoover .
 He was sometimes known as “the professor, or the master of intrigue,” by his associates in the anti-Castro movement . He was also known as "the master of . intrigue" by associates in his associates .
 Ferrie organized the New Orleans Civil Air Patrol into a highly respected unit . Ferrie had strong organizational abilities; he organized the Air Patrol in New Orleans .
 He, like Marcello, had an ability to influence others to do his bidding . He had a similar power of influence to influence people in his own life .
 Both Ferrie and Marcello were right-wing extremists and militant segregationists . Ferrie practiced hypnosis .
 Carlos Marcello, his family, and David Ferrie were present at the trial . The trial was a very important event indeed, and was attended by the family and friends of the victim .
 David Ferrie's boss, Carlos Marcello, dealt a devastating legal blow to Robert Kennedy’s Justice Department . The case was the result of a lawsuit filed by David F. Ferrie against Robert Kennedy's Justice Department in New York .
 President Kennedy, of whom Ferrie had made public statements outlining a cross-fire plot of how Kennedy should be assassinated, had now been assassinated in Dallas . Ferrie: "President Kennedy had been assassinated"
 Lee Harvey Oswald, Ferrie’s friend, had been captured by the Dallas police and accused of the crime . Ferrie and Oswald were friends in Dallas, Texas .
 David Ferrie and Carlos Marcello were at the centre of the world's most recent crisis . David and Carlos Ferrie were in the midst of a crisis in the United States . The pair have been together for more than a decade .
 Ferrie took off in his car with two young male companions and headed for Houston, Texas, on November 23 . Ferrie drove through a thunderstorm and arrived in Houston at 4.30pm on Nov 23, arriving in Houston .
 The route of this fascinating trip and the timing of events are shown in Exhibit 15-4 . The route and timing of this trip is shown in exhibit 15-3 . Exhibit shows how the trip took place .
 Before Ferrie and his companions left New Orleans, Ferrie had placed a telephone call to a motel in Houston that was owned by Carlos Marcello . Ferrie made a reservation for the night at a Houston motel .
 After that, he telephoned the owner of the Winterland Skating Rink in Houston and asked about the skating schedule . After that he called the owner to check out the schedule for the skating .
 Ferrie placed a collect call to the Town and Country Motel in New Orleans, Carlos Marcello’s headquarters . Sometime during the afternoon of the next day, Saturday, November 23, Ferrie called the Motel . Ferrie was arrested in the wake of the
 Ferrie and his companions never got around to ice skating in Houston, Texas . Ferrie says he and his friends were in Houston for ice skating, but never did it .
 Jack Ruby’s friend from Dallas, Breck Wall, arrived at the scene . They happened to arrive just before Jack Ruby's friend, Jack Ruby, arrived there .
 Breck Wall visited the home of Thomas J McKenna and received a telephone call from Jack Ruby . McKenna received a call from Ruby at 11:44m. on November 23, 2012 .
 It does not take much imagination to suspect that the frenetic trip was precipitated by Oswald having been captured in Dallas . There was an urgent need to communicate with Jack Ruby in a manner that would be difficult to trace .
 First is the logical assumption that somebody must have communicated with Ruby, ordering him to eliminate Oswald . Second is the assumption that Ruby must have been ordered to kill Oswald . The assumption is that Ruby was ordered to carry out the assassination .
 Ferrie's trip may have been to accomplish both purposes . Oswald was captured, thus accelerating Ferrie’s departure from New Orleans on that stormy night .
 Evidence that Ferrie’s mission to Houston and Galveston was to fly a get-away plane was reinforced when Dick Russell paid a visit to a gay activist named Raymond Broshears .
 He was going to fly these people on to Mexico, and eventually to South Africa, which did not have an extradition treaty with the U.S. He was flying them to Mexico and South Africa . South Africa is not extradited to the United States .
 David had a twin engine plane ready for them and that was the purpose of his mad dash through a driving rainstorm from New Orleans . They had left from some little airfield between Dallas and Fort Worth, Texas .
 Broshears went on to tell Russell that David Ferrie had told him that Lee Oswald did not kill the president . They did not L301 Broshearars told Russell that Ferrie said Lee Oswald didn't kill JFK .
 He also said Ferrie had told him that four people were going to shoot Kennedy . Ferrie told him he was going to be shot at Kennedy, he said .
 Ferrie told him that one of the men fired from a sewer opening along the parade route, another from a grassy knoll, and someone from behind . He said that later in 1964 Ferrie said he was told one of those men fired .
 He said Ferrie told him that Carlos Marcello was the one who put up the money for the killing . Ferrie said he was most closely aligned with the people who actually engineered the killing, he said .
 Ferrie told him he never worked for the CIA but might have been working for them without realizing it, he said . Ferrie said Ferrie may have worked for them but may not have known he was working for CIA .
 Ferrie said he was working for people he saw as patriotic Americans . Ferrie: "I'm working for those who want to be patriotic Americans" Ferrie says he's working for patriotic Americans.
 Broshears said Ferrie participated in the assassination for patriotic purposes and was manipulated by the government . He said the government manipulated Ferrie .
 Ferrie told Broshears he was going to be killed, and the next thing he knew was that he was dead . Ferrie was killed by a gunshot wound to the head .
 While Ferrie and his companions were in Texas, the New Orleans police were on a major manhunt for him . Ferrie was found dead in Texas .
 The reason for trying to find Ferrie was that he had been identified on a television program as being a friend of Oswald’s . This had triggered an allegation by Jack Martin, a private investigator and friend of Ferrie's who worked for Guy Banister .
 Banister pistol-whipped Martin over the head with the butt of his .345 magnum, Martin says . Martin says Banister then pistol whipped him, beat him over head with butt of gun . Martin: Banister beat Martin over head, pistol-wipped him .
 Martin saw the next day that three men were discussing Oswald’s friends in New Orleans and mentioned David Ferrie . The next day, Martin saw a television program during which three men discussed Oswald's friends . Ferrie was a New Orleans native .
 Martin suspected that Oswald and Ferrie had conspired to assassinate President Kennedy . Martin decided to get in touch with the police and telephoned his friend, New Orleans Assistant District Attorney Herman Kohlman, and told him that he suspected the two men conspired .
 Oswald and Ferrie’s relationship went back to 1955 when they had both served on the New Orleans Civil Air Patrol . Martin told a friend of Kohlman that Oswald, Ferrie's relationship, began in 1955 . The next day, Sunday, November 24, Martin said that
 Martin said Ferrie had taught Oswald how to fire a rifle with a telescopic sight . Ferrie hated Kennedy and he had once heard him discussing with Oswald the possibility of assassinating Kennedy . Martin said he had heard Ferrie tell Oswald of his plans to kill Kennedy .
 Ferrie’s library card was found on Oswald at the time of his arrest . Ferrie's library card had been found in Oswald's arrest . The noose around Ferrie tightened on November 25 .
 Library card found on Oswald was revealed to FBI by Marcello’s attorney, G Wray Gill . Library card had been found in Oswald's home .
 Ferrie learned in Galveston that Dallas police were looking for him, he returned to New Orleans on Monday, November 25 . Ferrie was arrested in Dallas, Texas, on November 23 .
 He was interviewed by the FBI, the Secret Service, and the New Orleans police . He was then interviewed by police and the FBI .
 They were never mentioned in the FBI summary report and were not turned over to the Warren Commission . The Warren Commission did not turn over the report .
 All of the November records of David Ferrie’s telephone calls were declared ‘unavailable’ by his lawyer, G Wray Gill . Ferrie's lawyer declared all of his November phone records “unavailable .” Ferrie says he has no record of
 This information only started to surface in 1967 when Jim Garrison began his re-investigation of the Kennedy assassination . This information was only discovered in 1967 .
 As we see throughout this book, further study of a given subject reveals intricacies of the conspiracy that lead to other suspects . As we can see, further studies of a subject reveal intricacies that lead other suspects, says author .
 Ruby's murder of Oswald serves to implicate the Dallas police force, with credible evidence that some of its officers were involved in the JFK assassination conspiracy . In Ruby’s case, a fuller understanding of his murder serves to incriminate the police force .
 Oswald charged Oswald through a cordon of police and fatally shot him . Then, he just happened to have an impulse to pull out his revolver, charge Oswald through the cordon .
 The second answer proposed does not require these ridiculously improbable coincidences . Instead, the second answer is that it doesn't require these coincidences to occur .
 It assumes that there was some very intricate planning and timing which involved bringing Oswald into the basement at the precise time that the police knew Ruby would arrive . The police knew that Oswald would arrive at the time of the attack .
 The purpose of the Sunday telegram at 11:17m. in that case would be to stage a reason for Ruby to be in the vicinity of the police station at that time . Ruby was believed to have been in the area at the time .
 If it were timed that way, then someone in the police department is guilty of giving the information as to when Lee Harvey Oswald was coming down, he says . Someone in the department may have given the information .
 It will be helpful to examine Ruby’s activities in November 1963 and in particular on November 21, 22, 23, and 24 .
 In doing so, we get an extremely interesting portrait of a highly agitated man involved in a conspiracy . In doing . doing so we get a very interesting portrait . of an agitated man .
 Met racketeer Al Gruber and mob hit man Paul R Jones in Dallas over a two-week period; both Mafia connected . Both mobsters were connected to the Dallas Mafia .
 Ruby visits Las Vegas where he could have met Lewis Mc Willie, mob hit man . Visits office of Lamar Hunt with Connie Trammell . Met with Jeah Aase and Lawrence Meyers at Cabana Motel where Eugene Hale Brading was also staying .
 Kennedy shot while Ruby was at Dallas Morning News Building . Ruby seen at Parkland Hospital by Seth Kantor . Went to Carousel Club and placed phone call to Al Gruber in Los Angeles . Has Nichols’ parking garage attendant sign receipt that Karen Carlin was given $5 at
 The three hadn't been together since 1947, and Al Gruber hadn’t had contact with Ruby for the preceding ten years . Gruber and Ruby hadn't seen each other for 10 years .
 During this same two-week period, Ruby phoned another mob hit man, Lennie Patrick, in Chicago . During the same two weeks, he phoned a hit man in Chicago to get his hit .
 On November 17, Ruby met Lewis McWillie, yet another mob hit man and contact of Santo Trafficante, Jr., in Tampa, Florida . Ruby took a trip to Las Vegas where he met another hit man in November .
 The relationship of Ruby and McWillie went back to the days when Trafficante ran gambling casinos in Cuba, before Castro took over . Trafficante's casinos were run by Trafficante, who later ran gambling in Cuba .
 Jack Ruby had personal meetings with mob hit men shortly before the assassination of John Kennedy . Ruby had a frenzy of telephone calls to Mafia figures all over the U.S. and Mafia figures .
 Ruby met with a Jean Aase and Lawrence Meyers at the Cabana Motel in Dallas, Dallas, the day before the assassination . The next suspicious activity of note was on the evening of November 21, the night before the shooting .
 Eugene Hale Brading was also seen at the Cabana Motel . By a curious coincidence, he was seen in the same place as Eugene .
 Braden was arrested in Dealey Plaza a few minutes after the Kennedy assassination . He was leaving the Dal-Tex Building, which is believed a shot or shots were fired at Kennedy in the motorcade .
 It just happened that Braden was a Mafia-connected figure, an ex-convict on parole, and just happened to be visiting in Dallas at that time . He was visiting the Dal-Tex Building to make a phone call when he was in the building .
 Jack Ruby was in the Dallas Morning News Building at 12:30m. on November 22 when Kennedy was shot . Ruby was likely in the building at the time of the November 22 shooting .
 Mary Ferrell, veteran researcher in Dallas, told me that she had four witnesses confirming that fact . She said she has four witnesses to confirm that fact.
 Ruby is next seen at Parkland Memorial Hospital between 1:30 and 2:00m. by the highly respected newsman Seth Kantor . Ruby was last seen at the hospital between 1-30 p.m.
 Kantor testified that he ran across Ruby in the hallway and spoke to him briefly . Kantor said he spoke to Ruby briefly before he was arrested .
 It has long been suspected that Ruby planted the magic bullet, number 399, on the stretcher . Ruby is believed to have planted the bullet on a stretcher at the scene of the accident .
 Ruby went to his Carousel Club and placed a phone call to Al Gruber in Los Angeles . Ruby called Gruber between 2:00 and 3:00 p.m. Ruby then placed a call to Gruber's Los Angeles office . Gruber died in a car crash in
 Oswald, instead of being shot while escaping as planned, had been captured by the Dallas police, and therefore a major problem had emerged . Ruby could have been calling Al Gruber to ask for further instructions .
 Al Gruber was an associate of Johnny Rosselli who was Sam Giancana’s right-hand man in Los Angeles . It should be noted that he was also associated with Sam Giancasana .
 He is carrying a loaded gun, to which he admitted in his testimonies to the Warren Commission . He admitted in testimony to Warren Commission that he was carrying a gun .
 Karen Carlin was given $5 at 9:30m. Then, at about 10:30 m.m., he had the Nichols parking garage attendant sign a receipt that he had signed .
 Ruby attended a press conference at the Dallas police station where Oswald was displayed . Ruby returned to the police station at 11:30 a.m. to attend the press conference . Ruby attended the Dallas press conference where he attended Oswald's display .
 Ruby interjected to tell everybody that it was actually “The Fair Play for Cuba” committee . Ruby then told everybody that the committee was actually a committee of Cuban players .
 Ruby met a Dallas policeman by the name of Harry Olsen who was with a dancer, Kay Coleman . Ruby met Olsen at some time between 2:00m. and 3:00 m.
 Ruby had exhibited outbursts of tears and emotion about the Kennedy assassination . Ruby had previously exhibited emotional responses to Kennedy's assassination .
 He alternately appeared to be grief-stricken, highly energized, and agitated . He alternates between grief and agitated, often with grief . He appeared to appear to be very energized and very angry .
 At one time, when he was with his sister, he went in the bathroom and vomited out of overwhelming emotion . At another time, he said, "I was overwhelmed with emotion"
 Ruby gave a demonstration of a twist board at the Dallas Times Herald Building at 4:00m. on November 23 .
 He then called an employee to bring a Polaroid camera to take a picture of an “Impeach Earl Warren’s sign at Dealey Plaza . The three of them then took a photo of the sign . The photo was taken by an employee who brought the Polaroid
 Ruby talked about the importance of this sign because it implied a right-wing conspiracy to kill Kennedy . They went to Dealey Plaza and took the picture while Ruby talked . Ruby said it was important that the sign implied a conspiracy to murder Kennedy .
 He is next seen at 3:00m. on November 23, standing in front of the county jail waiting for the Oswald transfer .
 Oswald was scheduled to be moved to the jail at the time but there was a last-minute change . Oswald was moved to jail at that time . Oswald had been scheduled to move to jail .
 Ruby went to the Dallas police station still carrying his loaded gun . Ruby learned this, and he went to police station on the third floor carrying the gun .
 Ruby was observed at various places in Dallas where there were pay telephones . On the evening of November 23, the event took place in Dallas .
 The next evidence of Ruby’s whereabouts was shortly after 2:15m. when the Dallas sheriff's office and the FBI offices received warnings that Oswald would be shot in the transfer to the county jail the next day . Oswald was transferred to the Dallas County Jail .
 The man in the sheriff’s office who received this call later identified the voice as belonging to Jack Ruby . Jack Ruby was the subject of the call . The call was made to the sheriff's office in the early hours of the morning .
 Dallas police received a similar warning that Oswald was going to be shot during the transfer . Oswald was shot in the transfer of Oswald from Dallas to Dallas . Dallas police were warned Oswald would be shot in Dallas .
 Ruby shot Oswald at 11:17m. on November 24 . Oswald was shot by Ruby in the head at 11.17m . Ruby was killed by a single bullet fired at Oswald .
 There is conflicting testimony concerning Ruby’s activities that morning that morning . Ruby was found dead at the scene of the shooting .
 Ruby received a call from one of his nightclub strippers, Karen Carlin, requesting that $25 be wired to her as an emergency loan . According to Ruby, he received a telephone call from a stripper at 10:19 m.m. asking for $25 .
 Ruby stated that he went to the Western Union office and wired the $25 to her at 11:17 a.m. Ruby said he wired the money to her via Western Union . Ruby said that he received the call from her and wired her the money .
 Ruby said he then walked over to the Dallas police building, walked down an auto ramp leading to the basement . Ruby said on impulse pulled out his gun and shot Oswald in the abdomen at close range . Ruby: "On impulse, on impulse, I pulled out my gun"
 Ruby was hanging around the Dallas police building all morning between 8:00m. and 10:30m. The problem with Ruby’s story is that there are several credible witnesses who testified that he was there all morning .
 TV news crewmen and a preacher saw Ruby on an elevator in the police building at about 9:30m. These witnesses were TV news crews and a preacher .
 Ruby's cleaning lady testified that she called Ruby’s apartment some time after 8:00m. when a strange voice responded who did not appear to know who she was . The cleaning lady, Elnora Pitts, testified that Ruby's apartment was burglarized by a
 This is based on evidence that Senator placed a telephone call from the Eat Well Cafe to attorney Jim Martin in Dallas a few minutes before Ruby shot Oswald . Senator placed the call to Martin, requesting that the attorney represent Ruby for the shooting that had not yet occurred .
 An understanding of what actually took place is facilitated by placing oneself in the minds of the conspirators after Oswald was captured . [L136]
 The conspirators, in a panic, realized that Oswald must be silenced—immediately . Oswald's assassination was the result of a panic in the U.S. He was assassinated in November 1963 .
 Oswald killed in his jail cell was too obvious and would clearly implicate the Dallas police . Dallas police would have to kill Oswald in jail cell . Oswald's death would have been too obvious to implicate police .
 The only alternative was to have him shot while being transferred to the county jail while in the presence of a large number of newsmen and bystanders . The only other option was to shoot him as he was transferred to county jail .
 The unlucky person selected to perform the execution was Jack Ruby, who was ordered to do so by his Mafia superiors . Ruby was the only person to be selected to carry out the execution . Jack Ruby performed the execution of his Mafia bosses .
 Ruby’s telephone calls to Al Gruber in Los Angeles and Breck Wall in Galveston were coordinated . This order was coordinated through Ruby's phone calls to Gruber and Wall's subsequent telephone call to Breck .
 The scheme would take considerable coordination and planning to make it appear to be an act of emotion by an enraged citizen who was an admirer of the Kennedys . Obviously this scheme would have to be coordinated and planning, says author .
 Ruby must have been near the police station at the time of the transfer . Ruby was transferred to a nearby police station in the early hours of this morning .
 "It would look less emotionally spontaneous and more deliberately planned. Otherwise it would look more emotionally spontaneous," she said . "I'm not going to let it go," she added .
 He placed the telegram to Karen Carlin at 11:17m. following her call to his apartment at 10:19 m.m. His telegram was placed after she called him at 10-19m. The telegram came from the same time as her call .
 Karen Carlin would have to be brought into the scheme to get her to place the 10:19 m.m. call . The call would be made at 10.19 a.m., or 10.20 a. m.
 She would later be intimidated by the conspirators to testify to that effect . She would then be intimidated to testify that effect.
 In order for Ruby to be on top of things and to receive messages regarding the exact timing of the transfer, he would have to be free on the morning of November 24 and near the Dallas police building . Shortly after her testimony she disappeared and has not been seen or heard from since .
 When the time of transfer was set, Ruby would be signaled, and he would then go to the Western Union office to place his telegram . Ruby would then be signaled to place the telegram, and the transfer would take place in time .
 Oswald would be brought down the elevator and into the police building basement, timed exactly for the execution . Oswald would then be observed by a conspiratorial coordinator, and at that moment a conspirator would be bringing him down . Oswald was shot by Oswald in the head at the time .
 If there were an unanticipated delay in bringing Oswald into the basement, there would be a means devised to hold Ruby off for a few minutes . Oswald would be brought to the basement of the White House .
 This would be accomplished by someone in the Dallas police station simply leaving a door unlocked leading from the alley to the basement . The door would be left open from an alleyway to a basement, police say .
 Supporting evidence is found in the statements of Karen Carlin just after the assassination . Supporting evidence found in statements of Carlin's statements just after her assassination .
 Dallas police were involved in the scheme to silence Oswald . Oswald was killed in the assassination of President Lincoln Lincoln . The Dallas police allegedly conspired to silence him .
 Oswald's killing would have been practically impossible without the help of the Dallas police . Ruby's killing of Oswald by Ruby was carefully orchestrated, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Oswald was killed by Ruby in Dallas, Texas .
 Sergeant Patrick T Dean may have been directly involved in the Dallas shooting . Dean was a Dallas police officer who may be directly involved .
 He was also in charge of security in the basement of the police building that morning that morning .
 He was on good terms with Joe Civello, Mafia boss in Dallas, subordinate to Carlos Marcello in New Orleans . He also had good relations with Marcella, a New Orleans Mafia boss, and with Dallas Mafia boss .
 Dean is the one who verified Ruby’s statement that he entered the basement via the auto ramp, which was later refuted by numerous witnesses as having been impossible without their having seen him . Dean is especially noteworthy that Dean is one of the ones who verified that Ruby entered the room via
 In view of all of the foregoing evidence and circumstances, Ruby’s murder of Oswald has all the appearances of a meticulously planned event, involving elements of the Dallas police and the Mafia . In summary, in . view of the . foregoing evidence, . the murder of . Oswald has
 Mobster Johnny Rosselli said that Ruby had been ordered to kill Oswald . This suspicion was confirmed to columnist Jack Anderson in the 1970s by an aging mobster .
 The evidence of Dallas police complicity in Oswald’s murder further strengthens the case against the Dallas police . Combining that with the evidence of police complicity, the case further strengthens Dallas police's case .
 Tippit was killed in Oak Cliff, Texas, a suburb of Dallas, Texas . He was killed between 36 and 45 minutes after JFK's murder .
 Bowley saw Tippit's body lying next to his squad car . Bowley, who was driving by and a . a , saw Tipperit’s body lying . next to the squad car, Bowley said. Bowley was a police officer .
 Oswald was nine-tenths of a mile away, standing at a bus stop no earlier than 1:03m. Oswald was blamed for Tippit’s murder although it was established that he was standing at bus stop . Oswald was found to have been standing no earlier
 Oswald left the depository building at approximately 12:33m . Lee Harvey Oswald proceeded to his rooming house by bus and taxi . Oswald was shot dead in Dallas, Texas, in November 1963 .
 Oswald would have had to run a sixminute mile to be at the scene of the crime . Oswald's time of the shooting of Tippit was 1:10m, the latest time is 1:20m, according to the latest estimate .
 The Warren Commission could not locate one witness who saw Oswald or anyone else running or walking from his rooming house to the scene of the Tippit slaying . Yet the Warren Commission was unable to find one witness to see Oswald at the scene . Oswald's rooming home was the scene
 Oswald’s Rooming House and Tippit Murder Scene to the Texas Theater . Relationship of Oswald's . Rooming . House and murder scene to Texas Theater: Oswald's Rooming Home .
 Lt. Oswald still would not have had time to walk to the @usuncrime scene . Ltn. Oswald would still have been able to get to the scene of the shooting .
 Oswald's rooming house was the equivalent of eighteen blocks from the Tippit murder scene . Oswald’s rooming home was located in the same place as the murder scene of the day . Oswald lived in a room that was 18 blocks from where the murder occurred .
 Oswald could not have arrived at the murder scene until 1:21 m., six minutes too late to commit the murder . Oswald had left his rooming house at 1:03m. , therefore, if Oswald had arrived at 1.21 m. , he was six minutes late to
 Oswald could not have shot Tippit unless he were driven to the murder scene by someone . Oswald could have been driven by someone else to the scene .
 Oswald would have needed an accomplice to do the driving . But, obviously, that is an entirely different matter . Oswald's accomplice would have had to do that .
 Warren Commission established Oswald shot Tippit because it added to their theory that he was some sort of a crazy nut, wantonly killing people . It was very important for the Warren Commission to establish that Oswald shot Oswald, the author says . Oswald was a "crazy nut," wantonly
 Their circuitous argument was that Oswald killed Tippit because he had just killed Kennedy and was fleeing the scene . Then they turned it around saying that Oswald was a nut who could have killed Kennedy because he was a crazy killer as proven by the murder of Tipperit .
 Only Helen Markham identified Oswald at the scene of the murder . Helen was the only person to identify Oswald as Oswald .
 It is obvious from her testimony that Helen Markham had an extremely confused mind . When I saw this man I wasn’t sure, but I had cold . When she saw him, she said, 'I wasn't sure' Markham said .
 Clemons stated that she saw two men standing near Officer Tippit’s car at the time of the murder . Clemons said she saw them standing near the officer's car when he was killed .
 She saw one of the men with a pistol waving the other away as he ran down to Jefferson Street . The two men were seen running down Jefferson Street from the scene .
 Second man described as tall and thin, in clothing totally different from what Oswald was wearing that day . The second man described is tall, thin and thin and in clothing different from Oswald's . Oswald was found dead at the scene of the shooting .
 Benavides was the closest of the witnesses; he was located only a few yards away when the murder was committed . He was located just yards away from the murder scene .
 There were several other witnesses who had valuable information, none of it linking Oswald to the crime, but they, too, were not called by the Commission . None of the information was linked to Oswald .
 Frank Wright saw the last part of the scene that was described by Clemons . Frank Wright was one of the witnesses to witness the shooting .
 Officer Tippit rolled over on the ground, probably the last move of his life . Mr Wright, who had been inside the house, came out in time to see the officer roll over . He had been in the house at the time of the incident .
 The man circled around the police car and got into an old, gray car on the other side of it . Then he got in an old gray car . The man then circled around police car .
 It seemed to be the second man Clemons had observed, the one who was waved off by the short, heavy one who ran away . The short-heavy one ran away from Clemons, the man he waved off .
 If Oswald was innocent of the Tippit murder, the foundation of the government’s case against him collapsed . Oswald was accused of the murder of T.E. D.C. journalist James T. Baker . The government's case against Oswald collapsed .
 Warren Reynolds identified Oswald in a line-up as the man he saw running away from the scene . There was one other witness, Warren Reynolds, who identified Oswald . Reynolds said he saw Oswald run away from scene .
 Reynolds initially told the FBI he would 'hesitate' to identify Oswald as the running man . Reynolds had initially said he would ‘hesitate’ to identify the man . He had initially told FBI that he would not identify Oswald .
 Reynolds had second thoughts about what he had seen and decided the running man actually was Oswald . After a miraculous recovery in the hospital, Reynolds decided Oswald was the real man .
 The Commission failed to tie Oswald to the murder of Tippit by either the timing evidence or by eyewitnesses . They also failed also to tie the four bullets found in the body with Oswald’s revolver . Oswald's revolver was also found to be in the same place as the
 Three of the bullets were copper coated and manufactured by Winchester Western Company . Winchester Western made the bullets . Three of these bullets were made of Winchester .
 The fourth was a lead bullet manufactured by the Remington Peters Company . The lead bullet was made from a Remington bullet made by the company .
 Bullets are never sold in mixed lots, which raises the question of how Oswald happened to have the revolver loaded with bullets from two manufacturers . Oswald's revolver was never made of bullets from both manufacturers .
 Four cartridges allegedly found at the crime scene were matched to Oswald’s revolver . But not until a six-day delay by Dallas police, during which time they had possession of the revolver, they matched it .
 The initial list of evidence by the Dallas police did not include cartridges of any kind, arousing suspicion that Oswald’s revolver had been fired after the fact to produce the cartridges . Oswald's revolver was found in Dallas, Texas, in November 1963 .
 Poe later testified that he believed he had marked them with his initials . Poe, who later testified, said he thought he had done so . Poe was a member of the Poe family . Poe's family is now in the U.S.
 Four bullets found in Tippit's body could not be identified with Oswald's revolver . Of the four bullets, three were from one manufacturer and the fourth from another manufacturer . There were no initials of any kind on any of the four cartridges .
 There was a six-day delay by Dallas police in submitting the cartridges to the FBI . They had possession of the revolver and plausibly could have fired bullets to create the cartridges .
 Oswald had walked or driven to the Texas Theater for some purpose, probably to rendezvous with someone who would get him out of the country where he would later be murdered . Oswald's view is that, instead of going to 10th and Patton, Oswald had gone to the theater for some
 A second scenario is that Tippit was murdered by the conspirators to set up Oswald as a wanton killer, thus linking him to the JFK assassination . A third scenario is a second scenario that Tipper was murdered .
 A third scenario is that Tippit was supposed to have picked up Oswald at a spot near Oswald’s rooming house, but for some reason he failed to do so, either losing his courage or bungling the effort . A third possibility is that Oswald's body was found
 The plotters, fearing that Tippit would talk, ordered that he be killed . Tippet was killed by the plotters fearing he would talk .
 Tippit was supposed to have taken Oswald to a private airport, where he would be flown somewhere and killed . In this scenario, Oswald would have been flown to an undisclosed location .
 Oswald, missing his ride, in desperation proceeded on foot and ducked into the Texas Theater, knowing nothing else else to do . Oswald missed his ride and decided to duck into the theater . Oswald, who was in the theater at the time, was forced to abandon his car .
 "I tend to favor this scenario. He was spotted going into the theater and then captured," he said . He was seen going into a theater, then captured, he added .
 I decided at this point not to pursue the murder of Tippit further, however fascinating the mystery .
 Sam Giancana is a prime suspect in the assassination of Mafia leader who is a key suspect . Sam is believed to be a key figure in the Mafia . Sam was assassinated in 1993 by the Mafia in the 1980s .
 The talking started before the assassination and has continued to this day . The talking has started before and after the assassination of JFK .
 David Atlee Phillips suspected of being Maurice Bishop and perpetrator of multiple Oswalds . Phillips said fringe elements of U.S. intelligence may have been involved in the conspiracy .
 Lyndon Johnson’s mistress, Madeleine Brown, has said that Lyndon Johnson implied before Kennedy was killed that it was going to happen . As earlier noted, Brown said that Johnson implied that it would happen .
 Marita Lorenz, CIA contract agent, said Frank Sturgis told her that he and a group of anti-Castro Cubans had been involved in the Kennedy assassination . Frank's testimony was part of a courtroom trial .
 Sam Giancana confessed to the crime in 1966, just before he was about to move to Mexico City . His brother, Chuck, revealed in a recent book Double Cross, that his brother Sam confessed to his crime .
 I have often thought that if the full truth ever came out about the Kennedy assassination, it would be in the form of talk and confessions by individuals who were either part of the assassination or were friends or relatives of the conspirators .
 A great irony is that most or all of these confessions and revelations must be dismissed by investigators . Most or all these confessions must be rejected by investigators, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: 'A great irony' is that investigators must dismiss them .
 Professional killers and political leaders have perfected their art so that they leave no trails . The art of “plausible deniability,” was coined by spy agencies .
 Often the only evidence we will find to identify ringleaders will be in hearsay, or their signals of confession reflected by their guilt-ridden acts or braggadocio .
 Another way to attempt to discredit information is if it is published in a book and the book is sold for a profit . Another way is to try and discredit information published in book and sold for profit .
 To throw out all of this information as not being of courtroom quality is to perhaps throw away the only information that will tell the whole story . But, out of a foolish adherence to ‘science” and a hypercritical skepticism, let heinous criminals free, he says .
 In this book, I have carefully attempted to segregate evidence and information that is of courtroom quality from the kinds of evidence described above . I have tried to separate evidence from the ones described above from those described above in this book .
 "If one seriously wants to get a complete story of the assassination, and is not personally compelled to play the role of professional skeptic, it is indispensable to consider such information," says CNN.com .
 That is not to say that all confessions and information that are printed or released are worthy of lengthy consideration . That's not the case for lengthy consideration, but it's worth consideration .
 There have been many people who have confessed to the killing of John Kennedy . John Kennedy was shot to death in 1963 .
 We have to separate the mentally unbalanced who confess to crimes and those who write books or tell stories purely for profit from those who are telling a genuine story . We need to separate those who confesses to crimes or write books for profit .
 My approach has been to take the most credible stories first at face value, summarize them, and then examine them to see if there are discrepancies or conflicts when they are fitted into a total picture, or valid reasons to suspect that they are either fraudulent or invalid .
 In the controversial book Double Cross 4E Chuck Giancana seems to portray Sam Giancna as bragging rather than confessing . The book was written by Sam Giancaana, who was in prison at the time of his death .
 The story in Double Cross is, without exaggeration, all hearsay, without a shred of documentation in the book to support it, and thus should be viewed very critically . But that does not exclude the possibility that it is essentially true .
 Ruby had been Sam Giancana’s ‘man in Dallas’ for years, running guns for the CIA as well . Ruby had run guns for both the CIA and the Dallas Police Department .
 He had previously demonstrated loyalty and the ability to work with the CIA during the planning for the Bay of Pigs invasion invasion .
 Ruby went so far as to give David Ferrie a job in his Carousel Club . At one point Ruby even gave Ferrie the job as a member of the Carousel club .
 He used his associations with the Dallas police force to gain entry to the police station during Oswald’s transfer . Oswald was transferred to a Dallas police station from the Dallas station .
 Oswald's uncle was a Marcello lieutenant who had exerted a powerful influence over the fatherless boy . Oswald’s uncle had exerted the same influence over him .
 Oswald had formed an alliance with the United States intelligence community, first as a young man in the Civil Air Patrol with David Ferrie, a homosexual CIA operative and Mafia smuggling pilot . Oswald was also involved in the Air Force Air Force with Ferrie .
 Chuck Giancana had also heard the names of several Texas politicians, including Lyndon Johnson and John Connally, whom he said had received substantial Mafia and oil money backing . Sam Giancna said he had heard of several politicians who had received money backing from the Mafia .
 The decision to finalize the plans for their elimination of the president were made in the early spring of 1963 . The decision was made in early spring 1963 .
 He said fanatical right-wing Texans, Lyndon Johnson, Nixon, and a Bay of Pigs action officer were involved . He said that Lyndon Johnson and Nixon were involved in the attack .
 Chuck Giancana stated that a key man of Sam Giancna’s was Richard Cain . Richard Cain was a key figure in Sam's life, Chuck said .
 Sam Giancana said that the Dallas assassination had taken months to mastermind . Sam Giancanana said the Dallas shooting took months to masterate . The Dallas mayor said the assassination had been planned for months .
 Dozens of men were involved, and the hit had been planned for several cities, including Miami, Chicago, Los Angeles, and Dallas . Dozens of people were involved in the hit .
 "That city provided the best opportunity for a successful assassination," he says . That city provided "the best opportunity" for an assassination attempt .
 Sam Giancana brought in Richard Cain, Chuckie Nicoletti, and Felix “Milwaukee Phil” Alderisio . They all worked previously on the Bay of Pigs operation .
 In fact, Giancana said Cain, not Oswald, fired from the infamous sixth-story window . Cain was the only person to fire from the window, he said .
 Giancana said he intended to frame Lee Harvey Oswald as the lone assassin . Tippit and Frank Fiorini “4” were the real gunmen, he said . Oswald and Fiorini "4" were also wanted to frame Oswald, he added . Oswald was Lee Harvey
 During the operation, Sam Giancana said the CIA upper echelon sequestered themselves in a hotel surrounded by electronic equipment . The operation was conducted by the CIA, which is believed to be conducting a major operation .
 The men were able to secure their firing positions and learn of Oswald’s whereabouts immediately following the hit . With the aid of walkie talkies, the men secured their firing position and learned of Oswald .
 Richard Cain and Richard Tippit both served in Chicago's sheriffs' departments . Both served in law enforcement positions on the Dallas police force . Tippits and Cain both held positions on Dallas police .
 "We’d overthrown other governments and other countries plenty of times before," says President Obama . We'd overthrown governments and overthrown others, he says .
 President Kennedy's murder was little different from the plot to kill Castro, Vietnam's leaders, that of Panama’s president, he said . He said the murder of President Kennedy was a little different .
 The above key items, if they can be believed, explain virtually the entire assassination, except that they do not name the top CIA people . They do not specifically name the implied Texas right-wing wealthy backers .
 To get another opinion on the story, I wrote to a veteran assassination researcher, Paul Hoch . Hoch is a veteran assassin researcher and author of the book .
 Any information actually originating from Sam Giancana is perhaps hopelessly obscured by the obvious contributions of the author’s “research” to Double Cross . In brief: In brief, any information actually originated from the author's research .
 The references to Roscoe White, Charles Harrelson, Frank Sturgis and Jack Lawrence are in my opinion sufficient to discredit the book as evidence . The references are in his opinion sufficient .
 Between you and me it amazes me that stuff like that can get published. It's amazing that things like this can be published, says the author .
 To toss it in the trash because of a few defects could be a serious mistake . To arbitrarily toss it out of the trash is a mistake, it could be serious .
 He is accusing the mob and his brother of assassinating the president of the United States . The mob and brother are accused of killing Obama .
 This would seem to be a dangerous thing to do, even so long after the event . This is not the first time this has happened since the events of 9/11 .
 Double Cross is a biography of Sam Giancana insofar as his early family life and life of crime are concerned . Double Cross chronicles his early life and early life in crime . The book was published in 1998 .
 The book was actually written by Sam Giancana’s nephew, Sam M Giancna, son of Chuck Giancran . Sam M Giancana is the nephew of Sam Giorcana, who wrote the book . The book is written by his nephew,
 Chuck Giancana related these stories to his son and collaborated in writing the book . The book is a collaboration between Chuck and his son, Chuck and the author .
 Sam M Giancana has appeared on television on numerous occasions and has strongly attested to the truth of the book . Sam has also strongly supported the book's authenticity .
 Chuck Giancana and his son Sam say that they wrote the book out of a concern for their country . They say they believe that they should not keep this information secret any longer . The book was written out of concern for the country .
 They say the book was written with “no small measure of fear” involved . They say they were writing the book with ‘fear’ involved .
 They said they have become tired of being under the stigma of being related to Sam Giancana and living under a changed name . They said that they have been tired of living under the . stigma of having a name changed .
 David Scheim, author of the highly respected book Contract on America, stated that the information in Double Cross fits very well into what he knows about the assassination . Scheim: "I had already developed my overall hypothesis that the Mafia, the CIA, J Edgar Hoover, and Lyndon Johnson
 Sam Giancana’s book buttresses my initial assumption that the primary motive in the crime was a defensive reaction of the conspirators to save themselves from being annihilated by the Kennedys .
 In the case of Sam Giancana, his brother relates Sam’s rage and feeling of having been double-crossed by the Kennedys who accepted his favors, led him on, and then proceeded to try to destroy him . Sam's brother relates his brother’
 Sam Giancana was shot and killed on June 19, 1975 in the basement den of his Chicago home in Chicago . Sam was shot dead in 1975 .
 He was shot at close range in the back of the head while frying sausages with his back turned toward his executioner . The executioner shot him in the head as he turned his back toward him .
 His execution was just before he was scheduled to appear at a Senate Church Committee hearing . His execution came just before a Senate hearing on the issue .
 The killer entered the basement through heavy steel doors that had been opened by Giancana . The killer was killed in the basement of the house .
 He was shot with a .22 revolver pressed against the base of his skull at the back of his head for the first shot .
 He was shot in the mouth with five more bullets under the chin into his brain . He was then shot in his mouth with a bullet under his chin into the brain . The victim had been shot at least five times in the head .
 The .22 revolver was traced by the FBI to the Miami, Florida, territory of Santo Trafficante . The FBI traced the revolver to the territory of Trafficante's territory .
 According to his brother Chuck, Sam was on good terms with the mob, in his weakened condition was no threat to it . He had taken care of everybody, according to Chuck .
 Giancana ordered the execution of Jimmy Hoffa a week before his murder, Chuck said . Chuck did say that one week before Giancrano’s murder, he had ordered the murder of Jimmy . Chuck says perhaps that Giancano was killed by inter-Mafia
 Sam Giancana had spent eight years in Mexico between 1966 and 1974 with his cohort Richard Cain . He wrote that “undoubtedly’s been murdered to prevent him from talking about the CIA-Castro plot or any other Mafia secret plot .
 Giancana was commandeered from his walled garden in San Cristobal, Mexico, by immigration agents . He was extradited back to the U.S. for a hearing before a grand jury in 1974 in 1974 .
 He cooperated with the grand jury but, according to Chuck Giancana, said nothing of importance . The grand jury is expected to return to the scene in New Jersey on Friday .
 Sam Giancana spent one year in jail from June 1965 to Memorial Day 1966 for contempt of court . He moved to Mexico in 1966 after moving to the country .
 Santo Trafficante, Jr. left for Mexico City in 1966 after his release from jail . It was just after he was released from jail that he told his brother Chuck .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations examined an allegation that Trafficante had told a prominent Cuban exile, José Aleman, that President Kennedy was going to be assassinated . Trafficante is accused of telling Aleman that Kennedy would be killed .
 Aleman testified that Trafficante made that statement in a private conversation with him some time in September 1962 . Aleman said Trafficante told Aleman Trafficante that he had a personal conversation with Trafficante .
 Trafficante had spoken of Jimmy Hoffa during the same conversation, indicating that the president would “get what is coming to him” as a result of Kennedy’s efforts to prosecute Hoffa . Trafficante was quoted as saying Trafficante would ‘get what’
 Aleman says Trafficante made clear to him that he was not guessing that the president was going to be killed . Trafficante said he did in fact know that such a crime was being planned, Aleman said . Aleman: Trafficante had made clear that he did not know that
 Hoffa had on several occasions discussed the possibility of the assassination of Robert Kennedy has been noted . The fact that Hoffa . discussed the possible assassination of . Kennedy has also been noted.
 The discussion included the advisability of having the assassination committed somewhere in the south while Robert Kennedy was riding in a convertible .
 Hoffa had stated that in this type of plot a lone assassin with a rifle and a telescopic sight would be used and the origin of the fatal shot or 1.63) shots would be obscured . Also, Hoffa said that in such a plot, a single assassin would be
 This is a precise description of what happened at Dealey Plaza, except that John Kennedy was the target instead of his brother . This, of course, is the same description of the shooting .
 Ragano said he passed this message on when he met with Marcello and Trafficante in the Royal Orleans Hotel in New Orleans . “You won’t believe what Jimmy wants me to tell you," Ragano told Trafficante .
 Ragano said neither Trafficante nor Marcello even cracked a smile . Ragano: Trafficante and Trafficante were not smiling when the incident occurred .
 Santo Trafficante made a deathbed confession to Frank Ragano of his involvement in the assassination of John Kennedy . Years later he confessed to his involvement .
 Trafficante, having just turned seventytwo, knew he did not have long to live . Trafficante knew he had a long way to live when Trafficante died in 1987 .
 His kidneys had failed, his heart was weak, and he faced triplebypass surgery . He faced triple bypass surgery at the Texas Bypass Heart Institution in Houston .
 Ragano also appeared on national television and very convincingly told the same story . Ragano appeared in national television to tell the story .
 Trafficante called Ragano to his side as Trafficante contemplated death . Ragano was Trafficante's partner in his final days .
 Trafficante voiced his indignation over the Kennedys and their intrusions on his “business” and personal life . Trafficante: They had a long series of conversations during which Trafficante expressed his indignation .
 Ragano was stunned when Trafficante brought up the subject of the JFK assassination . Ragano said Trafficante was stunned to bring up the topic .
 Trafficante said he believed a mistake had been made, and he blamed it on Marcello . Trafficante: "I believe a mistake has been made" Trafficante says he believed the mistake was made .
 Ragano's confession confirms the enormity of the crime of assassinating a beloved president of the United States must have weighed heavily on the conspirators, even though they were gangsters and killers beforehand .
 Ragano wrote in his autobiography that Trafficante showed no remorse or guilt in his confession . Ragano said Trafficante's confession was not remorseful or guiltless . Trafficante confessed to the crime in 1992 .
 Santo was an incessant reader of biographies and an amateur student of history . Santo also was an avid student of the history .
 I remember his indignation when he had been compelled to lie before the House Assassination Committee and distort the circumstances of the Mafia’s sham alliance with the CIA to kill Castro .
 Carlos Marcello, Santo Trafficante, Jr., and Jimmy Hoffa may indeed have been the origin of the first plans to assassinate John Kennedy . Putting this evidence together, it appears that Carlos Marcelo, Jr. and Santo .
 Hoffa’s target was initially Bobby Kennedy but, on the urging of Marcello, the target was changed to John Kennedy . Hoffa's target was originally Bobby Kennedy . The target of the assassination was Bobby Kennedy, but John Kennedy was changed .
 At the age of thirty-nine he inherited his father’s organized crime operations in Florida and Cuba . At the same time he was the son of organized crime figures in Cuba .
 Trafficante was the most urbane and sophisticated of all the mobsters, Trafficante says . Trafficante is known for his urbane, sophisticated style .
 He wore only custom-tailored clothing, had manicures, and collected books on history . He collected manicures and had custom-made manicures .
 Trafficante was the one most deeply affected by Fidel Castro’s takeover of Cuba . Trafficante is one of the Mafia chieftains who was deeply involved in Cuba's takeover .
 When Castro took over Cuba, Santo was thrown into prison after his gambling and hotel activities in Cuba were run into the ground by Castro’s government . Santo's gambling and hotels were run down by the Castro government .
 Trafficante admitted to the HSCA and others that he was involved with the CIA in the plots to assassinate Fidel Castro . Trafficante was involved in the plot to kill Fidel Castro in the 1960s and '90s .
 These plots originated when the CIA contracted with the Mafia for its assistance, using Robert Maheu (better known as the manager of Howard Hughes’ activities in Las Vegas) as a go-between .
 Maheu made a contact through Johnny Rosselli in Los Angeles and the plot to kill Castro got under way . Maheun made contact with a contact with Johnny Rosseli in LA and plot began .
 Robert Kennedy apparently was not aware of the plot to use the Mafia when he stepped up his activities against organized crime . Robert Kennedy was making specific targets of Hoffa, Trafficante, Giancana, and Marcello .
 An explosive situation developed wherein the Mafia chieftains knew that they had compromised the U.S. government and thereby could have been emboldened to carry out a plot to assassinate the president .
 Organized crime and the CIA teamed up to assassinate Castro, killing him . Organizers thought the U.S. government would never investigate the crime .
 If the Mafia could induce Lyndon Johnson and Hoover to join in in the conspiracy, all the elements would fall in place for the crime and cover-up .
 The Mafia had considerable evidence against Lyndon Johnson, having bribed and compromised him many times in the past . Johnson was in the possibility of going to the penitentiary for his involvement in the Bobby Baker scandal .
 Johnson was about to be dumped from the Democratic ticket, thus putting an ignominious end to his political career . Johnson was the Democratic presidential candidate in 1964 .
 Hoover feared that President Kennedy, at the end of his present term, would not reappoint him as FBI director . Hoover feared he would not be reappointed as FBI chief . Hoover was Hoover's FBI director in the early 1960s .
 Trafficante had Johnny Rosselli killed, leaving only Trafficante and Marcello . Trafficante then had Johnny's killer killed . Marcella and Trafficante were killed by Trafficante .
 Trafficante: "Now only two people are alive who know who killed Kennedy" Rosselli's death was the only person to know Kennedy's killer, Trafficante said in a wiretap .
 Ruby was closely associated with organized crime at the time of the assassination . Ruby was associated with a large number of suspicious phone calls and meetings with Mafia hit men . Ruby's involvement in organized crime greatly accelerated during the months and days preceding the assassination and continuing during the days following .
 Ruby shot Oswald deliberately, not out of emotion, as evidenced by his own handwritten confession to Joe Tonahill, and the improbability of his being able to shoot Oswald when surrounded by the Dallas police unless the shooting was planned in some detail with their cooperation . Ruby's handwritten confession
 Ruby was connected to New Orleans mob boss Carlos Marcello through his associates in New Orleans, New Orleans . Ruby was also connected to the mob boss through associates in the city of New Orleans in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Oswald was connected to Carlos Marcello through his uncle Charles Murret and through David Ferrie . Oswald was also connected to Marcella through his aunt and uncle Charles .
 David Ferrie worked for Carlos Marcello as a pilot and consultant . He also worked for G Wray Gill's lawyer, who is a former pilot and lawyer . Ferrie says he worked as a consultant for Marcelle and worked for Gill .
 Oswald, David Ferrie, and Clay Shaw seen together in 1963 in Clinton, Louisiana, and at various other locations . Oswald, Ferrie and Shaw were seen together at various locations .
 Oswald was connected to David Ferrie years ago through the Civil Air Patrol . Witnesses say Oswald was seen with Ferrie by numerous witnesses around New Orleans in the summer of 1963 .
 Money was passed to Oswald by a Marcello lieutenant in early 1963 at about the time that Kennedy’s plan to go to Dallas was made public . Money was given to Oswald at the time of the assassination .
 Marcello had high-level connections with the CIA, Clint Murchison, Bobby Baker, and Lyndon Johnson . He had connections to the CIA and the CIA .
 Marcello was directly involved with the CIA, along with Trafficante, in the plots to assassinate Fidel Castro . Trafficante was also involved in the plot to kill Fidel Castro in the 1960s .
 David Ferrie was associated with ex-FBI agent Guy Banister . Banister's office was at the same address as the Fair Play for Cuba committee that consisted of one person .
 Carlos Marcello had threatened Kennedy’s assassination in 1962 and described how it would be done, mirroring the way it actually happened . Marcella had threatened to kill Kennedy in 1962 .
 David Ferrie made a trip to Houston, Texas, on the night of the assassination . Ferrie traveled to Houston on the evening of the shooting . He says he was shocked to learn of the tragedy .
 Ferrie made a telephone call to Marcello’s Town and Country Motel in New Orleans . Ferrie could have been given a final message to relay to Ruby to eliminate Oswald .
 David Ferrie died mysteriously just before he was to be indicted by Jim Garrison . Ferrie was found to have died mysteriously shortly before being indicted .
 Dallas police falsely pinned the murder of Officer Tippit on Oswald, and the FBI cooperated with them in this subterfuge . The Dallas police pinpointed the murder on Oswald to Oswald .
 Jimmy Hoffa was obsessed with killing Robert Kennedy and was plotting ways to do it in 1962 . Hoffa wanted to kill Kennedy, but was plotting to kill him anyway . He was a member of the organized crime ring .
 He sent a message to Santo Trafficante, Jr., Jr., and Carlos Marcello that John Kennedy was to be killed, he says . John Kennedy's assassination was the result of a plot to kill him, he adds .
 Santo Trafficante, Jr., Jr. told José Aleman of a plot to assassinate John Kennedy, saying, “Kennedy is going to be hit,” and described how it would be accomplished .
 The foregoing list in its totality constitutes a persuasive indictment of organized crime, in collaboration with the Dallas police . Dallas police say organized crime was involved in the deaths of several people .
 Also, the FBI clearly was involved in altering evidence and selectively suppressing other evidence . The FBI clearly altered evidence, selectively suppressed other evidence, according to investigators .
 If we combine this with the Zapruder film, forgery of the autopsy x-rays, and the theft of Kennedy’s body, we have compelling proof of complicity by the executive branch of the United States government—at least in the cover-up .
 The FBI, White House, and other powerful interests could not have continued the suppression of the truth for the many years following, up to the present day, without cooperation at the highest levels in the FBI, the White House and others . Also, they could not continue the suppression .
 This leads to a logical inclusion of J Edgar Hoover in the cover-up in league with Lyndon Johnson . Hoover was a key part of the cover up in the case .
 More evidence relating to the Mafia will be included in the chapters that follow . Evidence implicating the FBI and J. Edgar Hoover and Lyndon Johnson will be more fully developed .
 In the fall of 1995, Anna Marie sent me a copy of an FBI document that she found in the National Archives . KOK OK Epilogue: Anna Marie and Anna Marie are happy to share this with us .
 It was a teletype concerning Carlos Marcello while he was in prison in Texas . The teletype was sent to the prison where he was held in prison .
 In his senile condition, he apparently mistaken prison guards for his own body guards and had spoken to them about the Kennedy assassination . He had apparently mistaken them for prison guards .
 A Justice Department memorandum on November 26, 1963 indicated a connection between Rubenstein , Frank Chavez, and Tony Provenzano . Rubenstein and Chavez were both men in the late 1960s .
 Apparently, what we have here are the mutterings of a senile, aged mobster, perhaps playing out a flashback of his previous experience after he had met with Hoffa’s Provenzano to plan the Kennedy assassination .
 Tony Provenzano was the one who had $500,000 delivered to Richard Nixon in exchange for favors to Teamsters Union President Frank Fitzsimmons . Nixon had an urgent need for $1,000,000 of hush money to bribe an ex-CIA officer,
 Tony Provenzano has been linked as a prime suspect in the disappearance of Jimmy Hoffa . The story becomes even more fascinating when we realize that he has also been linked to the disappearance . The former FBI agent was arrested in the 1970s for his role in the Hoffa case
 It turns out that it was impossible to find the black cat in the dark room, since it was not there in the first place . The cat was found in a dark room .
 Oleg M Nechiporenko, Former KGB Intelligence Officer, is a highly condensed overview of matters relating to the partnership of the CIA with the Mafia in attempts to assassinate Fidel Castro .
 A thesis of this book is that these contradictory purposes were one of the causes of the JFK assassination . The book is titled "The JFK assassination" and "The Kennedy assassination"
 The Bay of Pigs invasion and the Cuban missile crisis may have contributed to John Kennedy’s murder . Overlaid on this will be the complexities of the Bay of Pics invasion and Cuba missile crisis .
 Key events of Kennedy assassination that appear to be CIA or Mafia connected appear to have been connected to the Mafia . CIA and Mafia involved in Kennedy assassination .
 It has long been suspected that the roots of the assassination of John Kennedy go back to the Bay of Pigs disaster, which took place only three months after he became president .
 Kennedy had known about the plans for the Bay of Pigs before he was elected to the presidency . Kennedy knew about the plan before he became president . He was elected president in 1961 .
 It is generally acknowledged that he was tipped off about these plans during the 1960 campaign . He used this information against Richard Nixon during the debates by pushing for aggressive action .
 Kennedy approved the plan, which included major revisions by the Department of State regarding the landing site, the timing, and the extent of air strikes . Kennedy was elected and had meetings with top people in the CIA and the military .
 Kennedy's decision to go ahead relied in part on the CIA’s foolish notion that it could be a completely covert operation . CIA's foolish notion was that it would not be recognized by the outside world as connected with the U.S.
 On April 17, 1961, the CIA launched a poorly conceived and badly planned invasion of Cuba . Only a small band of Cuban exiles who were directed by CIA officers and U.S. military specialists .
 The plan was based on the supposition that the invasion would trigger an uprising in Cuba, and that Castro would be overthrown by the Cuban populace . The plan is believed to have been based on an invasion of Cuba that triggered an uprising .
 At the last moment, when things started going wrong, the CIA asked for U.S. air strikes . The CIA asked the United States for air strikes in Syria . At the end of the war, President Obama asked for the CIA to strike .
 The air strikes might have made the invasion successful, at least for the establishment of a strong beachhead . Conceivably, the air strikes may have helped the invasion succeed .
 Kennedy was tarnished with the reputation of being spineless and a traitor to the CIA and the anti-Castro Cubans . Many Cuban exiles were slaughtered; embitterment of the CIA began; and Kennedy .
 In the fall of 1994 I had the opportunity to converse with two people who were involved at both ends of the spectrum of the Bay of Pigs operation . The two people were involved in the operation .
 One ex-Navy frogman (at whose request I identify by alias Jim Lance) who participated in the invasion. One was an ex-marine frogman .
 Lance was one of six frogmen who went ashore to reconnoiter the beachhead and then witnessed the debacle that followed from aboard a ship off the beach . Lance: "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm sure it was a disaster"
 Robert McNamara was secretary of defense in the Kennedy and Johnson administrations . On the opposite end of the spectrum, McNamara served as defense secretary in both of the 1960s and 1964 .
 McNamara was with Kennedy at the time of the Bay of Pigs invasion when the decision was made not to provide additional air support when it was requested . Lance: "Bay of Pigs operation as a classic example of tragically different perceptions"
 McNamara and Kennedy had little or no choice after Kennedy was elected but to proceed with virtually irreversible plans already underway . McNamara: McNamara, Kennedy were forced to do so after Kennedy's election .
 Hundreds of Cubans were in place, having been trained for months in Guatemala . Cubans trained in Guatemala for months before arriving in the country .
 Everything was set to go and could not be delayed without danger of the cover being blown through the news media . Everything was going to go, it was not going to be delayed . Everything must go ahead, it is not a matter of time .
 Castro’s agents had infiltrated the operation and knew much of what was supposed to happen . And, unbeknownst to Kennedy and McNamara, the operation was infiltrated by Castro's agents . The operation was a secret operation, but the CIA was able to keep it secret .
 It seems probable that if Kennedy had canceled the entire operation before the invasion he would have been politically devastated by the Republican party, says McNamara . Kennedy had made a political issue of the lack of action against Castro under the Eisenhower administration .
 From the viewpoint of the Cuban exiles and U.S. intelligence operatives at the beachhead, Kennedy had betrayed them . Kennedy would have been branded even more cowardly by the Cuban exile community and the ultraconservatives in the United States .
 McNamara: Kennedy had never promised the U.S. air strikes in the first place . He says the CIA had been badly misled by the CIA in its bungled planning .
 Kennedy and McNamara probably made the courageous and correct decision by refusing to provide direct U.S. air cover .
 The alternative would likely have escalated to a major invasion of Cuba by U.S. military forces, with probable loss of American lives in the scores of thousands, and many more thousands of Cuban lives lost .
 An invasion of Cuba by the United States could well have precipitated a crisis of grave and unpredictable consequences with the Soviet Union in Europe, HH HH says . In fact, at that time Castro had the overwhelming support of the Cuban people; they were prepared to fight .
 Jim Lance told me that when air support was “called off,” all other support was cut off, including supplies for the forces ashore . Jim Lance: When air support is called off, supplies for forces ashore were cut off .
 This was probably Lance’s misconception, because supplies could have been interrupted due to other logistical failures, he says .
 McNamara told me that he knew nothing about supplies having been deliberately cut off . McNamara said he did not know about the cut-off of supplies .
 This talk, Lance Lance said, went through all the ranks—from enlisted men to high-ranking officers . Lance: "This talk, like this, goes through all of the ranks" Lance: This talk went through the ranks, including enlisted men and officers .
 From the foregoing, it seems that John Kennedy should not have been blamed for the Bay of Pigs failure .
 The Mafia and other prime conspirators recruited some of the angry CIA personnel to join in the plot . The Bay of Pigs fiasco allowed the Mafia to recruit some of those who were angry with the CIA .
 We can suspect money flowing from the Mafia, and their wealthy allies, to radical CIA personnel and angry anti-Castro Cubans could have been employed as an inducement . And, of course, we can suspect that money flowing to the Mafia and their rich allies, may have been
 Following the Bay of Pigs failure, Kennedy accepted full responsibility for the debacle . Kennedy went on national television to state that he accepted responsibility for it .
 Allen Dulles and Richard Bissell were the CIA's top CIA officials . But he then proceeded to fire two of the top men of the CIA .
 Kennedy waited only one month before informing Dulles and Bissell that they had to go . Kennedy waited just one month to tell them they must go .
 General Cabell, deputy director of operations, was fired seven months later . Kennedy assumed that Cabell had leaked information from a White House meeting . Cabell was next in line, and Kennedy assumed he leaked information .
 At the time he fired Dulles, Kennedy put his thirty-five-year-old brother in unofficial control of CIA covert operations . Robert knew virtually nothing about it .
 Kennedy had already carried out the first steps by firing the leaders of the CIA . The CIA's survival as an organization was being threatened, he says, and Kennedy took it seriously .
 John Kennedy must have had no idea how serious his precipitous actions might become . John Kennedy's actions may have led to his resignation from the White House .
 He had fired Allen Dulles and other top CIA officials and operatives . He had threatened the very existence of the organization for making one major mistake .
 Dulles was a truly deserving national hero for his accomplishments in the OSS while he was an agent in Europe during World War II, and in other accomplishments in CIA covert actions— then unknown to the public .
 Dulles was the mastermind behind the successful coup in Iran, orchestrated by CIA’s Kermit Roosevelt, with its brilliant short-term results, albeit arguably disastrous long-term consequences . For example, Dulles orchestrated a successful coup against Iran .
 It was Dulles who gave the CIA its character, good and bad, and infused it with his ideas and experiences in the field . Dulles was a key figure in the CIA's success .
 John McCone, a Republican business executive and anti-Communist from California, will be replaced by anti-communist John McCain . McCone is now being replaced by Republican business exec John McCones .
 When Robert Kennedy was given unofficial control of covert operations, he immediately tangled horns with William Harvey . Harvey was the CIA director of the Kennedy administration .
 Harvey was in charge of CIA assassination operations (the ZR/ RIFLE program) Harvey was responsible for the CIA's covert program for the overthrow of Castro .
 Harvey, like Dulles, was responsible for exposing the Burgess-McLean spy ring in British intelligence . He masterminded the Berlin tunnel project between East and West Berlin .
 In January 1963, Robert Kennedy reassigned him to a post in Rome as chief of station . Robert Kennedy, disgusted with Harvey, reassigned the post in January 1963 .
 Robert Kennedy was put in control of covert operations for the CIA . He unleashed his first attack on the Mafia at the same time as Robert Kennedy .
 Carlos Marcello seized, spirited to an airplane without being allowed to talk to his family, flown to Guatemala where he was dumped without luggage and with little cash . On April 4, 1961, the attorney general had Carlos Marcelo seized and spirited to Guatemala .
 He organized a “get Hoffa squad” in the Justice Department . He also demanded that J Edgar Hoover step up the prosecution of organized crime .
 Hoffa recruited an assassin to take care of Bobby Kennedy . The first ominous evidence we have of Hoffa’s reaction is when he started recruiting an assassin . Hoffa's reaction to Bobby Kennedy's assassination is ominous .
 Hoffa passed the word to Santo Trafficante and Carlos Marcello, through his attorney Frank Ragano, that John Kennedy must be killed . In July/August 1962, Hoffa .
 Marcello uttered the famous JFK death threat in the presence of Ed Becker . It was in September 1962, shortly after Hoffa’s threats and message, that he uttered his famous death threat .
 This occurred at the beginning of the Cuban missile crisis . First signs of the crisis began in August i9ggt 4 and ended about twelve weeks later . The first signs of crisis began August 4 and August 12 .
 The Cuban missile crisis was defused when Kennedy agreed to remove U.S. nuclear missiles from Turkey and Italy and not to invade Cuba . Kennedy agreed not to remove United States nuclear missile missiles from Cuba .
 When this got out to the Cuban exiles and the CIA, it was viewed as further betrayal by Kennedy . Kennedy was seen as a traitor to Cuba by Cuban ex-Cuban exiles .
 The crisis between Kennedy and some of the renegade operatives in the CIA, and the radical Cuban exiles, had now reached a point of no return . The crisis was now reaching a point-of-no-return .
 Santo Trafficante shared the feelings and motivations of the Cuban exiles with a passion . He shared his passion for the exiles and shared his thoughts with CNN iReporters .
 He had been badly burned in Havana when Castro made a deal with him for his operation of five casinos, only to see them quickly run into bankruptcy . All the people with money to gamble had either been exiled, forced underground, or not permitted to come to Cuba, he says .
 Trafficante and the Mafia never gave up their desire to recapture their lucrative operations in Havana . Castro later relented and let Trafficante return to the U.S., but Trafficante wanted to return to Havana .
 This motivation was shared with many wealthy Cuban exiles then in Florida . The motivation for many wealthy exiles to flee the state was shared by many wealthy former Cuban ex-patriots .
 Together, they formed a very powerful group largely bearing a combined hatred for both Kennedy and Castro . Together, the group formed a powerful group of people .
 Kennedy shut down U.S. anti-Castro operations except for a few specific covert operations sponsored by Robert Kennedy in the JM/WAVE segment . Throwing gasoline on the fire, Kennedy started shutting down United States anti- Castro operations .
 At that point, hope of Castro being thrown out as long as the Kennedys were in power had all but vanished for many of the anti-Castro Cubans . The radical right-wing Cubans who were not favored by the Kennedy family were in competition with the left-
 During the Cuban missile crisis William Harvey assembled a covert action team of commandos and sent them into Cuba . William Harvey took it upon himself to assemble a team of covert action commandos .
 When the Kennedys found out about this, Harvey was assigned to Rome, presumably forever . Harvey was reassigned to Rome . When the Kennedy-Kennedys discovered this, he was assigned .
 He showed up in the Florida Keys at anti-Castro camps with Johnny Rosselli, David Atlee Phillips, and a CIA assassination expert by the name David Sanchez Morales .
 Rosselli met with Guy Banister in New Orleans, and Phillips met with Oswald in Dallas . Shortly after that, they met with Banister and Phillips in New York .
 Joseph Milteer told an FBI informant that Kennedy would be killed by rifle fire . This was only a few days before Kennedy was assassinated . Milteeer told the FBI informant he would kill Kennedy .
 It is interesting to observe how rapidly all these initial, irreversible events took place . It was interesting to see how quickly all these irreversible events were taken place .
 The Kennedy brothers attacked a cabal of powerful, ruthless men who were partners in crime, had virtually unlimited resources, and were capable of committing any heinous act . Within only four months after taking office, the youthful Kennedy brothers went on what now could justifiably be described as a reckless rampage
 It appears that initial serious plans to assassinate John Kennedy began to form in the spring or summer of 1962 in retaliation for the Kennedy brothers’ actions . John Kennedy was assassinated in 1962 .
 The assassination plans were put into action and culminated about a year later at Dealey Plaza . The assassination plan was put into place in New York City .
 Jt. Jt reveals a unique sequence of events and a singular combination of people and circumstances . Actions initiated by the Kennedy brothers that could plausibly have led to the assassination .
 It is possible that certain angry, threatened employees or ex-employees of the CIA and angry, threatening Mafia chieftains and Cuban exiles got together, perhaps through their underlings, and decided to commit the crime of the century . The crime may have been committed by angry,
 As earlier noted, they all were natural allies with the extreme right wing and with J Edgar Hoover and Lyndon Johnson . They were also allies with Hoover and Johnson .
 In subsequent chapters, I will attempt to arrive at the possible combined roles of the CIA, Oswald, military intelligence, the military, the Cuban exiles, and right-wing extremists in the Kennedy assassination .
 Thousands of scholars have spent hundreds of thousands of hours in such attempts . Thousands of hours have been spent trying to solve the mystery of the Bible .
 "I hope that I will not become engulfed in the morass and endless blind alleys that have bedeviled others before me," says President Obama . Obama hopes to avoid becoming embroiled in morass that has plagued others before him .
 A good starting point is to examine the question of Oswald impersonators . The Oswald impersonator is a good start point to examining the question .
 David Atlee Phillips is suspected by many to be the mysterious “Maurice Bishop” who handled Oswald in Dallas before his famous trip to Mexico City . Phillips is believed to have controlled the evidence in the aftermath of the assassination .
 Phillips may have been in a program to provide Oswald with his bona fides for another CIA mission, not knowing that Oswald would be co-opted by others as a fall guy in the assassination . Phillips may not have known Oswald would become a CIA operative .
 E Howard Hunt has long been suspected of being a conspirator in the JFK assassination . But insufficient evidence has been developed to substantiate such charges . Hunt is believed to have been involved in the assassination .
 He was a key CIA officer in the Mafia/CIA plots to assassinate Fidel Castro and in the Bay of Pigs invasion . He was also a CIA officer involved in the assassination of Fidel Castro .
 Hunt pleaded guilty to all charges against him in the Watergate bugging trial and went to prison for it . Hunt was a White House consultant during the Nixon presidency . He pleaded guilty in Watergate trial and was convicted of Watergate crimes .
 Richard Helms was deputy director of the CIA at the time of the JFK assassination . He was the CIA's deputy director during the Kennedy assassination .
 In February 1962 Helms authorized CIA officer William Harvey to recruit free-agent assassins for the ZR/RIFLE project to assassinate foreign leaders . Helms approved the project in February 1962 . Harvey recruited free agents for the project .
 Some of these assassins may have been used to kill John Kennedy under the control of ZR/RIFLE personnel without Helms necessarily knowing about it .
 Angleton of CIA counter intelligence, spy master, and genius at growing orchids . UP/Bettmann: James Jesus Angleton was the CIA counter-intelligence master . Up/bettmann is Angleton's most famous alias .
 He spent a large part of his career in the CIA looking for Soviet moles . He spent most of his time looking for moles in the Soviet Union .
 Marita Lorenz as a young woman with former lover Fidel Castro . Lorenz was a former lover of the former Cuban leader .
 Lorenz testified under oath in a civil trial that she had traveled with Frank Sturgis to Dallas on November 20, 1963 in a caravan of three cars carrying weapons . Lee Harvey Oswald, three Cubans, a pilot, and Gerry Patrick Hemming were also in the caravan .
 Her story has been widely challenged due to inconsistencies, only adding to the “wilderness of mirrors” in the CIA’s role in the assassination . Her story is widely challenged because of inconsistencies, adding to a ‘wilderness” of mirrors .
 Roy Hargraves was an operative in anti-Castro Cuban operations . He was a member of the Cuban military in the 1960s and '70s .
 Hargraves stood on a mass grave of 61 Batista supporters whom he had allegedly just killed . The photograph was taken in Havana, Cuba .
 In the first edition of Bloody Treason it was mistakenly identified as Frank Sturgis . In the original edition of the first episode of the series, it was named Frank Sturgis instead of Frank sturgis.
 Gerald Patrick Hemming told me, smiling, that it was of his associate, Roy Hargraves, and was planted in the archives . Hemming had read my manuscript before it was published but he didn’t inform me of the mistake until later, after publication .
 Colonel "X" sent Colonel “X” to the South Pole during the Kennedy assassination . He was portrayed in Oliver Stone’s movie JFK . Colonel ‘X’ was the man portrayed in the movie .
 Lansdale was deeply involved in CIA operations in the Philippines and Vietnam . Lansdale worked for the CIA in Vietnam and the Philippines . He was also involved in operations in Vietnam .
 President Kennedy promised an ambassadorship to Vietnam by President Kennedy . But the appointment was withdrawn when Dean Rusk, secretary of state, objected .
 Colonel “X,” who was actually Colonel Fletcher Prouty, claims that Lansdale went to Dallas and was there on November 22 . Colonel "X" says Lansdale was in Dallas on that date .
 General Charles P Cabell, Deputy Director of the CIA, was fired by President Kennedy in January 1962 . Cabell was fired nine months after Kennedy informed CIA Director Allen Dulles and Richard Bisell, planners of the Bay of Pigs disaster, that they would be fired .
 General Cabell was the brother of the mayor of Dallas at the time of the assassination . He was killed in Dallas, Texas, in the early 1900s .
 Kennedy’s firing of General Cabell was based on erroneous information that he had leaked White House secrets to the news media . Kennedy fired Cabell because of erroneous information he leaked to the media . Cabell's firing was a mistake .
 General Cabell knew Clay Shaw and once gave an introductory speech at an event sponsored by Shaw in New Orleans . Cabell once gave a speech at a Clay Shaw event sponsored for him .
 Davis, a Texan, was checked into a hotel in New Orleans in August 1963 . Davis was checked in at a New Orleans hotel in 1963 .
 Oswald was arrested in North Africa with the name Oswald in his possession . At the time of the assassination, he was arrested with Oswald in possession . Oswald's name was in possession when he was assassinated in 1963 .
 Rolando Masferrer Rojas was former Cuban senator under the dictator Batista . Rojas is a former anti-Castro Cuban drug trafficker and associate of Santo Trafficante .
 He allegedly was the financial conduit between Carlos Marcello and covert CIA operations against Fidel Castro . He allegedly knew of plans for the JFK assassination, and knew of the assassination .
 Barnes allegedly knew a plot was afoot to kill JFK and was trying to find out what was going on by sending infiltration agents into Cuban exile groups . Barnes allegedly sent agents Richard Case Nagell and Robert Morrow to Cuba to investigate .
 Odio was one of the few witnesses in the Kennedy probe who had not exploited her role or capitalized on her early notoriety . Odio had not capitalized her role in the investigation .
 She refused interviews, despite being offered large sums of money, and had gone into hiding . She refused to give interviews, but had gone in hiding .
 We will examine evidence of an Oswald impersonator in Dallas in the months preceding the Kennedy assassination . Gaeton Fonzi Former Investigator for the HSCA 17 Two OSWALDS in DALLAS .
 The real Oswald was a patsy, and the plotters felt that they had to lay down a trail of evidence, before the assassination, that pointed unmistakably to Oswald . The answer could be that the real Oswald is a paty .
 Our first development of evidence of an Oswald impersonator will concentrate on three episodes . The first development will be three episodes of Oswald impersonators .
 A chronology of the activities of Oswald and his alleged impersonators during the sixty days prior to the assassination is shown in Exhibit 17-1 . The chronology is shown below .
 Most of the information is from the Warren Commission, which did a very thorough job on the details of this subject . The results, being inconvenient to the story of a lone assassin, were largely dismissed .
 Bus departs Houston for Laredo, Texas and Mexico City, Mexico City .
 Left New Orleans on bus to Houston at 12:20m; arrived Mexico City at 10:00m. on Sept. 30 . Left New York on bus from New Orleans to Houston, Texas, then flew to Mexico City, Mexico City . Arrived in Mexico City 10:30
 Left New Orleans on bus to Houston at 12:20 pm; arrived Mexico City at 10:00 .a.m. on September 29 . Arrived in Mexico City on September 28 .
 To prove that there was an Oswald impersonator, it will be shown that there were instances of Oswald being in two different places at the same time . Therefore there had to be an impersonator. To prove this, it is shown that .
 If there were an impersonator, we have strong evidence of a conspiracy to assassinate President Kennedy, author says . Plotters were trying to set up Oswald, he says .
 Oswald impersonator was observed by Garland G Slack practicing at a rifle range in Dallas on November 10, 1963 .
 Slack’s testimony was corroborated in part by Malcolm H Price, who testified that he had adjusted the rifle scope for a person on September 28, 1963 whom he believed to have been Lee Harvey Oswald . Price said he adjusted the scope for someone he believed was Oswald .
 The first time I saw this person was in September, the last week —the last Saturday of September, and that was the afternoon that they opened the rifle range . "The first time that I saw [this person] was in ... September," she says. "That was the day
 Ls Price went on to testify that he had seen this man on several other occasions practicing at the rifle range . Price testified that he saw this man several other times practice at the range .
 He said he recalled seeing this customer on four or five occasions . He said each occasion he wore a “bulldogger, Texas style” hat and had bubble gum or chewing tobacco in his cheek .
 Witnesses who claimed to have seen Oswald at the firing range had more than a passing notice of the person they observed . Oswald was a member of the Oswald family, his wife and four other relatives .
 Dr. Malcolm H Price, Jr., adjusted the scope on the individual’s rifle on one occasion . Garland G Slack had an altercation with the individual on another occasion . Sterling C Wood, who ona third date was present at the range with his father, Dr. Price,
 Homer Wood, spoke with his father and very briefly with the man himself about the individual’s rifle . Homer Wood spoke with Homer Wood about his father's decision to buy the rifle .
 Two other persons believed they saw a person resembling Oswald firing a similar rifle at another range near Irving two days before the og PAB assassination . The problem with the September 28 and November 10 incidents is that the person identified as Oswald could not have been Oswald . The reasoning being that Oswald
 The Commission simply did not consider that the person resembling Oswald was an impersonator . The Commission did not believe Oswald was impersonator, the Commission said .
 Albert Bogard was a salesman at a Lincoln-Mercury auto dealership in Dallas near the Texas Schoolbook Depository building . Bogard testified to the Warren Commission that in the early afternoon of November 9 he met with a prospective customer who went with him on a wild test drive of a
 The customer told him that in several weeks he would have the money to purchase the automobile . The customer said he would be able to buy the car in a few weeks .
 Bogard testified that the customer gave his name as “Oswald,” which Bogard wrote down on the back of a business card . Bogard said he wrote down the name of the customer on a back of the card .
 Bogard says he tore up the card and threw it in the trash can after Oswald's name was mentioned on the radio on November 22 . Bogard said he supposed Oswald would no longer wish to buy a car .
 The assistant sales manager at the time, Frank Pizzo, and a second salesman, Eugene M Wilson, stated that they recall an instance when the customer described by Bogard was in the showroom .
 Bogard asked a salesman to assist the customer if he appeared during certain evenings when Bogard was away from the showroom . Another salesman, Oran Brown, recalled that Bogard had asked him to assist him if he was away .
 Brown stated that he too wrote down the customer’s name and both he and his wife remember the name “Oswald” as being on a paper in his possession before the assassination . Brown stated he too .
 As noted, the real Oswald was in Irving, Texas, on November 9 . Bogard’s testimony was also corroborated in a lie-detector test conducted by the Fp 484 .
 A corroborating witness said the man was trying to attract attention to himself as a Communist nut . A witness said he was told that he might be unable to purchase a car without a credit rating .
 Witnesses who were at the agency said that the man they saw resembled Oswald resembled Oswald . There were differences in one witness’s testimony, who said the man who had identified himself as Oswald was only about five feet tall .
 Of course the Commission could have viewed this as evidence that he was an imperfect impostor using Oswald’s name, yet they chose to conclude merely that the man wasn’t Oswald, ignoring the obvious . Of course .
 The Commission concluded that Oswald was in Irving at the time of the incident, it was evidence that the man at the dealership could not have been Oswald . A further example of the fallacious reasoning of the Commission is that they concluded that because Oswald was . in Irving, it . was evidence
 The Commission went on to say that it could not find the piece of paper with the name Oswald on it on November 23 . After a search through the auto agency and its refuse, the Commission said it couldn't find it .
 The Commission concluded, the testimonies of Bogard and the corroborating witness Oran Brown were suspect, despite the fact that Brown’s wife corroborated his testimony . Bogard's testimony was suspect, the Commission concluded .
 Cuban exile Silvia Odio had a strange visit between September 24 and 29, 1963 . Oswald was being set up in a conspiracy, according to reports .
 She testified in a deposition to the Warren Commission that late in September 1963 three men came to her apartment in Dallas . They asked her to help them solicit funds for activities against Fidel Castro .
 Odio was a member of the Cuban Revolutionary Junta, an anti-Castro organization . Odio, twenty-six years old at the time, was a young man .
 She came from a prominent, wealthy family in Cuba and both of her parents were prisoners of Castro . Both parents were imprisoned by Castro .
 She testified that the men exhibited personal familiarity with her father, telling several details about him . The men appeared to be Cubans or Mexicans, she testified .
 Odio said that the men told her that they had just come from New Orleans and that they were then about to leave on a trip . Odio: The men said they were about to go on a vacation in New Orleans .
 Odio suggested doubts that the men were in fact members of JURE . She was certain that the American who was introduced to her as Leon Oswald was Lee Harvey Oswald . Odio also said that she was certain the American in question was Oswald .
 Her sister, who was in the apartment at the time of the visit by the three men, also believed that the American was Lee Harvey Oswald . The three men were seen briefly in the hallway when answering the door .
 By referring to the date on which she moved from her former apartment, October 1, 1963, Mrs. Mrs. Smith moved from the apartment in 1963 .
 Odio fixed the date of the alleged visit on the Thursday or Friday immediately preceding that date, 1.e. i.e., September 26 or 27 . The alleged visit is said to have taken place in September .
 Silvia Odio, Cuban exile from a prominent, wealthy Cuban family, is an important witness in the Kennedy assassination . She was positive that the visit occurred prior to October 1 .
 She testified to the Warren Commission that Oswald and two others (who appeared to be Cubans or Mexicans) visited her home in Dallas on or about September 25, 1963 . One of the men called himself Leopoldo, one of whom called himself "Leopold"
 Silvia and her sister Annie, who witnessed the event, had decided not to tell anyone about it . Silvia's sister Annie witnessed it and decided to keep it quiet .
 A trusted friend, Lucille Connell, learned about it through a third sister, Sorita, and told another trusted friend . But a trusted friend learned about the story through a trusted sister, and then told another .
 This is evidence of Oswald being involved in or maneuvered into a conspiracy . Oswald's actions are evidence of a conspiracy, according to the author .
 The identities of the two men accompanying the man they called Oswald have never been established . Despite a major effort, the Warren Commission and the FBI were never able to discredit Odio’s testimony .
 It should be noted that although the men visited her on September 26 or 27, Odio was not positive of the date except that it was in late September and before October 1821 . The Commission's reaction to Odio’s testimony was to request an investigation by the FBI to
 Loran Eugene Hall in Johnsondale, California, told the FBI he was in Dallas in September 1963, soliciting aid in connection with anti-Castro activities . On September 16, 1964, the FBI came up with a man in California who claimed to have been involved in the
 He told the FBI that he was accompanied by Lawrence Howard and William Seymour . He said he was with Lawrence Howard, William Seymour and Lawrence Howard .
 He said that “Seymour was similar in appearance to Oswald; he speaks only a few words of Spanish,” as Odio had testified that one of the men did .
 The FBI submitted the information to the Commission in a letter dated September 21, 1964 . The letter had the effect of explaining Odio’s story without implicating Oswald . Odio's story was explained by the FBI in the letter .
 Hall said he and two other men were interviewed within a week of his arrest . The other two men who he said had accompanied him were interviewed .
 The Odio problem had been finessed by the FBI, but it left open the mystery of who, in fact, was Oswald . Oswald was introduced as Oswald, and the identities of the two men who accompanied him were not revealed .
 The Commission concluded that Lee Harvey Oswald was not at Mrs. Oswald's home . The FBI had not yet completed its investigation into this matter at the time of the report went to press .
 Not only had the FBI failed to give the FBI its information on time, the Commission had proceeded to reach a conclusion without the FBI having completed its investigation . The Commission had so stated in its report that the FBI had not completed their investigation .
 The Commission had flagrantly ducked a most important item of evidence of a conspiracy . Thus, the Commission ducked most important evidence of an alleged conspiracy .
 It does not take a suspicious mind to conclude that the FBI had deliberately delayed investigating the Silvia Odio story . The story was powerful evidence of a conspiracy, the author says . The Warren Commission should have been able to use the information, he says .
 Later information would connect Loran Hall with Lawrence Howard and Gerald Patrick Hemming, all three involved in the radical right-wing, and suspects in JFK murder .
 If the Commission had not allowed the FBI to manipulate it, a conspiracy might have been revealed . The Commission was manipulated by the FBI .
 Silvia Odio was thoroughly checked out by the FBI and found to be very credible . She wrote a letter to her father in prison in Cuba and related the incident to him . The Odio evidence is so believable that it's believable, the author says .
 Both her father and the psychiatrist confirmed that she informed them of the incident before John Kennedy was assassinated . The psychiatrist and her father confirmed that the incident occurred before Kennedy's assassination .
 Silvia Odio’s father, Amador Odio, responded to her letter warning her to be careful because he knew of no one in JURE whom these people might be . Her sister Annie was the one who opened the door when the strangers arrived .
 Two Cuban visitors accompanying Oswald were suspected to be members of another anti-Castro group called Alpha 66 . This has led to the suspicion that the two Cuban visitors were members of the group . Oswald was killed in November 1963 .
 This group was on the extreme right and was involved in the efforts of the CIA and the Mafia to assassinate Castro Castro . The CIA and Mafia were involved in efforts to kill Castro .
 The JURE group was considered to be leftists or Communists who wanted to get rid of Castro but would maintain some sort of social democracy in Cuba . JURE was considered a leftist or Communists .
 The founder of Alpha 66 was Antonio Veciana, who later testified to the House Committee on Assassinations that he had met Oswald in Dallas in late August or early September 1963 . This raised the suspicion that the right-wing group was implementing a scheme to link JURE, the left-
 Maurice Bishop, as will be discussed at length later, was a code name for a CIA operative who was believed to be Oswald’s control agent . Maurice Bishop was a secret CIA operative, believed to have been Oswald's control agent.
 Oswald with Cubans who professed to be members of a leftist, anti-Castro organization . It is evidence of the likelihood of a conspiracy involving Oswald with Cuban dissidents . Oswald is believed to have been involved in a conspiracy with Cuban activists in Cuba .
 It proved to be impossible for the FBI or the Warren Commission to build even a flimsy case to refute it . The FBI and Warren Commission were unable to build a case against the FBI .
 Odio testified it was not Oswald who said that President Kennedy should have been assassinated . Odio said it wasn't Oswald said that Kennedy should be assassinated . Oswald was not the only person to say that Kennedy was assassinated .
 It was one of the Cubans, not speaking in the presence of Oswald, who telephoned Odio later and planted the idea in her mind . It was not the first time she had thought of the idea .
 If the Oswald who was visiting Odio with the Cubans were a witting impostor, Leopoldo would more likely have made his statement in front of ‘Oswald’ and not bothered to call later .
 Oswald's whereabouts at the time of the visit to Odio's apartment are shown in Exhibits 17-2 and 17-3 . Oswald’s whereabouts of Odio’�s visit to his home are shown .
 Oswald was in New Orleans until the morning of September 25 when he cashed an unemployment check at a New Orleans store . Oswald is believed to have been in the city at the time of the September 25 incident .
 Oswald could not have left New Orleans before 8:00m. on September 25 . Oswald was found to have been in New Orleans at the time of the attack . Oswald's whereabouts of Oswald and his family have been ruled out of the case .
 Oswald’s location is picked up in Houston, Texas, where he boarded a Continental Trailways bus at 2:35m. Oswald is believed to have been on his way to Mexico City at 2.35m .
 Oswald was observed sitting alone at 6:00m., before the bus reached Alice, by two English passengers, Dr. and Mrs. Oswald . Oswald was believed to have been on the bus at the time of the assassination .
 Oswald was very talkative with passengers on the bus, attracting attention to himself and talking about having just returned from Russia . Oswald was also talking to passengers about his recent trip to Russia .
 Oswald crossed the border into Mexico before 2:00m. on September 26; this was firmly established by Mexican immigration records . Oswald crossed into Mexico at 2:30 a.m. in the morning of September 26 .
 The time not accounted for is between 8:00m. on September 25, and 2:35m . on September 26—a period of about eighteen hours . Therefore, the time is thought to have been between 8m. and 2.35m.
 Oswald could have been driven ‘4 or flown from New Orleans to Dallas, visited Odio on the evening of September 25, and then been driven or flown to Houston in time to make the bus connection to Mexico City at 2:35m. on September 26 . Oswald was driven
 He could not have visited Odio on the evening of September 26 or any later date until he returned to Dallas on October 3y Exhibit 17-2 . Exhibit: Odio was not in Odio at the time of the visit .
 Oswald seen on bus, sitting alone, by Dr. and Mrs. Warren Commission . September 25: Earliest time Oswald could have left New Orleans on Continental Trailways bus . September 26: Left Houston for Laredo—one ticket purchased could have been Oswald .
 Oswald talked to passengers on bus, said he was traveling from New Orleans 1:20m.: Bus scheduled to arrive at Laredo, Mexico, before 2:00m. 2:30m. 4:30pm: Oswald crossed border into Mexico, crossed into Nuevo
 Oswald arrived in Mexico City at the time of the assassination . No airline tickets were sold to Oswald from Houston to Dallas, the only means of public transportation during this time period . Oswald arrived at the end of his trip .
 If Oswald did not go by bus from New Orleans to Houston, he could have traveled from Dallas to Alice, Texas, and caught the bus that left Houston at 2:35 am, but he could not have been on the bus at 6:00 am when seen by the McFar
 The Warren Commission concluded that Oswald was not in Dallas on September 25, 26, or 27 . Oswald stayed in Mexico City until returning to Dallas on October 3 . Oswald was killed in Dallas, Texas, in September .
 Oswald and the two Cubans visited Odio on September 25 . It could have been the same Oswald who went to Mexico City on the bus from Houston . Oswald was the driver of the bus that took him there from Houston to Mexico .
 Odio fixed the date that the three men visited her as being between September 24 and 29 . Recall that Odio had fixed that date as being September 24 .
 Warren Commission Report had perhaps inadvertently put the date at September 26 or 27 . The Warren Commission report was published in the Warren Report .
 The Warren Commission investigators determined that there was no indication that Oswald had flown by commercial airlines from New Orleans to Dallas, or Dallas to Houston .
 No bus tickets were sold between Dallas and Houston during the period September 23 to 26 . Continental Trailways had not sold tickets during that period, officials say .
 Continental Trailways was the only bus line on which Oswald could have made connections to the bus leaving Houston for Mexico City at 2:35m. on September 26 . The bus was the last to leave Houston at around 2:30m.
 New Orleans via Beaumont, Houston, Alice, and Laredo, with possible side Trip to Dallas and Austin . Possible Side Trip to Austin and Dallas .
 Oswald's earliest arrival at Austin would be 3m. if he left New Orleans at Sam. If he arrived at Sam, he would have arrived at 3:30pm . Oswald's arrival at Sam would be at 3.30pm if he arrived in New Orleans .
 Oswald most likely boarded a bus in New Orleans at 12:50 m.m. on September 25 that arrived in Houston in time to make the connection to Laredo and Mexico City . The Warren Commission concluded that Oswald was most likely to board the bus . Oswald traveled to New Orleans
 Oswald told passengers on the bus from Houston to Laredo that he had done just that, although of course it is possible that he was not telling the truth . In fact, Oswald said that he did it, but of course, it was possible that .
 The Commission did not seriously consider that it was possible for Oswald to have gone from New Orleans to Dallas, visited Odio, and then made the bus connection in Houston . If he had been driven or flown by an accomplice along the legs of the journey, the Commission said .
 It should be noted that he was in fact with two accomplices when he visited Odio . He should be careful to note that there were two more accomplices involved .
 Oswald was interviewed at a Selective Service office in Austin, Texas, on September 25, between 1:05m. and 1:35m. Oswald is believed to have been interviewed at the time of the interview .
 He and his driver would have had to average about 80 miles per hour to make the journey . The driver and his vehicle would have to average around 80mph to reach the speed limit .
 He would have had to travel by air in a private or military plane . Therefore, he would have to fly by air .
 Dannelly was of the firm belief that the date on which Oswald contacted her was September 25, 1963, based on her habit of going to the bank during lunch break on every other Wednesday, which was payday . The date of contact was based on the fact that she went to the
 The evidence of Oswald being in both Austin and Dallas is very important . Oswald was found in both Dallas and Austin, Texas .
 Oswald was being flown around Texas in a whirlwind series of meetings on September 25, 1963 . Oswald's name was clearly put forth and tied him to being a potential threat to Governor Connally and the other to a leftist division of anti-Castro Cubans .
 This suggests either a serious blunder on the part of the conspirators or a deliberate staging . The conspirators must have realized that future investigations would reveal the impossibility of Oswald being in all of these places unless he had accomplices to fly him .
 The LincolnMercury incident is the strongest evidence in that corroborating witnesses testified that the man identified himself as Oswald . Oswald was visiting with his wife in Irving, Texas, at that time and could not have been the man at the Lincoln-Mercury agency .
 The rifle-range incidents, although significant, depend solely on eyewitness identification of an Oswald “look-alike” without the person having identified himself as Oswald, are therefore the weaker evidence . The rifle range incidents, however, depend upon eyewitness identification .
 If it were the real Oswald, he had accomplices who flew him from New Orleans to Austin to Dallas, then back to Houston . The real Oswald was flown to Texas, Texas, then flown to Dallas .
 These accomplices set him up by telling Odio that he was a nut who could kill Kennedy, Odio says . Odio's accomplices told Odio he could kill JFK, but he was set up by the media, he says .
 If it were an Oswald impersonator, it still was a conspiracy setting up Oswald, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com . "It still was still a conspiracy set up Oswald," says Sutter .
 In either case, it does not seem to show Oswald as a lone nut without accomplices, as was later portrayed by the Warren Commission . The Warren Commission later portrayed Oswald as an accomplice .
 A pattern is emerging that the conspirators never intended for the assassination to appear to be the act of a lone gunman without accomplices, says CNN's John Sutter . The assassination was intended to appear as though the gunman had no accomplices .
 The lone gunman idea was a creation of the Warren Commission, after the fact . The Warren Commission came up with the idea of lone gunman after the shooting .
 If Oswald had defected to the Soviets, it would be to the KGB that he would tell all these matters . But CIA people working on the KGB would certainly want to talk to Oswald, he says .
 Minox camera was a Minox which was used almost exclusively for spy work . Minox cameras were used for the Soviets and U.S. intelligence .
 This espionage term was not commonly known to the general public in 1963 . Reference to “microdots’s” in his notes in 1963 was made in his book .
 The extreme ease and speed with which Oswald left the U.S. and entered Russia, also his Russian wife Marina’s swift approval for coming to the United States . Oswald bypassed passport procedures when he went to Russia and when he returned, he easily obtained a passport to travel
 Oswald’s relationship to a CIA contact , George de Mohrenschildt, who was his “baby sitter’ and who secretly debriefed him when he returned to Fort Worth, Texas . The CIA contact was his CIA contact .
 The strange absence of official CIA debriefing when Oswald returned from Russia . Oswald's return to the U.S. was the first time Oswald had returned to the CIA .
 Oswald’s proficiency with the Russian language suggests that he must have had secret training while in the Marine Corps. Oswald also had secret Russian language training . Oswald is believed to have been in the Marines during his time in Russia .
 Oswald spoke Russian so fluently that when his wife Marina first met him she thought he was a Russian citizen . Oswald spoke so fluent that his wife thought she believed he was Russian . Oswald's wife Marina thought she was Russian when she first met her husband .
 Oswald met with CIA officer David Atlee Phillips and radical anti-Castro Cuban exile Antonio Veciana in Dallas in September 1963 .
 Names of military intelligence personnel in Oswald’s address book were found in his address book . Oswald had a list of names of military officials in his book .
 Of the hundreds of books written on the Kennedy assassination, about half of the material has dealt with Oswald . Oswald was the only person to have been involved in the assassination .
 David Lifton has been working night and day, seven days a week, for the past seven years on an exhaustive book about Oswald . Lifton's book will be published in November 2015 .
 Oswald's story is a small portion of what is known about Oswald's life . Oswald was a prominent figure in the world's most famous assassination attempt . He was assassinated in November 1963 .
 I will focus on what I consider to be the most important information and how that fits into the overall scope of my thesis . I will also focus on how important information is to the thesis .
 Oswald was recruited into military intelligence while he was in the Marine Corps in 1957 . He was part of a program to send young military men posing as defectors into the Soviet Union . Oswald is believed to have been recruited by the U.S. government .
 Victor Marchetti, who resigned from the CIA in 1969, was disillusioned with the agency after 14 years of service . Marchetti was a member of the CIA who resigned in 1969 . He described the CIA program as a program that allowed the CIA to spy on Americans .
 Marchetti had been a staff officer in the office of the director of the CIA . He had been an executive assistant to the deputy director and staff officer .
 At the time, in 1959, the U.S. was having real difficulty in acquiring information from the Soviet Union . Technical systems had, of course, not developed to the point that they are at today, and we were resorting to all sorts of activities .
 ONI program involved three dozen, maybe forty young men who were made to appear disenchanted, poor, American youths who had become turned off and wanted to see what communism was all about . One of these activities was an ONI . program .
 They were sent into the Soviet Union, or into Eastern Europe, with the specific intention the Soviets would pick them up and “double” them if they suspected them of being United States agents, or recruit them as KGB agents . U.S. agents were sent to Eastern Europe
 The operation was being run out of Nag’s Head, North Carolina . They were trained at various naval installations both here and abroad .
 Many believe Oswald was one of these recruits . Oswald is believed to have been one of them . Oswald was a key member of the CIA .
 He defected to the Soviet Union where he announced in public that he was rejecting his American citizenship and turning over everything he had learned while in the Marine Corps at Atsugi Air Force Base .
 After living in the Soviet Union for about two years, he announced that he was disillusioned and wanted to return to the U.S. After two years of living in Russia, he decided to return home .
 He had married a young Soviet woman, Marina, who was the niece of a Soviet MVD officer . Meanwhile, he had married Marina's niece, Marina .
 Even if Oswald were an agent, or ex-agent, or double agent, it can be argued that he could have operated alone to assassinate the president . Oswald was not a double agent .
 In fact, the whole affair could have been very embarrassing to the CIA and the Navy .
 A major damage-control operation, using every technique, would be their first instinctive reaction . The White House would use every technique in its repertoire to deal with the situation, including the use of the U.S. military .
 Proving Oswald was a CIA or ONI agent could be part of their defense, in that it could be argued that it would have been very stupid to use one of their agents as a fall guy .
 More logically it would have originated, if in the CIA or ONI at all, with some of their more fanatical rogue agents, and not by top officials . More logically, the CIA and ONI should have started with rogue agents .
 Oswald, it seems, was a very impressionable and confused young man, from a broken home without a father, and with many problems . Oswald was an impressionable young man who had many problems, his mother says .
 He joined the Marine Corps, a gung-ho, patriotic act. Yet, paradoxically, he joined the Marines . He joined with his wife, who he says is a proud woman .
 Oswald could have been persuaded to go in many directions as long as it gave him some sense of belonging and purpose, which had been badly lacking in his background . Oswald was a patriotic soldier, patriotic soldier and American spy, as well as a Communist spy .
 Oswald was only twenty years old when he defected from the Marine Corps and went to the Soviet Union . He was only 20 years old at the time of his defection to Russia .
 He probably would not have been given a mission of any great importance . He would probably have not been given an important mission, but he would have been able to help .
 While Oswald was at Atsugi Air Force Base, he was considered to be somewhat of a loner . He was praised by his officer as being competent, intelligent, and a person who could be trusted to catch on quickly .
 Oswald worked in the radar room at Atsugi that monitored the spy flights of the U-2 aircraft over the Soviet Union . Oswald had first-hand access to flight information . Oswald was a member of the Japanese Air Force .
 The first indication we have of his spy activity was when he began studying the Russian language, presumably on his own, and when he was wandering around the base at Atsugi with a camera, taking pictures .
 Oswald began having an affair with a beautiful Japanese nightclub hostess who worked at one of the smartest clubs in the city . Oswald then started going off on two-day trips to Tokyo where he began having affair .
 The girls were expensive, costing more than a month’s salary for one night . They were expensive .
 Oswald said he reported the incident to his superior officer and was debriefed by a man in civilian clothes . Oswald told Bucknell that after he was first approached at this bar he reported it to his superiors . Oswald said the incident occurred at a bar in the early hours of the morning
 He said he was told to go back and give false information to the woman, who was a known KGB agent . He said the woman was known to be a known Russian agent .
 Oswald could have started his spy career as a double agent in Atsugi . Oswald's first introduction to spy work may have been his first spy work .
 Oswald developed a reputation for being a troublemaker during his stay at Atsugi . Oswald was known for his troublemaking ways during his time there .
 He was accused of deliberately pouring a drink over a sergeant but was acquitted in a court martial . He was later acquitted in court martial but was later convicted of drink-pinking .
 Found guilty of using “provoking words,” he had to spend eighteen days in the brig . Found guilty, he was sentenced to 18 days in prison .
 Also, according to the record, he accidentally shot himself in the arm, inflicting a minor wound, before his unit was due to leave Atsugi .
 He did this with a pistol that he kept in his locker, which was against service regulations . He used it to carry a pistol, which is against regulations .
 Oswald began to speak bitterly against the Marine Corps and avoid Marine acquaintances, friends say . Oswald's friends say he spoke bitterly about the Marines and avoided acquaintances with them .
 Oswald's radar unit moved to Taiwan in 1958 . The next incident of Oswald attracting attention to himself as a troublemaker or an eccentric was when his radar unit relocated to Taiwan . Oswald was known for his eccentric nature .
 While alone on guard duty at night, he fired several shots into the darkness, claiming he had been fired upon by men in the woods . The incident occurred in the early 1900s .
 Oswald declared he could not stand doing sentry duty . Shortly after that, Oswald declared himself unfit for duty . Oswald declared that he could no longer be sentry . Oswald was killed in August 18, 1918 .
 Oswald told a friend she was half Russian . Oswald was transferred back to Atsugi where he took up again with a beautiful Eurasian woman . He was then transferred to Japan and took up with her again .
 Oswald was transferred to the Marine Corps Air Station in Santa Ana, California . Oswald was then transferred to Santa Ana Air Station, California, where he was stationed .
 Oswald exhibited an intensified interest in learning the Russian language in Santa Ana, California . Oswald was inspired by his interest in the language of Russian in his youth .
 He applied to take a Marine proficiency examination in written and spoken Russian . He applied for the exam in Russian to be a Marine officer .
 Although he failed, he did show a knowledge of the basics of the language . He failed, but showed a good grasp of basic English .
 In the weeks following, he was observed studying Russian books and a Russian language periodical for hours .
 Oswald constantly talked with his Marine friends about Communist ideology and world affairs . Around the barracks, Oswald often talked with friends about Communism . Oswald was a member of the Communist Party in Cuba .
 He began to openly profess Marxist doctrine, claiming it was the best political system in the world . He also claimed it was a Marxist-inspired political system .
 Cuban embassy in Washington began receiving letters with official seal . Next he wrote to the Cuban embassy, he began to receive letters with the Cuban seal .
 He confided to a friend, Nelson Delgado from Puerto Rico, that he had visited the Cuban embassy in Los Angeles . Delgado said he visited the embassy in the U.S. and told Delgado he had been to the embassy .
 Delgado said he once saw Oswald in a conversation outside the base with a man wearing an overcoat . Delgado concluded the man was a Cuban and concluded that Oswald was a man from Cuba .
 All of this could have been staged to build a case that Oswald was converting to communism, and led up to the time when he applied for discharge from the Marines, using a fake story that his mother was ill . Oswald could have used the fake story to build up a case he was
 Oswald went to New Orleans to study philosophy at Albert Schweitzer College in Switzerland . Oswald boarded a ship bound for Europe on a pretense that he was going to Europe to study . Oswald died at the age of 92 .
 He disembarked at the British Port of South Hampton on October 9, 1959 . He arrived in the UK in October 1959 .
 Oswald was granted a six-day visa to enter the Soviet Union within two days . By midnight the next day he was checking into a hotel in Helsinki, Finland . Oswald had no known advance notice of his arrival .
 Swedish intelligence claim they detected a flying visit by Oswald to Stockholm where he may have visited the Soviet embassy . This suspicion was reinforced by the claim of Swedish intelligence that .
 "All of this is strangely sophisticated behavior for a twenty-year-old high school dropout who had never traveled anywhere except in the Marines and had very little experience"
 Oswald was mustered through the Soviet consulate in Helsinki with unusual speed . On October 16 he arrived in Moscow by train by train . Oswald was forced to leave Helsinki in October .
 He was met by a Russian representative and taken to the Hotel Berlin where he registered as a student . He was then taken to a hotel where he was registered as an international student .
 Oswald walked into the American embassy in Moscow in Moscow and renounced his American citizenship . Two weeks later, Oswald walked out of the U.S. Embassy in Moscow to renounce his citizenship . Oswald died in August 1944 .
 He voluntarily told Soviet officials that he would make known to them all information about the Marine Corps and the specialty radar operation knowledge he possessed . He also said that he had voluntarily told them all . information concerning the . Marine Corps .
 After the assassination, these agencies would deny any interest in Oswald other than routine . Oswald's interest was routine after the assassination .
 Oswald returned to the U.S. with his Russian bride, Marina, two years later . There was little debriefing of Oswald or Marina and no major investigation of them . Only action taken was that he was given a dishonorable discharge .
 Oswald was sent to the city of Minsk where he was put up in a roomy apartment with a balcony overlooking a river . The apartment was considered luxurious by Soviet standards by the Soviets .
 He was given a job in a Russian radio and television factory and put on a monthly allowance . He was put on the monthly allowance for a radio and TV factory job .
 This was brought up by FBI director J Edgar Hoover when he wondered aloud to the Warren Commission on the subject . FBI director Hoover brought up the subject in a speech to the commission on the matter .
 Oswald met Marina in Minsk, Belarus, six weeks after a whirlwind courtship . Oswald and Marina were married within six weeks of each other .
 Marina later remarked that when she met Oswald he spoke flawless Russian and she actually thought he was a native citizen . Marina said she thought Oswald was actually a native Russian citizen .
 In the last sixty days before the assassination, Oswald was being set up as a fall guy, at times by an Oswald impersonator and at other times by the use of the real Oswald . In one case to establish Oswald as a left-wing, pro-Castro activist, another
 Oswald was in Russia at the time of Kennedy’s inauguration in 1961, when he was in the country . Oswald had been in Russia when Kennedy was inaugurated .
 Two men came into the Bolton Ford dealership on North Clayborne Avenue and said they wanted to buy ten Ford pickup trucks . This event occurred in New Orleans at the dealership . Two men say they want to buy 10 pickup trucks at a dealership .
 When the first man said that the bid should be in the name of Oswald, the truck salesman, Oscar Deslatte, printed the name Oswald on the sales form . The first bid was printed in Oswald's name, but the name was printed on the form .
 The two men dealing for the trucks said they should get a good bid because they were buying them for a patriotic cause in that they were members of the Friends of Democratic Cuba . The men said they were hoping for the best bid because of their patriotic cause .
 This incident was confirmed by another auto salesman at the agency, Fred Sewall . The incident was reported to have occurred at an auto dealership in New York City .
 He also tried to call a number that may have been his contact in military intelligence, but the call was cut off . The call was also cut off by the number he tried to contact .
 Remarkably, Oswald spoke Russian with little accent, although he reportedly had no formal training in Russian and was a high school dropout . Oswald reportedly spoke with little Russian accent and spoke little English . Oswald was a Russian dropout and a high-school dropout.
 His wife Marina said that when she first met him in Russia she thought he was a native Russian . Marina said she thought when she met him she thought she was a Russian .
 Oswald knew David Ferrie, who was first accused of being a part of the assassination . Ferrie committed suicide when the matter became public . Oswald knew Ferrie .
 Ferrie was an employee of Carlos Marcello, Mafia chieftain in New Orleans, who was under extreme attack by Robert Kennedy . Ferrie worked for Marcella, a Mafia boss under attack by Kennedy .
 There is little doubt that these activities were part of an intelligence operation to establish Oswald’s bona fides as a radical Communist and supporter of Fidel Castro . Oswald was a supporter of the Castro regime, according to historian John Sutter .
 This was either a part of the conspiracy to kill JFK—or the real conspirators knew about these activities and maneuvered Oswald into a position where the assassination could be pinned on him as a Communist radical . This is either a good idea or a bad idea from the White House .
 Oswald's car salesmen remembered Oswald’s visit and called the FBI . The FBI arrived and picked up the bid form with tongs . Oswald was killed in 1963 .
 Jim Garrison’s investigating team in New Orleans obtained a copy of the articles of incorporation of the Friends of Democratic Cuba and discovered that it was in the name of Guy Banister .
 Guy Banister was up to his eyeballs in the conspiracy along with David Ferrie and Carlos Marcello . As you may recall, it was Guy . Banister who was up . his eyeball in the . conspiracy .
 In the month that John Kennedy was inaugurated, an intelligence project was using the name “Oswald” in bidding for pickup trucks for apparent use in the Bay of Pigs Invasion .
 Young American who did the bidding either knew Lee Oswald or knew his name . More important, the young American who had done the bidding had known Lee Oswald . Lee Oswald either knew Oswald or known his name.
 Oswald must have been designated long before the Kennedy assassination as a person whose name and identity could be used for disinformation purposes by U.S. intelligence agencies . This fascinating evidence shows that someone connected with anti-Castro operations was falsely using Oswald's name .
 Oswald-type characters were created by the CIA in 1961 . It is difficult to imagine what the CIA had in mind in creating Oswald characters .
 Someone was using Lee Harvey Oswald’s name and birth certificate for false identification purposes . This was picked up by J Edgar Hoover, who issued a memorandum that was issued by Hoover .
 Oswald the more mysterious it becomes. Oswald's mysterious origins make it more mysterious . Oswald is the subject of much of the world's most famous unsolved mysteries . Oswald's life is inextricably mysterious .
 Future investigators would go after Oswald like hounds chasing the scent, only to end up frustrated and tearing their hair out because each trail meandered into the forest and petered out . Oswald's trail would meander into a forest, petering out .
 Exhibit 18-1 shows some of the most important activities of Oswald for the first nine months of 1963 . Oswald was involved in the assassination of President Kennedy in 1963 .
 What I am looking for here is a systematic pattern of evidence showing that the CIA or some other entity was setting up Oswald as a fall guy for the assassination of the president . What I'm looking for is a pattern of . evidence showing . that the . CIA or other entity . was
 Oswald allegedly posed for backyard photographs of him holding rifle with Communist literature . Oswald received the rifle when he received it, he allegedly posed with it .
 As Jim Garrison said, this may be the first time in the annals of assassinations where the assassin has been so stupid as to purchase his weapon by mail order, use an alias, have pictures taken of himself holding the rifle and inflammatory literature .
 Oswald apparently willingly participated in a set-up of Oswald in which he willingly participated . Oswald's actions have the distinct appearance of being a set up of Oswald's . Oswald is accused of trying to cover up his involvement in the assassination .
 Oswald went to Russia on Oct. 1959 and returned to the U.S. on June 13, 1962 . Oswald's Activities and Related Events: Some of Oswald’s Activities and . Related Events—First Nine Months of 1963 .
 He went to Fort Worth, Texas, on June 14, 1962, and then moved to Dallas in early October 1962 . Employed by Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall, Inc., in Dallas from 4th quarter 1962 until 2nd quarter 1963 . He was employed by
 Oswald seen being passed money by Marcello associate at Town & Country Motel in New Orleans . Oswald allegedly attempted to kill General Walker in Dallas April 23 News release—‘JFK Going to Dallas’ April 24 Oswald went from Dallas to New Orleans; stayed there until Sept
 Volunteered to Carlos Bringuier to train Cuban exiles in guerilla warfare, fight Castro . Volunteered in Cuba to train ex-Cubans .
 Seen in Clinton, Louisiana, job hunting with Clay Shaw, David Ferrie . Arrested in New Orleans for street scuffle with Cubans when distributing Fair Play for Cuba material . Met with CIA’s “Maurice Bishop” in Dallas September Oswald, Ferrie
 As strange as this may seem, there is a consistent pattern of his participation in self-incrimination, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The most blatant example was when he allegedly attempted to kill Major General Edwin Walker in Dallas in 1963 .
 On that night, someone fired a rifle through a window in General Walker’s home, hitting the window frame and missing his head by inches . General Walker was sitting at the desk in his study when he was hit by the rifle .
 During the Warren Commission investigation it was concluded that Oswald was the lone shooter . Oswald was found to have been the lone gunman in the attack .
 Oswald came home late that night, nervous and excited, and confessed to her that he had attempted to kill General Walker . This was based on the testimony of his wife Marina who said he came home that night and confessed .
 There was an abundance of evidence suggesting that there was more than one person involved in the shooting, police say . But from the beginning there was evidence suggesting there was another person involved . The suspect was shot multiple times in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 President Kennedy relieved of his command by President Kennedy for using his position to distribute right-wing propaganda to his men . He had been relieved of command by . President Kennedy .
 Walker had thrown himself into a variety of rabid rightwing political activities, including inciting a race riot in which two people were killed . Walker had then resigned from the Army in anger and threw himself in to the rightwing .
 He had been temporarily consigned to a mental institution by Attorney General Robert Kennedy . He then had to be put in an institution .
 At the time of the shooting incident at General Walker’s, a fourteen-year-old boy, Walter Coleman, was standing in the doorway of a nearby house and heard the shot . General Walker was a leading member of the John Birch Society ZH
 Two men are suspected of shooting at the scene of the shooting . The suspect says he saw at least two men on the fence . Police say the shooting happened in a controlled area of the park .
 He testified to the House Assassination Committee that he saw some men speeding down the alley in a light green or light blue Ford . The car was either a 1959 or a 1960 model .
 He said he also saw another car, a 1958 Chevrolet, in the church parking lot adjacent to the Walker’s house . The car is black with white down the side .
 He said the car door was open and that a man was bending over the back seat as though he was placing something on the floor of the car . He said he saw a man bending over a man's back seat and then bending over it to place something .
 The young Coleman said that he had gotten a good look at these men and neither one resembled Oswald . Coleman said he had seen the men and they didn't look like Oswald .
 One of General Walker’s aides, Robert Surrey, had spotted two men prowling around the house . Four days before the shooting incident, Surrey had seen two men peeking in windows .
 Oswald's car was found among Oswald’s possessions . The car was seen in a photograph showing a rear view of General Walker's house .
 When the photograph was produced by the Warren Commission a hole had been cut in the picture where the car’s numbered plate should be . The Warren Commission produced the photograph of a car with a hole cut in it .
 Marina Oswald said that when she had seen the photograph she was positive there was no hole in it . Oswald said she had been positive there were no holes in the photograph when she saw it .
 On April 24 Oswald moved to New Orleans; his wife and children followed him in the latter part of May . Oswald's wife and kids followed him into New Orleans . Oswald had been in New Orleans since April 24 .
 Upon arriving in New Orleans, Oswald obtained a job at the Reilly Coffee Company 7231 located just down the street from Guy Banister’s office . The Reilly Coffee Co. 7231 is located near Banister's office .
 In mid-June Oswald was taken by his uncle, a Marcello lieutenant with whom he was living at the time, to a Jesuit seminary where he made a speech describing the failures of communism . Oswald made the speech at the seminary .
 Oswald put forth a right-wing image in contradiction to his other actions with a left-leaning image . Oswald's image is another example of Oswald putting forth an image of a right wing . Oswald was a member of the Oswaldist Party in the 1930s .
 Oswald for the first time handed out Fair Play for Cuba materials outside of the Naval shipyard in New Orleans . At almost the same time, on June 16, the U.S. government handed out the materials .
 Oswald came to town with two men, one was David Ferrie and the other, according to Jim Garrison, who was Clay Shaw . Garrison: "One of the two men was an older man, Clay Shaw"
 Oswald's activities in New Orleans were part of the CIA’s “sheep-dipping” of Oswald to create his bona fides as an unstable character going from one job to another . According to Garrison, the CIA was trying to create an image of Oswald as
 Oswald was being prepared for some future role by his handlers, who were CIA and FBI connected as well as Mafia connected . There appears to be little doubt that Oswald was preparing for a future role . Oswald's handlers were CIA, FBI, FBI and Mafia connected and were Mafia connected.
 Oswald's sheep-dipping may have been for some other mission unrelated to assassinating JFK . Oswald was preparing Oswald to be a double agent who would later defect to Cuba, or even return to Russia on a second mission .
 Oswald sheep-dipping operation in New Orleans continued through September . Oswald left for trip to Mexico City on September 25 . The operation continued until Oswald left New Orleans for Mexico City .
 Oswald was seen receiving money from Clay Shaw at Lake Pontchartrain, Louisiana, by a heroin addict by the name of Vernon Bundy . It was during this period in New Orleans, according to Jim Garrison .
 Garrison also brought forth a witness by the name of Perry Russo who claimed he had been at a party of homosexuals in New Orleans in which he participated in a conversation with Clay Shaw, David Ferrie, and Oswald in which Ferrie talked of assassinating JFK .
 Oswald was a CIA agent who was sent to the Soviet Union on a special mission . In summary, we can conclude with reasonable confidence that Oswald was CIA agent . KK
 There is little room for doubt that he was set up by some entity as a fall guy in the JFK assassination plot . And there is little doubt that some entity set up him .
 Oswald believed to have been involved in the plot, but it's unclear whether he was knowingly involved . Oswald was killed in the assassination of President Lincoln Lincoln Lincoln in 1917 .
 He could have been involved in another covert operation unrelated to the Kennedy assassination, but have been co-opted by the real conspirators . He could be involved in a covert operation, but may not have been the target of the assassination .
 The evidence that Oswald was linked with Guy Banister and anti-Castro Cuban operations, and Clay Shaw and David Ferrie, is virtually unassailable . The evidence is that he was linked to anti-Cuban operations and with Guy .
 Gaeton Fonzi, Former Investigator for the HSCA 19 OSWALD’S TRIP TO MEXICO CITY . Over the years since the assassination of President Kennedy, there has been an almost continuous evolution of evidence and information concerning the events of Oswald’s
 Although there still remain redacted portions of the information, and key documents that have not been released, it is now possible to piece together enough evidence to provide a valid base for the purposes of this book .
 That may be true, but I haven’t found a strong-enough argument to reach that conclusion, he says . That's true, he adds .
 Oswald impersonator visited both the Cuban and Soviet consulates while the real Oswald was elsewhere in Mexico City . Therefore, I will confine my analysis to the assumption that it was the . real Oswald who traveled to Mexico City, and examine whether it was an . impersonator .
 Maurice Bishop asks Antonio Veciana to bribe his cousin Guillermo Ruiz, in Castro’s intelligence service in Mexico City, to make statements that Oswald visited with him and his wife in 1963 . Ruiz is in Castro's intelligence service .
 The Mexico City CIA station sent teletypes to the FBI, the State Department, and the Department of the Navy with the message: Subject: Lee Henry Oswald . Oswald had contacted KGB office on October 10, 1963 .
 It seems that if the CIA as an organization were in fact involved in a conspiracy to set up Oswald in the assassination, it would not have deliberately released a teletype with a description of a man it said was Oswald when the description was erroneous .
 The next clue is that on the day of the assassination the CIA in Mexico City sent a packet of information by special plane to the FBI in Dallas, Texas . The CIA sent the information by a special plane, the next clue .
 The packet contained a photograph taken outside the Soviet embassy in Mexico City on October 1 . It identified the man in the photograph as Oswald . Oswald .
 Oswald Oswald was a much older, much heavier man who had no resemblance to Oswald . Oswald's photo was taken in the days before he was assassinated in November 1963 . Oswald died in August 1963 at the hands of President Kennedy .
 The photograph seemed to be consistent with the description of the man referred to in the teletype sent on October 10 . The photograph was consistent with a description of a man described as a man .
 The CIA said there had been a mix-up in the photos of Oswald and Oswald . The CIA was later questioned about the contradiction in the written and photographic descriptions of Oswald .
 Oswald had visited the Soviet and Cuban embassies, according to reports . Oswald had been photographed in Cuba, Cuba and the Soviet Union . Oswald was assassinated in November 1945 .
 The CIA was unable to produce any photographs of him entering or leaving either of the embassies, despite ten photo opportunities with automatically operated surveillance cameras located in buildings across the street .
 She remembered the name of an American who had come to the Cuban Consulate to obtain a visa to travel to Cuba in transit to Russia . In support of his application had shown his passport, in which it was noted that he had lived in that country for a period of three years .
 The declarant, admittedly exceeding her responsibilities, telephoned the Russian consulate, with the intention of doing what she could to facilitate issuance of the Russian visa to Lee Harvey Oswald . Oswald was killed in the June 4, 1918, assassination .
 The applicant was in a great hurry to obtain visas that would enable him to travel to Russia . However, they told her that there would be a delay of about four months in processing the case, which annoyed the applicant .
 The CIA leaked to commission members that Oswald had made contact with a KGB officer, Valery Kostikov, while in the Soviet embassy . Then, on January 22, 1964, the CIA leaked the CIA's findings to commission .
 The commission also received a report that Oswald had been seen receiving $6,500 inside the Cuban consulate on September 18, 1963, during which discussions of killing Kennedy took place . The FBI discredited this report as a fabrication .
 Warren Commission members were content to take the word of the FBI and CIA for Oswald’s Mexico activities . Oswald's links to a KGB or Cuban assassination plot so disturbed the Warren Commission .
 If true, the government’s options to prevent escalation to nuclear war would be greatly reduced . After all, if these statements were true and became known to the American public, the U.S. would have fewer options to stop nuclear war .
 Cable traffic began to flow between CIA headquarters at Langley and CIA Mexico City station in which it was finally ordered by Langley that Silvia Duran be arrested and interrogated by the Mexican authorities .
 Mexican national, 26-year-old, had been employed at the Cuban consulate only one month before Oswald arrived in Mexico City . Oswald was found dead at the scene of the shooting .
 What we see here is clear evidence of a cover-up, ordered by top levels of the CIA, of Oswald’s activities in Mexico City . Oswald was found dead in a raid on Mexico City in August 1945 .
 It also indicates a very close relationship between the CIA and the Mexican authorities . The CIA and Mexican authorities were involved in the operation .
 Richard Cain may have been a CIA contact with Sam Giancana . He was also the right-hand man to Sam Giancanana . The mob figure was also an FBI informant .
 Cain’s expertise was in electronic surveillance, most notoriously the tapping of telephones . Cain was known for his work on electronic surveillance in the past .
 In 1950-52 he had tapped the telephones of Cuban revolutionary leaders in Miami . In 1960 he was approached by his former employer to install phone taps on behalf of former Cuban President Prio. In 1960, he installed phone taps for former Cuban president Prio .
 The CIA engaged Cain in 1960 because of his Havana mob contacts, and also to wiretap the Czech embassy in Havana . According to an obituary notice in the Chicago Tribune, the CIA had engaged Cain because he had mob contacts in Cuba .
 U2 The Cubans at the Nassau conference confirmed to me that the DFS was indeed corrupt in 1963 . U2 confirms that the Cuban government was corrupt in the 1960s .
 The CIA ordered DFS officials to participate in a conspiracy to cover up evidence in Mexico City relating to the Kennedy assassination . And we see from the cable traffic that the CIA ordered . The cable traffic shows that this is not the first time the CIA .
 There seems to be no end to the ring of corruption and deceit into which the CIA had become embroiled . The CIA has been embroiled in a series of scandals since 2001 .
 Cubans and Soviets in Mexico City in 1963 were not also involved in the corruption . I wondered if some of the Cubans, Soviets involved were also involved .
 Oswald visited the Cuban consulate three times on September 27 . Oswald made such scenes that he was ordered out of the building . Oswald was ordered to leave the building after three visits .
 His anger was provoked when he was told that he could not get a Cuban visa in the three days he was seeking . He was angered when told he couldn't get a three-day visa in Cuba .
 Silvia Duran and her supervisor, Cuban consul Eusebio Azcue, were present at the final scene of the shooting .
 Azcue told the HSCA that he was convinced that the man who visited the embassy in 1963 was not the Oswald arrested in Dallas . Fifteen years later, Azcue said he was still convinced .
 He based his belief on his memory of the man calling himself Oswald as five foot six inches tall, with dark blond hair and distinctly different facial features .
 Azcue’s testimony was reinforced by his memory of when he first saw a movie of Ruby killing Oswald . Azcue: "I remember when I first saw the movie of Oswald killing Oswald"
 Silvia Duran, while being interrogated by the DFS, had described Oswald as short with blond hair . Also presumably not revealed to the Warren Commission was that she had described him as short and blond .
 Silvia Duran’s description of Oswald was repeated in more detail when she testified before the HSCA in 1978 . Duran's description was repeated more detail in 1978 testimony .
 She was “sure’t that it was the same person” but only after checking data in the consulate’s archives . Note that this translation says that she was ‘sure” she was . sure that it . was the . person .
 When Duran checked the data in the files, all she would have been able to see was a visa application photo which does not show Oswald as blond but with very dark hair . Oswald's visa application application photo shows him with dark hair but not blond .
 Oscar Contraras, who was studying to be a lawyer at the time, met with Oswald . Oscar's meeting with Oswald was revealed by a student at the University of Cambridge .
 Contraras belonged to a left-wing Cuban group that supported the Castro revolution . He had contacts in the Cuban embassy in Havana, Cuba .
 Anthony Summers was able to find Contraras later in Mexico City and interview him 2141 years later . He was reluctant to reveal much about the incident, but he said he met a man at a university cafeteria in September 1963 .
 Contraras and his friends connected “Harvey” and “Oswald” to a popular movie about a rabbit . This made a distinct impression on Contaras and friends because they connected "Harvey" to a rabbit movie .
 Contraras said that the man who claimed to be Oswald was only about five feet six inches tall . He said he was only five feet 6 inches tall when he claimed to have been Oswald . Contaras said the man is only about 5 feet tall .
 Oswald was five feet nine inches tall and looked down in conversations . He remembered this because he looked down on Oswald in conversations, he said . Oswald remembered this as he was 5 feet 9 inches tall .
 Oswald told the students he was having trouble getting a visa at the Cuban embassy . Oswald told them he wanted to know if there was anything they could do to help him . Oswald was a student at the University of Havana .
 The embassy contacted consul Azcue and Cuban intelligence officer . They agreed to help him and that night contacted the embassy, including consul .
 Oswald was told to break off contact with Oswald at once, that the embassy officials suspected him of trying to infiltrate left-wing groups . Oswald was sent to Washington, DC, where he was assassinated in November 1945 .
 Oswald was told by students that Cubans did not trust him and would not give him a visa . Oswald's students next saw Oswald, they told him that the Cubans had no trust in him . Oswald is now in the U.S.
 Oswald kept up his attempts to be friendly to the Mexican students . Oswald ended up spending the night at their apartment . Oswald spent the night with the students .
 At the time of the interview, Contraras was the editor of a Mexican newspaper, El Mundo .
 Contraras questioned how Oswald could have known that these particular students, out of all the students at the university, might indeed be able to help him . Oswald was the only person to know that these students might indeed help him, Contrarasa said .
 Contraras said he believed this was not divine inspiration, and that something else the Cuban official said when warning him to drop Oswald helped arouse his suspicion . He said something else, including dropping Oswald, was also the reason for his suspicions .
 Oswald impostor may have been an imposter, according to a voice tape recording . Oswald's voice was recorded on a recording of a voice recording . The recording was made by Oswald's wife, who was killed in November 1963 .
 When pressed as to why the tapes, clear proof of Oswald’s Mexican visit, had not been given to the Warren Commission, Phillips said . Phillips said that they had been routinely destroyed about a week after they were taken with the reasoning that Oswald hadn't been considered important prior to
 A five-page FBI document dated November 23, 1963 that refuted Phillips’ story became public in 1979 in the HSCA report . Phillips' 1976 testimony led to his 1976 testimony .
 Oswald contacted the Soviet embassy in Mexico City, according to a report . Oswald was questioned by FBI agents who were questioning Oswald in Dallas . Oswald had contacted the embassy of the Soviet Embassy in Mexico .
 Oswald contacted the Soviet Embassy in Mexico City inquiring as to any messages . The Central Intelligence Agency advised that on October 1, 1963, an individual identifying himself as Lee Oswald had contacted the embassy .
 Special agents of this Bureau have observed photographs of the individual referred to above and have listened to a recording of his voice . Special agents have spoken with Oswald in Dallas, Texas, who have conversed with Oswald .
 Special Agents are of the opinion that the above-referred-to individual was not Lee Harvey Oswald . Special Agents say they believe the individual is not Lee Oswald .
 The CIA wiretap of Oswald was not destroyed in October but was available to FBI agents on November 23 . In other words, the FBI was able to obtain the wiretap on that date .
 Once again, testimonies had placed the FBI and the CIA in embarrassing positions . The CIA and the FBI have been accused of covering up their mistakes .
 Later in the HSCA investigation, the FBI denied that a tape recording of Oswald’s voice had been received . Oswald's voice was recorded by the FBI .
 J Gordon Shanklin and James Hosty were the two FBI agents involved in destroying a note that Oswald left with the FBI in Dallas shortly before the assassination . It was very explicit, leaving no doubt that the FBI had listened to a recording of a voice, and the voice was not Oswald
 Final corroboration that Phillips lied in his testimony to the HSCA was provided 16 years later . Phillips' testimony was provided sixteen years after his testimony was made public .
 We have up here the tape and the photograph of the man who was at the Soviet Embassy, using Oswald’s name . We also have a photograph of Oswald's name . The tape and photograph were taken at the embassy .
 That picture and the tape do not correspond to this man’s voice, nor to his appearance . That man's voice is not that of this man, nor that of his appearance, it's not that he's a man .
 In other words, it appears that there is a second person who was at the Soviet Embassy down there . The embassy is located in Washington, D.C., near the White House .
 Hoover would have known that they were not telling the truth. Moreover, Hoover would know that they would not tell the truth .
 It seems evident that they were all working in concert with the CIA to protect David Atlee Phillips . Phillips and the CIA, thus suppressing evidence of a conspiracy, is evident .
 David Atlee Phillips has long been suspected of being the mysterious Maurice Bishop, a code name for a CIA agent who was seen with Oswald in Dallas . Phillips is suspected of trying to recruit Antonio Veciana to offer a large sum of money to a relative .
 Veciana said that he had agreed to contact his relative, but had been unable to do so . Veciana: "I'm not sure if I'm going to get back in contact with my relative"
 Veciana, a Cuban exile leader, had been a respected accountant in Cuba . Veciana was one of the founders of Alpha 66, a radical right-wing Cuban exile organization intent on doing away with Castro . This testimony was given by Veciana to the usca 2EI Vec
 He is considered by Gaeton Fonzi, the HSCA staff member who dealt with him, to be a very reliable witness . He said: "He is considered to be an extremely reliable witness"
 Veciana said that Maurice Bishop was his control agent who had been working with him over a period of 13 years . Veciana had met Bishop over one hundred times, during which he had met with him 100 times . In his testimony, Veciana described Bishop as a control agent . Vec
 He said Bishop had guided him in planning attempts to assassinate Castro . Bishop said he planned to kill Castro . He said that Bishop had also guided him .
 Veciana described a meeting between himself and Maurice Bishop in Dallas in late August or the first days of September 1963 . Veciana testified to the HSCA in testimony .
 He said he had met with Bishop often in Dallas during their long association . Bishop said he met with the former mayor often during his time in Dallas .
 The Southland Center is tentatively identified as a skyscraper building in downtown Dallas . During this particular trip he met with him at this particular building he met him at .
 Veciana arrived a little ahead of schedule to meet Veciana . Veciana and Veciana met in a public area on the first floor of the building .
 Veciana said that there was a young man standing with Bishop who gave him the impression of being very quiet, very strange, and preoccupied . Veciana described the young man as a very quiet and strange person .
 Bishop dismisses the young man, saying, “all right, see you later,” and dismisses him . The young man was with them ten or fifteen minutes, until Bishop told him something like, ‘all right .” Bishop was with the men for about
 Veciana said after the assassination he identified Oswald when his face suddenly appeared in newspapers and on television . Veciana identified Oswald after his image suddenly appeared on television and newspapers, Veciana says .
 Veciana recognized Oswald as the young man he had seen in Dallas at the meeting with Bishop . Then, Veciana said, he at once ‘eee recognized Oswald’s likeness .
 Veciana believes Oswald was Oswald, not just someone who resembled him . Veciana says there's absolutely no doubt in her mind that the man was Oswald .
 Antonio Veciana, a Cuban businessman who later became the leader of Alpha 66, testified to the HSCA that after the assassination his CIA controller, “Maurice Bishop,” tried to get him to bribe his relatives in Mexico City to say that Oswald had visited them
 He testified that he and Maurice Bishop had been headed for a meeting in Dallas when they encountered Oswald . Oswald spoke with Bishop before they encountered him, he testified .
 After Veciana’s testimony, he was ambushed and shot in the head, but he recovered . Veciana's testimony led to him being ambushed but he was able to survive .
 Evidence from multiple sources shows that Maurice Bishop and Phillips were the same person . Phillips was also known as Maurice Bishop . Bishop was the father of two children .
 When we combine the above with Veciana’s testimony to the HSCA that Bishop attempted to get him to bribe a Cuban official, we have a direct link of the CIA to Oswald and possibly to the assassination of John Kennedy .
 In his testimony, Veciana would not identify David Atlee Phillips as being Maurice Bishop . Veciana did not identify Phillips as Bishop .
 He was perhaps anticipating the danger in which he was placing himself, perhaps . He said: "I'm not sure what I'm going to do with this."
 His fear was justified inasmuch as he was the victim of a murder attempt in late 1979 . He was a victim of an attempted murder in 1979 .
 Four shots were fired in an ambush and a fragment of one bullet struck Veciana’s head . Veciana was shot in the head by a bullet fragment from a fragment .
 He miraculously recovered, but privately expressed concern that the attempt was linked to his testimonies concerning Maurice Bishop . He said he feared the attempt would be linked to Bishop's death .
 Despite considerable effort by the HSCA (involving a composite artist’s picture based on Veciana's descriptions), they were unable to bring themselves to identify Maurice Bishop as being in reality .
 Gaeton Fonzi, the HSCA staff member who investigated David Atlee Phillips and Maurice Bishop, was reluctant to speak out . He was not reluctant to do so .
 I state that unequivocally, although Veciana cannot officially identify him publicly as such . Veciana can't officially identify himself as such as Veciana . He says that he is a member of Veciana's family .
 In addition to the abundance of evidence...which unerringly points to Phillips being Bishop, believe me, I know that he was. The bishop was. He was. Phillips was. In addition, he was .
 He never opened up on specifics, but he did say something about the assassination of President Kennedy . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 .
 Phillips’ remark does not preclude that he himself was part of this rogue operation, or that his statement to Walsh was designed to confuse future investigators about his true role . It should be noted that Phillips' remark doesn’t preclude his own involvement in the rogue operation .
 Phillips’s specialties in the CIA were psychological disinformation schemes to set people on false trails . Phillips' specialties were to set up false trails for the CIA . Phillips was one of the CIA's top secret agents .
 The fact that Maurice Bishop was a CIA employee was confirmed by John McCone, director of the CIA at the time of the Kennedy assassination . Bishop was the CIA's first employee .
 He said vaguely that Bishop had been a senior officer, that he had met with him ‘two or three times” at CIA headquarters . He said he met with Bishop ‘2 or 3 times’ at CIA HQ .
 Castro’s General Fabian Escalante confirmed that there were two independent sources in Cuba who testified to Cuban officials that David Atlee Phillips used the name Maurice Bishop . Two independent sources testified to Cuba that Phillips used to be Phillips .
 David Atlee Phillips was a close associate of David Sanchez Morales . Wayne Smith, who was formerly stationed at the U.S. embassy in Cuba as a State Department representative, confirmed to me at the Nassau meeting that Phillips was an associate .
 David Sanchez Morales is suspected of being a ringleader in the JFK assassination . He is believed to have been a key figure in the assassination of JFK .
 This subject, with more on Phillips, will be addressed in a later chapter concerning the execution phase of the assassination . This subject will be discussed in the final chapter of this book .
 Oswald arrived in Mexico City by bus at about 10:00m. on September 27 . Oswald checked into the Hotel del Commercio at 10:30m. Oswald checked in to the hotel shortly after arriving in the city .
 At about that time, a man called the Soviet consulate to inquire about getting a visa to travel to Odessa in the Soviet Union . The man was able to get a visa for Odessa, Odessa .
 A man calling himself Oswald arrived at the Soviet embassy at about 12:00 a.m. He called himself Oswald and said he was from the Soviet Union .
 Oswald’s appearance at the Soviet consulate was reported by Colonel Oleg M Nechiporenko in his book Passport to Assassination . Valery Kostikov, who was also one of the consulate employees who was receiving visitors that day, confirmed the visit .
 According to Nechiporenko, both he and Kostikov believe that the man in the Soviet embassy was the real Oswald . The two men believe that Oswald was in the embassy .
 They immediately recognized him on November 22 when his picture appeared on television . They recognized him when he appeared on the news .
 He was of medium height, with a longish face, a narrow chin, and a high forehead that clearly tended toward baldness . He had a long, narrow chin and high forehead, which indicated he was bald .
 Oswald spoke very poor, mangled Russian . The fact that Oswald spoke fluent Russian is in conflict with the fact that he did speak fluent Russian . Oswald was the president of the Soviet Union in 1945 .
 Phone Taps, Cable Traffic, and Related Events During Oswald’s Stay in Mexico City . Oswald's visit to Mexico City included phone taps, cable traffic, and other events .
 Oswald at Russian embassy 2 4:05m.: Silvia Duran calls Soviet embassy saying American is in Cuban embassy wanting to know the name of the man he had previously dealt with in the Soviet embassy . 4:26m.: Soviet embassy calls Cuban embassy and asks if American has been
 Silvia Duran calls Soviet embassy; says Oswald, who had previously been to Cuban 5 sth22 embassy want to talk . Oswald at Russian embassy 11:51 p.m. to talk about Oswald .
 Oswald departs Mexico City by bust31 Thursday, October 3 1:35m.: Oswald crossed Mexican border to United States from Nuevo Laredo into Texas . Oswald crossed border to U.S. from Mexico into Texas. Oswald was killed in Mexico City . Oswald was shot
 Unidentified man outside calls Soviet embassy, speaks in broken Spanish, then English, says he’s looking for visa to Russia . Cuban embassy employee Silvia Duran called the Soviet embassy at 4:05m., saying that an American was at the Cuban embassy .
 At 4:26 a.m., the Soviet embassy called the Cuban embassy and asked Silvia Duran if the American had been at the embassy . Then, at 4.26 a .m. ET, the Soviet Embassy called and asked for the American to be found .
 At that point it was revealed that the American’s Russian wife also wanted to go to the USSR via Cuba . The American's Russian wife wanted to visit the Soviet Union via Cuba.
 The Soviet replied that he had not yet had a reply from Washington, D.C., where he had sent a telegram to get further information . The Soviet replies that he did not have a reply .
 The next clue we have is that at about 9:30 or 10:00m. the next day, a man calling himself Oswald appeared at the Russian embassy . The man called Oswald called himself Oswald and appeared in the embassy next day .
 This was reported by Nechiporenko and also by Pavel Yatskov, who was the first to show up at the Russian embassy that Saturday morning . The Russian embassy is located in Moscow .
 The Russians were getting together for a volleyball game that they usually played beginning around 10 o’clock on Saturday mornings . The Russians usually played around 10 a.m. Saturday morning .
 His pale features and the extremely agitated look of his face were especially noticeable . His pale facial features and an extremely agitated face were also noticeable .
 Oswald is the same man who was at the Soviet consulate on September 27 . Nechiporenko described Oswald as the man who attended the consulate on that date .
 Oswald said he feared for his life at the hands of the FBI, and then took out a revolver saying he must carry it to protect himself . Kostikov also described him as the same person 7241 Nechiporenko wrote that while Oswald .
 Oswald became “hysterical, began to sob, ‘I’m afraid they are going to kill me.” He wrote that Oswald became a ‘Hysterical’ man . Oswald was ‘hysterically’ and ‘sob
 Oswald, who had previously been in the Cuban embassy, wanted to talk . Then, at 11:51m, a woman who called herself Silvia Duran phoned the Soviet embassy . Let me inp i238 .
 The HSCA made a note of the caller speaking broken Russian, indicating that this person probably was not Oswald . The caller spoke broken Russian .
 If Duran were in fact with Oswald it would have been somewhere outside the consulate . Another contradiction is that the Cuban consulate was normally closed on Saturday, so if Duran had been there it would be somewhere outside .
 Silvia Duran testified before the HSCA she emphatically stated that Oswald had not returned to the Cuban embassy on Saturday, September 28, and that she had not called the Soviet consulate on his behalf . Then there was a hiatus insofar as cable traffic and telephone wiretaps are concerned,
 The unidentified man phoned the Soviet embassy in Mexico City at 3:39m . He spoke in broken Spanish, then English, saying he was looking for a visa to Russia .
 If we assume for the moment that the Russians at the Soviet embassy were telling the truth, we can conclude with a high degree of certainty that there was an Oswald impostor in Mexico City, along with someone calling herself Silvia Duran .
 Silvia Duran testified that she did not call the Soviet embassy with Oswald on September 28 . Oswald spoke fluent, not broken, Russian, according to the testimony .
 The telephone transcripts were fabricated by either the CIA or the DFS, or both acting together . Therefore, either there were impersonators of Oswald and Duran, or the impersonators .
 Colonel Nechiporenko was in the Soviet embassy on Saturday, September 28, and nowhere in his book does he mention a call from Silvia Duran and Oswald on that day .
 CIA officers who were in Mexico in 1963 and their Headquarters counterparts generally agreed that it would have been unlikely for the photo surveillance operations to have missed ten opportunities to have photographed Oswald . Oswald .
 He was at the Soviet Embassy at least twice on those same days, according to the documents . The documents also reveal that he was also at the embassy twice that day .
 Oswald’s visits were after dark; the pulse camera was not working; the case officer had given the photographic base house house agents the days off that Oswald visited . Oswald's visits were on Saturday afternoons or Sundays; the . case officer gave the photographic . base house agents
 Oswald’s visits were on a weekday during daylight hours and Saturday morning . Oswald's visits were known to be on a Saturday morning and a weekday . Oswald visited the White House on Saturday and Sunday .
 This Committee has not been able to determine with certainty, because of the missing production, whether all of the base houses were operating on the days of Oswald’s visits . The Committee is not able to confirm with certainty that the bases were operating at the time .
 This Committee believes that the pulse camera was in operation on at least one of the days that Oswald visited the Cuban Consulate . The LILYRIC base covering the Soviet gate should have been operating at the time of Oswald’s visits to the Soviet Consulates on September 27th and
 Lopez told Dorff that he personally examined and counted every photographic negative, all numbered in sequence, taken by the CIA cameras before, during, and after the summer and fall of 1963 . Lopez said none of the negatives contained a picture of Oswald .
 This is compelling proof that Oswald was never at the Cuban or Soviet consulates . Unless the CIA made up a false set of negatives, this is compelling evidence that Oswald never went to the embassies of Cuba or Russia .
 The real Oswald did not enter or leave either the Soviet or Cuban consulates . The photographs would have identified an impersonator of Oswald and set off a firestorm of alarm . It would have been proof of a conspiracy to set up the Cuban government and/or the Soviets .
 The photographs might have revealed an Oswald accomplice who was outside one or both of the consulates, but this still would be evidence of a conspiracy of almost equal proportions . Or, The photographs may have shown an Oswald . But this would be even worse for the conspirators if the accompl
 In any event, clearly there were impersonators of Oswald telephoning in to the Soviet consulate . Oswald impersonators called in to Soviet consulate in Moscow .
 Witnesses in the Cuban consulate describe someone who was not Oswald . Witnesses in Cuban consulate described someone who wasn't Oswald . Oswald was killed in November 1963 .
 Also at the conference was Jeremy Gunn from the congressional review board . Gunn: "I'm not sure what I'm going to do"
 General Fabian Escalante: Fidel Castro’s chief of personal security . Escalantes is the man who has kept Castro alive over the many years . He was the Cuban leader's chief of security .
 Lechuga was Cuba's ambassador to Mexico at the time of Oswald’s visit to Mexico City . Oswald was Cuban president of Mexico City in 1961 .
 Each of these Cubans had spent recent years researching the Kennedy assassination . Each of the Cubans spent time researching the assassination .
 "They comprised a very serious group that had done extensive investigative work on this subject," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "They were very serious," he says of the group .
 This was a very informative conference that touched on a wide range of topics relating to the assassination . The conference was held in New York City, New York .
 For this chapter, I will confine the material to that concerning Mexico City . For this section of the book, I'll confine myself to Mexico City.
 The Cuban consulate and Cuban embassy had been electronically bugged by the CIA in 1963 . One of the most significant items that I heard at the conference was the degree of the CIA's electronic bugging of the embassy and consulate .
 The Cubans said in 1964 they found microphones planted all over the place in their homes . They said it would have been impossible for the CIA not to have heard everything that took place there .
 The CIA withheld vital information from the American public for thirty-two years, that would have revealed a conspiracy . What we see here is a consistent pattern of the CIA withholding vital information, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Lopez Report is still being withheld . Much additional material from the Lopez Report has not been released .
 CIA, FBI, LBJ suppressed all evidence that there was an impostor in Mexico City because that would have revealed a conspiracy . In light of this additional new evidence, it is increasingly obvious that the U.S. government (CIA, FBI and LBJ) suppressed evidence that
 This goes back to the Dallas incidents of Oswald impostors, which the FBI and the Warren Commission also would not address . The Warren Commission would also not address the Dallas cases of impostor imposterors .
 There was a puzzling aspect of the Nassau conference with regard to the Cubans . The Cuban president is expected to make a speech at the end of the week .
 Oswald was in Mexico City for the purpose of implicating Cuba in the assassination of Kennedy . I could not agree with their conclusion that Oswald was at the Cuban embassy on September 27, 1963 .
 Shrugging their shoulders, they acknowledged that they had no explanation . Shruggling shoulders, the men said, "I have no explanation"
 Mexican police say they based their conclusion on Silvia Duran’s statements to Cuban officials before she was arrested and interrogated by the Mexican police . But they said that they based on statements made by Duran before her arrest .
 Duran identified Oswald after she went back to the files in the Cuban consulate and saw his picture on a visa photograph . Duran identifies Oswald after going to the consulate in Cuba to see his picture .
 I wondered whether the Cubans might have been motivated to be untruthful about their statement that it was the real Oswald in the Cuban consulate in Cuba . I wondered if the Cuban government might be motivated to say it was Oswald .
 Oswald’s visit to the Cuban embassy was to incriminate Cuba in a conspiracy to assassinate President Kennedy, according to investigators . Oswald's visit to Cuba's embassy was intended for incriminating Cuba in the assassination plot .
 I could not think of a reason why the Cubans were not telling what they actually felt to be true, but I remain puzzled . I could think of no reason why I was not telling the truth .
 Everything was prepared to document Oswald’s visit, because there was a plot to implicate Cuba in the assassination which would unfold after the North American response . The hypothesis is that everything was prepared, because of the plot, was to document the visit .
 Oswald was detained in Dallas, Texas, when he was held in Mexico . Oswald was found dead in Mexico in August 1945 . Oswald had been detained in Mexico since then . Oswald died in August 1944 .
 The theory of the “lone assassin’s” passed to the back burner after Oswald's murder . Almost immediately after the murder of Oswald, in the clumsy and hasty conditions known by all, appeared the theory of a lone assassin .
 These are essential questions that the public should respond to, to the public, when the assassination of John F Kennedy is clarified, once and for all . North American authorities should answer these questions, once they are clear .
 The Cubans at the Nassau conference stated several times that they believe that John Kennedy was assassinated by intelligence agencies of the U.S. The FBI, the CIA, and/or military intelligence, the Cubans said .
 John Kennedy was assassinated because he was planning to make peace with Cuba, they claim . Fidel Castro was arranging initial contacts between Fidel Castro and the United States State Department at the very moment that Kennedy was murdered in Dallas .
 During the 1976 HSCA investigation, information was developed that Silvia Duran had a sexual affair with Oswald when he was in Mexico City . The affair was discovered during the 1976 investigation .
 Witnesses stated that Oswald, along with two other men, had attended a twist dance party in September 1963 at the home of Duran’s cousin, Ruben Duran, at which Silvia Duran was present . The party was comprised of Communists and Communist sympathizers, witnesses
 Cubans at the conference thought so and strongly expressed that opinion . The Cubans strongly disagreed with the Obama administration .
 They said that they believe the information is false, but I remain puzzled . "I remain puzzled. They said they believe that they believed the information was false," she said .
 In 1965 Elena Garro reported that Silvia Duran had been Oswald’s mistress while he was in Mexico City . In 1965 she reported that she had been a mistress to Oswald .
 The CIA Station did not consider the information significant and told the agent to end his contact with Ms. Ms. Smith .
 If that information is accurate, then that Silvia invited Oswald to a party would not have been surprising . Oswald invited Silvia to the party would be surprising, according to reports .
 Silvia Duran admitted that the Mexican police had questioned her on this point but denied that she had had an affair with Oswald . Duran said she had been questioned by police but denied having an affair .
 Duran denied having any extramarital affairs while she was married to Horacio Duran . Duran denies having any affairs during her marriage .
 The Cuban Consulate in Havana, Cuba, reported that all that would have to be done to recruit Silvia Duran, whom he referred to by using the Spanish word for whore, would be to get a blond blue-eyed American into bed with her . This denial is not consistent
 There is also CIA information that indicates that Silvia Duran had an affair with a [ | in the early 1960s . Duran was married to a woman in the 1960s, according to reports .
 CIA documents speak of a sexual affair between Silvia Duran and Oswald . But numerous CIA documents say the affair was an affair between the two .
 Headquarters attention is called to paragraphs 3 through 5 of report dated 26 May . Headquarters attention was called to paragraph 3 through five of report from 26 May. Headquarters attention has been drawn to paragraph 5 .
 The fact that Silvia Duran had sexual intercourse with Lee Harvey Oswald on several occasions when the latter was in Mexico City is probably new, but adds little to the Oswald case . Duran and Oswald were both in Mexico when the two were at the time of the incident .
 The Mexican police did not report the extent of the Duran-Oswald relationship to this Station .
 Elena admitted she had gone to American embassy on an earlier occasion with her daughter and mother-in-law and talked to two embassy officers about this matter . Elena said she had also gone to the American embassy earlier with daughter .
 She said since embassy officers did not give much credence to anything they said, they did not bother to give a very complete story . She said the embassy officers gave little credence .
 The following info supplements and in some instances corrects that given in the memo of Dec 10 . The following information supplements and some corrects the original memo .
 Silvia is married to Horacio, a weak man, who was converted to communism by Ricardo Guerra . Horacio is the weak man who has been converted to communist by Guerra.
 Elena detests Silvia whom she detests and considers a whore . Elena has nothing to do with Silvia and considers her a 'whim'
 All three were obviously Americans and did not mix or dance with other people . They were obviously American, not mixing or dancing with others .
 Elena saw them by chance the next day walking down the street together . The three were friends . Elena saw the three again, and Elena said they were friends because she saw them next day .
 Elena had returned from Europe in June or July, she had already met Eusebio Azcue . She knows positively he was at party .
 On another occasion, she attended a party where she saw Eusebio Azcue, Emilio Carballido, and a Latin American Negro man with red hair . Not clear whether before or after the party in question .
 Carballido and Azcue, with others, were in heated discussions on that occasion about Kennedy . They came to conclusion that the only solution was to kill him, they said .
 Elena said Carballido is known as a Castro agent; he had been to Red China, Soviet Union, and many times to Cuba . Elena said he had traveled to China and the Soviet Union .
 Jose Vasquez Anaral, formerly with Rockefeller Foundation in N.Y. and who is now a professor at Rutgers, is a former Rockefeller Foundation expert . He is also a former Rutgers professor .
 The day after assassination, Elenita encountered Sefiora de Azcue in Sanborne . She was killed by the Spaniard, who was killed in 2007 .
 Azcue was called back to Havana after assassination and his wife followed shortly . Azcue called back home to Cuba after assassination . His wife followed him shortly after .
 Oswald was in Mexico City, with other Americans, consorting with Communists at a party on September 2 or 3, 1963 . CIA’s Oswald Chronology, P 8593, 92, is published by Elena Garro . In the above testimony, we see that Oswald was with
 She claims she was at another party where Eusebio Azcue was in heated discussions with others to the effect that Kennedy should be killed . She also claims that she was also at the party where Azcue discussed Kennedy .
 Reviewing the manner in which the CIA Mexico City Station and the Legal Attaché’s office in Mexico City handled Ms. Maria Cardona . Reviewing Ms. Cardona's handling of the case is critical of the CIA and the legal team .
 Garro’s allegations were handled in an irresponsible manner because they were dismissed after a superficial investigation . Garro's allegations reveal that, at best, her allegations were treated in a irresponsible manner .
 Legat dismissed Elena's story after interviewing one person who she said may have been at the party . The Legat, after talking to Elena, dismissed her story . Elena said she had been invited to a party in New York City .
 The manner in which the official American community handled Charles Thomas’ reporting is detailed in Section VI, C., C., 11, above . The manner of the official U.S. community handled Thomas' reporting is also detailed .
 FBI has discounted the Elena Garro allegations, the CIA is still disturbed by them . CIA is said to be very disturbed by Garro's alleged involvement .
 Under the circumstances it is unlikely that any further investigation of this matter will ever take place unless it is ordered by a high official in Washington, D.C.
 The Committee attempted to locate Elena Garro 2421 . Although the Committee established telephonic contact with Ms. Garro, it was unsuccessful .
 The Committee was frustrated in this aspect of its investigation, but yet believes that there is a possibility that Lee Harvey Oswald did attend a twist party at the home of Ruben Duran . The Committee believes there is still a chance that Oswald attended the party .
 We will examine two other incidents, both quite incredible . Before trying to bring all of this together, we will examine the other incidents .
 A plot to assassinate President Kennedy was discussed in the Cuban consulate in Mexico City, involving Oswald . Money had been passed to Oswald, with money having passed to him . Oswald was involved in the plot .
 On 2 SEP REPORTED in MEX TO PROFESSOR EDELDERIO TORRES, ADDRESS GENERAL ZUAZUA NUMBER 37, INTERIOR 8 . On 2 p.m. Report: General ZUazua .
 When Lyndon Johnson received it he unquestionably used it as a reason for establishing the Warren Commission . Lyndon Johnson told reluctant candidates for the Commission, including Earl Warren, of impending nuclear war if it were to be revealed that Cuba was behind the assassination .
 Once again we have the FBI shutting down evidence of a conspiracy after only two or three days of investigation . The FBI ignored the possibility that the person in the Cuban embassy could have been an Oswald impersonator, or actually Oswald himself .
 Gaudet said he had left New Orleans on September 19, 1963 via Pan American Airways . He said that he had not seen Oswald on the plane . He was interviewed by the FBI .
 Oswald presumably could have flown to Mexico immediately after getting his tourist card and been there on September 18 . Oswald could have been there immediately after receiving the tourist card . Oswald's son was killed in a car crash in September .
 Gaudet telephoned the FBI office on November 27 stating that Jack Ruby from Dallas, Texas, had purchased paintings for one Lorenzo Borenstein . Curiously, he told the FBI that Ruby had purchased the paintings for a man named Lorenzo Borestein .
 This, of course, is exactly what appears to be the reason for the whole Mexico City affair, as well as for the Dallas impersonators in Dallas . This is the case of the Oswald impersonator in Dallas, Dallas .
 Alvarado did not say who helped him fabricate the story and who ordered him to tell it . He did not reveal who else helped him tell it and who told it .
 Alvarado himself stated that he was a Nicaraguan secret service agent . It should be noted that he himself stated he was an agent .
 It would not be surprising if Alvarado were also a CIA double agent . With the CIA’s ability to penetrate virtually any intelligence agency in the world, it wouldn’t be surprising .
 Another CIA document dated December 10, 1963 reported the results of an FBI/DFS/CIA interrogation of Alvarado on December 5 and 6, using “technical” means, which by the wording in the lengthy report presumably meant lie detector tests .
 Once Subject was shown a photograph of Oswald taken by the New Orleans police in 1959 . Oswald was taken in 1959 by police in New Orleans, Louisiana .
 Subject was shown a photograph of Oswald which appeared in the local newspapers after the assassination . Subject showed the photograph to the next time he was shown the photograph . Subject was then shown a photo of Oswald that appeared in local newspapers .
 This examiner told Subject that the test results indicated that he was lying and that the “apparatus” was calling Subject a liar . Subject was told that the results indicated he had lied and that he had been lying . Subject said he was a liar.
 Subject’s reply to this was that he had respect for the apparatus and if that was what it said then that must be so, he said . Subject replied to this by saying that if it was what the apparatus said then it must be . Subject said that he would respect the
 Of course, it could have involved anything from hypnosis, drugs, beatings, etc.; and the results of the lie detector tests could simply have been rigged . Perhaps not uncommon for the FBI, the DFS and the CIA in those days .
 The Gilberto P Lopez Story is revealed in two CIA documents released unredacted on December 1, 1995 . What appears to be yet another disinformation scheme implicates Castro’s Cuba is revealed .
 When we combine this with the other stories, we have either an elaborate disinformation scheme or evidence that Castro’s Cuba ordered the murder of the president of the U.S. and left a trail leading to themselves littered with “evidence” that could not be ignored .
 The Cubans state that the delayed flight from Mexico City to Havana never happened . The flight never happened, the Cubans say .
 They dismissed it as being impossible to have happened without them knowing about it . They said it was 'impossible' to have occurred without the knowledge of it .
 On its face, it is ridiculous to seriously think that Castro would be behind such a plot paraded before the world, inviting his total destruction . Furthermore, on the face, on its . face, the . face of the plot parades before the . world, invites Castro's total
 Castro has not survived all these years without being prudent, calculating, and careful . Castro has been prudent and calculating in the past few years .
 This brings to consideration of evidence that the CIA had double agents in the Cuban embassy . This brings us to consider the evidence that there were double agents there .
 We now have proof of CIA double agents in Mexico City . CIA Double Agents in Mexico city .
 Also, Luisa Calderon is similarly a suspect, along with other candidates . Also a suspect in the case is former Mayor Ruben Navarrette of Colombia .
 The CIA had double agents who had the means to contact the Soviet embassy, as indicated above . Moreover, the CIA had a double agent who could contact the embassy .
 There is also the likelihood that the CIA had penetration agents in the Soviet embassy in Mexico City, Mexico City .
 The HSCA questioned David Atlee Phillips concerning CIA double agents in Mexico City . Phillips was questioned by the CIA about the double agents . Phillips is a former CIA agent who worked for the CIA in Mexico .
 Phillips was chief of covert actions in the Cuban section in the Mexico City station in 1963 . He is one of the prime suspects in the JFK assassination conspiracy .
 By profession, by training, and by disposition, he was an accomplished liar . He was also an accomplished, if not congenital, liar . "He was also a liar," he said .
 Mr Phillips stated that he had first heard Duran’s name from the telephone intercept transcripts . Mr Phillips said he first heard his name from telephone intercepts .
 Mr Phillips had previously mentioned the CIA Mexico City Station’s interest in recruiting a former Cuban Ambassador to Mexico named Lechuga .
 One of the station’s assets said he doubted Duran would have been pitched because the station could not identify any of her weaknesses . But when he was confronted with a statement from one of his case officers, he said it was all that would have to be done to recruit Ms
 Phillips said that it did indeed sound as if the station had targeted her for recruitment . Phillips said he still held to his position that he had never heard of her being pitched .
 Mr Hidalgo, professing not to remember all the details, said he thought Duran was a Cuban intelligence agent .
 At the time when this contact told me of Silvia Duran I tied the two together, yes, sir. At the . time when . this contact . I tied . up to the time . The two have been together for more than 30 years .
 "I don’t know, how at that time it was obvious to me as an intelligence agent that there was some connection there but it was of no interest whatsoever to me," he says .
 I do remember that when I next saw this contact of mine I mentioned the fact to him and let him proceed to do whatever he wanted to . I do not remember the fact that this contact was his .
 A document dated May 26, 1967 provides inferential evidence that Silvia Duran may have been a CIA asset in the Cuban embassy . Only recently have I come across part of a CIA document dated .
 It pertains to a meeting in a CIA safehouse with a man who is presumably a CIA penetration agent in Cuban intelligence . The meeting is believed to have taken place in a safehouse in Cuba .
 He mentioned specifically the case of Silvia and Horacio Duran . He then explained the background of his relationship with them .
 Silvia Duran worked as a receptionist at the Consulate in 1963-64 . She was on duty when Lee Harvey Oswald applied for a visa . He related that Silvia was working at the consulate in 1964 .
 The CIA had double agents and plants in the Cuban embassies and Soviet embassies, the authors say . "We can say with certainty" that the CIA had plants in Cuba and the Soviet embassies," they say .
 There are serious questions as to the reliability of parts of Nechiporenko’s book . Compounding the confusion, there is serious questions about its reliability .
 We must consider the possibility that the CIA has had the KGB’s cooperation, from the day of the assassination, to cover up a conspiracy . To be realistic, we must consider .
 The CIA could have contacted the KGB or Khrushchev immediately after the assassination to make such an arrangement, ostensibly to prevent nuclear war . It is reasonable to think that the CIA could contact the KGB to arrange the arrangement .
 Cable traffic in and out of the Soviet and Cuban consulates is probably genuine because it reveals details of conspiracy that the CIA was attempting to hide for thirty years . The cable traffic between the two consulates probably is genuine because of the CIA's efforts to hide it .
 It seems evident that if fabricated, the statements must have been designed with great care before the assassination . If fabricated, they must have had great care, says CNN.com editor .
 It was a continuation of staged or fabricated events starting with Oswald in New Orleans, in Dallas, and then Mexico City, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "It was a series of staged and fabricated events," he says .
 It has all of the earmarks of a covert intelligence operation, the author says . David Atlee Phillips, a.k.a. a. former CIA operative, is accused of being involved in a cover-up . Phillips is the subject of a new book, "David At
 This is a continuation of the pattern of the FBI’s participation in the Dallas cover-up, and the New Orleans cover-ups as well, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The FBI was involved in both Dallas and New Orleans, he says .
 Phillips did not know about the CIA electronic surveillance of the Cuban consulate . Phillips was not concerned about using an Oswald impersonator in the consulate in Cuba .
 Phillips, head of Cuban operations in the Mexico City CIA station, certainly would have known of the surveillance . Phillips was head of the CIA station in Mexico City, Mexico .
 The revelation was a bureaucratic snafu, caused by an unknowing clerk who searched the files looking for Oswald and found a photo and description of someone obviously not resembling Oswald . Another more plausible answer is that it was never intended for knowledge of the CIA electronics surveillance .
 Phillips tried to bribe the Cuban consulate staff to say that Oswald was there, only later to tell Veciana that everything had been taken care of once the decision had been made by LBJ, Hoover, and the CIA to scrap the scheme to pin the crime on Castro . This could explain
 Such manufacturing of benign scenarios to get the CIA off the hook ultimately becomes absurd, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The objective, it seems, must have been to provide a false sponsor for the assassination of President Kennedy and to precipitate an invasion of Cuba . The objective of the assassination, however, must be much larger, he says .
 Unless further evidence develops to the contrary, it seems reasonable to conclude that a radical faction, at a middle to high level in the CIA, was involved in John Kennedy's assassination .
 In this scenario, the sheep-dipping of Oswald in New Orleans would have been conducted by an agency of the U.S. government to discredit the Fair Play for Cuba Committee . Somewhere along the line, probably in Dallas, it was picked up by CIA radicals to provide cover for
 JFK and LBJ were informed only that the assassination of John Kennedy was going to happen and of the role they would jointly be required to play, which was to orchestrate a convincing cover-up if found to be necessary . My thesis continues that these two were probably not involved in the
 More analysis will be presented concerning this thesis and the culpability of the CIA in chapters that follow .
 Oswald's trip to Mexico City is one of the most significant events in American history . Oswald was killed in Mexico City in August 1945 . Oswald's death was the only known assassination of President Lincoln Lincoln Lincoln in 1916 .
 We will now examine other evidence of CIA and Mafia involvement in the Kennedy assassination . We will examine the fascinating mystery of the French Connection .
 John Scelso was a high-ranking intelligence officer in the CIA . He was superior in rank to Mexico City Station Chief Winston Scott . The testimony contained the testimony of John
 Scelso testified that James Angleton had immediately gone into action to do all the investigation . Richard Helms had called a meeting and told Angleton and others that he was in charge . Helms said everybody should report everything to him .
 Scelso complained to Helms who told him he had no control over Angleton . Helms said he was told he was not allowed to control Angleton. Helms told him to keep Angleton under control .
 Scelso said Angleton had “enormously influential contacts with J Edgar Hoover,” that he had his own direct line with Hoover . Angleton said he had an "enormous influential contacts" with Hoover, who he said was a CIA operative .
 In the latter part of his testimony, Scelso was extremely critical of William Harvey, whom he suspected of being the one who murdered Sam Giancana . In the testimony, he called Harvey a thug and a wacko .
 Scelso also testified that he suspected Angleton of having ties to organized crime . Angleton was convicted of murder in the 1990s but not murder .
 Oswald may have been part of an Angleton operation out of CIA’s counter-intelligence division . This shocking statement has large ramifications in light of recent evidence that Oswald was part of a CIA operation .
 It seems apparent that Helms was ordered to take the investigation away from Scelso and turn it over to Angleton . Angleton would do the bidding of Hoover .
 Hoover had allies and agents within the CIA, leaving open the possibility of combined FBI/CIA-CIA-radical factions in a conspiracy to assassinate Kennedy, in concert with the Mafia . More and more we see that Hoover had his allies and CIA agents in the CIA .
 The importance of this is that it links Oswald’s activities in New Orleans to Phillips and the CIA . Also, to Dallas, the DRE safe-house on Hollandale Street, and gun running involving Jack Ruby . It adds to the credibility of the evidence that Phillips was the
 It places Phillips even more deeply in the JFK assassination plot, it places him in the frame .
 It involves a complex cast of characters who operated with code names, false identities, and forged files with false dates, making their traceability difficult if not impossible .
 One of the techniques used was to employ false names that were in fact other real people who had reputations that would make them suspects for the crime . The techniques were used to employ a false name that would be used to make people suspects .
 Eager investigators would track down a suspect only to find that person having a perfect alibi . Investigators often track down suspects only to discover that they have perfect alibes . Investigators would track a suspect down and find him with an alibi.
 In Chapter 16, CIA and Mafia Overview, | outlined a plausible scenario for the execution phase of the Kennedy assassination which involved rogue elements of the CIA and their . Mafioso counterparts in the CIA’s program to assassinate Fidel Castro .
 French Corsican assassins might have been recruited by the Mafia in Marseilles, France . What follows is an extension of that scenario and an analysis of how it might have involved the recruitment of French Corsicans .
 Also to be discussed are allegations that part of the assassination team was recruited from the radical French OAS organization that had been involved in plots to assassinate French President Charles de Gaulle .
 Terrorists opposed Kennedy because of his long-standing support for a free Algeria . These terrorists opposed Kennedy's support for an Algerian free Algeria, he says .
 The first conclusive evidence of CIA plots to assassinate foreign leaders was in a 1975 report by the Senate Select Committee which was studying governmental operations with respect to intelligence .
 This report drew extensively on a 1967 report by the CIA inspector general on CIA plots against Fidel Castro . The report was based on a CIA report on plots against the Castro family .
 It was not until January 8, 1994 that the complete inspector general’s report became public by release from the National Archives . The National Archives released the report in 1994 .
 CIA went into the business of murdering foreign leaders in 1959, or at the latest 1960 . CIA was probably in 1959 or 1960, when it decided to go into business of killing foreign leaders .
 The main subject of concern was Patrice Lumumba of the Belgian Congo, who was considered to be dangerously leading that country into communism . The main concern at that time was that he was leading the country to communism .
 Eisenhower administration, the military, and the CIA were gravely concerned that many more Third World countries would follow . The Eisenhower administration was concerned about the fall of Cuba to communism and Fidel Castro .
 President Eisenhower knew about the plans to execute Patrice Lamumba . Whether or not he ordered the execution is not clear, but it seems certain he knew about it .
 Use of “plausible deniability” greatly affects understanding of how it would be possible for rogue elements of the CIA to take it upon themselves to assassinate the president of the United States .
 CIA documents often use plausible-deniability terms, such as “get rid of Castro,” “do something drastic about this man” or “eliminate that person” The terms could be said to have meant something other than actual murder .
 Operatives within the CIA would not even tell their superiors specifically what they were doing . They would employ such potentially misleading terminology even with their subordinates and assassin squads .
 This worked all the way to the top of the CIA, where even the director would not be told what was going on in certain clandestine operations . The CIA would not have been told what went on in clandestine operations, CIA officials said .
 Allen Dulles was involved in such activities on a one-to-one basis, with nothing in writing between Dulles and the president . And if presidents were involved in . such activities, it would have been discussed on a . one to one basis, not in writing .
 This form of plausible deniability has been used throughout history by heads of state and crime chieftains when ordering executions . It has also been used in the past to conceal the executions of criminals .
 A simple utterance of a code phrase or nod of the head or lift of the finger would be sufficient for the underlings to do their work . A nod of a head or a lift of a finger is enough to do the work, says the author .
 Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover could have been involved in the plot in a similar manner without knowing the details of the plot . It seems reasonable that LBJ and Hoover could be involved in such a similar way .
 They would know only that it was going to happen and be given only the briefest outline of what their potential roles could become in the event certain items needed to be covered up .
 Subprograms also included the development of knowledge on crowd reactions to events in motorcades, and mass psychological control of entire populations . The subprograms were also included .
 A massive project was undertaken to develop programmed assassins using hypnosis and drugs and other mind-control techniques . More sinister yet, a massive project to develop assassins used hypnosis .
 Bissell and Edwards both expressed the belief that Dulles authorized the initial phase of the assassination plot involving underworld figures . Edwards and Bissell believe the initial stage of the plot was the first phase .
 Dulles was not told about the plot until after underworld figures had been contacted . They acknowledged, however, that Dulles were not told of the plot .
 Bissell and Edwards insist the real meaning must have been understood . The words said to have been used to brief them—an intelligence operation — do not convey on their face that the plot involved assassination .
 There is some other evidence which can be said both to suggest that Dulles and Cabell did know and to suggest they did not know . There is also evidence that Cabell and Dulles did know .
 Allen Dulles was the one who proposed massive experimentation in mind control using LSD and hypnosis (sometimes on unwitting subjects) for creation of the ‘Manchurian Candidates” or patsies . Dulles proposed massive experiments in mind-control using, among other things
 Allen Dulles should be viewed in history as the man who, more than anyone else, was responsible for the programs that pushed the United States over the brink into despicable criminal activity .
 One of the theses of this book is that unintended consequences of these criminal programs resulted in the assassination of John F Kennedy . The book is based on the theories of the Kennedy's assassination .
 I found it useful to prepare a chronological list of the major political assassination plots in the 1960s .
 The use of the word “sponsor” in the following chronological list is not intended to imply at this point in our narrative that agents of the CIA actually pulled the trigger or performed the murders .
 It does imply that the CIA was behind and supportive of the plots, and decisively aided in their conception, promotion, and execution . But it doesn't imply that it was behind or supported the plots .
 All of the known successful assassinations in this list were accomplished by gunfire . Robert F Kennedy was assassinated in the U.S. in the 1970s .
 The first two attempts that used poisons or toxins did not work, primarily due to inability to deliver them . First two attempts failed to work, with the first two using poisons and toxins not working .
 This might counter assertions that if the CIA had wanted to kill John Kennedy, it could have poisoned him, or blown up his limousine . That never would have been used in the assassination of JFK .
 Only gunfire had worked in their previous plots, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 I also noted that the assassinations of John Kennedy, Robert Kennedy, and Martin Luther King, Jr., all occurred under the reigns of J Edgar Hoover and Lyndon Johnson .
 King’s agressive campaign to get the U.S. out of Vietnam and his promotion of racial integration, the extreme right wing had motives . Also, because of King's agressive . campaign to . get the United States out of . Vietnam, he said. Also,
 LBJ’s motive was to have King killed because he was leaving office . Less obvious was LBJ's motive to have him killed, because of his leaving office, he says .
 Carlos Marcello was a racist. Also less obvious was the Mafia’s motive, other than that he was racist. The Mafia's motive for the killing was less obvious, but it's not clear .
 Committee gathered evidence indicating that WI/ROGUE was a soldier of fortune and a criminal . Committee also gathered evidence of WI/OGUE's involvement in crimes . WI/rogue was a 'soldier of fortune' and 'criminal'
 The CIA sent him to the Congo after providing him with plastic surgery and a toupee so that Europeans traveling in the Congo would not recognize him . The CIA provided him with the toupee and plastic surgery .
 He is aware of the precepts of right and wrong, but if he is given an assignment which may be morally wrong in the eyes of the world, then it is right . He will dutifully undertake appropriate action for its execution without pangs of conscience, he says .
 You are hereby authorized to retain the services of Principal Agent QJWIN and such other principal agents and sub-agents as may be required .
 This authorization will continue to be in force through 31 December 1962, subject to renewal at that time . This authorization is in force until 1962 .
 As established by contract with him, QJWIN’s salary will be $7,200 per annum . QJW’S salary is set to be $8,000 a year .
 Accounting for the expenses of QJWIN and other agents involved in this activity will be in the form of receipts for funds received by them, and these receipts will be retained in the ZRRIFLE covert operational file .
 Accounting for funds will be by general category and by certification . Because of the sensitive nature of this activity, this activity will be confidential .
 In addition to the salary established for QJWIN, you are authorized to spend $7,500 through 31 December 1962 .
 This memorandum is to be considered in lieu of project and constitutes authorization for all travel, per diem, operational and other expenses . This memorandum will be used to provide funding for all of the project .
 According to CIA documents, QJ/WIN’s relationship with the CIA lasted six years . According to the documents, the relationship between the CIA and WIN lasted 6 years .
 He was terminated on February 14, 1964, about three months after John Kennedy was assassinated .
 Chief of Station: QJWIN Termination 14 February 1964 . Chief of station: "QJWIN" Chief of Staff .
 QJWIN has terminated his contract with the broadcaster . The operation in which he was to play a role had been shelved and therefore his contract was not renewed . His contract ran out on 29 February, and he was due to leave QJW in February .
 He was reassured that this action did not result from anything he had done and his past cooperation was appreciated . The action was not result of any wrongdoing, he was reassured .
 It was mentioned as conceivable that the operation might have been off and running if he had been able to establish his cover last year .
 QJWIN accepted the reason for termination and said he would always be available, if he could be of any assistance . QJ won't be available to assist in the future .
 In discussing his future, suggested, now that he has received all the necessary authorizations for doing business in Germany, he seriously consider going ahead with the venture in Cologne .
 His only hesitation is in committing himself to a long lease on a shop, he says . He says he has no hesitation in committing to a shop .
 Since January 1962, QJWIN’s only assignment has been to establish cover . QJW has been in the news since January 1962 .
 This requirement was confirmed by DIR-12541 of 28 May 1963 . 27 months and some $18,000 later, he is still not in place, although made an issue of this with him in August 1963 .
 Whether he ever really intended to commit himself to this assignment remains a question . Has strong doubts about whether he ever intended to do so .
 QJWIN’s personal history reflects major instability and the habit of hedging his bets is undoubtedly part of his character . QJW has a history of major instability .
 There is nothing to indicate that he has discussed his KUBARK relationship with anyone except, perhaps, his wife, perhaps .
 QJWIN knows the telephone number of the station’s outside phone, but this phone is being dismantled in October of this year . The station's outside phone is also being dismantled .
 There appears to be no question that QJ/WIN was a key element in the Kennedy assassination plot . The CIA operative could have been either involved in or knowledgeable of the assassination plot, author says .
 I decided to develop a description of QJ/WIN, as detailed as available information permitted, and see where it would lead . The description was based on available information .
 William Harvey sat down with a note pad and outlined the design of the project . Harvey’s Notes for Concept of ZR/RIFLE . Harvey was tasked with developing assassination capability for the CIA .
 He outlined his thoughts concerning how to recruit outside professional assassins and what their qualifications should be . He also outlined how to train outside assassins to become assassins themselves .
 The program may have been co-opted later to assassinate John F Kennedy . They show the workings of the fertile, logical mind of one of America's master spies .
 The notes are undated, most likely they were written sometime in 1962 because they mention that QJ/WIN was already under a written CIA contract . Most likely the notes were written because the contract was already written .
 Inasmuch as this contract was apparently authorized on February 19, 1962, it seems safe to conclude the notes were made after that date . The contract is said to have been signed by the President of the United States .
 As early as 1960, QJ/WIN’s expenses were being paid by the CIA through William Harvey, the CIA .
 Notes state that QJ/WIN was first contacted in 1958 through the Bureau of Narcotics . The notes state that the agency was contacted by the bureau .
 This leads to suspicion that the Bureau of Narcotics and the CIA were very close in nefarious joint-venture, covert operations during this period, including the mind-control program . The program is believed to have been part of the mind control program .
 Harvey was involved with QJ/WIN and was involved in recruiting spies or assassins in the early 1960s . Numerous CIA documents show that Harvey was . involved with recruiting spies and assassins .
 The notes clearly lay out the beginning concept of the CIA's assassination programs, whether or not the notes were written in 1962 . In any event, the notes laid out the CIA’s assassination programs .
 These are strikingly parallel to the three phases of the JFK assassination plot postulated in Chapter 8 of The Mastermind . These are the three stages of the assassination plot .
 Note “Corsicans recommended” presages what, it can be deduced, actually occurred in Dallas, based on French intelligence and FBI reports . Pee for ———} > 4. bce a pees bald .
 Other miscellaneous notes regarding expense disbursements and interviews by Harvey have been found and could be the balance of the forty-three pages .
 Notes could yield invaluable clues if analyzed in detail . Nevertheless, it seemed that the notes could yield an invaluable clue .
 What follows is a composite of the first nine pages of Harvey’s notes . The notes were found in five different files in the National Archives .
 Notes are a result of many hours of searching, followed by painstaking analysis over a period of two years . These notes are the result of a series of painstaking analysis .
 Harvey's notes were released from the National Archives on April 25, 1995 . They include the latest and most complete copy of Harvey’s notes which were released in 1995 .
 Agents will be spotted in several areas, including the United States, but for operational security reasons will probably not be used in their countries of residence . Agents will also be seen in several other countries, including U.S.
 Present developmental activity is being conducted in the WE and EE areas, but it is anticipated that this will be extended to other division areas . It is hoped that the development activity will be expanded to other divisions .
 The project will be operated against third-country installations and personnel . The project is expected to be used against third country installations .
 The following statement of “objective” was obviously written by Harvey to conceal the true nature of the project . Harvey was obviously writing the statement of "objective" to conceal his true intentions .
 There is no doubt that these notes are for Project ZR/RIFLE and for assassinations . The notes are meant for Project ZR/RAFLE and assassinations.
 No listing of targets would be valid for the duration of the project . Since these requirements are subject to frequent revision, no listing of target targets would remain valid for duration of project .
 Specific operations will be mounted on the basis of need and opportunity, the government says . Specific operations to be mounted based on the needs and opportunity of need, opportunity .
 The project will be conducted by Division D with assistance from area divisions and stations as needed . Division D will be conducting the project .
 Division D in 1960 began spotting of agent assets as a developmental activity . In response to the increasing requirements for the operational procurement of freight code and cipher materials .
 During the same period requirements from NSA became more refined and, in many respects, more sensitive . NSA requirements from the NSA have also become more refined .
 Division D, in closest touch with NSA on procurement requirements, could best conduct the activity . Most stations are not equipped to conduct this type of operation and because of the desirability of completely centralized control .
 The spotting activity has now advanced far enough to justify removing from the DDA category . It is no longer required to be classified as a DDA .
 QJWIN is under written contract as a principal agent, with the primary task of spotting agent candidates . QJW has been in charge of finding agent candidates since 2007 .
 QJWIN was first contacted in 1958 through the Chief of the Luxembourg I.S. by the Chief . Chief of Station, Luxembourg, in connection with an illegal narcotics operation into the United States .
 For a year and a half he was contracted sporadically by COS [Chief of Station] Luxembourg, in behalf of the Bureau of Narcotics . For a period of a year, and a . half, he was contract sporadously by . COS .
 Kubark is one focal point for control, search, tracing, case officering, etc. within Kubark . Kubark aims to be a central point for search, search and tracing of cases . Kubarks is one of the world's largest computer networks .
 Max security for only; no traces; possibilities of one man No PA’s or intermediaries; rigid case officering from start to finish . Max. security for just one person; no or traces; no . traces or possibilities of a one man . No PA's or intermedi
 No use of any agent who has worked for a U.S. government agency . Use of the material is restricted to those who have worked for the government .
 Kubark/D . no discussion in stations,e.e. no “steam” until ready to go 4) Blackmail: No American citizens or . or people who have obtained United States visas . No American . citizens or or people . have obtained U.S.
 Planning should include provisions for blaming Soviets or Czechs in case of blow . Planning should also include provisions to blame Soviets and Czechs, says CNN.com chief executive .
 Use of case officers who can pass as foreigners—and limited official reference— is limited to case officers . Case officers are allowed to pass as foreign nationals .
 What we see here is a master plan which has in it the key elements of the JFK assassination plot . Aside from the obvious significance of the totality of these notes, what we see is here is here .
 A key element of the plan was “non-attributability” with maximum project security . The plan was designed to ensure the project was non-attributionally anonymous .
 Only ‘one focal point’ was recommended for control, search, training, case officering, etc. Within the CIA only “one focal center” was recommended .
 This indicates that there would be a project manager similar to the one I hypothesized in Chapter 8 of The Mastermind . This indicates there would have been a similar project manager like I hypothesized .
 This strikes a ring of familiarity to the advanced disinformation plans for setting up Oswald so as to blame the Soviets or the Cubans; again, this is similar to my hypothesis . This is a repeat of my hypothesis that the Soviets and Cubans were behind the assassination of Oswald .
 We must realize that any files we have looked at may very well be phony files with forged documents in them . Any files we find in the future could very well well be forged documents . We must also realize that .
 Note also rules out recruitment from Sicilians for fear that Sicilian agents would lead to the Mafia . Note also that he rules out recruiters from the Sicilian .
 Harvey obviously is trying to shield the Mafia from being discovered in their plots . This seems to have special significance because Harvey obviously wants to shield himself from being caught . Harvey has been accused of trying to protect himself from the Mafia's plots .
 It is very significant that the recruitment of French Corsicans is what appears to have happened based on documents received from French intelligence, FBI documents, and other documents that will presently be discussed .
 French OAS members would later materialize in the form of French Corsican organized crime assassins . French Corsicans would later be involved in organized crime in Corsica .
 This is similar to my hypothesis in Chapter 8, in which the “mastermind” spoke of bringing professional assassins of foreign origin into the conspiracy . Again, this is similar . This is a similar to the "mastermind's" claim that he spoke of a professional assassin of
 A very high standard of competence and a unique balance of ruthlessness and stable personality would be the makeup of the assassins . These requirements, if met, indicate that a very high standards of competence would be met .
 Also shown on this diagram is the major cast of characters involved in this bizarre story . Also shown are the major players in the story .
 Some of the evidence supporting the diagram has already been presented . The diagram has been presented by the author .
 This diagram shows linkages; it is not offered as evidence of a conspiracy among all these individuals and organizations . This diagram was created by President Barack Obama in 2009 .
 It was first discovered by Mary Ferrell, a veteran assassination researcher .
 He was in Fort Worth on morning of 22 November and in Dallas in the afternoon . He was visiting Fort Worth in the morning of November 22 November .
 In January he received mail from a dentist named Alderson living at 5803 Birmingham, Houston, Texas, Texas . The dentist lived in the same place as a dentist .
 The French are concerned because of de Gaulle’s planned visit to Mexico . The French government is concerned about the visit of the former French president .
 They would like to know the reason for his expulsion from the United States and his destination . They want to know why he was expelled from the U.S. and where he is now .
 "They would like a check of our files with indications of what may be passed to French. They would like to see what may have been passed on to French."
 The FBI was not in a position to suppress the information . The FBI contacted Dr. David French after receiving the information from the French .
 Alderson said he had not seen the Frenchman since serving as a security officer with him shortly after World War II when he was working for the CIA at the time . Alderson says he has not seen him since he worked with him in the CIA .
 "From what I can gather, he was in the French underground movement in Algiers. From what I gather, I'm not sure what happened to him," he says .
 In France, you don’t have a thing if you’re from a poor family unless you have a military career behind you . In France you have to have a good military career to be able to survive .
 He was very interested in his career and this is why I never did really understand why he left it. So, he was very keen on his career, he said . He said: 'This is why he was never interested in football'
 She was a well-to-do, beautiful woman from a Southern France wine family . She was from a wine-loving Southern France family .
 Last I heard from her, she told me that he had left the French Army and had gone underground trying to save Algeria . The last I heard of her was she said he was the one who told me he had .
 He was committed, or felt committed, to leave his career, which was the only career he had, he said . So, evidently, he was rather committed, he felt committed to leaving his career .
 The last contact I had with the CIA was in France when I was working for him . The last time I had contact with CIA was when I worked for him in France, he says .
 Alderson described Souetre as having been about twenty-five years old in the early 1950s and speaking English, Spanish, and German without an accent . So, the only contact I had in this country was with the pp ool Alderson . Alderson describes Souete
 Souetre is a political activist of the radical right, neo-Nazi persuasion, says French politician . Souete knew many French politicians and knew many politicians, he says . Soumetre knew many of France's top politicians, according to the politician .
 He was greatly agitated at the prospect of a Moslem Algeria, as opposed to a French Algeria . And he became a military/political activist in Algeria, and became an activist .
 Souetre became head of the OAS in the South Zone of Algeria in June-July 1963 . According to a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit filed by Bernard Fensterwald, Jr., he was in charge of Algeria's OAS .
 In August, a large number of OAS groups merged to form the “Armée Nationale Secrete,” which had representatives in Canada, New Orleans, and Latin America .
 Souetre was director of Casino at Dironne les Bains on the French side of the Swiss/France border in 1982 . In 1982, he was director at the French-Swiss border casino on the Swiss border .
 He suggested that the person there may have been Mertz using Souetre’s name . He suggested the person may have used the name of the man in question .
 A French soldier of fortune, who called himself Jean Souetre (a.k.a. a. Jean-Souetre) was found in a French villager's home . He was also known as Jean-Jean-Suetre .
 Mertz was a member of a right-wing French militant group, being in Dallas on November 22, and then three persons, all with the name of MERTz, flying on November 23 from Houston to Mexico City .
 John Mertz was a John MERTz instead of a Michel Merts. The exception here is that it was that it wasn't a John-Mertz .
 There was also a Michel Roux visiting the Dallas-Fort Worth area at the time of the assassination . If this isn't complicated enough, there was also an assassination victim .
 The FBI ostensibly came up with Souetre's name when looking for him on behalf of the French . The FBI said it was looking for his aliases when it came to him and his aliases . He was found dead at a French prison in 2009 .
 Michel Roux was a deserter from the French Army after three years of service . Roux served in the French army for three years . He was killed in the Battle of the French Revolution .
 The reason for Roux being in the Dallas-Fort Worth area on this unique date in history is somewhat curious . Roux was in the area at the time of his death .
 According to the FBI, Roux was a room clerk in a hotel in Paris where he met two American tourists who invited him to Fort Worth . Roux says he met the two Americans in a Paris hotel room . The FBI says Roux is believed to be in Fort Worth, Texas
 He then took a bus to Houston and called his kind acquaintances and told them he was in the country and would like to see them . He then called them up and said he wanted to visit them .
 The incredible Texans drove over to Houston, picked him up, and took him back to Fort Worth . Then they took him to a hotel, the Fox Manor, where he stayed during his visit .
 Roux’s alibi would be confirmed through the mysterious friends in Fort Worth . This would be Roux's alibi if it could be confirmed . Roux has a history of drug dealing .
 He returned to France from Laredo, Texas, on December 6, 1963 . He stayed in Mexico City for a short period while obtaining a visa .
 At the time, he had no visible means of support, no auto, no driver’s license, and rarely left his apartment . At the same time he was living in an apartment, he was unemployed .
 Roux, a room clerk, financed and arranged his trip to Texas and Mexico, and became wealthy enough to return in luxury in 1982 . How Roux became rich enough to travel to Mexico and Texas, remains a mystery .
 He would have been about forty-three years old at the time of the Kennedy assassination . He would be about 40 years old when he was assassinated .
 Mertz spoke almost perfect English, German, and Spanish, as well as French . He also spoke fluent French and English .
 His exploits have been recorded in a number of books and magazine articles .
 Mertz married Paula Scheller Martel, adopted daughter of Charles Martel . The Sphinx was the operator of the famous bordello in Paris by the name of the Sphinx . He died in 1973 .
 This was Mertz’s introduction into the underworld of France and Canada . This was his introduction to the underworld .
 Mertz became actively engaged in both espionage and the smuggling of narcotics on a large scale from France to both the United States and Canada . He smuggled narcotics from France into the U.S. and Canada from France .
 By 1960, Mertz was one of a number of Frenchmen who had both French spy agency and narcotics connections . He was a French national who was involved in the drug trade .
 He was sent to Algeria as a reserve captain and pretended to be an OAS sympathizer . He pretended he was a member of the OAS but was sent there to Algeria .
 He learned of plots to assassinate Charles de Gaulle and is credited with having saved his life . He was credited with saving the life of the French leader .
 Between 1961 and 1969, Mertz and his colleagues were alleged to have moved two tons of heroin across the North Atlantic . Between 1961-1969, they are alleged to be responsible for the drug trade in the UK .
 He was closely associated with well-known French gangsters, including Christian David and Christian David . He was associated with the Guerin organization in Marseilles .
 Mertz was also closely connected with the Trafficante organization in Florida . Of special significance, he was closely associated with the organization .
 Mertz was considered an ‘untouchable’ in France because of his SDECE and Gaulleist connections . He was considered a ‘unpopular’ by French media .
 Mertz was arrested in 1969 for his drugsmuggling operations . In 1971 he was convicted and sentenced to five years in prison for his role in the smuggling .
 One of Mertz’s contacts in both heroin smuggling and French intelligence was Christian David, a man named Christian David . David was a key figure in the smuggling operation .
 Christian David would reveal the identity of the assassins at Dealey Plaza . Christian David was a witness to the Kennedy assassination . David would tell a remarkable story .
 Christian David was arrested in Brazil in 1972 and charged with being a member of a smuggling ring that imported more than one thousand pounds of heroin into the U.S. over a three-year period . David was accused of smuggling more than 1,000 pounds worth of heroin .
 David was extradited to the United States and sentenced to twenty years in prison . After his arrest in Brazil, David was arrested in the U.S. David was sentenced to 20 years in jail .
 David was nearing the end of his prison term in 1985 when he was interviewed by a California writer, Stephen J Rivele, to whom he told his story . David was fifty-eight years old at the time of the first interview .
 Rivele's research plunged him deep into the history of the CIA’s collaboration with organized crime and drug traffickers . The book is published by Pulitzer Prize-winning author David Gergen .
 Jean Souetre is also known as Michel Mertz and Michel Roux, both actual people . He is known as Jean-Souetre . He was born Jean-Mertz, a French national .
 Souetre, or someone using his name, was in Dallas on November 22, 1963 . The FBI reported that he was there in Dallas, Texas, on November 23, 1963.
 Souetre had contact with an anti-Castro group in New Orleans in 1963 . He met in Dallas with General Edwin Walker in April 1963 . Souete had contacts with General Walker in Dallas .
 He was also at a meeting in April 1963 in Madrid, Spain, with E Howard Hunt .
 Souetre denied being in Dallas on November 22, 1963 . He said it may have been Michael Mertz, using his name . In 1983 he denied being there on that date .
 David had been a member of the French Connection network . He was the leader of the Corsican network in South America known as the Latin Connection . David was also a leader in Corsican networks known as Latin Connection.
 The purpose of that group was to fight the right-wing terrorists in Algeria . The group was formed in Algeria in the 1980s and 1990s .
 A former French OAS officer claims that David’s victims ran to fifty-four . David's victims are thought to have been as many as 50,000 .
 After Algeria was granted independence, Christian David returned to organized crime . After Algeria's independence, he returned to crime .
 David was a wealthy fashion plate and became a household name in France . David was the son of a French fashion designer .
 David was awaiting extradition to France to stand trial for murdering a policeman in connection with the murder of Mohammed Ben Barka, the Moroccan politician . When Rivele first interviewed David, David had already been awaiting extradition .
 David told Rivele that he had information on the Kennedy assassination, in return for which he wanted a deal with the U.S. government that would block his extradition to France .
 The judge lifted the stay of extradition, and David was flown to Paris . David David was extradited to France after the judge ruled against extradition .
 In prison there since 1985, he was interviewed repeatedly by Rivele, Lesar and Lesar .
 Lesar provided me with copies from the Assassination Archives of Rivele’s correspondence with him in which he transmitted his notes of his interviews with Christian David . Lesar also provided copies of the correspondence between Rivesle and David .
 In May or June of 1963 he was offered a contract by Antoine Guerini, the Corsican crime boss in Marseilles, to accept a contract to kill “a highly placed American politician” whom Guerini called the “biggest vegetable” President Kennedy .
 David told Rivele that he turned down the contract because it was too dangerous . David said he turned it down because he wanted to stay in the country .
 When English intelligence officers were parachuted into the Marseilles area they were hidden in the cellars of Guerini’s night clubs .
 His younger brother Barthelmy was later awarded the Legion of Honor for his wartime exploits . His brother was also awarded the French Medal of Honor .
 David said he learned what happened about two years after the assassination in a meeting in Buenos Aires . Sarti, another drug trafficker named Michele Nicoli, David, and two others were present .
 This is how the assassination was carried out as David told it to Rivele . David told the assassination as he told the BBC's David Cameron . David Cameron's assassination was the first to be carried out in the country .
 First Meeting of Rivele with Christian David, January 15, 1986 . Met in private room with David for two hours. Met in . private . room with . David for . two hours .
 President Obama said he might make a deal with the House Intelligence Committee if David Hagan gave him specific, verifiable details about the assassination .
 Lucien Sarti has accepted the contract on JFK, as we had thought . However, after prodding he did confirm that he had referred to as having accepted the deal, he did not confirm that it was SARTi .
 Sarti flew from France to Mexico City, where he drove or was driven to the U.S. border at Brownsville, Texas . Said that about two weeks before the assassination, he flew to the United States .
 Sarti crossed at Brownsville where he was picked up by someone from the Chicago mafia jaz . This person drove him to a private house in Dallas . The person then took him to Dallas .
 David believes that Sarti was traveling on an Italian passport, and that he spoke to his driver in Italian . David says he believes that the driver spoke to him in Italian, and he was traveling with a passport .
 Did admit that he was working for the CIA in Congo in 1960-61, to kill Lumumba . Did admit to working with the CIA to kill the Congolese president .
 Admits he discussed intelligence network with a man in a hotel in Leopoldville but would not say who initiated conversation . Admits to discussing intelligence network in hotel in hotel but not who initiated talk . Would not say if he initiated conversation with man in hotel .
 Sarti says CIA tried to kill him in South America in 1972, killed him in Mexico . CIA says it killed him after he was killed in Mexico in 1972 . CIA: "We have a history of trying to kill people in Latin America"
 Said Dan Mitrione, killed by the Tupamaros, was in contact with him, had his name on a list and warned him several times to stay in line . Said he was in touch with him and was warned several times by him to stay out .
 Repeated that everyone who has expressed knowledge of the assassination has been killed, and he will be killed if he goes back to the U.S. to testify . Repeated everyone who . has expressed . knowledge of . the assassination have been killed and he is killed if . goes back
 "I began to have the impression that he meant he would implicate himself," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Denied that his appearance had ever been changed surgically, though claims all photos of him are faked . Denied he had ever changed his appearance .
 "Gave me impression that the photo was not authentic, or did not truly resemble Sarti," she said .
 Said CIA manipulated Oswald and him in the same way, and would be killed in same way if he is not careful . Said Oswald and JFK were manipulated by CIA and would have been killed if he was not careful. Said he would be murdered if he wasn't careful .
 David’s lawyer had been to see him that morning to tell him that the government was going to try to have him committed . David's lawyer told him that he had been told by the government that he would be committed .
 Sarti stayed in Mexico several weeks before going to U.S. but not more than a month . He stayed several weeks in Mexico before leaving the country .
 He corrected himself, saying not the bridge but that there was a little hill next to the bridge . There was a wooden fence on that hill, and Sarti fired from behind the fence, he said .
 He said there was somebody in an office building but could not remember where it was . He said someone was in the building but did not know where it is .
 Said they cased Dealey Plaza, took photographs and worked out mathematically how to set up crossfire . Said they took photos, worked out how to use crossfire and used math .
 Sarti was not in drug trade at the time, but heroin was the liquid currency of the time . Could not remember how much heroin he was paid for .
 Antoine Guerini was only the intermediary between Sarti and the Chicago mafia, said Guerini . Guerini withdrew from the affair after putting the mafia in touch .
 Would not say how they got to and from Dealey Plaza, or comment on photo of Frenchy . No comment on how they arrived, or how they left Dealey plaza, or why they left .
 At the end of the conversation, he mentioned that you can shoot better with one eye than with two . When you have only one eye you are a better shot than someone with two eyes, he said .
 Said there was no comparison since you’re not distracted by the sight in the other eye . Said there were no comparisons since you're not distracted from the sight .
 France Soir article said that Sarti had lost the sight in his left eye in a car accident . This recalled an article which said that he had lost sight in the left eye .
 Fourth Meeting of Rivele with David, January 18, 1986 . Met with David for an hour. Met with him for one hour . Met him again in 1986 .
 Said in a response to my question that he thinks Antoine Guerini was involved in plots against Castro . Said in response to his question he thinks Guerini had been involved in plotting against Castro.
 Knew Otto Skorzeny as a Nazi, did not want to say how he knew him but said he never worked together with him . Said he knew the Nazi leader but never worked with him in the 1930s .
 Said people who picked up Sarti in Brownsville were from the city of Chicago as opposed to the Chicago area . Said people from Chicago area were from Chicago .
 Said Sarti moved several times on his way from Mexico City to the U.S. Said he wasn't in Mexico City very long and wasn’t in it very long .
 He said such a man shoots faster and more accurately than one with two eyes . Such a man can shoot faster and better than a two-eyed man, he said .
 Said he frequently went hunting with Sarti who always shot better than he . Said he often went hunting hunting with him and he was always better shot .
 I showed him an aerial photo of Dealey Plaza and asked him to point out where Sarti shot from . He said it was Dealey's photo of the famous photo was taken from Dealey .
 He repeated that Sarti fired from the front, that he was not in a building . He said he was in the front of the building, not in the back of a building.
 Said Sarti wanted to be on the bridge but it was guarded so he had to move down towards the hill . Said said he wanted to go on bridge but was forced to move to the hill instead .
 Said you can't understand the wounds if you don’t realize that one gun was low, “almost on the horizontal” as he said several times . Said it was a low gun that was low .
 Refused to comment on whether Nicoli was involved in plot, but also refused to deny that he was . Refused not to say if Nicoli had been involved in the plot but also said he was involved .
 Insists that Sarti was assassinated, no reason for the Mexican police to kill him . Insists there was no evidence that he was killed by police .
 Said that Antoine Guerini was very careful about whom he hired for the affair . Said that he hired Guerini to be careful about who he hired to carry out the affair.
 Refused to say who the other two gunmen were or give me their nationalities . Refused not to give me nationalities of the other three gunmen . Refuse to say if they were the other gunmen .
 David said that Sarti was not a friend of his, that they worked together but he would not have chosen him as a friend . David said he would have chosen to work with him if he had chosen to do so . David and David worked together, David said .
 There were only two reasons why you killed someone, either to save yourself or to save a friend . When asked what he replied, he replied that there was only one reason to kill someone .
 Sarti was forced to jeopardize himself several times to get his friend out of jams . Evidently he had to risk his own life to save his life .
 He said, no, that’s something entirely different and he would explain it to me later on. He said no, he said, and he said it was a different thing .
 Fifth Meeting of Rivele with David, January 25 Refused to answer any questions . Refused not to answer questions. Refused a single question .
 Said there were documents, statements made under torture which proved he was telling truth . Said he was made to tell the truth .
 His brother's name has not been found and he refuses to say what hospital he is in . Refused for the dozenth time to tell me his brother’s name or where he is .
 Asked if he could name others who knew about the assassination who had been killed to prevent them talking, he said they were killed to stop them talking . He said he was not sure if they would be able to name others .
 Sixth Meeting of Rivele with David met with Jim and Dan Alcorn . David and Jim Alcorn met for the sixth time .
 He refused to answer questions, refused to give information before he was released . Refused to give any information before being released from jail .
 Said anything he said about assassination might be used to have him committed . Said anything that might have been used against him would be used as a crime .
 His Marseille lawyer had seen him the day previously and told him not to cooperate with us as he would soon be getting out of jail . He had been in jail in Marseille, France, for a year and a month earlier .
 He will write down the essentials of what he knows about the assassination and give it to a Corsican lawyer of his acquaintance . He will give the essentials to Corsican lawyers .
 The lawyer will retain this information and contact Jim to confirm that it is what David promised . Jim's lawyer will contact Jim and confirm that David promised to do so .
 In return Jim and Dan will appeal on David’s behalf to the Court of the Hague . In return, they will appeal for David to be allowed to continue his life in prison .
 If they are instrumental in getting David out, they get the information. If they're instrumental, they'll get the info. David is a good man for the U.S. He says .
 If David gets out otherwise, he will sell the information and give the money to his family . David says if he gets out, he'll give the information to David's family and sell the money .
 Said he will write down what he knows about the Congo separately and give it to the lawyer . Said he plans to write down the information separately . Added he will also give it also to lawyer .
 Said he would soon be getting out, or if not would be put under psychiatric observation for a few months . Said if not, he would be under observation for months and then released . If not, would be in psychiatric observation .
 Said all three gunmen had living relatives who would revenge them if he told them . Said they would trace the information back to him . Said he feared they would kill him .
 Said only Sarti had an explosive bullet and only one was paid in heroin . Said only one had explosive bullet, only one paid for by heroin .
 Said find out who Sarti’s contacts in U.S. were and I will know who was involved . Said he would find out . Find out who the contacts in the United States were and he will .
 Jim and Dan joined us late afternoon and firmed up details of the agreement . Jim says it's a good start to the season . Dan: "It's a great deal for the fans"
 It is conceivable to me that he was not involved in the actual assassination, but the nature of what he has said suggests he was . The nature of his comments suggests that he may have been involved in it .
 "I think it likely that he will not survive for another year, unless he is freed," he says . "Frankly, I think it is likely that [President] Obama will probably not survive another year," he adds .
 I accept the idea that Sarti was the man on the grassy knoll, and it strikes me as quite possible that Nicoli was another of the gunmen . Nicoli is believed to have been the gunman on the knoll .
 David suggested that Rivele locate Michele Nicoli, who had been with the group in Buenos Aires in 1965 when the assassination was discussed . David suggests that Nicoli's story could be corroborated by someone who could corroborate it .
 Rivele ultimately made contact with Nicoli after a lengthy search in North and South America . Nicoli was found dead at the end of the day in a car crash .
 He was aided in the search by Michael Tobin, a high-level official in the Drug Enforcement Administration .
 Nicoli testified against French Connection members in 1972 . Nicoli was living under the Witness Protection Program, using a new name . He testified against members of the French Connection .
 The DEA official vouched for Nicol1’s truthfulness in the strongest terms, saying that he had proven himself to be one of the most reliable witnesses over the years that the DEA had experienced .
 Riveles contacts with Nicoli took place over many months, and he proved extremely reluctant to talk . Nicoli was reluctant to speak .
 In the end, however, he told both Rivele and Tobin essentially the same story as had David. David.
 Nicoli told Rivele that the Mafia in the U.S. had hired Sarti . Nicoli said that the mafia in the United States had hired the Italian .
 Nicoli was interviewed on a BBC television program and repeated his confirmation of David’s story . Later, he was interviewed by the BBC on a television program .
 Nicoli and David had not been in touch with each other since the early seventies . As far as could be ascertained, Nicoli . David and Nicoli were not in touch .
 DEA official Tobin was satisfied that the matter should be pursued . By 1987, Tobin had been satisfied with the decision .
 He formally notified his superiors that he wanted to conduct a grand jury investigation drawing on Nicoli’s statements . The investigation will be conducted by a federal grand jury .
 After receiving death threats, he lived incognito in California until recent years . He received death threats from people who threatened him .
 Jim Lesar said Christian David was still alive and in prison in 1993 . Christian David is still in prison, but he is believed to be alive .
 Thomas Eli Davis III was from a respected family in Beaumont, Texas . He was a young adventurer and thief by the name of Thomas Elijah Davis III .
 Davis was in North Africa at the time of the Kennedy assassination . Ruby said Davis had first approached him about using some of Ruby’s strippers in pornographic movies, but later became involved in gunrunning .
 He was jailed in Tangier in connection with the Kennedy assassination . But he was not convicted of any crime related to the assassination .
 Moroccan security police arrested Davis because of a letter in his handwriting which referred in passing bho kets) a wae 2 to Oswald and the Kennedy assassination .
 In early 1963, Davis had contact with anti-Castro Cubans as confirmed by his wife and family . Ze In 1964, Ze In 1963, Ze Davis was in the midst of a crisis in Cuba . Ze
 Davis admitted he used the name Oswald while in North Africa . Davis admitted to reporter George Carter that he used it while in Africa .
 Davis's story was never told because it was not investigated by the Warren Commission or by the House Select Committee on Assassinations . Davis’s story was not reported because it wasn’t investigated by either of the committees .
 In September 1973, Davis was electrocuted when he cut into a 7,000-volt power line while attempting to steal copper wire from a construction site . Davis was killed in September 1973 .
 Jean Souetre is linked to right-wing extremists General Edwin Walker and General Charles Willoughby . He is also linked to CIA officer E Howard Hunt and anti-Castroites in New Orleans .
 The John Birch Society, sponsors of the infamous blackborder ads vilifying Kennedy, were behind the blackborder ad campaign . Hunt in Dallas, Dallas, and the John Birch society were also behind the ads . Hunt was the sponsor of the ads, which vilified Kennedy .
 Jean Souetre traveled widely in Latin America and the Caribbean between 1962 and 1971 . Le Cavelier found that Souetree traveled widely .
 Madrid was a center for the international right wing during the Fascist dictatorship of Franco . General Charles Willoughby was a member of the Franco-era regime .
 Hunt, as noted earlier, was then Tracy Barnes’s clandestine-affairs chief in the CIA . Hunt was the CIA's Domestic Operations Division . Hunt, who was in charge of the CIA, was a CIA director of clandestine affairs .
 Le Cavelier: OAS Intelligence Director Jean Claude Perez and several Hungarians looking to expand the global anti-Communist network . Also at the meeting were OAS intelligence director JeanClaude Perez, OAS leader Jean Claude P. Perez .
 Several of those present proceeded “in the direction of the Caribbean, then towards New Orleans’s New Orleans,” the group said . Several of the people were traveling with the group .
 Bringuier was the exile whom Oswald also encountered in the summer of 1963 . Oswald was also in exile from the same exile .
 Guy Banister’s office was the address of Oswald's Fair Play for Cuba literature . The address was stamped on the book, which Oswald used to use in Cuba . The book was published by Oswald in Cuba in 1961 .
 Evidence shows that French Corsicans were in Dallas on November 22, 1963, and that they were professional assassins . First, the employment of French Corsican assassins was planned by Harvey .
 Harvey was very specific in recruiting only top professional assassins from outside the country . Harvey recruited top assassins from abroad . Harvey was also very specific about recruiting top assassins .
 Fourth, Harvey specified rigid controls to keep plots limited to a few participants with strict rules of conversation and no paper trail .
 There is enough information available to form the basis of a major project in that regard which some future researcher could fruitfully undertake . However, there is still a lot of work to do on the project .
 CIA contracted with agents who had the cryptonyms WI/ROGUE and QJ/WIN . These agents were professional assassins, and that they were either French Corsicans themselves or French or Europeans who recruited Corsicans .
 Christian David told Steve Rivele that he was approached by Antoine Guerini, Mafia chieftain in Marseilles, to perform a hit contract on John Kennedy . David said Guerini asked him to perform the hit contract .
 David said that he turned it down, but the contract was later accepted by Lucien Sarti and two unnamed accomplices . David said he turned down the contract, but he later accepted it .
 Sarti and his two accomplices were French Corsicans connected with the Mafia in Marseille . Sarto and his accomplices are French Corsican Corsicans .
 David’s statements were confirmed by Michelle Nicoli, who was considered to be a very reliable witness by the U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency . Michelle was considered a reliable witness for the DEA by the DEA .
 Sarti was the gunman behind the picket fence . He was aided by two other Corsican assassins . He killed the president of the United States .
 The three assassins had met in Mexico City and crossed the United States Mexican border where they were met and handled by the Chicago Mafia . The assassins had crossed the U.S. border and crossed into Mexico .
 A further indication that Christian David was telling the truth is that he said that he met Lucien Sarti in the Belgian Congo in 1960 in 1960 . Christian David said he met the Belgian dictator in Belgium in 1960, according to reports .
 CIA documents confirm that both WI/ROGUE and QJ/WIN were in the Belgian Congo in 1960, in connection with the assassination of Patrice Lumumba . CIA documents reveal that both the CIA agents were involved in the assassination .
 This links David in CIA assassination operations that were assisted by QJ/WIN under the direction of William Harvey . William Harvey was the CIA's director of operations in the 1980s .
 Christian David stated that he was an associate of Michael Mertz in heroin trafficking . Christian David said he was a heroin trafficker . David was arrested in connection with the heroin trafficking of Michael David .
 QJ/WIN helped Thomas Eli Davis get out of jail shortly after the Kennedy assassination . Davis was arrested while using Oswald’s name in North Africa . Davis used Oswald's name to get his name out of prison .
 Thomas Eli Davis was in New Orleans in the summer of 1963 while Oswald was there . Davis had been involved with Jack Ruby in Dallas in gunrunning activities related to Cuba .
 French intelligence documents and FBI documents show that a man calling himself Jean Souetre was in Dallas on November 22, 1963 . The man was in the Dallas area on that date .
 Souetre was a French OAS terrorist and hated Kennedy because of Kennedy’s support of a free Algeria . Souete was a terrorist and opposed Kennedy because he supported a free Algerian state .
 FBI documents show Michel Mertz and Michel Roux were in Dallas on November 22, 1963 . FBI documents say both were in the city at the time of the shooting .
 A French intelligence source states that Jean Souetre had connections to E Howard Hunt, General Walker, and General Willoughby . A French Intelligence source states . A source claims that Jean Sourire's connections to Hunt, Walker and Walker were .
 This was the address of Guy Banister's office and the address on Oswald’s leaflets for the Fair Play for Cuba Committee . The address was also on the leaflets Oswald Oswald used for the committee .
 There is a linkage between all of these characters which encompasses operations in New Orleans, Dallas, the Caribbean, Cuban exiles, right-wing extremists, the CIA, French terrorists, Jack Ruby, Oswald, Guy Banister, and on in a complete circle .
 It seems unreasonable to conclude that all of this is just coincidence, it's not just coincidence .
 What we probably are looking at here is a matrix of the execution and cover-up phases of the Kennedy assassination, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: What we're looking at is the execution of the JFK assassination .
 Evidence in this chapter strongly suggests that the assassins at Dealey Plaza were originally identified and checked out by the CIA through the ZR/RIFLE project to assassinate foreign leaders of Third World countries . Once this capability was developed it was used to assassinate Kennedy .
 This does not necessarily mean that the CIA was behind the Kennedy assassination . Instead, it does mean that it was behind it .
 It does leave open the possibility that rogue elements, or ex-employees of the CIA, or an outside cabal of plotters, found it convenient to hire the same killers they had come to know .
 A further chain of evidence suggests that William Harvey, Johnny Rosselli, and CIA operatives managed the execution phase of the assassination . In particular, I will examine a further chain . of evidence .
 I will examine the possible roles of right-wing extremists in Dallas, New Orleans, and Europe . I will also examine the role of right wing extremism in Dallas and New Orleans .
 In the long run, the identity of the gunmen at Dealey Plaza may not be of great importance; they were hired guns . The identity of those gunmen may not matter much in the long term .
 Four or five individuals in Dallas at the time of the assassination were terrorists, murderers, drug smugglers . The most significant finding here is that there were four or five people connected to organized crime, the CIA, and its assassination programs . The author says they were connected to right-wing extremists
 The evidence strongly indicates that a covert assassination capability developed by the U.S. could have been turned against the very core of our constitutional government . The evidence suggests that the assassination capability was developed in the United States .
 The importance of Christian David having known Dan Mitrione was pointed out to him by Gaeton Fonzi in Fort Lauderdale in October 1996 when he and I were there to interview Gerald Patrick Hemming . Christian David had known Mitrioni and was warned by him that if he
 I had sent this chapter for Fonzi’s review months before, and he had finally noticed Christian David’�s reference to Dan Mitrione . Christian David was finally noticed by Christian David's reference to the author of this book .
 Christian David's statements were corroborative of Christian David’s statements, by virtue of the fact that it placed David into a network including David Sanchez Morales, the CIA assassination specialist who worked for William Harvey . Fonzi says David's statement placed David in a network of CIA assassination
 The fact that Dan Mitrione was warning Christian David that he would be killed if he talked lends even more credence to his story, and to the story of David Sanchez Morales, which will be reported in the chapter .
 Christian David, David Sanchez Morales, and the Guerini mob in France, are linked to the Guerini mob . Christian David was killed by a mob in 1998 in France . David was shot in the head by a police officer in 1998 .
 This, we shall see, leads to William Harvey and Johnny Rosselli, and the assassination of President Kennedy . We shall see how this leads to Harvey's arrest and assassination .
 Steve Rivele received an Academy Award nomination for best screenplay for Oliver Stone’s film, Nixon . He says he watched the Academy Award ceremonies on television in March 1996, and to his surprise saw that he had received a nomination .
 Rivele had graduated from plodding around Europe, risking his life looking for QJ/WIN and WI/ROGUE, then going into hiding after receiving death threats, and now was a celebrity . What a difference? I thought. What was a difference .
 It takes an even greater leap into fantasy to believe that Lee Harvey Oswald was a lone nut . It takes a great leap to believe Oswald was the sole nut .
 The CIA still officially denies that it has any relationship with Oswald . Despite all the substantive and overwhelming evidence confirming Oswald’s association with the CIA, the CIA still denies any relationship .
 It fosters and deliberately maintains the issue as a matter of public debate, it says . Moreover, it fosters, deliberately maintains, that the issue is an issue for public debate .
 In previous chapters we saw how the CIA’s program to assassinate foreign leaders may have been turned against our constitutional government . Gaeton Fonzi is a former investigator for the HSCA and the Church Committee .
 We saw evidence that CIA’s William Harvey planned the use of French Corsicans as assassins in his ZR/RIFLE program, and evidence that French Corsican assassins, recruited by the Mafia, were in Dallas on November 22, 1963 .
 Documents related to the Dallas murder were altered or suppressed by the Dallas police with the cooperation of the FBI, or vice versa . We saw evidence that basic documents related . to the crime were altered . or suppressed .
 We saw that the FBI, in cooperation with the CIA and the White House, suppressed evidence of a conspiracy to set up Oswald in Mexico City, Mexico City . The FBI, CIA and White House suppressed evidence that Oswald had been set up in Mexico .
 Kennedy’s body was stolen from Air Force One and modified before it was delivered to the autopsy room at Bethesda Naval Hospital . We saw evidence that Kennedy's body was literally stolen from . Air Force 1 .
 We saw evidence that the autopsy and x-rays were altered to conceal the true nature of Kennedy’s wounds . Kennedy was found to have been seriously injured in the shooting .
 We saw evidence that the brain examined after the autopsy was not Kennedy’s brain . Kennedy's brain was examined after his autopsy, and it was not his brain, the coroner says .
 It is not clear who masterminded the conspiracy, nor is it clear who organized it, planned it, and directed the intricate operations . It is clearly evident to me that a massive cover-up, directed by people in the U.S. government, was underway before Air Force One
 "In this chapter, and the chapters that follow, we will continue to struggle with these central questions," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The CIA’s antiCastro operation in Miami and its relation with the Mafia may be the subject of further study .
 Perhaps by studying that milieu, additional keys to the puzzle would be found, perhaps by studying the milieu .
 The prime cast of characters in this chapter includes the CIA’s William Harvey, who, as earlier stated, loathed the Kennedys . Harvey was the CIA's William Harvey . Harvey, a former CIA operative, was a key CIA operative who loathed Kennedy .
 It includes mobster Johnny Rosselli, who was closely involved in the same operations with Harvey .
 David Sanchez Morales was David Atlee Phillips’ number-one ‘executive action’ man in covert operations over the years . Sanchez Morales is a CIA assassination specialist by the name of the late Atlee .
 David Atlee Phillips, also known as Maurice Bishop, was the man who met with Oswald in Dallas in September 1963 . Phillips went to great extremes to conceal the truth of Oswald’s visit to Mexico City .
 In Chapter 8, The Mastermind, | speculated that there must have been a single person, a project manager, who planned the assassination .
 Staff members in the closing stages of the HSCA investigation in 1976 felt that person was William Harvey . According to Gaeton Fonzi, and supported by CIA documents, the CIA documents say that person is Harvey .
 As I delved deeper into this story, Harvey loomed more and more as a central figure in the story . Harvey's role in this story has become more prominent in recent weeks .
 William King Harvey I went to Washington, D.C., and searched the Assassination Archives, and had Anna Marie search the National Archives . Anna Marie also searched the National archives .
 I went through every book that I could find on the CIA and the JFK assassination, and was able to put together the following sketch of this outlandish and confounding man .
 William Harvey had a long and flamboyant career as a central figure in high-level CIA covert operations . Harvey was a major figure in the CIA's covert operations in the 1960s and '70s . Harvey died in 1994 at the age of 92 .
 Harvey uncovered Guy Burgess and Donald McLean as British agents in Washington, D.C., working for the Soviet Union . Harvey uncovered Burgess and McLean .
 Harvey uncovered Kim Philby as the “third man” when Burgess and McLean defected to the Soviet Union . Harvey also uncovered Kim . Philby was the "third man" when Burgess, McLean and Philby defected from the USSR .
 Harvey was responsible for masterminding the construction of a twenty-five-foot-deep tunnel between West Berlin and East Berlin . Harvey worked in conjunction with British intelligence .
 This tunnel provided access to underground communication lines connecting Moscow with Berlin . This tunnel was used to provide access to communication lines between Moscow and Berlin .
 Harvey had a brilliant photographic mind, an incredible memory for things in which he was involved in . Harvey had an incredible photographic mind .
 Harvey’s briefings would last for hours, all recited from memory of his files . Harvey would recite his files from his files, reciting from memory .
 His capacity for planning and carrying out intricate master schemes of a covert, illegal nature was legendary . His capacity to carry out master schemes was legendary, he said .
 He would frequently place his two guns on his desk or point them at subordinates to make a point . He would often place his guns on the desk or at subordinates .
 Harvey held in his hand a foot-long stiletto in a meeting with Dino Brugion, a CIA photo analyst . Harvey held it in the back of his hand .
 He cleaned his nails with the stiletto and then threw it at a target on his office wall . He then threw the nail at the target on the wall .
 Allen Dulles once described Harvey as a conspirator or a cop, but he didn’t know which . Dulles said he didn't know which of Harvey’s friends or family .
 Harvey took orders from Special Group, which was chaired by General Maxwell Taylor and augmented by Robert Kennedy . Harvey took his orders from the Special Group , chaired by Maxwell Taylor .
 The president’s brother treated Harvey with utter contempt . He browbeat Harvey and his aides relentlessly, he browbeat them relentlessly .
 Harvey was the antithesis of the sleek sophistication of the Ivy League types admired by the Kennedys . Harvey was an anti-Ivy League type, not an Ivy League-educated Ivy League type .
 Kennedy got up and walked out of the room two minutes later . Harvey was still talking when Kennedy walked out .
 Robert Kennedy bypassed Harvey, dealing directly with CIA and anti-Castro operatives . Robert Kennedy took things into his own hands, bypassing Harvey . Harvey was a CIA operative .
 Harvey suggested ominously that the attorney general’s habits were traitorous . Harvey began suggesting ominously . Harvey suggested that Attorney General's habits were betraying . Harvey: "I’m not sure what I’ve done, but I think he’d like
 He was removed from his post as head of Project Mongoose and sent to a much lesser post at CIA station in Rome, Italy . He was dealt the ultimate humiliation by the Kennedys when, in January 1963, he was removed .
 His drinking and repulsiveness got worse, shocking the Rome diplomatic corp. His drinking became worse and his repulsion got worse .
 His relationship with his first wife, who was also an alcoholic, deteriorated . He was also married to another alcoholic, who died in 2008 .
 Harvey would fly into rages, kicking down doors, throwing glasses and card tables or anything else he could get his hands on . Harvey would kick down doors and throw things like glasses, cards and cards .
 William Harvey was a man of extremes: indulgence of alcohol, extreme eating, extreme self-destructive behavior . Harvey was known for his drinking, eating and self-eating habits . Harvey committed suicide at the age of 50 .
 If ever there were someone in government who had the capability and destructive nature to plot the assassination of the president, Harvey would seem to be that man . Harvey would have the capability to plot President Obama's assassination without a major error .
 Before he died in 1976 of a heart attack, he instructed his wife to burn his papers and tell no secrets, to which she has complied . She has complied with his instructions to her .
 Robert Kennedy insulted and humiliated Harvey, then sent him to Rome, ending his career of action and power . Harvey may have felt his very survival was at stake when he was sent to Rome .
 Harvey faced the end of everything he had wanted and worked for if John Kennedy continued in office . Like Lyndon Johnson, J Edgar Hoover, Carlos Marcello, and Jimmy Hoffa, Harvey faced end of all he had worked for .
 Of course, this alone does not mean that Harvey was the mastermind of the Kennedy assassination, but it shows his motives and state of mind .
 Harvey could see to it that the assassination was planned, organized, and pursued to fulfillment . With his knowledge of covert assassination operations, and his relationships with the Mafia and professional terrorists in Europe, Harvey could have seen to it .
 Morales personally controlled mobster Rosselli, a former Army captain seconded to the CIA at the time . He was seen with him and another senior CIA officer, William Harvey, as late as summer 1963 . The agency had supposedly severed its connection with the Mafia .
 The source of this information, Banister’s former secretary, told ... that another visitor to the office was Oswald himself . Oswald himself, according to the former secretary .
 The alleged assassin, she gathered, was involved in ‘undercover’ activity sanctioned by Banister, she said . She gathered that the alleged assassin had been involved in 'undercover' activity .
 CIA officers control a top mafioso, who meets in 1963 with an anti-Castro operative suspected of manipulating—perhaps of setting up— the young man who is supposed to have murdered the President of the United States . The film is based on the book, "The Assass
 It will be useful to refer to Exhibit 21-1, which shows an organization chart for the JM/WAVE variety of sources . The organization chart is based on a chart that I constructed from a Exhibit 21 -1 .
 Simplified Organization Chart for Task Force W, Showing Its Relationship to JM/WAVE and ZR/RIFLE Projects . The organization chart is based on a simplified organization chart .
 Harvey is a prime suspect for being the mastermind of the plot to assassinate John F Kennedy . Harvey is believed to be behind the assassination of JFK .
 Harvey was a drinking buddy and cohort of Johnny Rosselli, a Mafia hit man who worked for Sam Giancana . Harvey was drinking buddy of Johnny Razzazzi, Mafia hitman who worked as a hitman . Harvey also worked with Razzi as a friend and
 He worked with David Sanchez Morales at the CIA’s JM/WAVE station in Miami . He worked for the CIA in Miami.
 David Atlee Phillips worked with David Sanchez Morales over the years in CIA assassination operations . Phillips was active in plots to kill Fidel Castro . Phillips worked for the CIA with Sanchez Morales .
 He was seen in Florida in the summer of 1963 with William Harvey and David Sanchez Morales . Harvey was supposed to be in Rome, Italy, when he was in Rome .
 Ruben Carbajal was a lifetime friend of David Sanchez Morales . He was a longtime friend of Sanchez Morales, who died Wednesday .
 Carbajal and attorney Robert Walton heard Morales’s remark about John Kennedy . Morales' remark about Kennedy was a reference to the slain president .
 He sees Morales as a very patriotic American, who did his duty to protect his country against its enemies . Morales says Morales is a patriotic American . He says Morales was a good man who helped the U.S.
 David Sanchez Morales was number-one action man for David Atlee Phillips’ covert CIA operations . Noel Twyman: David Sanchez is number one of the CIA’s top operatives .
 The top photo was probably taken in 1959 when Morales was 34 years old . Morales was probably 34 when he was a young man .
 Morales worked for William Harvey in Project Mongoose . Morales was close to Johnny Rosselli .
 The bottom photo was taken when Morales was in high school in Phoenix, Arizona . Morales was a member of the Phoenix-area high school band .
 Morales died suddenly of a heart attack in 1978 at the age of 53 . Morales died just after his name was put on a list of people to be questioned by the House Select Committee on Assassinations .
 In Chapter 19, it was conclusively established that Maurice Bishop was a pseudonym for David Atlee Phillips . Later, records reveal that Phillips was on leave at the JM/WAVE station in Miami and didn’t return to the Mexico City station until October .
 Item in my list was dependent on the credibility of Summers’ prime source, Captain Bradley Ayers . Item in this list is dependent on credibility of Ayers, the captain of the team .
 Bob Dorff turned out to be the person who had done the investigative work and who had the ingenuity to put the story together . Dorff was the man behind the story .
 Dorff’s investigation led him to find out more about the case . Dorff's investigation was part of an ongoing investigation into the death of Michael Dorff, who died in 2008 .
 After Anthony Summers published his book Conspiracy in 1980, he received a telephone call from Bradley Ayers . Ayers told him that he had been a U.S. army captain assigned to CIA operations in Florida in 1963 . He would reveal if he could meet personally with Summers .
 Summers, already busy on another book, did not follow up on the lead . Summers is already busy with another book .
 It was not until early 1988 that Dorff investigated Bradley Ayers’ story . Dorff’s story would be investigated by Dorff on the suggestion of Summers . The story was not investigated until 1988 .
 Summers gave Dorff a list of “things to be done” on the JFK assassination, one of which was to contact Captain Bradley Earl Ayers . Dorff: "There are still many things to do"
 Summers did not have Ayers’ address or telephone number but did remember that he was a private investigator living somewhere in Minnesota . Summers does not know Ayers' address or his telephone number .
 Private investigator Joe West tracked down the suspect through a Houston, Texas, private investigator . Within two months he found him through West's private investigator, Joe West .
 Ayers was running a private-detective agency out of Woodbury, Minnesota . Ayers ran a private detective agency . He was arrested in connection with the shooting .
 Dorff found Ayers’ phone number and telephoned him . Dorff had difficulty finding Ayers' phone number after finding it out .
 Ayers was going to be in Los Angeles in about two weeks, he says . Ayers says he'll be back in the U.S. in a few weeks .
 Dorff remembered a book entitled The War That Never Was by Bradley Ayers . Dorff had remembered a war that never Was . Ayers had written a book about the war in Afghanistan .
 Ayers’ account of his experience at the JM/WAVE station in Miami, Florida . The book was published in 1976 .
 Fonzi did not know much about Morales except that he had been in the CIA dirty tricks department . Morales is a former CIA operative who worked for the CIA .
 Morales was chief of operations of JM/WAVE —a very important position, indeed . Neither Fonzi nor the other members of the HSCA staff knew he was in the position . Morales is a former member of the National Security Council staff .
 Oswald had been reported in the company of dark-skinned Latin American men in New Orleans and Dallas . This caught Fonzi’s attention because Oswald was reported to have been seen with dark-skin Latin Americans .
 Dorff added Morales’s name to a list of people he intended to ask Bradley Ayers about when they met . Dorff said Morales was one of the people he wanted to ask about when he met Ayers .
 Dorff learned from Fonzi about a big Indian (in Spanish, “El Indio”) who had been in David Atlee Phillips’ book The Nightwatch . Dorff told me he almost fell out of his chair when he heard this because he had learned
 Phillips wrote of an ‘EI Indio’ who was with him in all of his field operations throughout the years . Phillips: “EIIndio” was with me in every aspect of my life .
 Dorff says Bradley Ayers was telling him that a “Big Indian,’ who was chief of operations at JM/WAVE, was Ayers’ boss . Dorff told me that now Bradley Ayer was telling me that a "Big Indian" was his boss
 This clearly appeared to be a connection between Johnny Rosselli, David Atlee Phillips, and David Morales . David Morales is a member of the cast .
 The HSCA had somehow missed all of this in its investigation, probably because it had run out of time . The investigation was prematurely shut down when it was closed down .
 I questioned Dorff about the believability of Bradley Ayers as a witness . Dorff: "Bradley Ayers is a witness. He is not a witness," Dorff said .
 He told me that in his discussion with Ayers over a period of several months he had come to believe Ayers’ story . He said he believed Ayers' story for several months .
 Ayers' conviction was based on Ayers’ grasp of details of JM/WAVE in 1963 that appeared in Ayres’ book . Ayers had written of Colonel Rosselli and descriptions and pseudonyms of other characters .
 Dorff noted that this was written in 1973 before Ayers could have known the details or gotten the names from available documents or books . Dorff: Ayers was not likely to know the details of the events .
 He was convinced that Ayers was telling the truth . He joined with Ayers in an investigation to track down more information about David Morales .
 Dorff provided Ayers with about $5,000 to partially cover out-of-pocket expenses for Ayers to take a trip to New Mexico . Dorff said Morales died of a heart attack when he was believed to have been in New Mexico when he died .
 Harvey was in the Florida Keys with Morales and Rosselli in the summer of 1963 . Dorff had passed that information on to Anthony Summers, who then reported it in the 1991 paperback edition of Conspiracy .
 Dorff sent me copies of notes he had made during his interview with Ayers which confirmed Ayers’ statements . Dorff also sent copies of the notes he made during the interview .
 Bradley Ayers provided me with a copy of an affidavit signed by him and notarized . Ayers confirmed the real names of the characters in his book, as stated above . The affidavit was signed by Ayers in which he confirmed the names of some of his characters .
 Morales was one of several people who died suddenly when their name was put on congressional investigation lists in that period . Morales died suddenly after his name was placed on the congressional investigation list . Morales' name was on the list when he died suddenly .
 Newly discovered documentary evidence tends to corroborate Bradley Ayers’ statements . The new documentary evidence is new evidence that appears to support Ayers' statements . Morales was arrested and charged with sexual assault .
 The United States Inspector General’s Report stated that William Harvey had met Rosselli in Miami and Los Angeles in February 1963 and again in Washington D.C. in June 1963 .
 Harvey said he had received a telephone call from Rosselli in April 1963 . Harvey also said he received a phone call from the Italian in April 1964 .
 Harvey had been removed from anti-Castro operations in Florida . This occurred after he had informed the Mafia that they would no longer be involved in attempts to kill Castro .
 Voucher—All Chargeable to OPS Expense QJ/WIN/ZR/RIFLE . The reference struck me as very important . Vouchers—All Charges are all charged with the use of a firearm .
 He alleged that an assassination team trained to assassinate Fidel Castro had been turned against President Kennedy . The assassination team was trained to kill Fidel Castro, he said .
 Harvey’s tour of Europe when he interviewed potential assassins for the ZR/RIFLE stable . Harvey's new material included a rich new lode on QJ/WIN, and a visit to Europe .
 Documentary evidence of Harvey being in the Florida Keys in April, 1963 . Harvey was involved in some complicated operations, he says .
 The expense accounts were headed QJ/WIN, and Harvey had been instructed to handle them through himself . Harvey had instructed him to handle expenses through himself. The expense account was headed Q/WIN .
 Between April 13 and April 21, 1963, Harvey was staying at a motel in Plantation Key, Florida, probably in room 22 . Harvey spent at least three days there at the motel . Harvey was probably at least 3 days there .
 During this time, a boat was chartered to go to Islamorada, Florida, and phone calls were made to Las Vegas, Los Angeles, Miami, Perrine, and Indianapolis .
 Also one round-trip plane flight, first class, Miami/Chicago flight, was purchased . Also purchased was a Miami-Chicago first class flight .
 An expense account for this period was filled out, dated April 20, 1963 .
 During this period, there was reimbursement for dinner for three (two unofficial Americans and Harvey) at the Fontainebleau Hotel in Miami .
 ZR/RIFLE/MI was reimbursed for operational hotel rooms at the Eden Roc Hotel in Miami .
 While Harvey was staying in room 22 at the motel in Plantation Key, someone else was staying next door in room 21 . Room 21 listed his address as 56510 Wilshire Boulevard in Los Angeles .
 The dinner at the Fontainebleau Hotel and the rooms at the Eden Roc Hotel struck a familiar note . The dinner was held in the same hotel rooms as the others .
 Sam Giancana and Johnny Rosselli had met with William Harvey in 1961 in what may have been their first meeting . The pair met in 1961 at the Fontainebleau Hotel in which Harvey may have met with them .
 Inasmuch as QJ/WIN and ZR/RIFLE were exclusively equated to assassinations, it looked like an assassination operation . The operation looked like a military assassination operation, but it was not an assassination .
 If nothing else were to be concluded, the expense and effort had been worth it . The cost of the effort and effort was worth it.
 I reasoned that at some point, somewhere, the plotters would have needed to meet to finalize the details . "I reasoned that there would have been a meeting to meet," he said .
 Jean Souetre was reported as having met with anti-Castro Cubans and General Edwin Walker in April 1963 . He also visited anti- Castro training camps in New Orleans during that time period .
 Bob Dorff, Mary Ferrell, and Gaeton Fonzi sent copies of their interpretations . I prepared a memorandum summarizing the above questions and mailed copies to them .
 Mary Ferrell had told me that the way to track down a telephone call made in 1963 is to call the public library in the city, ask for directory service, and then ask them to find the person whose name is listed for the telephone number in the crisscross directory .
 I passed this information to my niece, Lori Miller, whom I had enlisted to do research projects for me . Lori Miller is the niece who has been enlisted to help with research projects .
 The Miami public library had telephone records dating back only to 1973 . Lori found that only one phone number turned up a name . Lori says she found that the library had no records of anyone from 1973 .
 It was a woman by the name of Elaine Briley, which probably had no significance . It was probably a woman who probably had a little significance .
 Bob Dorff pointed out that Wilshire Boulevard addresses did not go as high as 56510 . Dorff: Wilshire addresses did go higher than 56500. Dorff points out that the addresses on Wilshire were not as high .
 I was disappointed, but consoled myself that this did not necessarily negate the importance of the documents . The documents will be published in the U.S. National Library of America .
 At least we had the cities that Harvey had called , all of which could have significance . At least these cities had significance .
 "It showed that Harvey was very busy during this four-day period and was certainly involved in some type of operation that he was coordinating," the president says .
 Without these documents, I would have been dependent solely on the Inspector General’s Report, which had little detail . Without the documents, the inspector general's report would have little detail, he says .
 Dusty Miller exchanged calls with Ruby on August 2 and November 2, 1963 . Miller and Ruby exchanged calls on August 3 and 4, 1963.
 Rosselli had been convicted in a card-cheating scandal at the Friars Club in the early 1970s . The Italian was convicted in the same scandal .
 Friars Club was founded by George Jessell and frequented by Hollywood comedians . The Friars club was founded in 1950s and is now owned by Hollywood stars .
 As another shot in the dark, I called information and got the current number of the Friars Club . The Friars club is located in New York City .
 The last five digits matched the digits of the phone number in Harvey’s expense account . Only the prefix CR was changed to CR .
 It seemed extremely improbable that the last five digits would match in the Crestview exchange . There would be only one CR30850. It seemed very unlikely that it would match .
 I then called the Friars Club and talked to a man named Clifford who was apparently the manager . Clifford is apparently the owner of the club . Clifford was apparently a member of the Friar Club in New York .
 He had no knowledge of what the telephone number for the Friars Club was in 1963 . He indicated he could care less .
 When I pressed him to look in his files, he turned icy and terminated the conversation . The former secretary of state of state turned icy when she asked him to check his files .
 Next I called Pacific Bell in Los Angeles and got a very cooperative operator who wanted to help me solve my problem . The operator was a cooperative operator, helping her solve her problem .
 She checked with her supervisor who told her that they had 1963 numbers in microfiche but would not release them without a court order . She said they would not be able to release the numbers without court orders .
 Harvey was telephoning Johnny Rosselli from the Florida Keys in April 1963 . Harvey was there in a ZR/RIFLE/MI meeting with QOJ/WIN, whose only function was political assassinations .
 Perrine, Florida, is just south of Miami on the Atlantic coast . Next, I checked a map and found that Perrine is located on the Florida coast .
 Islamorada appeared to be one of the principal towns in the Florida Keys . The town is located in the Keys and is located on the Florida island chain .
 Located about halfway down in the Keys, Florida, has a population of about 1500 . Located about half a mile south of Florida Keys, it is located in the state of Florida .
 This, of course, was the region where the CIA had training camps in 1963 for assassination squads . The CIA had a training camp in the region for assassination teams in 1963 .
 Plantation Key is only five miles from Islamorada on the west coast of the Keys . The Keys are located on the Florida coast .
 Bob Dorff received a rare copy of Bradley Ayers’ book, The War That Never Was . He assumed it would have information concerning the locations mentioned in Harvey’s expense accounts .
 Ayers had written about two CIA safe-houses located on Plantation Key . Ayers wrote about the safe-house .
 Years later I got a phone call from Bradley Ayers who was passing through San Diego, and I joined him for lunch at Denny’s near the Del Mar Race Track .
 My guess is that Harvey was staying at the Plantation Yacht Harbor, a motel/marina on the Bay side . The Marina, which, I dimly recall, may have had some mob connections, may also have been mob connections .
 It’s about a 40 minute drive south of the JM/WAVE station in South Dade County .
 The Eden Roc is just north of and in walking distance of the Fontainebleau . It is in the French capital, Paris, and is located in the city of Paris .
 William Harvey and QJ/WIN were in the Florida Keys and probably working on some sort of assassination operation in April 1963 . Harvey and WIN were in Florida Keys working on an assassination operation .
 It seemed that they were involved in this with Johnny Rosselli and possibly David Morales . It was also possible that David Morales was involved in the incident .
 Bradley Ayers said Harvey Harvey was meeting in the Florida Keys with Morales and Rosselli in the summer of 1963 . Bob Dorff said he knew no one until now had ever produced documents that would confirm Ayers' account .
 Dorff said Ayers may have been mistaken about the summer and he said it was possible . Dorff also said it is possible that Ayers could be mistaken for the summer .
 Sam Giancana, Santo Trafficante, and Johnny Rosselli had met in the Fontainebleau on occasions . The three men had a history of meeting up with each other in the hotel .
 Hoffa’s man, Dusty Miller, who lived in Chicago, called Jack Ruby in Dallas from the Eden Roc Hotel on November 8, 1963 in the midst of other phone calls between Jack Ruby and mafioso hit men, only two weeks before the assassination .
 The pattern of Harvey’s phone calls to Las Vegas and to the Friars Club in Los Angeles, his meetings in mob hangouts in Florida, and his receiving a visitor from Chicago, suggested Mafia . The pattern was similar to the pattern of phone calls from Las Vegas to Los
 Harvey was coordinating a very important project with mafiosi and QJ/WIN of the French Connection . Harvey was involved in the project, which he was believed to be a major project .
 Jean Souetre (of the radical right-wing OAS) was in New Orleans in anti-Castro training camps in April 1963, and then later later met with General Walker in Dallas in that same period . The report by the Frenchman, Le Cavalier, that Jean Sou
 I pondered whether I should put the arcane detail about the telephone numbers in the book, and decided that I should . The book is published by Simon Cowell, a former journalist from New York .
 Perhaps, someday, someone who reads this might know the people identified with these phone numbers and cities . The names of these people and cities can be found in the book .
 I also hoped that more information would emerge as my research progressed . "I hope more information and clarity would emerge," she said .
 In June 1995, I had the opportunity to talk with an attorney in Phoenix, Arizona, by the name of Robert Walton, who knew David Morales well . David Morales was a CIA Executive Action Man .
 Walton was Morales’s attorney in the 1970s . Walton was introduced to Morales by Ruben Carbajal, who was Morales's life-time good friend .
 Walton had not talked with anyone about Morales until years after Morales had died . Walton felt compelled to tell what he knew that might relate to the JFK assassination . Walton told me that because of attorney-client .
 He first told this story to Bradley Ayers and later to Gaeton Fonzi who reported it in his book, 1994 .
 At the time of the Kennedy assassination, he was thirty-eight years old and was a seasoned veteran in CIA covert operations . He was an experienced CIA veteran .
 By his own account , he participated over the years in CIA assassination operations in South America, Vietnam, Bolivia, Chile, and other places .
 Ruben Carbajal remembers in high school when Morales single-handedly and coolly took on a small gang of street bullies who had harassed him . Morales dispatched all of the bullies in quick succession .
 Morales says he volunteered to join the Navy but was turned down . He attended college at Arizona State, USC, and UCLA over the next two years . Morales is a member of the U.S. Navy .
 Shortly thereafter, he was assigned to the CIA, underwent special training, and reported as a “political officer” for the State Department in Caracas, Venezuela . Shortly thereafter , he became a CIA officer . He was assigned as a political officer .
 Morales worked with David Atlee Phillips out of the American embassy in Havana from 1958 to 1960 . Morales also worked with Phillips in Havana out of 1958-1960 .
 Morales was part of the Bay of Pigs invasion, then joined Phillips at JM/WAVE in Miami . After Castro took over, Morales moved with Phillips to operations in Vietnam and Laos . Morales was then sent to operations with Phillips in Miami and Vietnam .
 Morales was part of the infamous Phoenix Program in which perhaps 23,000 (estimates vary widely, up to 80,000) Vietnamese civilians were systematically assassinated in a CIA program to fight the North Vietnamese, “fire with fire,” hoping that they would kill a few Viet
 Morales had an office in the Joint Chiefs of Staff in the Pentagon before he retired . Morales rose high in rank while assigned to the CIA, according to Carbajal .
 Morales says Morales had a parking spot in the front row with the top brass with his name on it . Morales said Morales had parking spot with top brass in front row . Morales: Morales has a parking space in front of the crowd .
 A long line of high-ranking military brass and well-dressed, important looking people in civilian clothes wearing sunglasses flew in from all over the country to attend his funeral services in Phoenix . The funeral service was held in Phoenix, Arizona .
 When Morales’s body was interred in the small town of Wilcox, Arizona, the line of mourners extended all the way through town, amazing the local citizens . Morales' body was buried in Wilcox .
 Morales said he enjoyed polishing off a complete bottle of scotch . Carbajal said Morales was not an alcoholic but that he enjoyed drinking a full bottle .
 Morales had gained the reputation in the agency of having a loose tongue when drinking . Morales is known for having a 'loose tongue' when drinking.
 In Blond Ghost David Corn wrote that “Morales hated communists, and years later bragged to a colleague how he had once in South America parachuted out of an airplane with men he suspected of being communists .
 Morales sabotaged the parachute packs of the Reds, the story went . Morales sabotages parachute packs before they all leaped, according to the story .
 Morales’s bad temper was confirmed by Carbajal, who said he did not display that temper much, except when doing a job . Morales”s bad tempered was confirmed, but Carbajaal said that Morales did not show that much of it .
 Carbajal said then you had better look out if you didn’t do what Morales wanted . Carbajala said that then you would be a target for Morales .
 He also knew David Atlee Phillips at the time Phillips was a CIA agent posing as a consultant in Havana . Phillips was an undercover CIA agent in Havana posing as consultant in Cuba .
 Smith asked Smith if Phillips had worked with Morales in Cuba in those years . Smith said Phillips had indeed worked with David Morales in that time . Smith: Phillips had been working with Morales .
 In passing, I mentioned that, based only on having seen photographs of David Atlee Phillips, I had difficulty imagining that he could have been the type of person who would plot to kill the president of the United States .
 He became close friends with Johnny Rosselli when they were together at JM/WAVE working on plots to assassinate Fidel Castro . The pair would head off to favorite watering holes for drinking bouts .
 Bob Dorff brings up significant bit of information about Bob's life . Bob's story was brought to light by Bob D. Dorff . Bob D'Orff: "Bob's life is going to be a very interesting story"
 Morales would frequently travel from the JM/WAVE station in Miami to Mexico City . He said that in discussions with Bradley Ayers, Ayres had mentioned that Morales would often travel from Miami to the city .
 The significance is that David Atlee Phillips was stationed primarily in Mexico City . Mexico City was the center for much intrigue in the JFK assassination .
 My first conversation with Morales’s attorney, Robert Walton, was a telephone call on June 6, 1995 . They were a phone call from 1995 to 1995, Walton says .
 Walton recounted Morales’s astonishing words about political assassinations . Walton told of other strong indications of Morales's personal involvement in the JFK assassination . Walton also recounted Morales's astonishing words .
 Walton represented both Ruben Carbajal and David Sanchez Morales . He was at one time in a commodities business with them . He represented both of them in commodities business .
 Walton's relationship with Morales was first reported in Gaeton Fonzi’s book The Last Investigation . Walton and Morales were married at the time of the time .
 "The purpose of my call was to confirm that material and learn what else I could," he said . "I'm glad to see that information," he added .
 Only three people heard that remark: myself, my wife, and Ruben Carbajal . Ruben's wife, Ruben, was the only person to hear that remark . Only three other people heard it: Ruben and his wife .
 It took place in a hotel room at the Dupont Plaza, and we were the only three there . It was in a room with only three other people .
 It happened in 1973 and I had just had a coronary and I’d taken some time off. It happened after I'd had a heart attack in 1973 . It was the first time I had taken time off from playing football .
 David’s father had run off on his family and so he spent most of his time over at the Carbajal house as a kid . David's father ran off on him and his father died in 2008 .
 David and Ruben were going to set up in Guadalajara while I took a year off from the law to get my heart working right again . So we were back there with them , Ruben and I, to meet David and discuss the two of us going into a commodities
 As part of it he’d wanted to know who I was, right down to where I was baptized, so that he would feel safe about providing information to either Ruben or me, and know that he could trust me to the same extent that he trusted Ruben .
 Ruben was involved in supplying arms to Qaddafi and is now doing three life sentences . Ruben met a lot of people including one that...his name slips me right now...he was later involved with supplying arms for Qaddafi . David met a number of people through David .
 "We tried it for about one year, didn’t make any money. But that was for about a one-year," he said . "That was for a one year...we tried it," he added .
 We chased a lot of rumors and most of them David would check out and tell us that they didn’t exist . David would tell us they didn't exist. David would then check them out and say they were false .
 "We could never get them closed. And the two or three that did exist, for one reason or another, we could never close them up," he says .
 David retained me for legal work on two or three occasions, so I felt I had an attorney/client obligation not to reveal anything that he told me . After that David retained him for legal . He retained me .
 He just came off the bed when I mentioned that I'd done some volunteer work for Jack Kennedy in 1958, he said . He said he'd been working for the Kennedy family .
 I said no need to correct it, but I did not introduce Jack Kennedy for a speech at Harvard. I said there was no need for it to be corrected .
 I called around and got a hold of his entourage and scheduled him into Harvard stadium to make his first address to the American public . What I did do was come up with the idea that this fellow who had just liberated his country and was going to be speaking at the United Nations ought
 'We did end up being pretty close friends. And somehow, during the course of the evening, that was all overcome,' she said . 'I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm pretty sure we're close friends,' she added .
 Gaeton would reach into his pocket and pull out a little black plastic card, a little smaller than your typical credit card, just maybe slightly smaller . The card was mentioned in Gaeton's book .
 It just had a few gold numbers or letters on it—no insignia or anything else else . And it just had to be a few letters or numbers on it .
 I still have yet to find anybody else that was in the company at that time that could tell me what it was and how come it worked so well for him. And I'm not sure what it is, but I'm glad to have found out .
 John Kennedy and Robert Kennedy ceramic deal that you can hang on the wall . Someone had given him, way back in the ’60s, a Screencraft, West Yarmouth on Cape Cod, a . hand-decorated, John Kennedy .
 I remember that one time I had that somewhere in my office and he saw it and he offered to take it out and break it for me . He offered to help break it up for me, but it was too late for him to do it .
 Bob Greene: I thought he was getting close to also talking about Martin Luther King but I didn’t press it, and it just drifted away .
 "I always wondered in my mind whether he was about to tell me that he had an involvement there also, or not," she says of her husband .
 He told me, you know, for his lifetime, he could just see in his mind, all the people that he knew just being butchered, and he was up there in the air and couldn’t do anything about it . He said, "He told me for
 I think there were other instances beyond that that he never conveyed to me. "I think there was other instances," he said .
 You're right, it was a very deep, in a sense almost uncharacteristic, hatred. You’re right, I said. It was very deep hatred. It’s not a very common hatred, but it was deep hatred, he said .
 "I could think back, on most of the other people, he talked of them in kind of a detached form. Because if I could think . He talked of most of those other people ... he talked about them in sort of detached form," she says .
 "If you put it in the context of everything else, in a total story, it has significance" "It has significance," says CNN's John Sutter . "It's not a big thing, but it's a big story"
 David worked with the Bolivians to track down Che Guevara and that he was there when they made the arrest . He ordered them to chop his head off and then he kicked it as far as he could so there would be no stories that he’d been caught
 He also told us stories that night about having his wife along when he did an assignment in Venezuela and killed the leader of Venezuela . He also said that having his . wife along almost compromised things and that they almost got caught .
 That same night he told us he had killed two ranking Vietnamese generals who were not cooperative, and the leader of Laos . That night he also told us that he killed two of the leaders of Vietnam and Laos .
 I can tell you when, because I relate it to when I had a coronary in November of ’72...this was spring of ‘73 . This was Spring of '73, when I was having a coronary .
 "I had represented him later on some legal matters including a DUI (driving under the influence of alcohol) and that’s why I didn’t feel I could say anything, at least while he was alive," he said .
 He was part Mexican, part Yaki , but he said, “I’m worried about my own.” He said he was worried about his own life .
 As I reviewed the foregoing conversation, I was struck by its historical importance . The conversation was an important part of the conversation .
 Morales’s direct involvement in CIA political assassinations, not behind-the-scenes manipulations, as reported by the Church Committee . Here we have Morales' own words, recounted by his attorney, recounting the events .
 Morales's perhaps unwitting confession of either his involvement, or the CIA’s involvement, in the JFK assassination . Morales also confesses to having been involved in the assassination .
 It is confessional and state-of-mind testimony of the words of the deceased suspect himself from a most credible witness . It is a confessional state of mind testimony from the suspect .
 I noted the parallel of Morales’s story to that of Jim Lance concerning the Bay of Pigs . I noted that Morales's story was similar to Lance's story about the Bay .
 Morales was in the air above the Bay of Pigs invasion helplessly watching his friends on the beach being slaughtered . Morales thought John Kennedy was a traitorous coward. Morales thought, "John Kennedy was an idiot"
 At the same time, Jim Lance was watching the slaughter on the beach from a ship offshore . Lance was on the ship at the time of the slaughter .
 Kennedy and McNamara were in the White House making a decision which history would never fully understand . And John Kennedy and Robert McNamara made a decision that history never fully understood .
 "I reflected that this is the material from which great tragedies are born," he said . He reflected on the material that makes great tragedies come from tragedy .
 Morales’s father deserted his family when Morales was very young . Morales's father abandoned Morales' family when he was a child . Morales' father also deserted Morales' parents when Morales' mother was a teenager .
 Morales’s rage and murderous nature had nothing to do with his murderous nature . I wondered if that had anything to do to Morales's rage and murder .
 Carbajal told Bob Dorff an amazing story in the January 1995 taped interview . The interview was taped in 1995 and aired in 1995 .
 Morales told Carbajal that he took $2 million from the $10 million that had been funded by the CIA for the Allende assassination . Morales took the money from the CIA, which had funded the assassination . Carbaja said Morales took it for himself .
 I have often wondered if CIA agents would have been able to resist pocketing some of the cash that flowed through their hands in CIA covert operations, or in drug-running partnerships with the Mafia .
 Carbajal said he used code letters AID to get in contact with Morales in the late 1960s . He would call a number in San Francisco, use the code letters to get a message to Morales .
 Carbajal made a point of saying that Morales was in special forces at that time . Morales was a member of the special forces, Carbajala said .
 Morales was connected to the Army’s covert assassination operations through their special forces . Morales was killed by the Army's special forces in 2009 . Morales' death was the result of an assassination attempt .
 Ruben Carbajal’s friend, Frankie, said he thought highly of Morales . Morales' friend said he was impressed by Morales' work in the Senate .
 I found that Summers’ source for Item 3 of my list was buried in an endnote in the back of his book Conspiracy .
 Rosselli has been identified as taking an active part in anti-Castro military operations in spring 1963 . He was identified as having taken part in an active role in the Cuban military .
 An exile training camp was being established in southern Louisiana at that time and with financing and support from organized crime . The camp was set up with financing, support from organised crime .
 New Orleans would have been a natural enough place to find John Rosselli . New Orleans was a natural place for him to be found, he says .
 Jim Braden, California Mafioso, also associated with right-wing elements in Los Angeles—the Minutemen . Braden is a former member of the Minuteman, a group of right-leaning elements in the city .
 Braden was picked up by the Dallas police on November 22, 1963, just after the assassination, when he was leaving the Dal-Tex building .
 Braden said he had gone in the building to make a telephone call from a pay phone . Braden says he was trying to use the pay phone when he was attacked .
 The linkage of Braden to New Orleans goes back to 1963 when parole records show that Braden made several trips to the city .
 Oswald was also identified by Delphine Roberts, Banister's secretary, as having been at Banister’s office on several occasions . And, as previously noted, he also was identified by Roberts, who was also a secretary .
 This was reported by Charles Rappleye and Ed Becker in their book American Mafioso . It was based on FBI reports uncovered by a federal investigator thirteen years after Rosselli’s murder .
 This investigator relayed the contents of his investigations, on a confidential basis, to Washington, D.C. reporter Scott Malone .
 There are compounding linkages between Harvey, French Corsican assassins, French OAS terrorists, Rosselli, Phillips, Morales, Banister and Banister . All occurred at times when the planning of the Kennedy assassination would likely have been taking place .
 Time and again, evidence leads to the same menagerie of assorted political fanatics, deviates, and murderers . All operating plausibly under the protection and cover of Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover, says author .
 Follow-up Interviews with Ruben Carbajal and Robert Walton . I decided that I should take a trip to Phoenix, Arizona, and talk with them myself .
 The opportunity to meet and talk with these two men was too important to miss, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 On the flight from San Diego to Phoenix on July 19, 1995, I had a sense of excitement . On the plane to Phoenix: "I was flying with excitement. I was excited to see my daughter's dream dream."
 Ruben Carbajal was due to meet with Ruben at 2m. that day in Phoenix at El Molino, his Mexican restaurant . Ruben has been accused of corruption in the past but says he is not corrupt .
 I checked into the Doubletree Suites near the Phoenix airport near the airport and took a taxi to the El Molino . I checked in with a doubletree Suite near the hotel .
 Ruben's restaurant turned out to be a bar with Ruben’s memorabilia posted behind it, and a few tables . Ruben is the son of Ruben, who died in 2010 .
 There were eight or ten patrons drinking at the bar or enjoying beer and Mexican food at the tables .
 Carbajal was there, sitting at one of the tables, talking with some friends . Carbajala was sitting with friends at the tables .
 He was surprisingly spry and young-looking and greeted me with enthusiasm . He said: 'I was surprised to be greeted with enthusiasm and enthusiasm'
 We sat down at one of the tables, ordered beers, and started the interview . It was the first time we sat down to talk to the author of the book .
 We talked for more than two hours with a tape recorder running in the noisy surroundings . We talk for over two hours .
 "That evening at the Doubletree I listened to the tape and it was completely garbled. That evening at . The Doubletree," she said, "I listened to . The tape and the tape was completely gaffe-ridden"
 Ruben and Ruben were having breakfast at the end of the night before the show . Ruben was the first to meet Ruben for the first time in a row . The pair had been together for more than a decade . The show is set to be shown in London on BBC
 He said that he found this along with $8 million more, $10 million total . He said he found the money along with an additional $8 more .
 President Nixon authorized $10 million for Nixon administration . Nixon had authorized the money, but it was never authorized by Nixon .
 I didn't even know Nixon had authorized $10 million until you told me. Yousee, I didn’t even know . Nixon had OK'd $10M until you tell me .
 "Over the next years she disappeared for a while, went back to Boston, I guess," she says . "She disappeared for years, went home, I'm not sure what happened," she adds .
 The CIA told her not to get an autopsy, she says . She says she thought that she had said to the effect that she didn't want to have an autopsy . But she says she was told not by the CIA .
 She was very rebellious about it. Well, I think they might have told her that, but I wasn’t a witness to that,’s not a witness .
 She's not the type to maneuver around unless there’s some force behind it, she says . She's the type of force behind her, she's not going to move around .
 I mean I can read people pretty good, you know, and that, to me, was my opinion . "That, to be my opinion," she said. "That's what I really mean."
 I understand she used to work for Morales in Germany, so she was part of the military establishment . She used to be part of Morales' military establishment in Germany . She also worked for Morales' government in the 1990s .
 "Terrorism took over Uruguay, you know, for the government. But for about 3 1/2 or 4 years, the terrorists took over," he says . "The terrorists took control of Uruguay," he adds .
 'They all moved into these complexes, you know, apartments, fancy apartments. So when they got all settled down thinking they were high on life, living free, nobody’s gonna touch them, they all moved . So when . they got . settled down, they moved into
 The CIA, which is where Didi was the leader, took over and, like I said, they went from door to door, knocking on doors. That’s when the CIA took over, and that's when Didi took over the CIA .
 "They knocked on the door and wiped everybody out. For example, this one tenant lived here, they knocked on a door," says CNN.com's Rob Greene .
 All those things, nobody writes about them, nobody knows anything about them. Nobody knows anything of them. "Nobody knows anything," he says. "All those things" are "a mystery"
 We're thinking that everything is handed down, like everything is copacetic, you know, here it is. We’re thinking that . Everything is okay. Here it is, it's OK, it’s OK. It's OK .
 They forgot who all the people were who worked to put it together, save other people’s asses, you know. ‘They forgot who . All the people who helped put together, saved other people's asses,’ he said .
 Bob Walton could tell you more about that, because he remembers it better than I do . "Bob Walton" could tell more than I know, but he could be better than me .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com photos of the latest iReport .
 "You wouldn’t make a statement like that unless you knew what was behind it or knew enough about it, you know, that you could put the finger on somebody"
 "How in the hell would you make a statement like that. That’s my way of thinking," he said . "I’m not sure what I would say," he added .
 Walton mentioned Morales told him, he thinks it was on that same trip . Walton mentioned that Morales said to him, "I think it's on the same trip" He thinks Morales told Walton about the trip .
 Walton inferred that since he said he was also in L.A. when Bobby Kennedy got his, that perhaps he was in Dallas when Jack Kennedy was assassinated . Walton said that since Bobby Kennedy was in the U.S. when he got his shot, perhaps he may have been in
 Morales didn't say specifically that he was in Dallas, Walton said . Walton was clear that Morales didn’t say that he’d be in Dallas .
 There were 8 million people in Los Angeles at that time. Well, you know, there were 8million people in the city .
 J was in Los Angeles when Bobby Kennedy got his . Bobby Kennedy was in LA when he got his shot .
 "When his brother made him the general attorney of the goddamn nation, he had never had one court trial," he said . "He's never had a court trial. He had never been in court trial."
 "I haven't forgotten, when he said he told the blacks to take whatever you want, man, it’s yours. And then, I haven’t forgotten,” he said, “when he said . He said the blacks should take whatever they want
 When a person makes a statement, there’s a lot of leeway which way you want to go with it, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "You’ve got a lot to do with it," he says .
 Bob Walton probably told you the same thing; he was definitely just one way . Bob Walton was definitely one way of dealing with the world .
 I played golf and tennis for about five years and just finally couldn't take it any longer, so I got into writing this book . I played for five years, and finally couldn’t take it all longer,’s the author .
 I’ve got to check out this mine there you know, and then we’ll see and talk to my people there, the government officials there, get that squared away . We’re going to go to the mine mine there, and I got to talk to
 Every time I'm down in Mexico about ten days I’ve got to come back over here. Every time he’s down there, I've got to go back over . I'm in Mexico for about 10 days a week, he says .
 "It takes me about another week putting things together, or maybe two weeks, then we head that way again," he says . "I'm not sure how long it will be," he adds .
 The information became known only to a committee of committee members . That is when the information becomes known to the public .
 It is extremely unlikely Carbajal would have known about it at the time of the interview in 1995 .
 In his judgment, this makes Carbajal’s story about Morales very authentic, he says . In the judgment, it's not surprising that Morales was assassinated .
 Carbajal seems only to take it to mean that ‘we were the CIA,’ not necessarily Morales himself . But he seems to take that to mean "we was the CIA," not Morales himself.
 "It goes beyond anything revealed in any government documents or the Church Committee Report," he says . "It's not only revealed in government documents, but it goes beyond that," he adds .
 Its linkage to the French Connection via CIA’s Dan Mitrione and Christian David is very important . The link between Christian David and the CIA is important to the CIA .
 CIA operatives handling cash for illegal operations must have skimmed some of it for themselves . Many CIA operatives handled cash for CIA illegal operations . CIA operatives who were handling cash must skim some of the money .
 The evening before the breakfast interview with Ruben Carbajal, I had dinner with Robert Walton at the Doubletree during which I taped our conversation . Robert Walton: "The evening before this interview, we had dinner in a Doubletree hotel"
 I started taping after I asked him about Morales’s seeming cold-bloodedness in the assassinations in which he had been involved, he says . Morales: “I’m not sure if I’ve been involved in any of these assassinations,�
 He'd just say, “T’m the one that was working down in Asuncion and I was monitoring where Che Guevara was and I had the Bolivian police arrest him.”
 When I told them to shoot him, I said wait a minute and I asked them to chop his head off and I kicked it thirty yards, fifty yards, whatever, so there would be no stories about we only wounded him and he was still alive somewhere . "I kicked it 30
 He'd tell one story about assassinating the president of Venezuela, I think it was the president . About the only time he was ever human about it, he’d say one of those stories .
 He said he made the mistake of having his wife along and he almost didn’t get them out because she created a real drag . He said, “She created a drag. She created a really drag”
 There were no details, but he also talked about wiping out Chile, the head of Laos, Vietnamese generals . There were also talk of wiping out heads of Chile, Laos, Vietnam generals .
 "I had to wonder if he was pulling my leg and kind of telling stories like a nineteenth century pirate might tell, you know, he’s got a peg leg," he says of Stevenson . "Robert Lewis Stevenson was going to make a mint writing about. I had to
 Hemingway’s short story The Killers, there wasn’t a lot of flowery description . There wasn't any talk about hesitation or argument, he says . Hemingways’ short story ‘The Killers’ is a classic of Heming
 Ruben told me about how Morales would wipe out political dissidents that had taken over the government and restore another government . They would just go in and mow down everybody with machine guns .
 Ruben says there was a coup in Uruguay and then we didn’t like the government and so our CIA, according to Ruben, went in and killed everybody . Ruben: "Apparently there was an overthrow of the Uruguayan government, and just to replace the government
 He also spent a lot of time explaining details on the Bay of Pigs, he says . "I just wish I had a tape recorder and I didn’t," he writes .
 After Eisenhower administration, getting whatever they wanted without any hassle, somebody said no. After the Eisenhower administration . Someone said no . After Eisenhower, somebody else said yes. After Eisenhower .
 You know there's a gross misunderstanding about Kennedy’s role in the Bay of Pigs . Kennedy was assassinated in 1961 . He was killed by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 It was a misperception of the men there like Morales, Morales; and I’ve talked to another man who was a frogman at the Bay of Pigs, down on the beach . Morales was a member of the original crew, Morales says .
 Those people thought Kennedy had betrayed them when actually Kennedy had never promised the air cover in the first place . Kennedy never promised them air cover .
 He had promised to let these dozen or so B-26 bombers do a job and they screwed up, he says . He says he was disappointed with the outcome of the mission .
 Kennedy turned down the offer to use Navy strike planes off the carriers . The U.S. didn't get all of Castro’s planes .
 I got the impression that the appearance of a couple of old P-51 mustangs and a Catalina PBY were a total shock to the attack forces that he had organized . I got an impression, and it may have been from Gaeton’s book, I don�
 Castro had the vintage World War II aircraft . They didn’t realize that Castro even had these vintage planes . Castro was the pilot of the aircraft .
 Castro really had a small air force, but they didn't take out three fighter planes, he says . "Those fighter planes really played havoc," he says of Castro's air force .
 "If we had gotten those three, the disaster probably would have never happened," says President Obama . "We're not going to be able to recover from the disaster," says Obama .
 I was fortunate to get an interview with Robert McNamara on this about a year ago . I was lucky to get a chance to talk about it with McNamara about it .
 I think I have it pretty well documented exactly what happened from the point of view of the men on the beach and men like Morales; and . McNamara and . Kennedy in the White House .
 "There are two different perceptions of what’s going on. And you have a sort of drama where there are two . Different perceptions" of what's going on, he says .
 He caught himself in a position untenable in that he had made an issue of this in defeating Nixon in the election . But then, he caught himself . He had made a issue of Castro .
 President Obama was presented with this plan, and politically he couldn’t turn it down, he would have been finished, politically. So the minute he got elected, he was . So the moment he got . got elected he was presented . with the plan, he said .
 The plan was misconceived by the CIA to begin with, and Kennedy changes the beachhead site at the last minute over to another site . So he goes ahead with this stupid plan, and the Kennedys are young green, he says .
 Kennedy and McNamara "wouldn't do it" if they had to authorize escalation in order to win, he says . "They wouldn’t do it," he adds .
 Morales and people like him there on the beach saw of Kennedy's betrayal . That’s the betrayal that Morales, like him, said of Kennedy, Morales . Morales: "That's the betrayal of people like me"
 It's not that Kennedy was a coward, it’s just that he was smart enough to not let this thing escalate to where we would have had to invade, he says . Kennedy was smart, not a coward .
 Idon’t care, but just for the significance of it being totally accurate . Idon: “I’m not sure why I said that, but it’s important that it was accurate.”
 "We were just business partners. So if anybody asks me later how come you revealed whatever David told me later," she says .
 I guess, in a sense, somewhat like the position I've taken in the last ten years because of all the heart problems I’ve had, I want to leave a mark . I had...t was kind of a testy evening...because I guess ...I want to
 "This man had that same feeling back in the early 70s," he said . "He really felt that he was doing the right thing for this country," he added .
 In his own mind, he really thought that he was Zorro. Not only the Castro’s but the Russians, the corrupt people within the turmoil in Vietnam and, in his own . Vietnam, Vietnam .
 "I don’t think he ever considered himself to be a hit man. That he was getting rid of the cancer within the organization," he said . "I think he never considered himself a hitman," he added .
 I got the impression that on a lot of these things he’d be hiding down the fifth level in some consulate in Asuncion or whatever. He’s been hiding in the fifth-level of the building, he said . He said: “I got the
 Alfred Hitchcock had a great half-hour show back in the late ’50s, where I can still see his face, the British actor, but he’s taking a trip around the world . Alfred Hitchcock was a British actor and British actor .
 He'd done what he'd done was steal money, do his five years in jail, and then when he got out he'd dug up the money . What he’d done was stealing money, then digging it up, he said .
 With the interest on the bond notes, he was able to take a trip around the world . The interest on bond notes allowed him to travel the world with the money .
 His enjoyment was more at influencing the system in his own mind, seeing that right prevailed over wrong, which was communism or any kind of government that was alien to our U.S. He said he didn't want to see any government that's "alien to our United States"
 When he told me, “We got that son of a bitch,” he said he was in Dallas. “He told me he was going to Dallas. It was Dallas. When he said, ‘We got . That son of the bitch”
 I doubt very much that he personally pulled the trigger or anything else, but he was there, he helped organize it, he said . "He was there," he said, "but he was also there, helping organize it. He was there"
 Morales felt betrayed by his father who abandoned the family and then he admires Kennedy and gets betrayed by the father of his country . Well, you know, you can see where a person feels betrayed by a person that feels betrayed .
 "I was just trying to think, how can a man get this murderous nature and how could any man who considers himself a patriot become involved to kill the president of the United States. How could any . consider himself a patriotic become involved? "I'm trying to find out how can
 Thad one client that reminded me a lot of what I thought David might be. Thad reminded me of what he might be . Thad was one of the clients I thought Thad might be like David, David .
 I found out only because I was representing him in an accident case and I had to get his medical records from the military . "I found out about it only because he was representing me in a case," she says . She says he was in the military when he died .
 He challenged the officer a second time and they gave him a psychological dismissal for the good of the service . He came out and challenged the same officer again and was given psychological dismissal . The officer was given the psychological dismissal after a second challenge .
 I wasn’t aware of that until we were trying to settle the medical case and I get his military records . I wasn't aware of it until I got his medical records, he said . The case was settled, he says .
 He showed up with a cane and he started trying to beat me with it, he says . He was hitting me with the cane...he was hitting him with it . He shows up with cane and starts hitting him in the face .
 "He had two or three more incidents that I reluctantly represented him in. He had a few more incidents," he said .
 He wanted to be a big shot but he also felt that the people who were giving him the orders were really no better than he was . He said he felt that he was being given the orders but was not better than anyone else .
 I don't know how you would have felt or how I would have . I don’t know how it would have been if we’d have had fathers just run out and abandon the family .
 In those days we didn’t have the word dysfunctional, which we have now. Well, hey, in those days . Well, Hey, in . Those days . We didn't have the . word dysfunctional. Well . We have now a dysfunctional family .
 Simpson's father turned out to be a homosexual and abandoned the family or just left, I guess. The Simpson thing is the same thing as the Simpson thing . "I guess it's like a homosexual thing where his father left the family"
 You and I would have had difficulty, I know, in even imagining what that might do to us if we had fathers like that . We would have been happier to have a father like that, but we can't imagine it .
 "He had his faults and I had a lot of problems with him, but basically he was an honorable man who stuck with the family," she says . "Basically he was basically a honorable man," she adds .
 "I think it could make a permanent, deep scar psychologically in a person," says author . "Even though they may never express it, ever, it may come out in various ways," she says .
 "My time with David, even his adult life, isn’t one hundredth as much as the time that Ruben had with him," she says . Ruben's life was "one hundredth" as much of David's life as Ruben’s, she
 I might have been with David a total of a dozen or fifteen times, whereas during that same period of time, Ruben probably saw him thirty or forty or fifty times . Ruben saw him 30 or 40 or 50 times during that time, David says .
 David and Ruben didn't have a one-on-one friendship like Ruben had with David . Ruben's friendship with David was unlike David's with Ruben. Ruben and David didn't share the same friendship .
 In fact, it’s unfortunate, but in my adult life, I haven’t had but maybe one or two really good one-on-one relationships and both of them are dead now, he says . He says it's unfortunate that in his adult life he hasn
 You realize as you get older that they’re only silver and the old ones are gold, but there just isn’t that much silver out there . You realize that they're only silver, and you realize that there's only silver .
 Morales is the subject of a new book on Morales' life . Morales is a former journalist and author of a book about Morales' work .
 "For some reason David and these Communists were going to parachute out of an airplane, they’re . They were down in South America and there were these Communists," he says .
 David sabotages their parachutes and then they all jump out of the airplane . As they’re all falling down, these guys pull their cord and nothing happens . David jeers at them on the way down and then pulls his parachute cord and is fine .
 "He had an amazing ability to rationalize that what he was doing was for the benefit of everybody," he said . "He was an amazing leader," he added .
 "I don’t want to beat that horse dead, but that one night we were talking was over a lot of scotch," he says . The two or three conversations he had with him over the next 2 or 3 years where he really opened up was because he�
 "He enjoyed being on the borderline of being baracho and staying on his feet and staying in the conversation. He enjoyed being able to stay on the feet," he said .
 He did tell me that what he worried about was that some of the other people in his organization that he was going to tell people that he shouldn't be telling people that they shouldn't tell people .
 "I thought these stories maybe had materialized one at a time over a period of years," she says . "These stories were materialized at the beginning of the story," she adds .
 "Once ina while there would be a reference back to... in my case, he talked about ... South America," he says . "More about South America than Vietnam"
 I don't know to what extent he participated in finding Che, whether he just was summoned after they had him tied up with his hands behind his back or whether he was just there at the final moment . You talk about “I told them to chop Che Guevara�
 If Morales was in Dallas and if he was involved in all this, this brings the CIA into it all the way; not just a rogue warrior . You know, if Morales was involved, he could be a CIA operative, not a rogue .
 I never got the impression that, even on the Che Guevara thing, that it was anything he did, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm not sure what happened to Che," he says .
 He was working Asuncion and spying from behind a desk and waiting until the Bolivians were given the information of how to pick him up . Then he went and witnessed the final act .
 In his theory, he was a field director of an assassination team in Dallas, Texas . He says he was the field director for a Dallas-based assassination team .
 He would be directing the team and coordinating the various activities going on . He would also be coordinating the other activities going to the event .
 I started my book thinking the CIA was the principle force behind killing Kennedy, but I went away from that over the years . I started thinking that CIA was behind JFK's killing, I went from that to that, I think it was the CIA's .
 It almost developed to a firm belief that they were set up, that they really didn’t kill Kennedy, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I almost believe that they are set up"
 "Rogue agents may have been seduced by the Mafia or some right-wing extremists," agent says . "Maybe they had one or two rogue agents that got ... seduced"
 Ruben Ruben says he was a brigadier general at the Joint Chiefs of Staff in the Pentagon . Ruben: "I'm not going to let it slide down, but I'm going to do it" Ruben is a retired Army veteran who served in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 "I was only back there with Ruben I think a maximum of three times. See, I was only . I think I was back there . Ruben," she said .
 "I’ve been in his apartment over on the Arlington side, I couldn’t find it now but it was a high-rise apartment complex, well furnished," he says . He says he's been in the apartment complex in Arlington .
 I do remember meeting Wilson who I guess is doing a couple of late terms right now . I remember meeting him, and he's doing a few late terms .
 I do remember meeting some other people who at that time had names that I remember . "I do remember ... meeting some of the people I met," she says .
 The first part of this week's Miami trip was a trip to Miami, Florida . It was a two-part trip to the U.S. and the second part was to Miami .
 You know it never came up, but I assumed that if we made money we were gonna give him some, but we never did . We never did. We never gave him some of the money, he says .
 Interview with Robert Walton provided insight into the character of David Sanchez Morales . Sanchez Morales is a covert assassination expert .
 Walton and Carbajal said he was a super patriot and a friend . He was seen by both Walton and carbajal as serving his country, and a good friend .
 There is no doubt in my mind that both Carbajal and Walton were completely open and honest in their statements concerning Morales . They both believe that he was deeply involved in the Kennedy assassination . Morales was a major figure in the assassination .
 All this evidence is not complete enough to warrant definitive conclusions, it is clear that, when combined with the ZR/RIFLE/QJWIN French connection evidence, nowhere else at this juncture do we see assembled such a cohesive body of documents and testimonies to explain the execution
 David Sanchez Morales could well be the man who managed the assassination of John F Kennedy . We also see in Sanchez Morales what could well .
 For purposes of analysis, I constructed a model that appeared to represent the primary forces of the assassination, exclusive of possible high government officials such as Lyndon Johnson or J Edgar Hoover, whom I assumed were background figures for cover-up purposes only, 1.e., not involved directly in the
 The “right-wing extremists” would include the right wing of the Cuban exiles in Miami and elsewhere . The "right wing" would include right-wing extremism in Miami, Miami .
 The value of this model is that it shows possible relationships of the parties without designating a hierarchy; and it facilitates testing against the evidence . This model is used to test relationships between parties in order to find out the truth .
 If we accept the evidence that the professional assassins were from the CIAMafia stable recruited for the ZR/RIFLE Project, then any of the three groups designated by the sides of the triangle could have recruited the assassins . All three groups were aware of and had connections to them
 If William Harvey were the planning genius of the JFK assassination, he could have been involved only to the extent of providing a conceptual plan, then fading out of the picture . Also, if William Harvey had been involved in the assassination, it was likely he would be involved only in the conceptual
 Oswald’s New Orleans phase could be an FBI and/or CIA counterintelligence operation to discredit the Fair Play for Cuba Committee . William Harvey: Planning Genius David Sanchez Morales: Field manager of the execution . Johnny Rosselli: Mafia liaison to Harvey and Morales . David Atlee
 Design concepts of ZR/RIFLE appear to have been applied directly to the JFK assassination plot .
 Harvey continued his relationship with Rosselli and met with him and Morales in the Florida Keys in the spring of 1963 . The JFK assassination plot would likely have been in the process of being finalized . Harvey supposedly was in Rome, and his involvement in Mafia-CIA operations to assassinate Fidel Castro
 Telephone records and eyewitness accounts indicate that QJ/WIN was involved with Harvey in this operation in the Florida Keys . Harvey was involved in the operation .
 Harvey recruited French Corsicans as professional assassins with the help of QJ/WIN who worked for Harvey . The Mafia in Marseilles helped Harvey recruit the Corsicans to become professional assassins . Harvey recruited the Corsican as assassins .
 Harvey had the motive, the means, the opportunity, and the state of mind to become involved in the crime, prosecutors say . Harvey was the victim of the murder, according to police .
 Harvey loathed the Kennedys, having been humiliated and emotionally emasculated by Robert Kennedy, having humiliated him by his brother-in-law . Harvey was humiliated by the Kennedy family .
 L Hunt, General Edwin Walker, and General Charles Willoughby, visited New Orleans and Dallas in April 1963 . Hunt, Walker, Walker and Walker visited Dallas and New Orleans .
 These same terrorists were acquainted with the French Corsicans recruited by Harvey . Harvey recruited the Corsicans to join the terrorist group .
 Rosselli and Harvey were drinking buddies . Harvey and Morales were friends with Rossells and Morales .
 He was the natural choice to be the Mafia liaison between the CIA and Marcello, Trafficante, Giancana; all of these four Mafiosi have revealed themselves to have been involved in the JFK assassination . He was a natural choice for the CIA .
 He was a CIA officer for assassinations, a long-time partner with David Atlee Phillips . Phillips was a natural to work with him and Harvey in an assassination plot against President Kennedy .
 Morales had the cold-bloodedness, the experience, and the means to direct a field operation in Dallas . Morales would have the ability to direct the operation remotely or on the spot . Morales is a veteran journalist and photographer .
 Jim Garrison had received an anonymous note from someone in Florida claiming that ‘Indio’ was involved in the JFK assassination . Garrison received the note from an anonymous person in Florida . Garrison: "Indio" is involved in JFK's assassination .
 By his own words, Morales participated in the assassination of Allende in Chile and Che Guevara in Bolivia . Morales says he participated in Allende's assassination in Chile . Morales has been in Bolivia since 1968 .
 Morales was a fervent anti-Communist, and would fit naturally with the extreme right wing . Morales was an anti-communist . Morales would fit well with right-wingers .
 Morales telling Carbajal of the $10 million that had been provided by the United States to take care of Allende is very strong confirmation of his story, Morales says . Morales: Morales' story is confirmed by the document in the Church Committee Report .
 At the very least, Phillips was a handler of Oswald, having met him in Dallas in late August 1963 . Phillips met Oswald in Dallas, Texas, in August 1963, in Dallas .
 Phillips went to extreme efforts to conceal the truth of Oswald’s visit to Mexico City . Phillips tried to cover up the fact that Oswald visited Mexico City, Mexico .
 He lied to the U.S. government concerning evidence related to audio transcripts of Oswald’s conversation with the Cuban embassy in Mexico City . Oswald was killed in the June 4, 1963, assassination .
 Phillips was a propaganda specialist and spent his life devising ways to mislead people and populations in sophisticated operations . Phillips was known for his work as a propaganda expert . He spent most of his life working in sophisticated propaganda operations .
 Phillips is a most likely man to have conceptualized the Oswald “sheepdipping” operations in Dallas, Texas . Phillips is also likely to be behind the phony story of Oswald’s visiting the Cuban and Soviet consulates in Mexico City .
 In conclusion, it is very plausible, although not proven beyond reasonable doubt, that the combination of Harvey, Phillips, and Morales, with help from the Mafia, planned and directed the assassination of the president of the United States .
 Phillips must have known about photo and wire-tap surveillance at the Cuban and Russian Embassies, he says . It's troublesome why Phillips let the Mexico City blunder occur, but it's troublesome .
 CIA officer John Scelso said he suspected Harvey was the one who murdered Sam Giancana . Chapter 19: In testimony released in October 1996, he said that he suspected that Harvey killed Sam .
 "I wonder if the government has looked into the possibility that Harvey did knock off Giancana," he said .
 Harvey instructed his wife to burn his wife's papers, which Harvey instructed her to burn, Scelso said . Harvey instructed the papers he was trying to conceal would have anything he wanted to conceal, Scellso said. “He was too young to have assassinated McKinley and
 Another document dated April 2, 1963 that I obtained from Gaeton Fonzi in November 1996 adds to the picture . The document dates back to 1963 .
 The letter corroborates biographical information supplied by Bradley Ayers, Ruben Carbajal, and Robert Walton . It corroborates, to the letter, biographical info supplied about Morales by three others .
 Subject’s wife was security approved on 16 September 1949, entered on duty in October 1949 and resigned due to pregnancy on 20 January 1952 . Subject's wife was approved for security approved in September 1949 . Subject resigned on January 20, 1952, due to the pregnancy .
 No information of as to the nature of her employment has been disclosed by the files .
 All of this again tends to corroborate the accuracy of the memory of Carbajal and Walton . "All of this ... corroborates the accuracy" of the memories of the two men .
 Christian David told Steve Rivele that he had been warned several times by Dan Mitrione that he would be killed if he talked about his knowledge of the JFK assassination .
 Mitrione was a CIA officer who was murdered by the Tupamoros in Ecuador . Fonzi told me that this precipitated the slaughter of the Tupasoros in an operation led by David Sanchez Morales . David Sanchez .
 Seymour Hersh’s book The Price of Power was published in 1983 . Hersh wrote that the price of power was a violation of freedom of speech . He also said that the U.S. should not have been allowed to use the power of the presidency .
 He wrote at length about the assassination of Allende and the $10,000,000 authorized by Nixon . Allende was killed in Chile in 1973 .
 It seems beyond question that parts of the CIA had degenerated into little more than a pack of gangsters and assassins . Personal greed running rampant, at least in some of their covert operations, the author says .
 Carbajal’s account of Morales’ statements rings credible, he says . And, once again, the account is credible . Morales' statements ring credible, the attorney general says .
 I was in a taxicab when I got the news. I was shocked to hear it. I'm not sure what happened to me. It's a very sad thing to have happened. I don't know how it happened .
 A half hour later I got to my apartment and the doorman told me he was dead . A half an hour later he was told he had been killed by a car crash .
 Initially I proceeded with the hypothesis that right-wing extremists were not the prime movers in the conspiracy . If anything, they provided money, if anything, it provided money .
 John Kennedy's survival as individuals was not seriously threatened by John Kennedy, author says . Survival of key individuals, independent of ideology, formed the motivation for the assassination, he says .
 "The assassination was, in fact, a right-wing coup—conceived, financed, and executed by organized rightwing extremists," he says . "As I progressed further and saw the large number of suspects ... I began to examine more seriously the possibility that the assassination was a right
 A right-wing conspiracy would not rule out the cooperation of Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover or help from the Mafia and extremist elements of the military in carrying out and covering up their crime .
 As far as I knew then, in my limited knowledge, I knew that they were fanatical anti-Communists and people who trained in paramilitary units on weekends . As well as I know then, I know nothing about them .
 The pair seemed to have a natural rapport with the military and local police . They seemed to be able to get along well with military and police .
 Flag-waving proponents of “free enterprise” and “law and order” tended to be Christian white supremacists . They were violently angry that their money was being taxed and distributed to the poor .
 As self-described Patriots, they distrusted and hated “big government” and, almost to a person, loathed John Kennedy . They loathed and hated John Kennedy, as well as ‘Big Government”
 They looked upon him as a liberal who was “soft on communism,” despite the fact that he was attempting to stop the Communist takeover of Southeast Asia . He had faced down Khrushchev in the Berlin Blockade and in the Cuban missile crisis, taking the United States to
 They became alarmed when Kennedy signed the nuclear test ban treaty with the Soviet Union . They became very alarmed when he gave indications that he was going to make peace with Cuba and enter into disarmament talks .
 Kennedy had begun to have second thoughts on our country’s involvement in Vietnam and was considering a phase-out by 1965, following the presidential election . Also, stories were circulating that Kennedy had started to have . second thoughts .
 In 1993, I discovered that my view of right-wing extremists in 1963 was nowhere near complete . But as I did my research, I found that my views on extremists were not nearly complete, he says .
 "The degree of dedication of the worldwide anti-Communist movement, and the fanaticism of the people in it, went far beyond my imagination," he said . "The level of dedication and fanaticism in the anti-communist movement was beyond imagination."
 Adding to the explosive mixture were extreme developments within the U.S. military . Adding to that was the development of the United States military .
 Little did I know the extent to which our military had become engaged in political assassination, illegal opening of the mail of U.S. citizens, and any other means it considered necessary .
 CIA and army intelligence were employing these methods, creating a cadre of extremist generals, retired military officers, and murderers, who later could get out of control . Not only the CIA, but army intelligence was employing these techniques, says author .
 Allied with the military in this fanatical war was a bewildering array of right-wing civilian organizations . Some of the most powerful and wealthy US citizens developed their own paramilitary organizations, some of whom developed their .
 They embraced such Romanesque titles as the World Anti-Communist Congress for Freedom and Liberation . The Tolstoy Foundation, The Nightingales, The National Alliance of Solidarists, The Congress of Freedom, Inc. and The Nightedales .
 John Birch Society and Minutemen formed chapters all over the U.S. to alert the citizenry to the menace of communism and socialism to the nation . This is not to mention the John Birch society and the Minuteman who were forming chapters .
 Several key suspects in the plot to assassinate Kennedy were right-wing extremists . In fact, there were several key suspects involved in the assassination plot .
 J Edgar Hoover was a right-wing extremist by definition by definition . Hoover was the FBI director of the 1950s and '60s . Hoover had a reputation for being a 'right-wing' extremist .
 He was a maniacal anti-Communist and racist and promoted himself as a super cop, fighting evil . He was also a racist and racist .
 Hoover stood to have his whole sordid life exposed if Kennedy should live . Hoover's life exposed in the wake of Kennedy's assassination . Hoover stood by by his actions in the aftermath of the Kennedy assassination .
 Carlos Marcello, Mafia chieftain in New Orleans, was direly threatened by the Kennedys . He was a member of the New Orleans Mafia, who was also threatened . He died at the age of 50 .
 Marcello was a rabid anti-Communist and anti-Castro fanatic, along with his underling, David Ferrie . Ferrie spoke openly in favor of John Kennedy's assassination and spoke openly of his assassination . Marcella was also a rabid Communist-hater and
 Lee Harvey Oswald was connected with New Orleans businessman Clay Shaw . Shaw was on the board of directors of Permindex Corporation, an extreme rightwing organization . Shaw also was a CIA contract agent .
 E Howard Hunt of the CIA was connected with this address, which was also used on the proCastro literature distributed by Oswald . Hunt was also connected to this address .
 Hunt was a major contributor to extreme right-wing organizations, a friend and supporter of Lyndon Johnson, and a friend of J Edgar Hoover . Hunt was closely associated with J. Edgar Hoover, and was a friend to LBJ .
 The night before Ruby shot Oswald, Hunt ordered his security man to check out the security of Oswald in custody . Hunt ordered the man to look at Oswald's security in custody the night before he shot him . Hunt's security man was also ordered to check Oswald's safety at the time of
 His man went to the jail and reported back that there was no security at all at all . His man said he went to jail to find out what happened .
 Marina Oswald visited Hunt’s office with an FBI agent about a month after the assassination . Marina Oswald also visited Hunt's office . Hunt was Hunt's partner in the White House .
 Hunt’s office was visited by Mafioso Jim Braden while he was in Dallas at the time of the assassination . Hunt was also visited by Braden in his office . Hunt's office was in the Dallas office when the assassination occurred .
 Braden was picked up by the Dallas police after the assassination at Dealey Plaza, but was immediately released . Braden has been in custody since the assassination .
 Braden was linked to the Minutemen in Los Angeles, and had an office in New Orleans next to David Ferrie . Braden also had a New Orleans office .
 The handwriting of this letter has been authenticated by experts as Lee Harvey Oswald’s . The “Dear Mr Hunt” Letter was written by Oswald in the early 1940s .
 The Miami police turned the information over to the FBI, which passed the information to the Secret Service . But they did not send it to Dallas, Dallas, although they sent it to other Secret Service offices .
 Larry Schmidt was a young right-wing extremist who was founder of Conservatism U.S.A. and was active in Dallas before the assassination . Schmidt was the founder of the conservative movement Conservatism USA .
 He was one of the authors of the infamous black-border ad smearing Kennedy before he arrived in Dallas on November 22 . He was also the author of the ad that smeared Kennedy .
 Schmidt was alleged to be an accomplice of Oswald in the General Edwin Walker shooting incident . General Walker in an interview with Dick Russell . Schmidt is alleged to have been a member of Oswald's team .
 Schmidt interviewed extensively by the Warren Commission, but nothing came of it . Schmidt was interviewed extensively but never charged with wrongdoing .
 Lee and Marina Hunt returned to Fort Worth after returning from Russia . Hunt was CIA operative and ex-Nazi spy, who was the first person to greet them . Hunt, a former CIA operative, was first to greet the couple .
 De Mohrenschildt would later unexpectedly commit suicide the day after HSCA investigator Gaeton Fonzi had contacted his daughter in trying to arrange an interview with him . He would later later commit suicide .
 Michael Paine took Oswald to hear a speech by Major General Edwin Walker . Walker was a right-wing fanatic and organizer of radical fringe activities that prompted Robert Kennedy to have him temporarily confined to a mental institution .
 It was General Walker who was allegedly shot at by Oswald months before November 22 . General Walker was allegedly killed months before Oswald .
 The story that the shooter was Oswald was based on the most spurious evidence, but it created the illusion that Oswald was a crazed Communist sympathizer with the capacity to assassinate prominent right-wing figures . Oswald was not the shooter, but the story created an illusion of him being a craz
 At the time of the assassination on November 22, General Walker was on a commercial airline flight to New Orleans when the pilot announced that Kennedy had been murdered . Walker was aboard the plane at the time .
 Walker ran up the aisle of the plane exclaiming, “See—it couldn’t have been me.” Walker: "See-it couldn't have been myself. It couldn” have been him."
 General Walker talked on the telephone with two newspapers in Germany to tell them it was Oswald who had attempted to kill him earlier that year . There was no legitimate way Walker could have known this because Oswald was not yet identified suspect in the Walker shooting .
 Marina Oswald was interrogated by the FBI after a strange letter implicating Oswald in the Walker shooting showed up in her possession . Oswald would only come later when she was questioned about the case .
 General Walker’s connection with Jean Souetre, the French OAS right-wing extremist who visited him in Dallas in April 1963 . General Walker's connection with the extremist was also noted in the Dallas massacre .
 Anti-Castro Cuban Eladio del Valle was David Ferrie’s close associate . Hunt sponsored the infamous black-border ads vilifying Kennedy before his trip to Dallas . Hunt's son, Nelson Bunker Hunt, organized his own paramilitary group; .
 Del Valle was found bludgeoned and shot to death in Florida within a day or two of David Ferrie’s mysterious suicide in New Orleans, three days after the news media had revealed that Ferrie was a target of Jim Garrison's investigation . DelValle was
 I went over a long list of suspects or near suspects, I found a virtually unbroken chain of individuals who were either rightwing extremists or closely allied with right-wing extremist causes . The suspect is believed to be a member of a group of rightwing extremist extremists .
 We can say with certainty that Lyndon Johnson was not a right-wing extremist . We can also say that LBJ was not an extremist. We can't say that .
 It is difficult to put him in that category, although he was a fellow traveler with right-wing extremists . He played off of their dementia for his own political advantages .
 Richard Nixon became president only after Lyndon Johnson served one term and voluntarily withdrew from the race, and after Robert Kennedy was assassinated . It's interesting to note that Richard Nixon only became president after Lyndon Lyndon Johnson left the race .
 It took two assassinations of Kennedys and the unexpected withdrawal of Lyndon Johnson from the race in 1968 before Nixon could become president . Governor George Wallace stood to siphon off Nixon’s southern right-wing vote .
 He faced political oblivion if Kennedy were to stay in power . Worse yet, he faced a possible sentence in the federal penitentiary if his involvement in the Bobby Baker and Billy Sol Estes crimes were not suppressed . Kennedy faced political .
 The extremists could have concluded they had no choice but to assassinate Kennedy before the 1964 election . A possible answer is that the extremists had to kill Kennedy before 1964 .
 Lyndon Johnson had to be president for one more term, from a practical standpoint . Goldwater or Nixon would have preferred Goldwater to Nixon, but LBJ had to stay .
 If Kennedy stayed in power, he was going to dump Johnson before the 1964 election, he said . "If Kennedy stayed, he would dump Johnson," he said. "I'm not going to be surprised"
 Kennedy knew that when Kennedy picked his next vice president it could very well be someone out of their realm of control . Kennedy knew he was going to pick someone who might be out of control, and it could be someone who is out of the realm of their control .
 The new vice president could turn out to be someone far more liberal than Lyndon Johnson . Only with Johnson as their man would the plotters be certain there would be a cover-up .
 This reasoning would apply even if Johnson were not informed in advance of the impending assassination, because of the plotters’ knowledge of Johnson’s lifetime of corruption, and because they had blackmail material on him . The plotters knew of Johnson's corruption, so they could blackmail him
 The prime conspirators, despite including a few high-level, right-wing extremists, would not necessarily have plotted to kill John Kennedy out of ideology . John Kennedy was assassinated in 1968, but not necessarily in the way of ideology, author says .
 In other words, it could be misleading to blame the Kennedy assassination on right-wing extremism just because many of that ideology were involved up and down the line .
 It would only be natural for the master plotters to recruit Kennedy haters and fanatics to do their dirty work; and, one would think, almost all of the violent Kennedyhaters would have been in the extreme right wing . Also it would be natural .
 I saw the necessity of examining the evidence for any proof of a conspiracy that was conceived purely out of right-wing ideology, even though I found myself rejecting the idea . Nonetheless, to avoid a premature conclusion by ruling out a right wing plot, I saw a need to examine the evidence
 This would include German ex-spies, industrialists, and military personnel who became incorporated into our military industrial complex after World War II as a policy of the U.S. government .
 Oswald and Marina Oswald befriended each other when they came back from Russia . This would include elements in the Dallas-Fort Worth area who befriended Oswald . Oswald's wife Marina Marina was killed in the September 4, 1963 attack .
 These subjects will now be addressed, along with their accumulative effect in the formation of a climate of hate and political violence that could have given birth to the Kennedy assassination . The subjects will be addressed .
 It was a stage trick, complete with accessories and false mirrors, and when the curtain fell the actors, and even the scenery, disappeared . When the curtain fall, the actors and scenery disappeared . It was an elaborate stage trick .
 Evidence will now be examined that implicates extremist elements of the U.S. military in the Kennedy assassination . James Hepburn Farewell America 23 will be presented .
 In addition to allegations that the assassination was sponsored by, or at least condoned by, a segment of the industrial-financial elite of the U.S. The assassination was also alleged to have been sponsored by or condoned . In addition, I will address allegations that . the assassination
 "My goal continues to be to resolve the question of why John Kennedy was murdered and who were the principal plotters," he says .
 Eisenhower warned of the powerful combination of weapons manufacturers, industrialists, financiers, and the military . Eisenhower called it the militaryindustrial complex .
 There are many who believe that such a combination of bankers and militant barons rule the world .
 Winston Churchill coined the term ‘high cabal’ to describe such a powerful super-elite . Churchill coined it to describe the term 'high cabal' in the 1930s . The term was coined by Winston Churchill to refer to a powerful and powerful group .
 A favorite villain for those who believe in the high cabal is the Trilateral Commission . The Trilateral commission is a favorite villain among those who think it is a high-society cabal .
 In the 1960s and ’70s it was believed that the Trilateral Commission (consisting over the years of the Rockefellers and other such eastern-establishment types) determined even the selection of the president of the United States .
 Trilateral Commission was aimed at a liberal, one-world future, it is claimed . Dwight Eisenhower and Jimmy Carter would not have been elected president had they not been approved by the Commission .
 One of the more publicized of the high-cabal theories is in the book JFK by Colonel L Fletcher Prouty . The JFK theory is one of the most publicized theories of the assassination .
 Colonel Prouty has probably had more experience with the military and national security establishment at a high level than any person alive today who is willing to write about the Kennedy assassination .
 During the Kennedy years he was chief of special operations for the Joint Chiefs of Staff . He was Chief of Special Operations for the JCOs during the Kennedy administration .
 He worked with General Edward Lansdale, Robert McNamara, Allen Dulles, and General Maxwell Taylor . He was also involved in the Secret Service, the CIA and the White House .
 What Prouty has to say is certainly interesting and could explain major aspects of the Kennedy assassination, although one may find fault with some of his reasoning .
 Prouty met with author at his home in Alexandria, Virginia, in 1995 for a fascinating discussion . He was fascinated by his work in the field of art .
 What follows is a summary of the key points that I learned about Prouty’s views . What follows was a discussion of his views on the issue of gay marriage .
 In addition to Prouty’s discussion with Robert McNamara on the same subjects, I will also include an equally fascinating discussion with McNamara . Both McNamara's views on the Kennedy assassination will be discussed in the book .
 JFK Prouty presents the appalling hypothesis that the Cold War was deliberately planned by a “power elite” to create markets for the arms industries . JFK: The Cold War is deliberately planned to create an arms market for arms sales . JFK's hypothesis is that a ‘power
 Prouty postulates that when the United States and England recruited Nazis before the end of World War II, it was the conscious beginning of a plan to line up the capitalistic major powers against the inexorable forces of communism and socialism .
 The United States, Great Britain, Germany, France, Japan, and Nationalist China were to be allied as a block to oppose the anticipated expansionist thrust of the Soviet Union . The eastern block countries that were ceded to the Soviet Soviet Union through World War II agreements .
 Prouty states that the organizing principle of the U.S. after World War II was, indeed, promotion of war . The driving force behind this capitalistic plan was the powerful super-elite—the “high cabal” of bankers and industrialists . Prout
 All-out warfare had become obsolete and unthinkable because the power elite itself would be destroyed in the process . However, due to the advent of the atom bomb, the atomic bomb, and later the hydrogen bomb, became obsolete . The power elite would have to be destroyed by the atomic bombs
 The “high cabal” saw the necessity for wars in lesser-developed countries such as Vietnam and Korea, where the conflict could be contained so as not to escalate to nuclear weapons . “High cabal’s” thus saw the . necessity for war in lesser developed
 Prouty’s theory is that Vietnam and Korean wars were consciously selected by the High Cabal at the end of World War IT as the future battlegrounds for territory and for the consumption of weapons so as to provide markets for weapons manufacturers .
 The CIA was formed to conduct the Cold War through covert actions and methods of destabilization applied in the lesserdeveloped countries . Thus we had the formation of the CIA as the agency .
 The fact that millions of people would be slaughtered was, in the theory, an integral part of their plan to control population growth . Population growth must be controlled, so it goes. The idea of slaughtering millions would be part of the plan was to control the population growth.
 This became evident to the military in the Bay of Pigs invasion and in the Cuban missile crisis . Kennedy refused to accept the military chiefs’ recommendations for escalation . Kennedy's refusal to accept military chiefs' recommendations was evident in the missile crisis in Cuba .
 The CIA turned over covert activities that were in the CIA to the Department of Defense . Decided to diminish the scope of the CIA by turning it over to the Defense .
 Fired the top people in the CIA after the Bay of Pigs fiasco as part of his intention to take control . Took direct charge of arms procurement and used it as a pork-barrel program for his re-election .
 According to Prouty, this was blatantly done in the case of the $6 billion TFX contract . The contract was signed in 2007, when it was supposed to be worth $5 billion .
 Kennedy and his inner circle ordered that this operation be taken over and supervised directly through Arthur Goldberg under Robert McNamara . Arthur Goldberg was responsible for overseeing the operation . Robert McNama ordered that Arthur Goldberg be responsible for the CIA .
 The objective was to get re-elected by a more comfortable margin than in 1960, says President Nixon . Nixon was elected to the White House in 1960 .
 Goldberg and McNamara’s whiz kids radically changed the basic design of the TFX airplane over military objectives, Prouty says . The plane's basic design was designed to meet military objectives .
 President Bush divided up the TFX contract in a master plan to influence votes from sections of the country that had previously leaned Republican . Decided to pull out of Vietnam and reverse the Cold War process, thus confronting the arms industry with the probability of massive cutbacks . Then they divided up
 U.S. will pull out of Vietnam in 1964 and get out completely by 1965, President Nixon said in 1963 . He appointed General Maxwell Taylor in charge of a study group, which issued a national security memorandum .
 In his books, Prouty admits that he cannot say who those in the “power elite” are . He admits he can’t say who the ‘elite’ are .
 He mentions the liberal Averell Harriman as one possible candidate for the power elite . He also mentions the . ; , ; , and 2 S120 liberal A.120 liberal .
 Prouty says this group is constantly shifting, people dying and being replaced by other powerful figures . He says people are dying and people are being replaced with others .
 He seems to think of the ‘power elite’ as a cabal of powerful liberals and conservatives, but certainly joined together in the battle against communism and socialism . “Power elite” is not a cabal, but a group of powerful conservatives and conservatives .
 Prouty’s idea of a high cabal manipulating the world sounded plausible, but there was no real evidence, in my view, to support the allegation that the assassination of Kennedy was sponsored by such an ill-defined group .
 A more plausible explanation to me was that the acolytes of the ‘power elite” (in the form of right-wing elements of the CIA and threatened military leaders who were anti-Communist extremists) became aware of the desire of the Mafia and others to assassinate Kennedy
 In this version of my hypothesis, Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover were ordered to join the conspiratorial group, or joined it voluntarily, I think . In this case, Johnson and Hoover may have joined the conspirator group .
 The ‘power elite’ simply stood by and let it happen, looking the other way during the aftermath . The "power elite" simply stood . by and looked other way in the aftermath of the attack .
 If the truth had come out about the extreme nature of the conspiracy, it could have devastated the credibility of the military-industrial complex . The results would have been unpredictable, possibly an economic catastrophe, and therefore to be avoided .
 It was at this point in my investigation that I had a dialogue with Robert McNamara concerning the Kennedy assassination . McNamara was a key figure in the investigation of the assassination .
 A Conversation with Robert S McNamara . I first met Robert McNamara in a hiking group in California's High Sierra mountains in the spring of 1994 .
 Our group hiked and camped out for six days during a forty-mile trek across Donohue Pass at 11,500 feet to Touloumne Meadows .
 Throughout the hike, we discussed everything under the sun, or so it seemed, but I never mentioned the Kennedy assassination .
 President Obama suggested that we meet and talk over dinner at his home in Georgetown . After first saying he was not prepared to ‘go on the record’ on that subject, he agreed .
 McNamara served as secretary of defense under both Kennedy and Johnson . McNamara also served as president of the World Bank . He was close to the Kennedy family and had served in Washington .
 McNamara felt that Johnson was capable of being involved in a plot to assassinate President Kennedy, he says . The interview was conducted to get a first-hand account of McNamara's feelings .
 I had begun to think of myself as being presumptuous in writing seriously about the unthinkable—that Lyndon Johnson was involved in the plot . I thought I was presuming to write seriously about Lyndon Johnson's involvement in the assassination plot .
 I had never met the man except seeing him close-up at one speech he had given. I had met him in a speech I had given, he said . He said: 'I never met him but I was impressed by his work'
 Lyndon Johnson was not the type of man who would be involved in a plot to kill the president, a friend said . A friend who knew LBJ said he had been admonished that he would not have been involved .
 I also wanted to learn from McNamara whether there was a war crisis atmosphere in the White House on the night of the assassination when Lyndon Johnson returned from Dallas, Texas .
 Admiral Taswell Shepard was the first military officer to meet with Lyndon Johnson when Johnson arrived at the White House on the night of the assassination . Two years earlier, he had interviewed Admiral Shepard .
 Shepard told me unequivocally that there was no such crisis that night that night . Shepard said there were no such crises that night, and Shepard said it was not a crisis . Shepard: "There was no crisis in the building that night"
 John Kennedy was with John Kennedy during the Cuban missile crisis . He said that he knew what such a crisis was like because he had been with Kennedy . There was nothing at all like that on the night of November 22 .
 Lyndon Johnson used the nuclear war scare in recruiting Earl Warren and others to serve on the Warren Commission, says historian .
 McNamara says he arrived at McNamara’s home on the appointed date, ten minutes early . He says he took a taxi and arrived at the house ten minutes ahead of the scheduled date .
 McNamara showed up a few minutes later in jogging shoes, returning from his office . McNamara returned to his office wearing jogging .
 He was in the midst of a final review of his 155,000-word manuscript Jn Retrospect, which would soon create a firestorm against him .
 At about 7:10, we retired to the dining room which was set for our dinner . At 7:30, we went to our dining room where we had dinner .
 McNamara talks about his new book . McNamara says McNamara's book will be released in October .
 Three years earlier I had become involved in Kennedy assassination research, primarily because of the Oliver Stone movie . He related to him how three years earlier he had been involved in assassination research .
 Robert Kennedy did not realize that he was going to take down Jimmy Hoffa and the Mafia, he says . "I then outlined to him the basic conclusions that I seemed to be headed toward," he writes . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 I mentioned that this would have included certain elements of the CIA, along with J Edgar Hoover and Lyndon Johnson . J. Edgar Hoover, Lyndon Johnson and the CIA would have been involved .
 I told McNamara that I had just about concluded that CIA renegades were involved in the assassination and that Lyndon Johnson was involved . McNamara told him that he had concluded that the CIA renegade was involved and that LBJ was .
 I said as far as Hoover was concerned, I was in a dilemma but I would put nothing past him . I said that as far . as far from Hoover was . concerned, he was concerned . Hoover was a good man, but I said he was not a bad man, and
 McNamara said he could not conceive of any possibility that Johnson was behind the assassination . McNamara: "I can't conceive any possibility" that he was behind it .
 McNamara says it's conceivable to him that Johnson had foreknowledge of his actions . McNamara: "I asked McNamara if it was conceivable" that Johnson knew something about it .
 After pausing for a moment, he replied that he could see that as a possibility, though he still didn’t believe it . After a moment of silence, he said that he still doesn't believe it.
 He elaborated that he could also see, only as a possibility, that renegade CIA people were involved, but he didn't endorse that either . He said he didn’t endorse that .
 McNamara was willing to talk about the assassination but in no way wanted to write that he endorsed the concept of a conspiracy or any specific allegations toward individuals . It was apparent that McNamara .
 He was willing, nonetheless, to state his opinion as to ‘possibilities” insofar as the character of individuals was concerned and his overall knowledge of events, he said .
 McNamara did not seriously dispute that Kennedy had been killed by a conspiracy . McNamara said he did not doubt that Kennedy was killed by an assassination .
 McNamara revealed an amazing lack of knowledge of the important details of the Kennedy assassination . What surprised me was that McNamara said he had no knowledge of important details .
 He did not seem to know that the HSCA had reached a conclusion that there was a conspiracy, and that it could have involved the Mafia, he said .
 He mused that he thought it was a good thing to get the files out to the public .
 The Mafia was brought down by the Kennedys it would expose the CIA renegades, says McNamara . "I reviewed with McNamara my thoughts that renegade criminal activity of the CIA, in partnership with the Mafia in drug running, could have served as a motivational base"
 Project Mongoose was the U.S. assassination capability for disposing of foreign leaders, headed by William Harvey under Project Mongoose . William Harvey was the leader of the project .
 McNamara then nodded that he knew what I was talking about; but it struck me as interesting that McNamara, as head of the Department of Defense, was not aware of the CIA code name for that project .
 This seemed to illustrate the extent to which the ZR/RIFLE program was kept compartmentalized, and how the men at the very top of government did not know much of the details, although they knew of the program .
 One of the most prevalent theories is that Harvey became involved with the Mafia and was possibly the mastermind of the Kennedy assassination . I pointed out that many theories are that Harvey was involved in the Mafia .
 CNN's John Sutter was asked to explain why he didn't endorse the idea . Sutter: "Remember he admonished me to remember that he certainly did not endorse it"
 Harvey came up again as a prime example of a CIA renegade who could be suspect . Harvey was the subject of a conversation with CNN's John Sutter about the CIA .
 McNamara confirmed what he had been quoted in the literature as saying, that Mongoose was a stupid idea . McNamara was quoted as saying: 'Mongoose was stupid idea. Mongoose is not a good idea'
 I asked him if Robert Kennedy knew about Mongoose, or was in charge of it . He said Kennedy knew of Mongoose . Kennedy was not in charge, he said .
 He wouldn’t say that RFK actually “ran” Mongoose, but did say he certainly supported it . RFK certainly supported Mongoose .
 I pointed out that Willoughby was part of a right-wing extremist element in the retired military at the time of the Kennedy assassination . I also noted that Willougby was a member of an extremist group .
 McNamara: General Walker was another right-wing extremist . McNamara added pointedly that General Walker is another right wing extremist . He said Walker was a "right wing extremist"
 Clint Murchison had squired Hoover and Tolson to their bungalow at the Del Charro Hotel in La Jolla, California, over the years . In our discussions about J. Edgar Hoover, I described how Clint Murnison squired Tolson and Hoover .
 Robert Kennedy confirmed this in a book of RFK interviews, RFK in His Own Words . I also pointed out how Robert Kennedy had confirmed this .
 McNamara made a point that in his view it was impossible that Allen Dulles and Richard Helms were behind the Kennedy assassination . He commented that he didn’t know about Murchison’s connections to the Mafia .
 Richard Bissell, Allen Dulles, and Richard Helms had been or were still his close personal friends . Bissell reiterated several times that he knew them like brothers and that they were in no way involved in his assassination .
 He insisted that they would have had nothing to do with the assassination; that they were patriotic, honest Americans . He said they were all patriotic and honest Americans.
 "Mr. McNamara was completely sincere in this, as he was in everything we discussed," McNamara said . McNamara's apology was "completely sincere"
 McNamara noted that John McCone may not have known what was going on in the CIA . Helms, McCone’s deputy director, would certainly have known if there were a CIA plot to assassinate Kennedy, McNamara said .
 He repeated that he could “absolutely guarantee that Helms was not involved,” and that the CIA wasn't involved, he said . He also said he could "absolutely guarantee’s Helms not involved”
 He replied that that would not mean Helms, Dulles, and McCone were involved because they could not have had total control over all the renegade types .
 After all, the Department of Defense had one to two million people in it . After all of the Defense Department had one or two million in it, the Pentagon says .
 McNamara remarked that he could not believe that the government had anything to do with the assassination except possibly by renegades . McNamara: "I don't believe that any of us could be responsible for the assassination"
 I explained my concept of “transferability of capability,” 1.e. i.e., when the U.S. government decides to assassinate foreign leaders, and develops the capability . We run the grave risk of that capability being turned against our own government .
 The capability to assassinate leaders of a country involves only assembling people with the mentality and skills to calculatedly commit murder . The knowledge of deception methods to control the crime, and the knowledge of ways of disposing of witnesses .
 "I emphasized that this capability is not like a manufacturing facility or a weapons system," says President Obama . "It's not just like a factory or weapons system. It's not a weapons facility," he says .
 It is mainly in a few people’s heads, easily transferable to the highest bidder . It is in the hands of a few, but it is in a lot of people's heads .
 I added that while I could possibly agree with the justification for getting rid of someone like Hitler or Castro, the danger to ourselves (the destruction of our own government) made it not worthwhile .
 McNamara seemed to be somewhat taken aback and then pensive with this thought . McNamara then seemed pensive and seemed taken aback .
 After dinner, we retired to the living room where I brought out a list of prepared questions .
 John Newman's book JFK in Vietnam, by John Newman, is about JFK's life in Vietnam . John Newman is a Vietnam veteran who served in the U.S. State Department of Vietnam .
 Newman had discussed back channels from Lyndon Johnson to the CIA, which he had discussed in his book . Newman: "Back channels" from Johnson to CIA were discussed in Newman's book .
 McNamara said he didn't know about back channels 3241 if mentioned to McNamara that Colonel Howard Burris, Johnson’s military aide and presumably his conduit to the CIA, had gotten most of his information from USARPAC intelligence bulletins . It seemed to me that McN
 He elaborated that he had a large staff to make sure he had everything . He said he had to make certain that everything was in place .
 The Vietnam War was discussed with top generals, military advisors, and cabinet members on November 20, 1963 . Newman seemed to be saying that this was the moment of McNamara’s “awakening” to the deterioration of our military position in Vietnam .
 McNamara said Bundy was above reproach and would never have allowed such a thing to take place . McNamara replied that he absolutely did not believe that .
 I asked McNamara if Lyndon Johnson escalated the Vietnam war immediately after he assumed office . McNamara: "I asked him if he was going to escalate the war" McNamara says he was in charge of the Vietnam War .
 President Johnson carried out the continuing policies of Kennedy, says McNamara . McNamara said "absolutely not" that Johnson carried on with Kennedy's policies . "It was absolutely not," he says .
 He did elaborate, however, that he believed Kennedy would have gotten us out of Vietnam whereas Johnson didn't .
 Newman wrote that this was just a paper shuffle instead of removing actual combat helicopters along with men . Newman: "Yes, yes. I responded yes, but yes, yes, this was the paper shuffle"
 McNamara replied, “I don’t remember much about helicopters, but a thousand men were taken out.” McNamara said . ‘I don't remember much of helicopters,’ he said .
 McNamara asked McNamara if John Kennedy had refused to go ahead with the air strikes when the Bay of Pigs went awry .
 He added that after the invasion started to go bad, the CIA asked for air strikes which had not been promised to them . He said that he and John Kennedy made the decision not to provide them .
 He emphasized that this was entirely different from saying that Kennedy withheld air strikes that had been promised .
 McNamara replied that it was absolutely not true and “not true on its face” because Bissell was the one who had planned the Bay of Pigs and wanted the air strikes, McNamara said .
 He said Bissell was a good friend, a very bright man and extremely capable, who had a great record . Bissell blew it on the Bay of Pigs, he said .
 Bissell was the last person in the world who would not have relayed Kennedy’s approval of air strikes if they had been given, but Kennedy had not given approval . Bissell said Bissell would have relayed the president's approval of the strikes .
 I told McNamara about my friend Jim Lance, who was one of six Navy frogmen who were sent ashore to reconnoiter the invasion site at the Bay of Pigs . Lance was a member of the Navy's six frogmen . Lance died in the fall of 1968 .
 Lance observed from offshore what was happening in the invasion, and that Kennedy withdrew air support and cut off supplies to the beachhead . Lance saw from offshore that Kennedy cut off air support, cut off all supplies to beachhead, Lance says .
 McNamara again repeated that Kennedy had never promised air support in the first place . McNamara said he never promised to provide air support for the troops .
 He said he didn't know about the cutoff of supplies, though he seemed to acknowledge that it could have happened . He said that he did not know about it .
 McNamara said the Bay of Pigs was supposed to have been a totally deniable project (deniable that the U.S. was involved) and was designed to create an uprising of the Cuban populace, which didn’t take place . McNamara: The Bay of Pige
 President Kennedy refused to allow certain air strikes that were not in the plan, he said . He added that the United States invasion plans had been penetrated by Castro’s intelligence and Castro knew .
 An admiral during the crisis was cursing Kennedy, blaming him for the fiasco, says Lance . Lance said Lance had told him that everybody blamed and hated Kennedy . Lance: "Everybody hated Kennedy. Everybody was involved in the Bay of Pigs operation"
 McNamara implied that Kennedy did not deserve the blame . McNamara responded that he could see that this possibly was true, but implied that he did not .
 McNamara told me that he and a team were sent to inspect Russian ships leaving Cuba to inspect for missiles . They were instructed to do nothing but give away Zippo lighters and not look at anything .
 McNamara said that was not true because no one boarded any Russian ships to inspect for missiles . McNamara: "No Russian ships were inspected for missiles"
 The U.S. did flyovers fifty feet above the Russian ships and took photographs of the above-decks, which was the sum total of inspection .
 No missile inspections were done in the Cuban mainland, he said . He said he asked him if it was true that no missile inspection was done in Cuba .
 Part of the agreement allowed the U.S. to inspect for missiles in Cuba, but Castro reneged . He replied affirmatively; part of the deal allowed the United States to inspect .
 He added that once Castro had reneged, we were no longer held to the agreement not to invade Cuba . He said once Castro's renegeged, the agreement was no longer valid .
 We discussed whether Kennedy had actually agreed never to invade Cuba . He seemed to hang up on that a bit when asked about it .
 I pointed out that it did not seem likely that we would agree never to invade Cuba because that would obviously be something that would be impossible to promise in good faith . I said that it seemed unlikely that it would be possible to promise never to invasion Cuba .
 Robert Morrow was a CIA operative who went on a covert expedition into Cuba for the CIA, at the time of the Bay of Pigs invasion in April 1961, to check for evidence of the beginning of construction of offensive missile sites in Cuba . McNamara questioned Morrow about Morrow's story .
 McNamara replied that he didn’t know about covert missions, but certainly they would not have been looking for missile sites . There was no buildup of missile sites in Cuba until May 1962 at the earliest .
 He said he is absolutely certain of this based on conferences he had with top military people in the Soviet Union during the last few years and with Fidel Castro and Fidel Castro .
 He was positive there were no missile sites under construction before May 1962 . He said he was positive no such sites were under construction .
 McNamara asked McNamara if there were nuclear warheads mounted on missiles in Cuba at the time of the Cuban missile crisis . McNamara: "There were no nuclear warheads in Cuba"
 According to McNamara, the CIA had informed Kennedy that there were no nuclear warheads in Cuba at the time of the crisis . McNamara: The CIA had told Kennedy that no warheads were in Cuba .
 McNamara said the CIA qualified its statement by stating “they could not be absolutely certain,” but in recent years, this was found to have been bad information . McNamara: In recent years this information has been found to be bad information.
 I said it was my understanding that McNamara recommended to Kennedy that he base his decisions on the assumption that there were nuclear warheads there, since the possibility existed . The possibility existed existed, he said .
 In discussing Project Mongoose, McNamara asked McNamara if he had ever heard of William Pawley . McNamara said he had never heard of Pawley, who died in 2008 .
 McNamara asked if he had heard that Henry Luce financed private operations against Castro in the Caribbean . McNamara said Luce funded private operations in the region .
 McNamara reflected that he could not believe that all the honorable men in the Warren Commission would have allowed themselves to be involved in a cover-up . McNamara: "I don't believe that any honorable men would have been involved in such a cover up" McNamara said .
 He said he knew Gerald Ford personally and did not believe that Gerald Ford would have gone along with a cover-up .
 He added that he also couldn’t understand how Earl Warren would have been manipulated by the media .
 LBJ tapes show how LBJ browbeat people and used nuclear war scare to break Earl Warren down until he was crying before he finally agreed to accept the chairmanship of the Warren Commission . I pointed out that I had transcripts of the tapes showing how Johnson browbeated people .
 McNamara contended that if Johnson were orchestrating a cover-up, it did not make sense to him that such distinguished people would have been appointed to the Warren Commission . McNamara: It did not seem to make sense that such people would be appointed .
 Johnson had first proposed a Texas commission to investigate the assassination, but he quickly withdrew the idea when objections were raised against it . I replied that Johnson had proposed a commission but quickly withdrew .
 Johnson was in a position of having to avoid a congressional investigation and had to appoint prominent people . Some of these people who signed the report did so very reluctantly, he says .
 Johnson appointed Hoover as sole investigator of the assassination . Johnson shut down the Secret Service investigation as well as the investigation of the Dallas police .
 Hoover kept substantial information from the Warren Commission . Hoover kept a huge list of things he did in the investigation that kept substantial info from the public . Hoover's actions were revealed in a series of interviews with former FBI agents .
 Hoover's personal paranoia and hypersensitivity could have led him to cover up anything . Hoover’s personal paranoia may have led to him covering up anything, he said . Hoover's paranoia and hyper-sensitiveness could have been a problem for Hoover .
 Hoover could have been involved in a cover-up simply to save himself from the embarrassment that Oswald was an FBI informer, or from having known about Oswald in advance, etc. My point was that Hoover could not have been .
 I recounted the story of British double-agent Dusan "Dusko" Popov and Hoover’s refusal to listen to Popov because of a personal pique that Hoover had against him . Hoover had a personal vendetta against Popov, Hoover said .
 Hoover was a homosexual and had tremendous motivation to do anything to keep that information from becoming public, he said . Hoover was vulnerable to blackmail, and therefore was susceptible to blackmail . He responded that it wasn’t common talk as far as he knew .
 JFK assassination, RFK assassination, and Martin Luther King assassination, a common thread is J Edgar Hoover . Hoover, FBI director, was behind three of the three assassinations . Hoover was behind the murders of RFK, JFK and RFK . Hoover is the FBI director of the FBI
 McNamara seemed startled by my statement, but was non responsive, so I went on to something else . McNamara was non-responsive to the question .
 It was quite interesting to me how little McNamara knew about the details of the Kennedy assassination . To repeat, it was interesting to see how little he knew .
 John Kennedy was close to both John Kennedy and Robert Kennedy and was practically a member of the Kennedy family . He had not followed conspiracy allegations or theories over the years except in the broadest sense .
 It appeared that McNamara had accepted the results of the Warren Commission because it was comprised of such honorable men . McNamara appeared to accept the results because it appeared to be comprised of honorable men.
 McNamara had put the tragic event behind him, moving on to the present from the past . Like millions of other Americans, including myself until I wrote this book, McNamara .
 He refused to believe that officials of the federal government could have been involved in the case .
 Lyndon Johnson had his campus operatives use razor blades to cut out pages of his college yearbook that were unfavorable to his image . Robert Caro’s story was a story that he said Johnson's campus operatives used razor blades .
 Even at the age of twenty Johnson had his political organization in college to do this for him, he said . Johnson added that even at the . age of 20 Johnson had . his political organizations in college .
 I described this incident as illuminating a basic character trait of Lyndon Johnson . The incident was described as illuminating the basic character traits of Johnson .
 I told him I had read most of Dallek’s book and had heard this praise from others . I also told him that I had heard praise from other people who had read it .
 At one point McNamara confided that Hoover certainly had a vendetta against Martin Luther King . Hoover had great conflicts with Robert Kennedy, McNamara said . McNamara also confided about Hoover's vendetta with King .
 He mentioned he didn’t know about Hoover’s conflicts with John Kennedy . Hoover was the president of the United States in 1964 .
 McNamara later raised the question about Kennedy’s womanizing as if it somehow related to the Kennedy assassination, but the conversation dropped at that point . McNamara said Kennedy's womanizing was not related to his assassination .
 At about 9:00m., McNamara said he had another commitment and insisted on driving me back to the hotel, rather than my getting a taxi . McNamara insisted on his return to his hotel room .
 "During the drive, he remarked how much he had enjoyed the evening," he said . "He was impressed with my knowledge, and how surprised he was about it," he added .
 He pointedly beseeched me to realize that, of the people he knew in the CIA and government, he sincerely believed they were doing what they thought was the right thing for their country . He said, "He pointedly told me that of the . people he . knew
 McNamara commented that what I was doing was very interesting but he thought I was on the wrong tack . As a final statement, McNamara said that when he got out of the car, he thought he was doing the wrong thing . McNamara: "When I got out, when
 Perhaps that was for the best, keeping the discussion on the broad political and motivational issues . Perhaps it was best to keep the discussion going on .
 "In my view, McNamara is certainly a most honorable man, a dedicated public servant, and an important man in history," says President Obama .
 Admiral Shepard seems to represent the same type of thinking that I encountered with Admiral Shepard . He seems to have the same kind of thinking as Admiral Shepard, he said .
 Neither disputed that there was a conspiracy; neither would put anything past J Edgar Hoover . Neither could believe that ‘government’ could have been connected to the Kennedy assassination . But neither could believe “government” could have had anything past Hoover .
 Kennedy and Johnson were both very close to Kennedy and LBJ . They represent the thinking of the Washington establishment, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Their mentality may explain why it is so difficult to penetrate this thinking . Their mentality is the reason why it's so hard to penetrate their thinking .
 They knew Kennedy; they knew Johnson; they also knew the military and CIA people . "They knew Kennedy, they knew Kennedy," says a former CIA operative .
 I could see the need for more discussions with McNamara if it could be arranged . McNamara would like to meet again to discuss his role in the White House .
 I telephoned McNamara once when I was in Washington, D.C., but he had just returned from a 55,000-mile trip in Asia . McNamara was on his way to Europe when he was on the way back from Asia .
 After returning to California, I turned my attention to the military itself. After returning, I focused on the military .
 John Kennedy was in deep conflict with the military chiefs in the years and months preceding his assassination . John Kennedy had a history of conflict with military chiefs . He was assassinated by the military in 1963 .
 It had reached the point that Kennedy would rarely speak to the chiefs . It had become so bad that Kennedy rarely spoke to them . Kennedy would often only speak to chiefs .
 Kennedy conducted his business with them mostly through the chairman of the Joint Chiefs, General Maxwell Taylor . Kennedy had appointed and trusted Taylor, whom he had appointed .
 Kennedy was aghast at the crazy antics of General Curtis LeMay, commander of the Air Force . Kennedy was horrified at the antics of LeMay .
 He had come to look upon LeMay and his nuclear bombs as a threat to the human race . LeMay's nuclear bombs were seen as a potential threat to humanity .
 Kennedy had gotten into the practice of walking out of meetings when LeMay or other generals were making presentations . Kennedy walked out of the meetings when he heard LeMay make a presentation .
 Privately, Kennedy had begun to express concern about a military coup . “I told you to keep them away from me,” he once remarked to no one in particular as he was leaving Cabinet room .
 The President said he had read Seven isa ie Days in May in May the previous night . We were out on the “Honey Fitz’ again the next day .
 It could happen in this country, but the conditions would have to be just right for it to happen . It's possible in the UK, but conditions need to be perfect for it .
 If the country had a young President, and he had a Bay of Pigs, there would be a certain uneasiness . If, for example, the country's young President had a . young . President, he said. "There would be an uneaseiness. There would be
 This would be written off as the usual military dissatisfaction with civilian control . Maybe the military would do a little criticizing behind his back, but this would be seen off as a military dissatisfaction .
 The military chiefs’ contempt and animosity toward John Kennedy have been noted in previous chapters of this book . John Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 The chiefs would speak derisively of Kennedy in public in a manner that would be shocking today . The chiefs of the Kennedy administration would have been shocked to hear them speak out .
 The chiefs opposed Kennedy’s plans for nuclear disarmament and rapprochement with the Soviets . The chiefs were strongly opposed to the plans for disarmament .
 One graphic instance was reported by author Richard Reeves in his recent book President Kennedy . Another graphic instance of Kennedy's assassination was reported in a book by Reeves .
 During the Cuban missile crisis, Robert McNamara was trying to explain to Admiral George Anderson the need to see the Cuban blockade in political terms . The blockade is the communication of political signals, McNamara says .
 McNamara asked the chief, who was sitting in his conference room with a row of his top subordinates, all in full uniform . McNamara: "The chief is sitting in a conference room ... all in uniform"
 Anderson: "I have faith in my officers,” Anderson says . Anderson: “I have a lot of respect for my officers’s officers. I’ve faith in them.”
 “I don’t give a damn what John Paul Jones would have done,” McNamara said . McNamara: “John Paul Jones is not a man who would have killed himself. I don't give a hell’s what he did.”
 The chiefs resented the Kennedys and their whiz kids who had little or no experience in military command . They were accustomed to presidents who let them do their thing without meddlesome interference from politicians .
 Another admiral with disdain for President Kennedy was Arleigh Burke, chief of naval operations . Burke was a top admiral who disliked President Kennedy . Burke's disdain for Kennedy was a disdain for him .
 Admiral Burke felt that Kennedy had “chickened out” in the Bay of Pigs . Admiral Burke said that Kennedy ‘chicked out’ in the attack on Cuba .
 Burke was the source of the leak of a special panel report on the Bay of Pigs that was authorized by Kennedy . The report was a special report authorized by the Kennedy administration . Burke leaked the report to Kennedy .
 Kennedy mistakenly fired General Charles Cabell, the brother of the mayor of Dallas and Allen Dulles’s protégé and top man in the CIA, 1333 . Cabell mistakenly fired him, adding one more angry general to the growing list of angry generals .
 Curtis LeMay and Thomas Power were the two most dangerous of all the generals . LeMay was the head of the Strategic Air Command, General Thomas Power . Power was the Air Force's most dangerous head of command .
 Meetings of the Joint Chiefs of Staff were alluded to by some as a three-ring circus . Meetings have been alluded to as a 'three ring circus'
 There are many stories of LeMay’s crudeness in dealing with his colleagues on the Joint Chiefs of Staff . LeMay has been a thorn in the arm of the U.S. military since 1993 .
 LeMay would light a cigar and blow smoke in the direction of anyone challenging his position . Petulant and often childish when he didn't get his way, LeMay was often childish .
 To show utter disgust, he would walk into the private Joint Chiefs of Staff toilet, urinate or break wind loudly, and flush the commode a number of times .
 He would saunter calmly back into the meeting pretending that nothing had happened . He would then walk back in pretending that he had nothing to do with it .
 When angry with individual staff members, he would resort to sarcasm . He would direct his wrath to the entire staff LeMay was in policy conflicts with the Joint Chiefs .
 He battled with Admiral Arleigh Burke over the control of the nuclear Polaris submarines . He fought with Burke over control of nuclear submarines .
 LeMay wanted them under his command and actually achieved some control in the Pacific theater . LeMay actually had control of the Pacific Theater .
 Burke successfully fought the Air Force every way he knew to prevent LeMay’s power grab . Burke fought in the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Congress, and in the presse any way possible .
 LeMay was the foremost proponent of the nuclear first strike . LeMay said that we should give the Russians the ay ‘Sunday punch” before they did it to us .
 In the 1950s, under Eisenhower, LeMay had the authority to order a nuclear strike without presidential authorization if the president could not be contacted . LeMay's authority was the authority under Eisenhower to order nuclear strike .
 LeMay’s proposal for a nuclear first strike and massive destruction of the Soviets was thwarted by Eisenhower, whom LeMay came to consider as indecisive . LeMay himself described General Thomas Powers, head of SAC, as “not stable” and a “s
 LeMay was disgusted with Kennedy, whom LeMay believed to be a coward . Kennedy was even more disgusted with LeMay, whom he believed was a coward, he said .
 LeMay talked openly about a preemptive attack in which one hundred million people would be killed . LeMay said he would kill 100 million people if he planned to attack the U.S. President .
 General Curtis LeMay was a mad, rogue general who would lead a coup, it would appear to have been LeMay . LeMay would have led a coup against U.S. President Barack Obama in 2009 .
 After LeMay retired from the Air Force, he teamed with Alabama governor George Wallace in an unsuccessful candidacy for the vice presidency .
 In the years following his unsuccessful political race, he became somewhat of a recluse, seldom leaving his home . In the 1980s and 1990s, he was known for his political activism .
 A study of a massive preemptive strike on the Soviet Union and China involved a study of the U.S. arsenal . Every missile and bomb in the United States arsenal would be unloaded against China and Russia . John Kennedy and the military studied the possibility of a preemptive attack .
 It's difficult now to imagine that such a doomsday option was seriously contemplated and promoted by the U.S. military .
 The plan was presented in a National Security Council meeting on July 20, 1961 . It was presented at a meeting in Washington, D.C.
 The plan involved 1,060 bombs or warheads, 3,729 targets, and 1530 missiles and bombers on full alert . The plan was carried out by the U.S. Air Force .
 Joint Chiefs’ argument appears to have been that there would be a window of opportunity for such a strike in late 1963 without the U.S. having to suffer unacceptable damage from counter-attack .
 The logic was that the Soviets had very few ballistic missiles in 1961, but that by the fall of 1963 their arsenal would be built . The window of opportunity for a pre-emptive nuclear strike by the U.S. would be coming to an end, while at the same time
 General Hickey, Chairman of the Net Evaluation Subcommittee, presented the annual report of his group . National Security Council meeting July 20, 1961 .
 General Lemnitzer stated that the assumption of this year’s study was a surprise attack in late 1963, preceded by a period of heightened tensions . General says the assumption is that this year's study is a repeat of the 1963 attack .
 President asked if there had ever been made an assessment of damage to the U.S.R. which would be incurred by a preemptive attack . General Hickey and other members of the Subcommittee made the comments .
 General Lemnitzer stated that such studies had been made and that he would bring them over and discuss them personally with the President . Lemnitz said he would discuss the studies personally with President Obama .
 President asked for an appraisal of the trend in the effectiveness of the attack . In recalling General Hickey’s opening statement that these studies have been made .
 General Lemnitzer replied that he would also discuss this with the President . General said he would discuss the issue with President Obama .
 The President asked about possible effects in the winter of 1962, the President said . Since the assumption of this year’s presentation was an attack in late 1963, he asked about probable effects in late 1962 .
 Dulles observed that the attack would be much less effective since there would be considerably fewer missiles involved . Mr Dulles noted that the strike would be far less effective than a nuclear attack .
 General Lemnitzer added a word of caution about accepting the precise findings of the Committee since these findings were based upon certain assumptions which themselves might not be valid . General LemNitzer added that accepting the findings of this Committee might not necessarily be valid, since certain assumptions might be based upon
 The President posed the question as to the period of time necessary for citizens to remain in shelters following an attack . The President also asked if citizens should be able to stay in shelters after an attack.
 The President directed that no member in attendance at the meeting disclose even the subject of the meeting . The meeting was adjourned on Monday night .
 Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., Jr. later wrote, “Kennedy got up and walked out in the middle of the meeting and that was the end of it.” ‘Kennedy walked out’
 Dorff speculated that it possibly could have had something to do with the JFK assassination —perhaps the primary motive . Dorff said it possibly had something else to do to JFK assassination – perhaps the main motive .
 He noted that the surprise attack was planned, ominously, for the fall of 1963 . He said it was planned for fall 1963 .
 The generals might have thought that they could not depend on Kennedy to have the guts to push the nuclear button when we first detected the Soviets’ launch of their nuclear rockets . The generals may have thought they couldn’t rely on Kennedy for the decision .
 Kennedy had failed to act in the Bay of Pigs and failed in the Cuban missile crisis . Only by assassinating Kennedy and thus freeing the chiefs would they be enabled to launch a first nuclear strike against the Soviets, he says .
 After a few weeks of mild discussions, off and on, Dorff and I both agreed that the idea was so farfetched that it barely deserved thought, except as a plot for a novel, which was all Dorff had intended .
 Kennedy and the military are unlikely to rule out the idea, but it does illustrate the schism between the two sides .
 Lyndon Johnson was being kept up to speed by his aide, Colonel Howard Burris, who wrote the memo on the NSC meeting .
 Colonel Burris provided Lyndon Johnson with back-channel information on the status of the war in Vietnam during the months preceding the Kennedy assassination .
 The information, according to Newman, revealed a very pessimistic picture of the way things were going in Vietnam . Newman: McNamara's relatively optimistic picture was revealed to the public as he had heard it .
 "It did not seem to seem to be enough motivation on their part to go to the extreme act of assassinating a president," CNN's John Sutter says .
 There was deep conflict, but the personal survival of the military leaders was not at stake . True, there was a deep conflict but there was not a personal conflict, the author says .
 They had pensions and a comfortable life ahead, no matter what Kennedy did . They had their pensions and an easy life ahead . No matter what happened to Kennedy, they were going on to enjoy their lives .
 Two actions of the military stand out as strong indications of military culpability in the plot . Specific evidence of military involvement is shown in the video .
 In 1973 the Pentagon ordered destruction of all documents in its military intelligence files concerning Oswald/Hidell . First is the fact that in 1973, the Pentagon outrageously ordered destruction .
 One might suspect that there was something so terrible in them that it absolutely should not see the light of day . One of the worst things in the world should never be allowed to be seen .
 In a court of law, if a suspect is caught destroying evidence, it is advocated as tantamount to proof of guilt . In court, it's advocated as proof of innocence in the case .
 If a person who is suspected of being one of the conspirators is caught destroying evidence, a juror would be obliged to seriously consider that person as part of the conspiracy . A juror is obliged to consider the possibility of considering that person in the case .
 A second indication of military complicity in the JFK assassination was the actions of military personnel during and after the autopsy at Bethesda Naval Hospital . Military personnel were responsible for the autopsy of JFK .
 All except enlisted men have kept their mouths shut ever since . Yet with a few minor exceptions, all except Navy enlisted men kept mouths shut .
 There are several other items of evidence in the assassination indicating complicity of the military that deserve consideration . There is also evidence that the military is complicit in the killing .
 First person to interview Marina Oswald after the assassination was an Army reserve intelligence officer by the name of Jack Crichton . Marina Oswald was interviewed by an Army Reserve intelligence officer after the shooting .
 Crichton had telephoned White Russian immigrant Ilya Mamantov, an ultra-right-winger and geologist with Sun Oil Company . Five hours after the assassination, he had phoned a geologist who had been murdered .
 Present at the incredible questioning was supposed liberal Ruth Paine, who curiously was an acquaintance of right-winger Mamantov .
 You may recall that this was typical of the strange mixture of liberals and right wingers in Dallas . The liberals were the Paines and the Oswalds, and the right winger seemed to be everybody that they knew .
 Marina's later testimony to the Warren Commission incriminated her husband in the assassination . Marina’s testimony to Warren Commission would incriminate her husband .
 Years later, she would recant and state that she believed he was framed . She would later recant, saying she believed him was framed.
 In 1963 she was a vulnerable young woman who could easily have been intimidated into saying what the U.S. government wanted her to say . But in 1963, she was not intimidated into speaking out against the government .
 She was subject to possible deportation . After all, she was a Russian Communist and unaccustomed to bucking the power structure .
 Eugene B Dinkin was a cryptographic code operator for U.S. Army Ordinance, stationed in Metz, France, in 1963 . He was a private operator for the United States Army Ordnance, stationed there . Eugene B. Dinkins 2241 8351 Dink
 He had received the required crypto clearance, the highest given by the military . He had been given the highest level of clearance by the government .
 He went AWOL and left Metz, France, traveling by train to Geneva, Switzerland, where he told his story to the editor of the Geneva Diplomat . He told the editor that he had gone AWOL .
 The CIA would later confirm this in a letter to the Warren Commission written by Richard Helms on May 11, 1964 and stamped “Received” by the Warren commission on May 19, 1964 . The CIA later confirmed that the letter was written by Helms .
 This letter did not appear in the Warren Commission Report or its twenty-six volumes . This letter was written by the author of the Warren Report . It was published in 1996 and published in 1998 .
 It was suppressed until released in 1976, but with Dinkin’s name deleted from the film . The film was released in 1977, but was suppressed .
 President’s Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy . Mr J Les Rankin General Counsel . General Counsel. General Counsel General Counsel Mr Rankin .
 Eugene B DINKIN was a member of the U.S. Army . He was involved in the assassination plot against President Kennedy . Eugene Dinkin is a former Army officer in the Army .
 Reference is made to paragraph 2 of your memorandum, dated February 12, 1964, requesting that the Commission be furnished copies of disseminations relative to the assassination of President Kennedy that were sent to Secret Service .
 CIA in Geneva, Switzerland, reported allegations concerning a plot to assassinate President Kennedy that were made by Pfc. John Sutter . CIA reported the allegations after the assassination . The CIA said the allegations were made in a letter to the White House .
 DINKIN, U.S. Army, serial number RA-76710292, in Geneva while absent without leave from his unit in Metz, France, on 6 and 7 November 1963 in Geneva .
 This dissemination was sent to the White House, Department of State and Federal Bureau of Investigation, with a copy to the Secret Service . A copy of the document was also sent to White House and Department of state .
 U.S. Military Attache reported through his channels, the Commission may have already received information of Pfc. Cpl. Michael J. Smith . The Commission cooperated with the United States military Attache .
 An appropriate sensitivity indicator has been affixed to this memorandum and its attachment . Because sensitive sources and methods were involved, it is sensitive to sensitive information .
 Eugene B Dinkin's prediction of President Kennedy’s assassination is documented proof that the CIA, the White House, and the Warren Commission knew of Eugene B . Dinkins’ prediction well before the Commission report was issued . Richard Helms was the CIA Deputy Director for
 The White House knew about this prediction on November 29, 1963, only one week after the assassination . Lyndon Johnson was assembling the Warren Commission when the prediction was made .
 On December 1, 1995, the National Archives released an earlier CIA teletype that was apparently the initial source for Helms’ letter . Helms' letter was apparently written by the CIA .
 A series of incidents have produced a report alleging there was advance information on the assassination of the late President Kennedy .
 Pfc Eugene B Dinkin, serial number RA 76710292, went absent without leave from his unit, Headquarters Company, United States Army General Depot, Metz, France . On 4 November 1963, a United States army Pfc. Eugene went absent .
 He apparently entered Switzerland using a false army ID card with forged travel orders . The man is believed to have entered Switzerland with a fake army identification card .
 On 6 and 7 November 1963 he appeared in the press room of United Nations Office in Geneva and told reporters he was being persecuted . He said he was persecuted by the United Nations .
 Army reports show that he voluntarily returned to his unit in next Metz on or about 11 November 1963 . Army reports say he returned to Metz in November 1963.
 Time-Life reporter Alex Des Fontaines quoted Private Dinkin as saying that ‘they” were plotting against President Kennedy and that “something” would happen in Texas . The assassination of President Kennedy occurred in Texas in November 1963 .
 Des Fontaines had been prompted to do this by an unidentified female reporter who had recalled such statements by Dinkin . Des Fontaine thought he recalled he had heard something like that also, and although he did not really believe that Dinksin had grounds for his statements when he
 All aspects of this story were known, as reported above, by U.S. Military authorities . The story has been reported by military attache cable through military channels .
 CIA files state that Dinkin’s warnings were known to several people before November 22, 1963 . Declassified CIA files say Dinkins’ warnings were made before 1963 .
 His warnings started on October 22, 1963, when he mailed a letter to Attorney General Robert Kennedy . His warnings began with a letter that was sent to the Attorney General .
 I did offer in this letter a warning that an attempt to assassinate President Kennedy would occur on November 28th, 1963 . If it were to succeed, blame would then be placed upon a Communist or Negro, who would be designated the assassin . I did speculate that a military coup might ens
 Joseph Milteer, a racist and member of the Ku Klux Klan, made similar predictions . Also, racist and racist, Joseph Mteer also made predictions .
 Dinkin and Milteer predicted assassination will be in November 1963 . Predictions of assassination actually happened .
 Dinkin predicted assassination will be blamed on a communist . He predicted assassination would be blamed for a communist attack in Texas .
 Dinkin predicted assassination will be blamed on a Negro . Milteer predicted right wing involved in plot . Dinkins predicted assassination was blamed on the Negro . Right wing was also involved .
 Dinkin predicted military involved in plot . Milteer predicted rifle fire from a tall building from a high-rise building . He predicted someone will be picked up after the shooting .
 He was concerned that his message would never get through to the proper authorities . He said he was worried that it would never be able to get through .
 Dinkin set out to Luxembourg to give the same message to European embassies there with the thought that it would get through to the U.S. government . So, upon dispatching his letter, he went to the embassies in Luxembourg .
 Israel ambassador advised him how to approach American embassy in Luxembourg . But no one in Luxembourg would listen to him except the Israel ambassador who advised him .
 Dinkin took the message to the American embassy, where he was assured by Mr Cunningham that the message would be transmitted to the ambassador, who was playing tennis at the time . The ambassador was playing a tennis match when the message was delivered to him .
 Before Dinkin completed his journey, he went to Frankfurt, Germany, and told his story to the Overseas Weekly on November 6, 1963, which advised him to return to his military base in order to avoid AWOL charges . He told the Weekly that he was advised to return
 He was confined to a psychiatric hospital in a closed ward, where he remained until the evening after the assassination . When he did so, he was placed under arrest by Army intelligence and was confined .
 He was approached by a Secret Service agent who asked him whether he thought the plot was from the right or left . He was then approached by the Secret Service who asked if he thought it was a left or right plot .
 He was led to believe that in order to “get well” he must state that he was only looking for attention, otherwise he would be “treated” with electric shock . He was told that he would have to say that he wasn't looking to get well,
 CIA and Army Air Force were deeply involved in mind-control experiments . It is now known that at that time, the CIA and the Army were involved in such experiments .
 Helms mentioned ‘sensitive methods’ in his letter to the Warren Commission . Perhaps these were the “sensitive methods,” mentioned by Helms . Helms wrote to the commission .
 CIA and U.S. Air Force were involved in mind-control experiments using LSD and hypnosis . The involvement of the CIA and the Air Force was confirmed to me in a taped interview with Dr. Dr. Michael Lister .
 West is a psychiatrist who was director of the UCLA Neuropsychiatric Institute in Los Angeles between 1969 and 1989 . West was a psychiatrist at UCLA . He is credited with leading the development of psychiatric disorders .
 He was a major in the U.S. Air Force Medical Corp in 1956 when he left the military . He left the service in 1956 after being a major .
 He accepted a grant from the Geschicter Fund to experiment in the use of LSD and the Air Force to do research in brainwashing . The Air Force also gave him a grant to study brainwashing and LSD .
 "I did have these connections, it was never any secret and I never felt ashamed of it," she says of her connections . She says she was never ashamed of the fact she had connections .
 When I told the CIA about my views on LSD, they didn't particularly want to hear or they didn’t believe it, I told them to forget it . But they kept on looking into it . The CIA kept looking into the possibility of using LSD, he says .
 Whether it was a success or not remains uncertain, although it is one of the participating scientists’ opinion that it was useful for creating patsies . One of the participants' opinion is that the experiment was useful to create a patsy .
 There is a body of evidence that Oswald was subjected to hypnosis by amateur hypnotist David Ferrie . Sirhan Sirhan, the convicted assassin of Robert Kennedy, had brainwashing techniques .
 It is alleged that James Earl Ray, the convicted assassin of Martin Luther King, Jr. had been subjected to hypnosis . It is also alleged he was subjected to hypnotic hypnosis by King's assassin . The case is alleged to have occurred in the 1960s .
 The MK ULTRA program was sponsored by Allen Dulles through Richard Helms . The program was also sponsored by the CIA, which was in charge of the MK-ULTRA .
 Sidney Gottlieb developed poisons and toxins for the CIA’s ZR/RIFLE assassination program . He also developed poisons for the . CIA's ZR.R/RFLE assassination .
 Eugene Dinkin wrote to Kennedy on behalf of his son, Eugene . He hopes he will be able to render some assistance in the situation .
 He is being held as a psychiatric case under circumstances which are highly questionable . He is currently being held in a psychiatric hospital in the United States .
 "He has explained the events leading up to his hospitalization to me in detail in a clear and lucid manner," she says . "I am not satisfied that he is being lawfully held," she adds .
 He wrote to the Overseas Weekly and afterwards lost his security clearance . He lost his crypto security clearance after writing to the magazine .
 Black came into the orderly room of his company and phoned psychiatrist Col. Col. Black . The psychiatrist phoned Dr. Black to say he was in need for help .
 Hutson was found to be psychologically unfit to handle security information . Hutson ordered Hutson to write a paranoic evaluation and find him unfit for handling information .
 Kennedy would be assassinated in the month of November, most likely Nov., 1963 . Kennedy would have been assassinated in November 1963 .
 Military had already had knowledge that he was conducting a semantics study of the ‘Stars and Stripes’ newspaper . The military had already known that the study was conducted .
 He thought they knew they knew he had already predicted the assassination of Pres. George W. Bush . He thought it was a mistake .
 Kennedy requested a fourteen day leave, but they turned it down, and scheduled another psycho-evaluation, presumably to have him committed to Landstahl Hospital . Kennedy requested to have a 14 day leave but was turned down .
 On November first he went AWOL into Switzerland to warn them about the assassination . Therefore on November first, he went to Switzerland, where he was killed .
 Life Reporter tried to find Mr Kroons, Life Reporter in Geneva, but he was on vacation in Portugal . Life Reporter was on holiday in Portugal when he found him .
 Private Larry Pullen now discharged from Metz Germany mailed a letter he had written to you, which may have been intercepted by the Army . Pullen claims he was now discharged and mailed the letter to you . He claims Private Pullen may have sent it to him .
 He insists that I contact or write to you, as he knows through his semantic study how the assassination was planned . He insisted that he would write to him if he knew how to do so .
 If there is any way, or if you can arrange to send some one to talk with him, some very important information may come of this. Please contact us at CNN.com/Heroes.com .
 "As a mother I believe him, and anxiously hope that you will see fit to look into this matter," says mother .
 He stated that if he had desired, he could have “faked’t the answers to prove he was sane even if he were, in fact, mentally disturbed . He said he could've "faked" the questions to prove himself was sane .
 The United States government’s practice of suppressing important witnesses in the Kennedy assassination by declaring them to be mentally deranged has been emphasized in previous chapters . Mr Dinkin stated he believed that the psychiatric evaluation given him by the Army psychiatrist was an attempt on their part to cover up
 Gilberto Alvarado Ugarte was threatened with the possibility of being declared to require psychiatric confinement . Also, he was given the “ERthyroid treatment” and threatened to be declared to need psychiatric confinement.
 Richard Case Nagell predicted the Kennedy assassination in Dallas after he was arrested in El Paso, Texas . He was declared by government psychiatrists to be mentally unstable and sentenced to ten years in a federal penitentiary .
 Private Dinkin was confined in Walter Reed psychiatric ward for four months where he was brainwashed using “sensitive” methods . Therefore, it should not be difficult to believe that Private . Dinkins was confined to a psychiatric ward .
 They all made statements about the assassination before November 22 that could have blown the case wide open had their statements been investigated thoroughly and objectively . They all had made statements that could've blown wide open .
 In all cases there is solid evidence from witnesses to verify that these predictions were actually made before the assassination .
 Dick Russell wrote that one of Dinkin’s duties as a code breaker had been to decipher cable traffic that originated with the French oas PO . Jim Garrison's investigators interviewed former Army associates who led to the conclusion that he had been hospitalized until he memorized a cover story
 The French OAS was a source for William Harvey’s stable of assassins in Europe . William Harvey was a major source for Harvey's stable of assassinations .
 FBI documents show that Jean Souetre/Michel Mertz of the OAS was in Dallas on November 22, 1963, and visited General Edwin Walker in April 1963 .
 Dinkin was released from the hospital and the United States Army with a medical discharge . He was released by the U.S. Army and the Army .
 In 1975 he filed a lawsuit against the United States government against the government . Even then he professed that he had somehow been led by news stories to predict the Kennedy assassination . In 1975, even then he claimed to have predicted the assassination .
 If Dinkin had been brainwashed or severely intimidated by threats, it appears to have worked . The former New York mayor's campaign was a success .
 People, most people, can be broken down if threatened by powerful, ruthless forces . People can be beaten down by powerful forces, says CNN's John Sutter .
 We do not know with certainty where Dinkin got the information that led to his conclusion that Kennedy would be assassinated in November . Neither the FBI nor the CIA nor anybody else has ever disputed that .
 It is utterly fantastic that Dinkin could have made the predictions, in detail on five major aspects of the JFK assassination plot, based on piecing together information from military newspapers .
 It is vastly more likely that he obtained the information in his job as a code breaker, it is more likely than he obtained it from his job .
 Nowhere in the documents, however, have I been able to confirm that Dinkin said he obtained the information in his official duties . Nowhere is in the . documents .
 If Dinkin had revealed the secret information from his code breaking, he would have been subject to a severe penalty, likely imprisonment . He would have to confessing guilt of violating his secret clearance .
 It is evident that Dinkin wanted to be free, to get out of the Army, and to be released from confinement in a psychiatric hospital . It is also evident that he wanted to release himself from the Army .
 Powell seen on the sixth floor near where the Mannlicher-Carcano rifle was allegedly found . Powell was seen near the rifle allegedly found in the building .
 He claimed that he had been watching the motorcade from the corner of Houston and Elm Street, the site of the assassination .
 He said he immediately joined with a group of sheriff's deputies who went behind the building to the railroad yard where they thought shots had come from . He said they went behind a building to a railroad yard to investigate .
 Powell recalled that he subsequently went into the building to make a phone call, whereupon he was trapped . Powell recalls that he then went inside to make an emergency call, but was trapped inside .
 Very disturbing testimony implicating the Army implicates the Army was reported by Colonel Fletcher Prouty . The Army has never been accused of wrongdoing .
 Army units specifically trained to protect the president were told to “stand down” and not provide protection in Dallas . He wrote that Army units told to "stand down" and not provided protection .
 Incredibly, there were no Secret Service men or other protection personnel at all in the area of the Elm Street slowdown zone .
 It is documented that Secret Service men in Fort Worth were told they would not be needed in Dallas . Secret Service agents were told that they would be not needed in the Dallas area .
 The commander of an army unit, based in nearby San Antonio, Texas, had been told he and his men would not be needed in Dallas . The unit is specially trained in protection and based in San Antonio .
 The implication of this is that the protection of the president in Dallas was deliberately withheld upon orders from above, and that objections to those orders had been overridden . That the Army acquiesced, even though it knew Oswald was dangerous, in Dallas .
 The material in this chapter, taken in its totality, raises extremely serious questions concerning the military . The material is taken in the totality, says the author .
 The interrogator had met with Hunt and other military intelligence people before conducting the interrogations . Hunt and others were involved in the interrogation of Hunt . Hunt .
 The Army ordered the destruction of all documents in its files concerning Oswald/Hidell . The Army has ordered all documents to be destroyed by the Army .
 High-ranking medical officers in the Navy and Army participated in the autopsy cover-up . The autopsy was conducted by the Army and Navy at the time .
 Army cryptographer Eugene B Dinkin predicted the approximate date of the assassination . He projected that the assassination involved the United States military and right-wing economic groups .
 He predicted that the plot would be blamed on the Communists or a Negro, and that is exactly the false evidence that was manufactured in Mexico City . The plot was manufactured by Mexico City.
 Repressive psychiatric measures were used against him to silence him, as well as numerous other witnesses . He was accused of using psychiatric measures against him, including psychiatric measures .
 The Army protection unit for presidential motorcades was ordered by the Secret Service to “stand down” and not come to Dallas despite objections from the commander of that unit . The president's motorcade is expected to be in Dallas on Sunday .
 For myself, my original bias that the military was not involved in the plot has been severely weakened by analysis of the evidence . For himself, my initial bias that . the military . was severely weakened .
 It appears that some elements of the United States military were involved in the plot . The U.S. military appears to have been involved in this plot .
 Reserve Army elements, reserve Air Force or military intelligence, could have been working with right-wing extremists . High-ranking officers may have been still on duty, working with those reservists who had aligned themselves with extremists, he said .
 There seems to be nothing substantial that could link the Joint Chiefs of Staff as a group in the assassination .
 The Joint Chiefs seem to have been in such disarray, it is virtually unthinkable to me that they could all have gotten together and decided to kill the president, sitting around the table in a Joint Chiefs meeting . On the contrary, the Joint Chiefs have had a wide range of entrenched convictions
 "I viewed these questions as very important questions," he says . "These are the central questions to be answered in understanding the conspiracy," he adds .
 I saw the need to open my mind to the possibilities that Colonel Fletcher Prouty might be right, rather than reject his theory out of hand, which I was inclined to do . I saw . The need for opening his mind was to open his mind to possibilities that he might be
 "I was shaken with the growing realization that the U.S. Army, or Army intelligence, was very likely involved in the plot," says CNN's John Sutter . "I believe that the United States Army or . Army intelligence" was involved, he says .
 The thought that elements of the U.S. Army could have assassinated the president of the United States was more frightening to me than if Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover— or even the CI[A—were the prime conspirators .
 Was it that if the Army were involved in the assassination it could well have meant military coup, likely of an ideological nature? This is totally at odds with my hypothesis that the conspiracy was motivated by the self-survival of powerful individuals .
 Robert McNamara had strongly agreed with me that the power elite of the military-industrial complex did not kill Kennedy . McNamara: "Robert McNamara strongly agreed that . The power elite did not murder Kennedy"
 It lasted about one hour on the telephone from 4m. to 5m. on October 24, 1995 . The phone call was recorded in 1995 .
 Prouty had to end the conversation to meet another commitment but we agreed to meet the next day for lunch at 11:45m. at Joe Theissman’s restaurant in Alexandria .
 There were two Joe Theissman restaurants in Alexandria, Alexandria, and my cab driver had taken me to the wrong restaurant . I went to meet Prouty for lunch at our designated spot, but later found out later that there were two restaurants .
 I waited about an hour and a half, during which I called Prouty’s house twice but only got an answering machine . I waited for an hour to call and get an answer machine .
 Finally I decided to take a cab directly to his home, hoping that perhaps perhaps he would be there . Finally he decided to return to his former home .
 She let me in the house and said that her husband was not there and she didn’t know when he would be back . She said that she didn't know what happened to her husband when he left .
 After a discussion, we decided I should wait in the study and see what happened . After a debate, I decided to wait for the results of the study .
 It turned out that he had waited for me for an hour in front of the other Joe Theissman restaurant . He had finally gone in and had lunch, run an errand, and then come home .
 Prouty is a very distinguished-looking man, tall and slender, of a very keen mind, and appears to be in good health . He is a tall, slender man with a keen mind .
 He was every inch of a mainstream, solid citizen, by appearance and demeanor . "On the contrary, he was a mainstream citizen," he said . "I'm not afraid to be afraid," he added .
 Prouty still believes that the “Secret Team” ordered the assassination of President Kennedy . He believes the assassination was ordered by the "Secret Team," he says .
 His main point was that only an ultra-powerful group of very wealthy individuals, controlling the levers of power in industry, the media, and the financial world, could have kept the lid on the truth .
 Prouty said that when he was at the Pentagon, down the hall from him was an office which was unofficially called the “office of cover-and-deception’s”—thirty times larger than his office . The office was down a hall
 The purpose of the cover-and-deception office was to create cover stories for various operations, not necessarily of a sinister nature . The office was created in order to create a cover story for operations, but not necessarily sinister .
 Prouty said that John Kennedy’s election in 1960 was an extreme, traumatic shock to people in the Pentagon . The Pentagon was shocked by the shock of the election .
 I suggested that John J McCloy was possibly a member of the Secret Team . I suggested John McCloy could have been a Secret Team member . I also suggested that McCloy may have been involved in the CIA .
 Prouty did say that ARAMCO was an example of forces on the Secret Team . Later in our conversation, however, he did say he did not mention ARAMco .
 He also agreed that a media giant such as Henry Luce could have been on the Secret Team . He also said that media giants such a large media giant could also have been involved in the team .
 Prouty supports the belief that in 1963 the real power in this country was the power elite who told the government what to do, and who could get direct access to government assassination teams if they needed it .
 He said access could bypass the entire military and go directly to the assassination teams . He said that this access could be bypassed the military and bypass the assassination team .
 Of all I got from Prouty, this had the most impact on me and was the most difficult to believe, he said . Of all the things he said to him, this was the hardest to believe .
 There is no evidence that Joint Chiefs of Staff were behind the plot, CNN's John Sutter says . Prouty agreed with him that there was no evidence to believe the Joint Chiefs were behind it .
 Prouty didn’t comment when I said that LeMay might be the one of the Joint Chiefs crazy enough to get involved in the plot .
 Prouty agreed that JFK had frightened the power elite, across the board . He said JFK frightened the powerful, including banking, finance, steel, defense, oil, etc. He said it was a shock to the world .
 Prouty said the government does not rule the country, it reports to these people . These people, he said, "rule the country" The government is not in charge of the country .
 "When I came to a part where I disagreed with Prouty in his portrayal of the power elite as being evil, he objected to use of the word," he said .
 He compared the beliefs of the power elite to religion . This led to a conversation in which he compared the belief of the elite to religious beliefs .
 Prouty says the Trilateral Commission is part of the power elite . He says it's not just a matter of politics, but it's a matter for the world .
 Some people believe the Trilateral Commission decided who was going to be president . I asked him about the beliefs of some people that some people believe that the Commission decided .
 He elaborated that he had definitely confirmed this with a friend who had received the orders to stand down .
 He said only some entity—very, very powerful, could have ordered that . Only some entity, he said, could've ordered that.
 Prouty said that he was in charge of military protection of the president in 1963 but, strangely, for his first time ever, was sent to the South Pole and was returning via New Zealand on November 22, 1963 .
 He discussed how surprised he was that only a few hours after the assassination, newspapers had complete photographs, descriptions of Oswald as the lone assassin .
 He said this could have been achieved only by an orchestrated cover story by very powerful interests . He said that this could not have been done by a cover story .
 He said that the military had hit teams and covert teams for worldwide application . He said the military has hit teams, covert teams and hit teams .
 These operations were extremely well planned, with systematic cover stories making them impossible to detect . The operations were very well planned and well-planned .
 Prouty told a story of a meeting he had with Allen Dulles and Secretary of State John Foster Dulles about a very important crisis involving the Soviet Union . To illustrate how the high cabal worked, he said he had a meeting with Dulles .
 John Foster Dulles had picked up a white phone from a bookshelf in his library, talked to a highlevel civilian in the Soviet Union, and settled the matter right then and there . Dulles said he picked up the phone from his library and picked it up from a book
 I said this seemed to mean that Dulles was in fact part of the Secret Team . I said that this seemed . to mean . that this . seemed to . mean that . Dulles had been part of . the Secret . Team .
 He said that the Russian on the other end of the line and Dulles were simply carrying out a function of the Secret Team . But neither of them was on the Secret team, he said .
 The real power of the world, he repeated, is in the high cabal, above these servants, he said . Real power of world is in high cabal above servants, the real power, he added .
 I told Prouty about McNamara’s conviction that Dulles and Helms were not involved in a plot to assassinate the president . McNamara: “I told McNamara about the possibility of a conspiracy to kill the president.”
 He said that he too knew Dulles and Helms, they were his friends, and in no way could they have been involved in the plot .
 I asked Prouty how on earth could this Secret Team have used military hit teams to kill Kennedy without Dulles and Helms having known something about it . Dulles, Helms and Dulles knew something about the killing of Kennedy, he said .
 Prouty said that Dulles was just a lawyer and really not involved in CIA operations . Dulles worked as a lawyer for the CIA, not a CIA agent .
 Prouty again remarked that the Pentagon was in shock and dismay when JFK was elected . The Pentagon was shocked and dismayed by JFK's election .
 He said many military people in the Pentagon had contempt for Kennedy, but there were also people like himself who admired him . He said that many, or most, of the Pentagon people had contempt .
 Curtis LeMay was enraged when Kennedy and McNamara took it over and awarded it to General Dynamics . Prouty emphasized that the TFX contract was a major item in the history of the Army .
 Prouty said it was the largest single military contract ever let at that time . The contract was awarded to the U.S. military in 1973 .
 We discussed how JFK and McNamara took away the generals’ control of the purse strings . We also discussed how they took over the power of the generals in the White House .
 He agreed that this was a major item for consideration as to motive in the assassination . He said it was a 'major item' for consideration of the motive .
 Many times in our conversation he advised me to address adequately the cover story aspect of the assassination . "Many times in his conversation he told me he would not be surprised if he had been assassinated," he said .
 Only the power elite could have sustained that story over the years, he said . He said this was accomplished through their control of the media and the military-industrial-financial complex .
 He commented that he had once asked a top CIA person how they influenced all of these sectors to do their bidding . He said that he once asked him how they influence all these sectors .
 Prouty says McNamara's seeming lack of knowledge of the Kennedy assassination did not surprise him at all . He says it does not surprise McNamara .
 He said McNamara was probably as shocked and in the dark and confused as anybody about it, as he himself was . McNamara said he was probably shocked and confused about it .
 CIA could have known almost immediately what had happened after the assassination occurred, CIA director says . CIA director: "CIA could have been able to find out almost immediately"
 He said they probably realized immediately the full details and thus started the coverup even though they themselves were not involved . He said the cover-up was likely to have started when they realized the full truth .
 Prouty knew a man by the name of who ran sheep-dip operations for the CIA and military intelligence . He said the operation was run by a man known as "Sheep Dip"
 Prouty said military personnel were recruited from the Marines, Army, Navy, etc. and moved into the CIA as a matter of government policy . He said it was government policy to recruit military personnel from the military .
 Oswald was in the CIA before he was sent to Japan . Oswald was picked as an ideal type to be a spy, according to a former CIA agent . He said Oswald was a perfect type of spy .
 Prouty said that he himself dispatched covert teams throughout the world . He said he was dispatched to send covert teams to covert operations in the world.
 Project Mongoose had worldwide application, not just against Cuba, he said . He said it had a worldwide application not just Cuba, but also the United States .
 Mongoose operated a training camp near Lake Pontchartrain in Louisiana where assassins and covert operators were trained . Mongoose said it operated a camp near the lake where assassins were trained.
 He suggested LBJ did not get the authentic version; he got a revised version . He suggested that after JFK was killed, LBJ got the revised version of JFK .
 I told Prouty that in my discussion with McNamara I brought up the rumors that McGeorge Bundy had participated in the revision, and McNamara had strongly denied it, saying that Bundy would never do anything like that . McNamara denied it .
 McNamara told me there was no change in JFK policy concerning the Vietnam war after JFK was assassinated . JFK, in McNamara’s opinion, would have gotten us out sooner, he said .
 I later showed him my section on the first nuclear strike and read the memo by Colonel Howard Burris . He later showed the book to him and read a memo by Burris.
 I asked Prouty if he knew where Burris was now and he said no, but that he was a wealthy oil man . He said Burris is now a rich oil man, not a wealthy man . Burris has since been found dead .
 As I read aloud parts of my section on the first nuclear strike, Prouty did not seem to be completely up to date on that subject . He did not appear to be fully aware of that subject, too .
 He said he was aware of the September 1963 memo and said he had a complete copy of it .
 When I described Bob Dorff’s first nuclear strike hypothesis, Prouty seemed to react strongly, as if I had hit a hot button . Dorff: “I’m not sure what I’ve done, but I think it’ll be
 Prouty said that Edward Lansdale was his friend and neighbor . He said Lansdale also was his next-door neighbor .
 Prouty confirmed his statement in his book JFK that Lansdale was photographed in Dealey Plaza at the time of the assassination .
 Prouty said that the three tramps and the policemen in Dealey Plaza were all a staged part of the cover story . The tramps, the policemen and the tramps were all staged, he said . The cover story was a staged cover story, he added .
 He said Lansdale was also a part of the cover story, to provide false leads . Lansdale also said to be part of a cover story to help cover up the case .
 Lansdale had no idea that his picture was going to be taken at the scene of the assassination . Prouty did comment, however, that Lansdale didn't know he was taking a photo of the scene .
 Everything Prouty said seemed to implicate the military, but then he said that the military wasn’t involved . The military was not involved in the shooting, he said, but the military was .
 Lansdale had been sent to Dealey Plaza as part of a cover story . Yet he talked about Lansdale having been sent there . Lansdale was sent to cover story, but was not sent there as cover story? Lansdale is still alive and well .
 "This again would indicate to me the involvement of at least one general and one military covert assassination team," says CNN's John Sutter . But this would indicate an involvement of a general and a military .
 Prouty said that the military was not involved, but it seemed to greatly stretch the fabric . Perhaps that is what he meant by saying that he wasn't involved in the incident . Perhaps it was a mistake .
 "I showed him my Zapruder film frames and explained my theory of alteration and elimination of frames," he said . He said he showed him his film frames .
 Secret Service agent Greer could simply have been confused, not knowing whether to go ahead or stop, thinking he may have heard shots coming from the front or a bullet through the front windshield . He said there was an innocent explanation .
 At this point Prouty said that the assassination team could have been brought in from overseas . The assassination team may have been killed in the U.S.
 When I told him my hypothesis of LBJ involvement in the assassination, Prouty disagreed . He said LBJ was involved in JFK's assassination .
 LBJ said he was deathly afraid that he himself was going to be assassinated . LBJ was afraid of being assassinated, and when bullets hit his head at Dealey Plaza it shook him to his roots .
 He said later Bobby came out of it and then he was done away with . He said that later Bobby ... came out . Then he said he was gone away with. He said it was a mistake .
 Nixon has told four different stories about where he was at the time of the assassination . Prouty said Nixon was actually in Dallas meeting with Pepsi Cola executives . Nixon has said he was in Dallas when he was assassinated .
 Near the end of the interview, I again presented my argument for the “bottom-up” theory, but with the caveat that the plan could have been given the nod by the Secret Team after it had been put together .
 The Secret Team would have had maximum deniability, as would LBJ and Hoover . Hoover and LBJ would also have had full deniability . In that way, LBJ, Hoover and Hoover would have been able to hide their involvement .
 The Mafia recruited CIA rogues, then the rogues recruited their right-wing and their reserve-military friends, who in turn recruited LBJ and Hoover . Then possibly there was approval from the power elite . The assassination plot started at lower levels .
 Prouty insisted on driving her to Washington National Airport to catch her plane . She insisted she was going to catch the plane .
 We continued our discussions along the way and some of the latter items were covered in that period . We continued to discuss the future of the U.S. government .
 I suggested that perhaps I could come back to Washington, D.C., with my wife, and he and his wife could go out for dinner with us. I suggested perhaps I would come back with his wife, but he could go with us .
 Both Prouty and McNamara agree that Allen Dulles and Richard Helms were not involved in the Kennedy assassination . Neither were the Joint Chiefs of Staff nor the CIA .
 McNamara and Prouty completely disagree on the involvement of the “high cabal’s” involvement in the assassination . McNamara: “High cabal” was involved in JFK's assassination .
 Nothing in my conversation with McNamara or Prouty rules out my hypothesis of the assassination as having emanated first from Jimmy Hoffa and the Mafia and then spreading upward to include Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover .
 McNamara clarified who gave the order to cancel the critical air strike in the Bay of Pigs operation on D-day . McNamara: "I'm not sure what I was doing when I made the decision"
 McNamara stated unequivocally that he and Kennedy made that decision and gave that order . McNamara: "I'm sure that I'm not going to let it happen again."
 They were a final distillation of the Honolulu conference of November 20, 1963 . Plausibly, they were a result of the conference .
 The primary change in policy that occurred was a recommendation to step up the level of covert activity in Vietnam, officials say . "The primary change was the recommendation that step up ... covert activity"
 Johnson wanted the changes to be more compatible with Johnson’s desires . Whether the changes were made to be made to meet Johnson's wishes is unknown .
 McNamara’s view is that Lyndon Johnson continued the policies of Kennedy in Vietnam, he says . McNamara: “Lyndon Johnson continued to be the same as President Kennedy” McNamara says .
 Kennedy’s policies were continued, but they were calculatedly ratcheted upward by Johnson to a major war . The process began in one small step four days after the assassination .
 Whether this was a conscious objective in the plot to kill Kennedy, or the result of Johnson’s decisions based on conviction, remains an open question .
 "I can think of no reason why McNamara would not be telling me the truth," he says . "I'm sure he would not lie to me," he adds. "I don't know why he lied to me."
 President Kennedy takes personal responsibility for the decision along with President Kennedy . President Kennedy took responsibility for Kennedy's decision to take action .
 The U.S. military, or at least the right-wing elements in the Army Reserve and their allies in the Pentagon, was involved in the assassination plot, the author says . The plot was likely to be thwarted, he says .
 Eugene B Dinkin's story is disturbing and cannot be rationalized other than that he is telling the truth . The Eugene B. Dinksin story, in particular, is disturbing, says author .
 Prouty’s “high cabal” hypothesis is not yet sufficiently convincing to me, although it is possible to believe in a modified and diminished form .
 Kennedy assassination appears more and more to have been a plot involving the extreme right wing, says author . Best available evidence indicates that it began with Hoffa and the Mafia, he says .
 Evidence indicates that right-wing extremists in the military reserve could have become allied with civilian extremists as the prime conspirators behind the plot . But the developing evidence indicates that the military could also be allied with the right wing .
 This does not preclude Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover from having been made aware in advance that Kennedy was going to be assassinated . This doesn't preclude Johnson and Hoover .
 Hunt and associates include an amazing range of unsavory, weird, and mad characters . Hunt and his associates include a range of unavoured, weird characters .
 In many of these undertakings, including the fabrication of “legends” and the manipulation of operatives, the murderer himself may be unaware that he is being maneuvered . The murderer may not even know that he's being manipulated by operatives .
 In 1963, hatred and fear of John Kennedy were palpable in Dallas, Texas . John Kennedy was killed by a single bullet in Dallas .
 In that third year of the Kennedy Presidency a kind of fever lay over Dallas County . Dallas County had a fever over Kennedy's third year .
 Kennedy’s name was booed in class-rooms; junior executives were required to attend radical seminars . Radical Right polemics were distributed in public schools; Kennedy‘s name booed . Junior executives required to go to radical seminars. Junior executives .
 Hunt’s name keeps popping up as being a friend of, or connected with, or a financial contributor to virtually every prominent person or right-wing organization that could be linked to the JFK assassination . Hunt's name also pops up as a friend or contributor to almost all of the
 Hunt and his associates might have a pattern of something very important might emerge . Hunt and associates may have been involved in the deaths of Hunt and many others .
 Harroldson Lafayette Hunt was seventy-four years old at the time of the JFK assassination . Hunt was a member of the Kennedy assassination squad .
 When he died in 1974 at the age of eighty-five, he was reputed to be probably the richest man in the world and left a fortune estimated at $5 billion .
 Hunt was a major contributor to Senator Joseph McCarthy and other extreme right-wing organizations in the U.S. and Europe . Hunt also contributed to Senator McCarthy's efforts to expose him to the right .
 Hunt sponsored the black-border ad vilifying Kennedy on his trip to Dallas . Hunt was one of three people who sponsored the ad . Hunt's ad vilified Kennedy in Dallas, Texas .
 Right-wing extremists at that time believed John Kennedy was a Communist . Although it is difficult to imagine today, many right-wingers believed him was a communist .
 They believed, further, that the CIA was a Communist organization . Allen Dulles was a . Communist, as was the Supreme Court of the . United States and its chief justice, Earl Warren .
 Right-wing extremists also believed that President Eisenhower and the State Department were all ‘domestic enemies,” either Communists or under the control of an international Communist conspiracy . The right-wing extremist group also believed President Eisenhower was a Communist .
 A fascinating illustration of what the John Birch Society thought of John Kennedy and his assassination is found in an American Opinion article, published in March 1964 and reprinted in the Warren Commission Report, written by Revilo P Oliver, a member of the society . Oliver's article was published by the
 The John Birch Society used its journal to spread disinformation linking the assassination plot to a Communist conspiracy . This was in concert with J Edgar Hoover’s initial reports following the assassination, as well as the elaborate disinformation scheme .
 "Far from sobbing over the deceased or lying to placate his vengeful ghost, it behooves us to speak of him with complete candor and historical objectivity"
 The departed Kennedy is the John F Kennedy who procured his election by peddling boob-bait to the suckers, including a cynical pledge to destroy the Communist base in Cuba . He is the man who promised to destroy Cuba's Communist base .
 John F Kennedy with his blessing and support the Central Intelligence Agency staged a fake ‘invasion’ of Cuba designed to strengthen our mortal enemies there and to disgrace us . He is the John F. Kennedy .
 John F Kennedy staged the phony ‘embargo’ that was improvised both to befuddle the suckers on election day in 1962 and to provide for several months a cover for the transfer of Soviet troops and Soviet weapons to Cuba for eventual use against us .
 Kennedy installed and maintained in power the unspeakable Yarmolinsky-McNamara gang in the Pentagon to demoralize and subvert our armed forces . He is the John F Kennedy who installed and . maintained in . power in the . Pentagon to sabotage our military installations and equipment
 I have mentioned but a few of the hundred reasons why we shall never forget John F Kennedy . We will never forget him. We will always remember him.
 So long as there are Americans, his memory will be cherished with distaste . "So long there will be Americans," he says. "His memory will always be cherished by distaste"
 If the U.S. is saved by the desperate exertions of patriots, we may have a future of true greatness and glory . But we shall never forget how near we were to total destruction in the year 1963 .
 Oliver’s article continued in which he spewed a variety of assassination plot scenarios, all attributable to Communists . Oliver: Americans will remember Kennedy while they live, and will curse him as they face firing squads or toil in a brutish degradation .
 He declared that Oswald was a Communist agent who assassinated President Kennedy in a conspiracy between the “Communist controlled” CIA and the Soviet Union . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 .
 Kennedy was part of a Communist faction including Nikita Khrushchev that was going to replace Fidel Castro with another Communist of its choosing, he wrote . He wrote that Kennedy was a member of the Communist faction .
 He said the plot had been covered up by the president’s commission, headed by ‘Communist’ Earl Warren . Earl Warren diluted the report of the FBI investigation of the assassination, which would have revealed the truth .
 He wrote that Jack Ruby was a Communist agent and was involved with Oswald in activities in Cuba . Ruby’s real name was Jakob Leon Rubenstein, the real name of Jack Ruby .
 Oliver was one of the thirty founding members of the John Birch Society . Oliver was a founding member of the society . He was also one of 30 founding members .
 During this meeting, plans to assassinate political leaders were openly discussed . Plans were also discussed .
 Capell published under the masthead of then-retired General Willoughby’s Foreign Intelligence Digest . The circle becomes complete when we find that Capell .
 Dick Russell, 2, received copies of extensive correspondence between Willoughby and Hunt family from the Douglas MacArthur Archive in Norfolk, Virginia .
 Russell wrote that by mid 1966, Willoughby had gone to work directly for H L Hunt’s son, Nelson Bunker Hunt, helping arrange the acquisition of all offshore oil rights in the Portuguese colony of Mozambique .
 Biographer Harry Hurt III wrote that Hunt was a child prodigy . Hunt was known to read the financial pages of the newspaper fluently at age three .
 Hunt breastfed until the age of seven, often standing on a crate in front of her while she kneaded bread dough in the kitchen . Hunt often stood on a small crate while her kneading bread dough was made .
 Hunt was a bigamist with three separate families . Finally his concerned father put a stop to 28H Hunt . Hunt had three families with three different families . Hunt's father was a concerned father .
 When he died at the age of eighty-five, he left seventy living direct descendants, including ten children, twenty-one grandchildren, and twelve greatgrandchildren, accounting for forty-three .
 Hunt lived in Dallas in an exact replica of George Washington’s home at Mount Vernon . Hunt lived there in a replica replica of Washington's Mount Vernon home . Hunt also lived in the replica home in Dallas .
 He gleefully admitted to being the world’s richest human, but insisted on carrying his lunch to work in a brown paper bag .
 Hunt was a high-stakes risk taker, both in the oil fields and at the poker table . Hunt was known for his risk-taken gambler exploits in the poker and oil fields .
 Hunt’s wives, Frania Tye Lee, described Hunt as a bigamist and philanderer, a professional gambler, a hypocrite, a con man, and a liar . Hunt's wives have also described him as a pro gambler and a conman
 Three days before the assassination, H L. Hunt called me over and said he wanted to give me something . Mr Hunt and I parked our cars in the same lot, and he called me .
 It was that “Wanted for Treason” poster with Kennedy’s face on it, which got circulated all over Dallas . The poster got circulated around Dallas all over the city .
 He said, “I’m the richest man in the world and nobody’s going to do anything to [him] me. And he said, "Nobody’t going to [do anything to] me"
 Hunt and Clint Murchison Sr. Sr. were the chief Texas organizers of the MacArthur for President bid . Hunt and Murchisons Sr. led the MacArthur campaign for President in Texas .
 Hunt reportedly put up $150,000 for the campaign P38 although he denied doing so . Hunt has denied putting up the money for P38 campaign .
 Hunt gave General Curtis LeMay $1 million for personal use . The money was intended to induce LeMay to run as vice president with George Wallace . Hunt gave LeMay the money to run with Wallace .
 Harry Hurt III wrote that Hunt was normally not a big spender when it came to campaign contributions . Yet, he said Hunt was not a major spender in the past .
 Hunt was a supporter of Lyndon Johnson in his bid for the presidential nomination against John Kennedy . Hunt supported LBJ's bid to win the nomination in 1964 .
 200,000 copies of an anti-Catholic sermon to be distributed during the 1960 Democratic Convention in Los Angeles . Anti-Catholic sermons were distributed at the Democratic Convention .
 Hunt was closely associated with right wingers General Charles Willoughby and evangelist preacher Billy James Hargis . He also supported General Edwin Walker in his unsuccessful bid for governor of Texas S21 .
 General Willoughby was in the extremis of the military extreme right-wing . It is noteworthy that he was not in the extreme left-wing of his military .
 He was involved in the worst of criminal covert operations and was composed of a military-religious-industrial complex of extreme conservatism . capable of planning an operation similar to the JFK assassination, he said .
 Hunt was an oil wildcatter—an independent, not associated with big oil . Hunt was a wild-haired, independent, independent oil wild-atter . Hunt died in a firehouse explosion in 1973 .
 Or perhaps he was arrogantly confident that he had nothing to fear, with his friend LBJ succeeding in the presidency and his and LBJ’s friend J Edgar Hoover heading the FBI—that he could do anything he wished . Or perhaps perhaps he thought LBJ's friend Hoover
 Hunt had another of his security men, John Curington, check out the Dallas police station for the status of security provisions to protect Oswald . Hunt had a security check on the status .
 Curington completed this assignment on the evening of November 23, 1963 . He reported back to Hunt that security for Oswald in the Dallas jail was nonexistent . Hunt reported that security was nonexistent in the jail .
 Mr Hunt called Mr Hunt to see what kind of security they had surrounding Oswald in police custody . Mr Hunt asked him to go down and see the security surrounding Oswald . Curington remembered: “About five-thirty or six o’clock on the Saturday afternoon after the
 I had no more than hung up the phone when a lady called who did ironing for my family . I had already been ironing since I was a teenager, I said .
 She said her husband was in jail on a DWI charge and asked if I could go down and get him out . She said she wanted to help her get her husband out of jail .
 Mr Hunt had told me, regardless of what time it was, to come by the house and tell him what I witnessed . Mr Hunt told me to come to his house regardless of the time of the incident .
 "There was no security whatsoever around the jailhouse. It was a little bit after midnight when I reported to him," he says .
 Hunt said Johnson told her on the evening before the assassination that JFK would “never embarrass him again” Hunt said that people she knew in the oil business and in the CIA were behind the Kennedy assassination . Hunt said after the assassination he told her that she knew people in oil business
 Hunt had extremely close ties with General Edwin Walker, who was allegedly shot at by Oswald in 1963 . Hunt had close ties to General Walker who, you will recall, was allegedly killed by Oswald .
 Hunt through the John Birch Society and other right-wing organizations . Hunt through John Birch society and other organizations. Hunt through . Hunt . Hunt. Hunt .
 Mafia-connected Eugene Hale Brading visited Nelson Bunker Hunt’s office in Dallas twice—shortly before and after the assassination, ostensibly to discuss business dealings . Marina Oswald visited Hunt's office with an FBI agent shortly after .
 Braden was arrested at Dealey Plaza immediately after the assassination . Braden had been arrested at the scene of the assassination in New York .
 Braden claimed he just happened to be walking through Dealey Plaza attempting to make a phone call, and had gone into the Dal-Tex building looking for a phone . Braden claims he was trying to make an emergency call .
 Braden was arrested as he got off an elevator coming down from an upper floor of the building . He claimed that he was on the third floor making a phone call . Braden claimed he was in an elevator making a call .
 Kennedy Act removed distinction between repatriated oil profits and profits from overseas investments, making both subject to U.S. taxation . In October 1962, the JFK Act removed the distinction between the two tax rates .
 In January 1963 the president discussed a plan to eliminate or reduce the oil depletion allowance which permitted 27. percent of oil profits on new wells to be tax free . In addition, in January 1963, in addition to eliminating or reducing the allowance, a plan was also discussed .
 World Petroleum Magazine predicted that the Kennedy reforms, if passed, could cost U.S. oil as much as $280 million in annual profits .
 Hunt may have been the sponsor of an incredible flyer distributed around Miami among Cuban exiles in the spring of 1963 . Hunt may also have been a sponsor of the flyer .
 This blessing would come to pass if an inspired Act of God should place in the White House within weeks a Texan known to be a friend of all Latin Americans . The Zionists who since 1905 came into control of the U.S. are only stooges and pawns .
 I am suggesting that we discuss the matter fully before any steps are taken by me or anyone else . I'm suggesting we discuss it fully before taking any steps taken by anyone else, he says .
 The letter first turned up when a copy was mailed to Penn Jones, Jr., an assassination researcher in Texas, on August 18, 1975, with a transmittal letter written in Spanish .
 The anonymous writer said he had previously sent a copy to FBI director Clarence Kelley in late 1974 but had never received a reply . Anonymous writer said that he had sent it to Kelley in 1974 .
 Since Kelley hadn't responded, he said he was sending the letter to Jones, hoping it would be of help . Mr Kelley hasn't responded .
 The handwriting has been authenticated as Oswald’s by an eminent Canadian expert on handwriting, plus two other experts contracted by the Dallas Morning News . Oswald's handwriting was authenticated by three other experts, including two others .
 Oswald note is of great significance . Full implications of the Oswald note remain a mystery . Oswald note remains a mystery, but it is clear that it is significant .
 Hunt was associated with Sergio Arcacha-Smith, head of the radical Cuban Revolutionary Council, with links to Alpha 66 and Guy Banister in New Orleans . Hunt was also associated with the Cuban revolutionary Council .
 Hunt met with Jack Crichton of Army intelligence, along with other Army intelligence officers, to discuss the first interrogation of Marina Oswald . Hunt met to discuss Marina Oswald's interrogation of Oswald .
 Hunt left Dallas to reside temporarily at the Mayflower Hotet222 in Washington, D.C., upon the insistence of the FBI, which feared for his safety . Hunt left Texas to live with the FBI at the request of the government .
 Hunt and the Minutemen had more evidence accumulated against them in the Kennedy assassination than any other right-wing group in 1963 . Hunt and Hunt were both involved in the 1963 assassination .
 CBS news reporter Peter Noyes did a masterful job of investigating right-wing linkages with the Mafia in the Kennedy assassination . The book Legacy of Doubt is published by CNN's Tom Charity .
 I obtained Noyes’ research notes for his book from the Assassination Archives . Bob Dorff obtained a copy of his book and notes from the assassination archives .
 Noyes’ investigation turned up a group called AVG which was a spinoff from the Minutemen . AVG was a group that was spin off from the minutemen, according to an investigation .
 The topic of AVG was first mentioned to me in a conversation with former FBI agent Bill Turner in February of 1970 . AVG first mentioned by Turner in conversation with Turner in 1970s .
 Turner said he interviewed Robert DePugh, national leader of the Minutemen, at Leavenworth where he was imprisoned on conspiracy charges . Turner interviewed Robert dePugh at the prison where he is serving a prison sentence .
 DePugh claimed he tried to start AVG as a front organization but others took it away from him . He claimed he started AVG but was taken away from it by others .
 Turner apparently implied to Turner that AVG was a dangerous paramilitary organization . He apparently implied that AVG is a dangerous, paramilitary organization.
 In April 1970, Noyes opened discussions with Connie Crawford of the California attorney general’s staff concerning Mafioso Jim Braden . Braden: "What we see in all of this is a pattern of right-wing groups not being extreme enough for some of their
 Noyes had become very interested in Braden through his studies of the Warren Commission volumes . Braden was an important figure in the history of American history .
 Crawford became so interested in Noyes’ material that she assigned the case to Joel Taylor, the attorney general’s special agent for the San Diego area . Crawford was so interested she assigned Taylor to the case .
 Braden’s membership in the La Costa Country Club, the Mafia/Teamsters mecca in north San Diego County . The reason for selecting the San Diego area was Braden's membership in La Costa .
 FBI had been investigating Braden, but had suddenly stopped several weeks earlier . FBI agent said FBI had stopped investigation of Braden several weeks ago .
 In a subsequent conversation Taylor advised me that he had ways of developing information concerning Braden, apparently checking all his phone calls . In a later conversation Taylor said he would check all his calls .
 Mederick Johnson, USMC, Retired, mysteriously died of gunshot wounds several years earlier . Johnson was a member of the U.S. Marine Corps. who had mysteriously died from gunshot wounds . Johnson died from a gunshot wound to the head .
 The presence of Jim Braden at the La Costa Country Club was discussed during the conversation . Braden's presence at La Costa was discussed .
 On Wednesday, August 19th, I received a collect phone call from Paul Rothermel in Dallas, Texas . Paul is a former Dallas resident and author of the book, "Rothermel"
 He said he was calling me from a phone booth because he was frightened for his life and had to be extremely careful . He was calling from a telephone booth because of his fear of his life .
 He said some years ago, when he was in Nelson Hunt’s confidence, a most unusual conversation took place . Nelson Hunt said the most unusual thing happened to happen to Nelson Hunt .
 Nelson intended to draw on ranks of General Edwin Walker’s cell of the John Birch Society in Dallas . He said Nelson announced his intention of forming a group known as AVG . Nelson said he planned to form a group called AVG .
 Nelson planned to form a paramilitary group for political purposes, he said . Nelson hoped to obtain a certain type of gas gun from Europe which would kill people and make their deaths appear to be heart attacks .
 Nelson proceeded with his plans to set up AVG and bought a ranch through a real estate broker named William H Cies . He said he proceeded with plans to start AVG and buy a ranch .
 Rothermel described the ranch as Nelson Hunt’s West Coast base for paramilitary operations, maneuvers, etc. The ranch was used by Hunt as part of his West Coast operations .
 Rothermel did not state the exact date of his initial conversation with Nelson Hunt in California 40H . The meeting took place at the Hunt Oil Company, November 21, 1963 .
 To see Nelson and Lamar Hunt: Morgan Brown, Claud Duval, Roger Bauman and party . To see the full interview with Lamar Hunt, visit http://www.mailonline.com/lamarhunt .com .
 Hunt denied emphatically that the Hunt family was close to FBI director J Edgar Hoover . Hunt family denied that they were close to the FBI director .
 Rothermel repeatedly emphasized his fear of something happening to him . He repeatedly emphasized that he feared something would happen to him in court .
 Noyes wrote that according to California intelligence, “the rhetoric more often than not dealt with assassinating the ‘three K’s’— John Kennedy, Robert Kennedy, and Dr. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. The Minutemen were involved in the
 Hunt’s security man, told Dick Russell that he had purchased the original copy of the Zapruder film from Abraham Zapruders on the night after the assassination . The original copy was purchased by Hunt's security man .
 Another Hunt employee, John Curington, told Dick Russell that Hunt had sent him to check out the security for Oswald at the Dallas jail . He reported back to Hunt that there was none of the security at the jail .
 Hunt’s ‘Texas High Cabal’ comprised of the fascist General Willoughby and his right-wing clique in military intelligence . Hunt's ‘Cavaline’ was a right-right-wing military intelligence clique . Hunt was a member of
 It's difficult for me to imagine how the totality of this could not be of great importance in solving the JFK assassination . It is difficult for us to imagine .
 Hunt was somehow involved—at the very least he knew about the plot . Hunt knew who masterminded it and who the major players were . Hunt was involved in the plot, and he knew who was involved . Hunt is still alive and well .
 It is clear that he had the resources, connections, and capability to be a major player in the plot . It is also clear that it was also clear he had connections to the plot, and had the capability to make a major role .
 With his Mafia contacts and his financing of terrorist organizations in Europe such as Der Burd and the OAS, he indeed had the capability—with Willoughby’s covert operations expertise—to put together an assassination team . With his friends Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover, he
 Hunt was not directly involved in the plot, although he knew that a plot was underway, but like Johnson and Hoover may not have been not privy to the details of the plot .
 Later, fearful that he might have been set up, he instigated his own investigations immediately after the assassination to protect himself . He instigated the investigations to protect his own life .
 With sufficient imagination one could explain his purchase of the copy of the Zapruder film, his involvement in Marina's interviews, and his curiosity about Oswald’s safety in the Dallas jail . The film could also explain his interest in Oswald's safety .
 Hunt could, with a stretch of the imagination, be dismissed as coincidence; but it’s too much of a stretch for me . Hunt could thereby, with the stretch of imagination, could . be dismissed . as coincidence, but it's too much a stretch .
 Hunt could have been one of several powerful right-wing extremists—civilian and military—who were remote sponsors of the plot . Hunt and his close associates are so removed from its execution that it would be impossible to implicate them with legal proof .
 Hunt conceivably could have planned and ordered the murder of Oswald, but only LBJ and Hoover would become implicated because of their direct actions in the cover-up, which were not anticipated, i.e.
 The corruption of American ideals has taken place in the name of fighting communism, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Adolf Eichmann's personal staff was too tainted to be rejected by the CIA’s recruiters, at least as long as his relationship with the U.S. government could be kept secret . No one, it seems, not even the personal staff of Eichman�
 Christopher Simpson, Blowback 25 FASCISTS AND WAR CRIMINALS . In 1992, while attending a symposium on the JFK assassination in Dallas, I met a medical doctor and another man attending with his son, who was perhaps sixteen years of age, and very bright .
 At dinner we all talked at length about the assassination, during which I expressed my views, then strongly held, that the Mafia was the prime mover behind the conspiracy . At dinner, I expressed his views, which he later held strongly held .
 The dinner ended soon after and I thought that would be the last of it, but I didn't think it was the end of it . The dinner was the last thing I thought of the dinner .
 Two days later, in the final hour of the conference, a bright young man came up to me and handed me a paper that he thought I should read . But two days later he came up with the paper and told me to read it .
 It was an article entitled “The Nazi Connection to the JFK Assassination” by Mae Brussell . Brussell, of whom I had never heard, was an author of the article .
 Ex-Nazi spies and Nazi collaborators in Eastern Europe and Ukraine had become an integral part of the U.S. intelligence network after World War II . They had played a major, perhaps decisive, role in shaping United States foreign policy, says Brussell .
 As I contemplate this study, I anticipate that there will not be enough substantial evidence to conclusively implicate this array of heinous characters in the JFK assassination .
 This is another example of the seemingly endless avenues of investigation that should not be overlooked . This is, however, yet another example that should be overlooked.
 General Reinhard Gehlen, along with his extensive organization of German spies and murderers, developed a secret plan to defect en masse to the U.S. General Gehlen was a master Nazi spy and master spy . Gehlen and his organization planned to defect, en masse, to the
 Through the actions of Allen Dulles they negotiated a secret treaty to implement the mass defection . The secret treaty was negotiated by Allen Dullsman . The treaty was signed by Dulles to implement mass defections .
 This malodorous apparatus became the foundation of U.S. intelligence for espionage activities against the Soviet Union in Eastern Europe . The apparatus was used to spy on the Soviets in eastern Europe .
 Wernher von Braun and about 1800 other Nazi scientists were involved in a race against the Russians at the end of the war . Recruited along with these Nazis and killers were rocket engineer and rocket engineer .
 Also recruited were Nazi psychiatrists who had experimented in mind control through hypnosis and drugs . Also recruited was Nazi psychiatrists .
 These fiendish experimenters would later become part of the CIA’s massive mind-control program to attempt to create robot assassins . The CIA would later attempt to make robot assassins.
 The rationale was, of course, realpolitik—no room for sentimental morality . The enemy was now the Soviet Union and we should use any tool available in the battle for survival against the Communists .
 According to generally accepted estimates, Gehlen was furnished with $200 million by the United States to finance his spy organization . But he also had extraordinary powers of concentration and a jeweler’s attention to detail, both served him well .
 Gehlen developed a remarkably close rapport and friendship with Allen Dulles . During the first decade following the war, the United States provided funds and employed about 4,000 of Gehlen’s operatives full time .
 When Gehlen finally retired in 1968, Dulles gave him an expensive Swiss chalet . Dulles also gave Gehlen a chalat .
 One of the many speculations surrounding the Kennedy assassination is that the Gehlen organization carried out the assassination through South American Nazis in exile .
 Although this is one of the more bizarre scenarios, it is worth keeping in mind as we continue. Although this was one of many of the most bizarre scenarios of the day .
 Reinhard Gehlen's incorporation into U.S. intelligence brought with him many Eastern European characters from Eastern Europe . The Odessa has flourished over the years thanks to Gehlen . Gehlen is one of the key figures in the story .
 The Odessa, you may remember, is the secret Nazi organization formed in the waning years of Hitler’s regime . Tens of thousands of SS, war criminals, and mass murderers were relocated to Argentina, Paraguay, South Africa, and Egypt .
 This final element of the Odessa was the so-called Gehlen Organization . Gehlen was the Nazi intelligence system that sold itself to the U.S. at the end of the war .
 The military intelligence historian Colonel William Corson put it most succinctly, “Gehlen’s organization was designed to protect the Odessa Nazis.” Corson said .
 The only intelligence provided by the Gehlen net to the United States was intelligence selected specifically to worsen East-West tensions and increase the possibility of a military conflict between the U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 Gehlen's Org extended all over Eastern Europe to encompass anti-Communists, proNazis, and quislings . Gehlen’s Org. included anti-communist, pro-Nazi, anti-Nazi groups . The reach of the Org . extended all
 Like many topics we touch in this book, we would need to write another book to cover this subject adequately . Like many other topics, this book would need a book to be written .
 The JFK assassination is the subject of a new book on the JFK assassination . CNN.com's John Sutter will host a panel of experts on the assassination of the day .
 Ferenc Nagy, a fascist from Hungary, is a key figure in the Gehlen network . Nagy is one of the key figures in the network of fascist movements .
 Nagy's name is linked, by unimpeachable documents, to Clay Shaw, now undoubted former CIA contract agent, and the man whom Jim Garrison accused of being part of the conspiracy to assassinate John Kennedy . Nagy is of importance in our analysis .
 Clay Shaw was on the board of directors of an affiliate of an entity called Permindex Corporation, a U.S. State Department document dated November 27, 1958, shows unequivocally that he was a member of the company's board .
 Permindex and CMC are widely alleged to have been a CIA front company that participated with the French OAS in its assassination attempts on French president Charles . de Gaulle . CMC is alleged to be part of the CIA front-setters behind the French assassination attempts .
 Major Louis M Bloomfield é of Montreal, Canada, allegedly visited by Clay Shaw and David Ferrie in Montreal one day in late 1961 or early 1962 . Bloomfield was a major shareholder in Permindex, and CMC as well .
 This was reported by Jim Garrison in his book, Trail of the Communist political party . Jim Garrison's book was published by Garrison in 1998 .
 Ferenc Nagy and Clay Shaw are, respectively, president and director of Centro Mondiale Commerciale in Rome, Italy . United States State Department document dated November 7, 1958 shows Nagy . Nagy was president of Permindex in Rome .
 Nagy and Shaw were also president and director of Permindex, based in Basel, Switzerland . Shaw and Nagy were also presidents of PerMindex, which is based in Switzerland .
 Ferenc Nagy lived in Dallas, Texas, at the time of the Kennedy assassination . Nagy was a member of the Dallas-based radio network .
 General Charles Willoughby was right-wing extremist and General MacArthur’s chief of intelligence . He was also the right wing wing of the Republican Party in the U.S.
 Hunt was active in anti-Communist activities in Europe and Asia after his retirement . Hunt was a member of the Communist Party in the 1960s and '70s .
 He is suspected of being a key figure in the Kennedy assassination and the link between right-wing extremists in Dallas and military intelligence . He is believed to have been a link between military intelligence and Dallas extremists .
 Walker was ousted from the Army by President Kennedy for distributing John Birch Society literature in Germany . President Kennedy ousted Walker from the army in 1963 . Walker was forced to leave the Army in 1964 .
 Walker was allegedly shot at by Oswald in 1963 before the Kennedy assassination . Walker was alleged to have been shot at in 1963 by Oswald . Walker is believed to have survived the assassination .
 Walker knew Oswald was suspected of shooting him before he knew he should have known . Walker knew he had been suspected of being shot by Oswald before he was killed .
 When the war ended, he was brought over to the U.S. by the OSS and Allen Dulles . He was brought to the United States by the CIA and OSS .
 Gehlen was later financed by the United States with $200 million and sent back to Europe where he operated his organization under the direction of the CIA as the CIA . Gehlen's organization was later sent to Europe by the U.S. as a Soviet eastern block spy agency .
 Some believe he infiltrated back into the U.S. with a Nazi spy apparatus and was instrumental in the Kennedy assassination . Some say he infiltrated into the United States with Nazi spies . He is believed to have been instrumental in Kennedy's assassination .
 When Gehlen retired, Dulles gifted him with a retirement home in Switzerland .
 Couple befriended Oswalds when they returned from Russia . They are the couple who befriended the Oswalds after they returned to Russia .
 De Mohrenschildt is an ex-Nazi spy, an oil man, and in right-wing circles in Dallas . He is a very interesting figure, having been an ex Nazi spy and oil man .
 De Mohrenschildt committed suicide the day after Gaeton Fonzi, investigator for the HSCA, contacted his daughter to arrange an interview . The investigation was conducted by an investigator for HSCa .
 We shall now proceed to other linkages of fascists, war criminals, and extreme right-wing organizations in the JFK assassination .
 The welfare department called Oswald’s brother Robert, who immediately sent $200 to pay for transportation to Fort Worth . Oswald's brother Robert Oswald sent a $200 bill to the welfare department .
 It turns out that Raikin was more than a mere representative of the Travelers Aid Society . He was actually a member of the group .
 Raikin was secretary general of the American Friends of the Anti-Bolshevik Bloc of Nations . He was an extreme right-wing, anti-Communist organization with Nazi and fascist roots in the Ukraine of the Soviet Union . How strange it is that a man in
 The ABN was formed to lobby the Congress of the United States on behalf of captive nations under the Soviet Communist yoke . It should be noted that the ABN lobby the U.S. Congress of Congress .
 Willoughby was very active in anti-Communist extremist organizations in Europe, Japan, and Korea . He had access to the OAS, the French terrorist organization intent on assassinating Charles de Gaulle . He was also involved with anti-communist extremist groups .
 Walker met with Jean Souetre, the French terrorist, in Dallas in April 1963 . Walker: "I'm not afraid to die. I'm scared to die"
 Souetre, or someone using his name, later showed up in the Dallas area at the time of the JFK assassination . He was in a meeting with the CIA’s E Howard Hunt in Spain in 1963 . He later appeared in Dallas, Texas, in 1963, at the
 Willoughby was seventy-one years old at the time of the Kennedy assassination . He was one of the oldest people in the country to be assassinated .
 He was born in 1892 in Heidelberg, Germany, and migrated with his parents to the United States when he was 18 years old .
 His name first came to his attention in an anonymous letter, a response to the first article he wrote in 1975 about the assassination . "His name came to my attention in a letter to me in 1975," he writes .
 “Tscheppe-Weidenbach” was born in Heidelberg, Germany, in 1892 . He was advised to examine the career of someone identified only as ‘Tschepp Weidenbach,” born in Germany .
 Charles Willoughby has been described as a bull of a man who spoke with a German accent and affected a monocle . Adolf Tscheppe-Weidenbach was the original name 42 of Charles Willougby “2+ Charles’s .
 Willoughby received decorations from Benito Mussolini while serving as a military attaché in Ecuador . General MacArthur referred to him as “my little fascist 2H’H” General MacArthur called him “My little fascist’
 In a final gesture to Spain’s fascism in 1952, Willoughby lobbied Congress to authorize $100 million for 2 |. at wf , Spain's dictator, Francisco Franco .
 Russell wrote that it is not stretching the point to say that Willoughby was a racist and an anti-Semite . Russell said it is 'not stretching the . point' to say he was an autocratic and arrogant . being autocratic . Russell also said that it was not
 His “intelligence digest’ recommended all through the 1960s that various “weapons of mass destruction,” unspecified, be used against the Vietnamese people . The Vietnamese people were killed in the Vietnam War .
 Willoughby was a thoroughly loathsome person whose entire world view consisted of piles of ethnic stereotypes; he was apparently capable of anything S321 .
 During the Occupation of Japan and the Korean War Willoughby maintained clandestine ties to Japanese militarists . In the 1950s and 1960s he claimed to have close ties to Reinhard Gehlen and other former Nazi officers then being used by United States intelligence in the cold war .
 After MacArthur’s sacking, Willoughby frequently visited Spain, and claimed to have been involved in the American military base negotiations with Franco .
 He set up a kind of right-wing internationale called the ‘international comité,” using money from the Hunt brothers in Texas, linking Spain and Portugal together with Germany, Spain, Germany, and others .
 During World War II, Willoughby ran MacArthur’s intelligence in the Pacific . He became a rival of OSS head William Donovan . This rivalry lasted for years .
 If a faction of retired U.S. military intelligence set up the CIA as a false sponsor in the JFK assassination, Willoughby would be a logical suspect . If, in fact, he would be the logical suspect in the assassination .
 Hunt/Willoughby story is their shared opposition to the eastern establishment internationalists represented by the “old boy network” recruited from Ivy-League universities to run the CIA and the Department of State . Hunt and Willoughby opposed to the ‘old boy’ network
 Hunt was a venomous opponent of “world government,” which he considered to be a Communist plot . Hunt considered ‘world government’ backed by international firms, bankers, and stateless people, especially Jews .
 James Angleton launched his “Project DINOSAUR” to smoke Harriman out as the long-sought Soviet mole within the intelligence “community .” The CIA Counter-Intelligence chief was long the head of the CIA counter-intelligence .
 He blamed them, not totally without foundation, for the premature end of his military intelligence career . He blames them for his military career .
 The CIA managed to shape information to place the blame on Willoughby for the intelligence failure in not predicting the entry of the Chinese across the Yalu River .
 A hypothesis that one aim of the plot to kill Kennedy was to destroy the CIA has increasing merit, author says . The CIA was targeted in the assassination of Kennedy, Kennedy's widow says .
 The Texas High Cabal, by one fell swoop, would have struck a fatal blow to the Kennedys, the CIA, and the one-worlders, ridding the nation of its mortal threats—or so they might have obsessed .
 Willoughby became involved in postwar anti-Communist activities in Japan . He was also involved in anti-communist activities .
 Yoshio Kodama, future leader of the Yakuza crime syndicate, bargained his way out of jail as a “Class A” war criminal . Kodama was a CIA contract agent and Lockheed lobbyist . He was a member of the U.S. government and
 Hunt was the rabid Kennedy hater and fanatical anti-Communist from Dallas . Hunt was a fanatical fan of the Kennedy assassination . Hunt is also a rabid anti-communist and anti-Kennedy fan .
 Device was for use in assassinations to induce apparent heart attacks that were untraceable . Device was used to induce an apparent heart attack that was undetected .
 The relevancy of the gas gun is that Nelson Bunker Hunt, according to Paul Rothermel, Jr. (via CBS reporter Peter Noyes), was very much interested in this weapon for use in Hunt's paramilitary operation .
 The weapon takes us to the Ukraine of the old Soviet Union, the origin of the ABN represented by Raikin, who met the Oswalds when they got off the boat returning from Russia . The weapon was used by the Soviets in the Soviet Union .
 There is also a Ukrainian connection of White Russians in the Dallas-Fort Worth area . White Russians befriended the Oswalds when they returned to Ukraine .
 For the benefit of readers who have an appetite for fiendish mechanisms, I have included a drawing of the gas gun . The gas gun can be fired at a range of speeds of up to 100mph .
 A double-barreled version of this weapon was used by Bogdan Stashinsky to kill Stefan Bandera, the anti-Soviet leader of OUN, on orders of the KGB on October 15, 1959 . The weapon was also used in the 1959 killing of Stefan B
 2 g Reconstruction sketch of the poison-spray weapon issued by the Soviet’s KGB to Bogdan Stashinsky and used by him to kill Dr. Stashinksi . The weapon was used by the KGB in the Soviet-era KGB .
 The assassin also inhaled some of the gas, which would have killed him had he not taken an antidote thirty minutes before the murder, followed by an antidote shortly after the murder . The assassin took an antidote 30 minutes before he killed himself .
 In a later trial in Germany, Stashinsky, guilt-ridden, confessed to the crime . Ina later trial, he confessed to his crime .
 This weapon was of keen interest to Army intelligence . As will be discussed later, this weapon was a weapon of interest to the British Army .
 Richard Case Nagell mentioned to Dick Russell that it was one of several exotic weapons that U.S. intelligence had acquired . Russell: "It was a weapon that the United States had acquired" Russell: It was an exotic weapon .
 Nagell was part of Army intelligence in Korea under General Willoughby . It has not been established that he knew him directly, although it is not known that he was involved in it .
 Nagell was only a captain at the time, so he may not have known the general . He may have known him at the beginning of the war .
 Willoughby and Lev Dobrionsky were the two leading supporters of the ABN in the United States . Dobrionky was a Ukrainian-Ukrainian-American who supported the organization .
 Dobrionsky was an OSS officer in Germany in World War II, working under Bill Donovan . Dobrionky was a member of the OSS in Germany during the war .
 Dobrionsky was linked to David Atlee Phillips in Mexico City through Cuba’s Salvador Diaz Verson . Verson sat on the same board of directors for the World Anti-Communist Congress for Freedom and Liberation .
 Willoughby/Hunt and the Texas High Cabal have the capability to plot and carry out the assassination of John Kennedy, it has been claimed . But what we have already described should be enough to support the allegation .
 This does not prove that the Texas High Cabal actually did mastermind the plot to kill Kennedy . All of this, of course, does not mean that the Cabal masterminded the plot .
 What we see here is a worldwide, right-wing network of Fascists, militarists, and radical anti-Communists . Only a relative few of these people, three or four, need to have been involved in the full scope of the plot .
 Hunt need only to have been involved as sponsors, in a plan using cutouts whereby the dirty work and exposure to being caught could have been delegated to a small number of professionals and lower-level operators with no traceable linkage to the top . Hunt need not have to be involved in
 Of course, the existence of parts of the plot could become known to people like Milteer and others who would brag about inside knowledge of the impending assassination .
 As earlier quoted, it is impossible to keep an assassination plot a secret . The assassination plot was a secret, according to the author of the book .
 Even David Sanchez Morales could well have been part of the right-wing clique in U.S. intelligence and military . Yet he himself not known the full nature of the plot .
 David Atlee Phillips, likewise, could have been one of the Kennedy haters who were swept into the crime of the century, even unwittingly . Phillips, who was a Kennedy supporter, could also have been a Kennedy hater . Phillips was a member of the British House of Representatives .
 Hunt to have been part of the ‘committee of patriots’ shown on the chart . Hunt to be part of a “committee of patriotots” shown in the chart. Hunt .
 Kennedy haters, paranoid anti-Communists, criminals, and crazies that seem always to exist in the world . "I began to see the Kennedy assassination as a phenomenon that arose spontaneously," he says .
 The facts that the survival of Hoffa and certain Mafia chiefs was threatened were part of the perfect concomitance to allow the plotters to sponsor the crime, see that it got carried out, and go scot-free, even though a few things went wrong .
 This will take us from Miami which involved gun-running and boat raids against the Cuban mainland; to Dallas, involving theft of arms from the Army for delivery to anti-Castro Cubans, linked to Jack Ruby and Oswald . ...for some years the control of Washington was consolidated in
 This appears to have been part of a policy sponsored by the U.S. government through the CIA, in cooperation with anti-Castro Cubans . The Minutemen were involved in their combined efforts to unseat Fidel Castro .
 This will include a discussion of an Oswald "look-alike" in Dallas who might have—wittingly or unwittingly, been John Thomas Masen . This will also be a discussion about an Oswald look-alikes in Dallas .
 John Thomas Masen was a weapons dealer and operated a gun shop in Dallas in 1963 . Masen operated a weapons store in Dallas, Texas. Masen's gun shop opened in 1963.
 John Sutter says he furnished illegal weapons to CIA-financed DRE/Alpha 66/SNFE in Dallas . Manuel Rodriguez Orcarberro was violently anti-Kennedy and leader of that anti-Castro group . Sutter: "There is no question that he furnished
 ‘Oswald’ may have been seen at anti-Castro Cuban safehouse in Dallas . Second, he may be the “Oswaldo’s seen at the anti-Cuba safehouse on Harlendale Street .
 New evidence suggests that he was involved with Jack Ruby in the above-mentioned gun-running activity in Dallas in November 1963 just before the assassination .
 ATF undercover agent Frank Ellsworth suspected that Masen was a member of the Minutemen and associated with General Edwin Walker . Ellsworth also suspected Masen's association with General Walker, providing one more link to the Dallas right wing .
 Masen was one of only two dealers in Dallas selling 6.5mm Mannlicher-Carcano ammunition, the type used in the alleged Oswald rifle . Masen may have been the "Oswald" who was shooting at the rifle range in Dallas .
 He could have been the ‘Oswald’ who met with David Atlee Phillips and Antonio Veciana in Dallas in September 1963 . In addition, he could have visited Silvia Odio in late September 1963 and could have met with Silvia O'O' Odio
 Of all the evidence suppressed by the federal government in the John Kennedy assassination, the evidence of Masen stands out as one of the most egregious examples . Masen was a member of the Kennedy assassination team .
 There were at least fifty major documents on Masen that were not released until 1993 . Masen was released in 1993 .
 In addition, a large number of critical documents have not been released as of this writing . In addition to this, many critical documents are not being released .
 The evidence shows that a massive investigation was made of Masen but virtually nothing of importance was revealed in the Warren Commission Report or the HSCA Report . Masen was the subject of a major investigation into the death penalty .
 He knew Masen well, having been involved as an undercover agent in a planned major sting operation against Masen . Masen was trafficking in illegal, stolen weapons .
 Masen escaped the major sting that had been set for him, apparently due to FBI interference . FBI interference that blew the ATF operation blew up the ATF sting .
 Ellsworth then arrested Masen on a minor charge; he was released on bail . Masen was arrested in Ellsworth, Ellsworth . Ellsworth was then arrested on an unrelated charge .
 Ellsworth was in the Dallas police station after Oswald’s arrest on November 22, he looked at Oswald and thought that he had just turned loose the man who had killed the president . Ellsworth said he thought he had turned loose Oswald .
 I happened to arrest him personally very shortly before and then when I saw Oswald a few days later, I thought—that’s my neck. That's my neck, he said . I happened . I was arrested personally shortly before . He said, "I happened to arrested him
 The guy was out on bond, and very closely connected with the extreme right . He was released from prison on bond .
 “99% of the people we did investigate had no significant political connection,” he adds as an inside . “We had reason to believe he was with the Minutemen," he says .
 “I personally talked to some individuals who thought they saw Oswald, subsequently saw this guy and said—that's him. That’s him. I bring the subject back to this “second Oswald’—“I brought the subject of this ‘second Oswald
 The first time I saw Oswald was from here to the door. My immediate reaction with Oswald was, that’s who he was. That's who I thought Oswald was. He was who Oswald was and the first time he saw Oswald, he said .
 Oswald look-alike might’ve been identified as Oswald at a rifle range, whether the look-at-allike might have been the one identified . Oswald was killed in the September 9, 2012, terrorist attack in Washington .
 He was able to ascertain the look-alike was at someone's house in North Dallas, Texas . He was at two instances in which he was at the home of someone who he was visiting .
 "I’d read in the paper or somebody would say, he had been in X’s house on X night. I’m not sure what happened," he says . He says he's not sure if he's ever been in a house at X's house
 "I’d find the look-alike knew these people and had been there at that approximate time," he says . "And I’ll find these people ... and they’ve been there for about 30 years," he adds .
 Witnesses saw him in the company of several other Minutemen, witnesses say . Witnesses say he was seen in two instances of being seen with other men .
 One of these deals did involve a group of Minutemen at a rifle range, I remember, and he knew all these people . One of the deals was with the Minuteman, who he knew at the range, he says .
 Masen also stated that he frequently used the Trinity river bottom to test-fire rifles . Masen says he frequently tested rifles at the Trinity River bottom .
 People in the gun repair business in the vicinity of Love Field, Dallas, use the Trinity river bottom as a place to test fire rifles .
 He advised the river levee is sufficiently high to provide ample safety . He advised that the levee was high enough to provide adequate safety .
 Mr Masen stated he frequently used the Trinity river bottom to test fire guns . He said he frequently tested fire guns at the Trinity River bottom .
 He described this place as being approximately two miles west of his gun shop . He described it as being located about two miles from his gun store .
 No cartridge cases or live ammunition were found . This area was checked and no ammunition was found .
 By many measures, he appears to have been an important figure in the fringes of the Kennedy assassination, but not necessarily involved in the plot . He appears to be a figure in many measures of the assassination .
 A strange thing about Masen is that despite his having been arrested, apparently three times between November 20 and November 22, 1963 (and arrested at least once, apparently concerning the JFK assassination) no photographs have been found of him in the public records .
 His fingerprints were taken and a large amount of information developed about him, but no photographs . He was taken and his fingerprints taken .
 According to Carol Hewett, criminal attorney and JFK assassination researcher in Florida, this is virtually unheard of . Hewett: "This is virtually unprecedented"
 Hewett and Anna Marie worked together in research on Masen over a period of two years . They obtained virtually every available document concerning his arrest and trials . But nowhere did they find a photograph of Masen .
 The only photograph they could find was in his high school yearbook, which showed some resemblance to Oswald . Oswald's high school photo was found in the yearbook .
 What is needed is a photograph circa 1963 to make a comparison with the real Oswald . Oswald's image is needed to compare him with that of JFK's assassin .
 Frank Ellsworth learned that Masen was involved in a large-scale operation stealing weapons by the truckload from the Army at Fort Hood in San Antonio . This was done with the cooperation of Captain George Nonte, the chief ordnance officer in charge of the Ford Hood arsenal .
 We think he got away with a medium tank supposed to have gone to the Minutemen . The tank was supposed to go to the minutemen, but it wasn't a tank .
 Some things that happened scared the wits out of these people and brought the whole thing to a halt . The whole thing was brought to a standstill, but some things were scary .
 Masen Masen was subsequently charged and convicted with some violations stemming from this violation . Masen has been convicted of some of these violations .
 Army Intelligence, San Antonio, Texas, on 10/24/63 advised that subject, Dallas, Texan sporting goods store operator, had asked Captain George Charles Nonte, Fort Hood, for information concerning large-scale military operations in the Caribbean .
 Subsequent meeting between subject and Nonte was arranged for evening of 10/24/63 . Subject was sent to Nonte to meet with him at the time of the incident .
 In view of possible espionage activity, San Antonio Office was telephonically instructed to closely follow and develop full details . San Antonio office was told to closely monitor and develop details .
 On 10/25/63 Nonte, who was cooperating, advised he met subject as scheduled . Nonte said he met Subject as scheduled. Nonte is cooperating, who is cooperating .
 Subject implied Martinez had previously been involved in attack on Cuba reportedly carried out by Alpha 66, anti-Castro organization . Subject implied that Martinez was involved in attacks on Cuba that were carried out .
 Subject did not know date operation would take place, but indicated it would be directed against Cuba by large rebel forces . Subject said rebel forces allegedly staging at unknown Caribbean bases . Unknown date of operation, subject did not say .
 Subject asked Nonte if he knew anyone who would pay for such information implying considerable money could be made on stock market by person having such data . Subject said he would like to know if anyone would pay such information . Nonte said he could make a fortune in the stock market if he
 Nonte plans to recontact subject on 10/31/63 in effort to obtain additional data . Nonte: "I will not be able to contact subject again until 10/30/63"
 Nonte characterized subject as opportunist who would avail himself of any opportunity to make money . Nonte said subject was opportunist and would be opportunist .
 Information appears to pertain to plan of anti-Castro exiles to attack Cuba from Caribbean area . Foregoing information appears to be pertains to plan to attack Cuban island from Caribbean .
 Reports have been received indicating exiles are using Caribbean area for attacks on Cuba . Since crackdown by United States authorities on such raids from U.S. Exiles have used Caribbean area to attack Cuba, reports say .
 CIA on 9/28/63 in discussing anti-Castro activities in Nicaragua, advised that it was not organizing any Cuban invasion forces . George Nonte wrote books on guns and was considered worldwide to be an expert .
 He once worked with Masen in attempting to obtain a permit to import a ‘fine deer rifle” from Russia . Masen successfully used a rifle successfully used in international target shooting events .
 Agent Ellsworth states that during his association with Masen, Masen had mentioned Rodriguez as being a Cuban who was attempting to buy arms from Masen . Rodriguez was a Cuban trying to buy machine guns, bazookas, and other heavy equipment, according to Ellsworth .
 Masen also mentioned a George F Parrel, a Cuban National who was an associate of Rodriguez and who was also attempting to buy arms from him . Parrel was also trying to buy weapons from Rodriguez .
 Masen informed Agent Ellsworth, while Ellsworth was undercover, that Rodriguez and Parrel were leaders of the local organization of the Cuban Student Directorate . Also, that they were members of the Segundo Frente del Escambray which is known in America as Alpha 66 .
 Alpha 66 is known as an active commando type organization . Alpha 66 has recently made raids on Cuba .
 John Elrod was arrested at 2:45m. on November 22, 1963 and placed in a cell in a Dallas city jail for four hours following Elrod’s arrest . Mary and Ray La Fontaine pieced together Elrod's story in their book Oswald Talked .
 Oswald told Elrod that he had been in a motel a few days preceding with four other men, including Jack Ruby, during which money had changed hands for a gunrunning transaction . Oswald's remarks were that a man with a smashed face had been brought into the cell block by the Dallas
 Laurence Reginald Miller was arrested on the night of November 18, 1963, along with Donnell Darius Whitter, in a stakeout by the FBI and Dallas police that was related to an illegal transfer of weapons stolen from the Texas National Guard armory .
 The Dallas police had pursued the receivers of the illegal weapons, Whitter and Miller, and, curiously, had let the purveyors of the weapon leave the scene unscathed . Dallas police let them go unscathed, leaving them with the weapon .
 In a 60-mph chase through the streets of Dallas, the car driven by Whitter crashed against a telephone pole . Whitter and Miller were arrested after the crash .
 Whitter was taken to the Dallas Parkland Hospital where he was treated for severe abdominal injuries, remaining there for five days . The automobile was a 1962 Thunderbira #4 .
 Miller, the one with the smashed face, was released the same day and sent to the Dallas city . The Dallas police apparently had some reason to suspect a connection between the man in Elrod's cell block and Miller .
 They brought Miller into the corridor of the cell block to see if Oswald could identify him . Miller was taken to a cell block by Oswald, but Oswald had already identified him .
 Elrod was retained in the Dallas jail over the weekend, put in lineups related to the JFK assassination . He was released after Jack Ruby shot Oswald Oswald .
 Elrod walked into a police station in Memphis, Tennessee, and told the officer there that he had information concerning Lee Harvey Oswald . The Memphis police called the local FBI, which questioned Elrod .
 The FBI dismissed Elrod’s statement that he had been incarcerated in the Dallas City jail . The FBI said their search of Elrod's records did not reveal such an arrest . Elrod says he was incarcerated in Dallas City Jail .
 Mary La Fontaine obtained the arrest record in 1994 in a search of newly released Dallas police records . The arrest record did not see the light of day until 1994 .
 The arrest record clearly shows that Elrod was arrested on November 22, 1963 at 2.45m. Arrest record shows that he was arrested at 2:45m . Elrod's arrest record shows he was in custody at the time of his arrest .
 The FBI did not report Elrod’s arrest or his complete story . Elrod's arrest is one more example of suppression of what appears to be critical evidence that could have unraveled an important part of the JFK assassination mystery .
 John Franklin Elrod, an inmate of the Shelby County, Tennessee, Jail, as of August 11, 1964, furnished the following information . Elrod was a prisoner in Shelby County Jail in Tennessee, Tennessee .
 Elrod currently lives at Memphis, Tennessee, and has been staying at the Harbor House....a home for alcoholics, and Elrod stated that he, himself, is an alcoholic .
 Elrod came to the Shelby County Sheriff's Office during the early morning hours of August 11, 1964, after having consumed some beer and vodka . Elrod had come to the sheriff's office after drinking a large amount of alcohol .
 He was at that time in possession of a sawed-off 12 gauge 12 gauge shotgun which had a pistol grip . He was later found dead in hospital .
 He stated that he had begun to think of the possibilities of killing his wife from whom he is now separated . He said he had started thinking of the possibility of killing her .
 He decided he should come to the Sheriff's Office and talk, which he did . Inasmuch as he had the sawed-off shotgun and the desire to kill her was known to him .
 He further advised that he had been somewhat troubled by events which occurred immediately following the assassination of President Kennedy at Dallas, Texas, on November 11, 1963 .
 Elrod Elrod was arrested by the Dallas Police Department and placed in the City Jail . Elrod had been two and one half miles from the scene of the assassination at Lemon and Oaklawn Streets in Dallas .
 His arrest had nothing to do with the assassination of the President, and he knew nothing concerning the assassination, he said . He knew nothing about the President's assassination .
 At the City Jail in Dallas, he was placed in Cell 10 on the fifth floor . At that time his cellmate was a man whose identity he could not recall . At the time he was in cellmate, he said, his identity he couldn't recall .
 An individual, whose face was smashed up, was brought into the hallway of the jail where Elrod and his cellmate could observe him . An individual was brought in to the jail to observe him, Elrod said .
 The unknown cellmate made some mention that he had known this man with the injured face as a result of meeting him at a motel . At that time he made mention of meeting the man at the motel .
 The cellmate stated that five men had met at a motel, and they had been advanced some money under some type contract . The cellmates said they had met in a motel and had advanced money .
 The man with the injured face had received some money . He was reported to have been driving a Thunderbird automobile with a large quantity of guns contained therein .
 Elrod advised he was confined in the Dallas City Jail for a period of 72 hours, and he was confused at this time concerning the events which occurred . Elrod told the court that he had been confined for 72 hours .
 A cellmate at some time had told him that one of the men who had been at the motel referred to above, name and location unknown, had been Jack Ruby . He stated he could not recall whether Jack Ruby’s name had been mentioned prior to the time of the killing
 He stated that on several occasions he has had difficulty remembering due to his extreme use of alcohol . He said he has struggled to remember due to the use of excessive alcohol .
 Elrod’s story ring authentic is that it is very unlikely that he would have known about the Thunderbird automobile and the meeting in the motel room with Jack Ruby, guns, and money changing hands .
 The Thunderbird car had come out in a small article on page 19 of a Dallas newspaper while Elrod was in jail . Elrod's knowledge of gun running and Jack Ruby was not yet public .
 It seems reasonable to conclude that Elrod did, in fact, get this information from someone in the cell block with him . It could have been Oswald or an Oswald look-alike . Elrod could have gotten the information from an Oswald-look-alikes .
 The La Fontaine book was lauded in the assassination research community as a major breakthrough in the JFK assassination . Some of the authors’ broad conclusions were challenged, but some of them were challenged .
 Oswald look-alike John Thomas Masen more likely to have been Oswald looker, critics say . Oswald's story that it was Oswald who had talked to Elrod in four-hour period challenged by critics .
 There are reasonable arguments that Elrod talked to Masen instead of Oswald . There were reasonable arguments for Elrod to have talked with Masen, not Oswald .
 Masen was arrested on November 22, 1963, according to fingerprint records and a Texas Department of Safety arrest record . He could well have been in the jail at the same time as Elrod, who was arrested in 1963 .
 Inasmuch as it seemed likely that the controversy as to whether it was Masen or Oswald in the cell block could go on for an extended time, I decided to confine myself to the broader aspects of the evidence on the logic that it must have been either Oswald or Masen
 Using this premise, I would determine how it fitted in my quest for the identity of the people at the top of the conspiracy hierarchy . I would then try to find out how it fits in my search for the identities of those at the highest levels of conspiracy .
 In the last analysis, it does not really matter whether it was Masen or Oswald who met with Jack Ruby days before the assassination, at least in so far as we are concerned about Ruby’s activities . The last analysis is that it doesn’t matter whether Masen
 Evidence corroborates Nancy Perrin Rich story that Ruby was running guns in 1961 . Either way we now have independent evidence corroborating the story .
 We have independent corroboration for the much ridiculed Marita Lorenz story that she met with Jack Ruby the week of the assassination in a motel room loaded with weapons which had been stolen from military armories . And we have independent .
 Lorenz, Rich, and Elrod most definitely did not know one another and thus their statements, however farfetched they sound independently, now have the ring of truth when assembled together, and give us more insight into Jack Ruby than the Warren Commission ever did AOS phasic added
 I thought perhaps, in my caution, I’d thrown out the baby with the bath water . But now I thought maybe, perhaps, I'd thrown out . The baby was born in New York City, New York, but the baby was still growing up .
 Marita Lorenz was another CIA operative who told her story involving anti-Castro Cubans and CIA renegades in the plot to kill Kennedy . Lorenz's story was told in a joint interview with CNN's John Sutter .
 This now brings the number of CIA agents who have revealed their stories to five, not counting David Sanchez Morales . This is not the first time the CIA agents have come forward to reveal their stories .
 Marita Lorenz recruited into the CIA by Frank Sturgis while she was Fidel Castro’s mistress in Havana . Lorenz was recruited by the CIA during her time as a mistress to Castro .
 She left Cuba to participate in CIA activities in the U.S. She was brought into the lawsuit by Mark Lane for her extraordinary testimony .
 The basis for the lawsuit was an article asserting that E Howard Hunt may have been implicated in the assassination of President Kennedy . Hunt was accused of being involved in the Kennedy assassination .
 Published fifteen years after the murder of the president, it was written by a former CIA officer, Victor Marchetti .
 In December 1981, Hunt had won an initial judgment in the amount of $650,000 . The award would have forced Liberty Lobby into bankruptcy .
 Liberty Lobby retained attorney Mark Lane for the second trial . February 1985, the jury found Liberty Lobby not guilty of libel .
 In his book Plausible Denial, Mark Lane stated, “There is no legal precedent for Hunt Liberty Lobby.” Lane said in his book, "There are no legal precedents"
 Her testimony was taken in a January 11, 1985 deposition with Hunt’s legal counsel, Kevin A Dunne, in attendance . Dunne was in attendance at the deposition .
 I had filed them away because I had decided to abandon telling her story, but I hadn't decided to do so so .
 In one fell swoop, Marita Lorenz’s testimony establishes guilt of the CIA at a high level . Lorenz traveled with a team of CIA operatives from Miami to Dallas in a caravan of two cars in late November 1963 .
 Lorenz: Frank Sturgis, Gerald Patrick Hemming, two Cuban brothers named Novis, a pilot named Pedro Diaz Lanz, anti-Castro exile Orlando Bosch, and Lee Harvey Oswald . According to Lorenz, the people traveling in the cars included Frank . St
 She testified in 1978 that it must have been on a weekend before the assassination . She testified that it was on the weekend before her assassination .
 Lorenz identified E Howard Hunt as passing money to this group of people in a Dallas motel room on November 21 . Jack Ruby visited the motel after Hunt had left, Lorenz said . Lorenz also identified Jack Ruby as visiting the motel .
 She had Sturgis take her to the Dallas airport on November 21, and took a flight back to Miami . She had to take her back to Dallas, Texas, after she was taken to the airport .
 Whether this was the actual team that assassinated Kennedy is not certain, but Lorenz has emphatically stated that she understood from Sturgis that they were involved in the operation . Lorenz: "I know from a friend that was involved in this operation"
 Lorenz’s story was discarded partly because she swore that Lee Harvey Oswald was in the group in the second car that traveled to Dallas . In addition to peer pressure, I had discarded Lorenz's story partly because of peer pressure and peer pressure .
 Oswald was working at the Texas Schoolbook Depository during the period in question . Unless this was another Oswald lookalike, this could not be true because Oswald was at the time of the incident .
 I deleted Lorenz’s story from my manuscript except for the photo caption . I attempted to contact Lorenz through a friend who knew her family in Philadelphia, but to no avail .
 It still has some problems, such as Oswald being in the caravan as well as Gerald Patrick Hemming, who has denied it, and her vagueness as to the date of departure from Miami . Now they have reinserted it, although it still has problems, including Oswald being
 Bob Dorff organized a small conference to be held in San Francisco on July 4-6, 1996 . Dorff became very interested in the Masen/Elrod story and organized it .
 The agenda for the conference was a review of the La Fontaine book, primarily the part on John Elrod . The conference was held in New York City .
 Also included on the agenda was an update on the latest evidence about Oswald in Mexico City . Also included was a update on evidence that Oswald was killed in Mexico .
 The San Francisco Conference met at the Golden Gate Holiday Inn on the evening of July 4, 1996 .
 Marathon sessions continued until noon on July 6, with time out for sleep, food, and drinks, and for watching a spectacular display of fireworks from Mary Ferrell’s suite .
 Oswald or Masen may have been in the cell block with Elrod, the author says . As I anticipated, we were unable to reach a consensus on the viability of the evidence . Oswald was found to be in the same cell block as Elrod .
 Carol Hewett presented her arguments and documents that the person could have been the Oswald look-alike Masen . Hewett said the person who could be Masen could be the man who looked like Masen was Oswald .
 Mary Ferrell presented Warren Commission documents showing that Oswald could not have been in the cell block at that time . Ferrell: Oswald was not in that cell block when he was in that time.
 Bill Adams argued his and the La Fontaines’ strong position that it was in fact Oswald in the cell block . Bill Adams argues that Oswald was actually Oswald in a cell block.
 Oswald look-alike, John Thomas Masen, was conclusively linked to the arrest of Whitter and Miller in gun-running operation . However, there was no disagreement that the arrests were linked to Masen .
 There was no disagreement that the gun running from Fort Hood was to provide weapons for the DRE/Alpha 66 headquarters at the house . There was also a disagreement that Fort Hood provided weapons for DRE-Alpha 66 .
 Being unable to tie down the John Elrod evidence connecting Oswald to the Whitter-Miller arrest and Jack Ruby to his satisfaction, I reaffirmed my decision not to place evidentiary credence on it in this book . Not that the La Fontaines had failed to uncover important evidence
 Jack Ruby’s gun running in Dallas and connections to anti-Castro Cubans and John Thomas Masen . It did seem to be essential, however, to address the issue of Jack Ruby's gun .
 As Carol Hewett wrote, there was a linkage of the arms trafficking to Jack Ruby . Regardless of whether it was Masen or Oswald in the cell block with Elrod, it was linked .
 The FBI report in Memphis has Elrod telling about Ruby in a motel room in Dallas with Miller and others . Money and guns are changing hands, the FBI report says . Elrod says he told the FBI about Ruby and Miller .
 The Nancy Perrin Rich story in the Warren Commission documents about Ruby and gun running in Dallas, long ignored, now has credence . The story now appears to be true .
 Jack Ruby may have been involved in the gun running of Whitter, Miller, and Masen . Jack Ruby is a possible link to the gun-running of the men .
 Additional evidence of Ruby’s deep involvement in gun running for the anti-Castro Cubans is in a tape of Gaeton Fonzi’�s HSCA interview of Wally Weston . The tape of the interview is found in a recording of the tape of F
 Weston was a nightclub comedian who worked for Jack Ruby in the Carousel Club . He worked for the club in the 1950s .
 Russell went to Masen’s gun shop in Dallas early one evening and dropped in unannounced . Russell visited Masen's gun shop unannounced and took photos of the shop .
 Oswald look-alike had put on about thirty pounds over the years, Ellsworth says . Ellsworth: Oswald's weight has dropped about 30 pounds since he was first seen .
 In 1976 he was a stocky, brown-haired thirty-six-year-old, about the same height as Oswald . In 1976, Oswald was about the height of Oswald, but was stocky and stocky .
 Masen’s eyes flashed and his reply was acrid. When I mentioned the name of Frank Ellsworth, Masen said he was angry . Masen: "I’m not sure what I’ve done, but I think we’re going to
 All charges were dropped except failure to keep proper records . They finally dropped all charges except failing to keep records .
 "This has cost me an enormous amount of money, not being able to deal in firearms," he says . "I have been unable to deal with firearms since I was a teenager," he adds .
 "This has cost me $20,000 or $30,000 over the past twelve or thirteen years," he says . "I've been doing this for 12 or 13 years, and it's costing me money," he adds .
 He gave me a long, probing look, as if he knew exactly what I was driving at . He gave him a probing look and said he knew what he was going to do . He said: "I'm not going to be surprised, but I'm going to make a big
 Going around asking people about the Cubans, the Kennedy assassination, Kennedy assassination . "I'm going around asking about the Cubanans," he says. "I don't know anything about it," he adds .
 What may be a living to you, he said, ‘can be a life to them.” ‘‘“‘I”’s’
 These gun-running activities link Ruby to John Thomas Masen who was described by ATF agent Frank Ellsworth as a remarkable Oswald look-alike . This implicates Ruby as being deeper into the plot than just a low-level hood who was ordered to kill Oswald .
 Masen may have been the second Oswald seen around Dallas in the weeks before the Kennedy assassination . There is no conclusive evidence that Masen consciously posed as Oswald . He may simply have been mistaken for Oswald .
 Headquarters for 112th division of Army intelligence was also in San Antonio . Headquarters for the 112th Division of Army Intelligence was also located there .
 The FBI thwarted the ATF operation to arrest John Thomas Masen in the gun-running operations, thus shutting it down and keeping the story underground . This may have been part of a larger postmissile crisis program involving killing Castro .
 The FBI suppressed evidence of John Thomas Masen and gun-running operations until it was finally revealed in documents released by the National Archives . The FBI then systematically suppressed evidence .
 This suggests that the gun-running operation could have been closely associated with the JFK assassination . The operation was carried out in the early 1960s, according to reports .
 The common elements are Cuban exiles, the Mafia, the CIA, and right-wing extremists . The CIA, the mafia, and the CIA are common elements in the U.S. government's war .
 There are four repeating patterns of evidence that, over and over again, strongly define the broad structure of the plot to kill John F Kennedy . James Hepburn, Farewell America 27 .
 The Mafia, including Jimmy Hoffa, and anti-Castro Cuban movement . Right-wing extremists in the CIA and/or the military; Extremists in the anti-Cuba Cuban movement; and Civilian extremists/racists .
 An important pattern that has emerged is the large number of people who had foreknowledge of the plot, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "An important pattern" has emerged that many people knew about the plot .
 There seems to be a disproportionate number of people connected with anti-Castro Cuban groups or others linked closely to them . Among these people are those linked to groups that oppose the Castro regime .
 "My objective in this chapter is to bring these disparate elements into a simplified account supported by the evidence," says author . "I'm trying to bring together the evidence to support my case," he says .
 It was useful in previous chapters to focus on a single group of suspects and explore their linkages with other suspects . This chapter focuses on a group of suspected terrorists .
 By focusing on the anti-Castro Cubans and evidence of their foreknowledge of the assassination, I anticipate that a more definitive pattern will become apparent . I think that a definitive pattern of the Cuban assassination will be apparent .
 Hunt: Everywhere we turn we see evidence of involvement of the anti-Castro Cubans . Hunt: "There are signs of involvement in the disinformation phase of the plot, and perhaps also in the execution phase"
 This chapter is long and detailed, and so is the chapter that follows on Gerald Patrick Hemming . Hemming is the son of Gerald Hemming. Hemming died in 1968 at the hands of a British soldier .
 Two chapters reveal intricacies of the substructure of the plot, and thereby evidentiary linkages to the identities of the master plotters . But these two chapters are perhaps the most important .
 In 1963, there was a bewildering array of anti-Castro Cuban organizations in the U.S. There was more than one hundred of them in the United States .
 We will concentrate on a few of the more important ones where there is some known or suspected connection with the assassination . This is a list of some of the most important assassinations in history .
 Key Anti-Castro Cuban Organizations i Group: Alpha 66—Segundo Frente . Group: SNFE-Alpha-66-MRP Key Individuals: Sergio Arcacha-Smith; Antonio Veciana; del Escambray Rolando Masferrer; Tony Cuesta
 FRD — Frente Revolucucionario Democratico Key Individuals: Sergio Arcacha-Smith; Dr. Dr. Sergio . Dr. Marc-Marc-Smith . Dr.- Marc-Smith is a former member of the FRD .
 Echevarria was a member of the 30th of November group, which was dissolved shortly after the assassination . He was a former member of a group that was formed shortly after his assassination .
 Another member of this same group was Rolando Masferrer, who was also a money conduit between Carlos Marcello and Alpha 66 . Rolando was also part of this group, which was also known for its money conduit .
 Alpha 66, the radical exile group, had a house in Dallas at the time of the assassination . Alpha 66 had a home in Dallas when the assassination occurred .
 The Secret Service memorandum about Echevarria was sent to the FBI, but no action was taken . The memo was sent by the FBI to the Secret Service .
 Lyndon Johnson gave the FBI sole jurisdiction over the entire JFK investigation . The FBI made it clear that it wanted the Secret Service to terminate its investigation . Once again we have the FBI, under the control of LBJ, suppressing vital evidence .
 The HSCA found that the 30th of November group was backed financially by the JGCE, a Chicagobased organization run by Paulino Sierra Martinez . The organization backed the more militant groups including Alpha 66 and the DRE . Carlos Bringuier was involved in the
 The JGCE financial support allegedly came from individuals connected to organized crime . The group was dissolved shortly after President Kennedy’s assassination .
 This report highlighted the possibility of a serious connection between Oswald and Cubans in Dallas shortly before the assassination . This report clearly highlighted the possible connection . Oswald and Cuban Americans were in Dallas at the time .
 It suggested the possibility of asafe house in Dallas to accommodate assassins . The idea was suggested by the suggestion of a Dallas-style house to be set up .
 Later it would be revealed that the house on Harlendale Street was for the use of Alpha 66 . The house was later revealed to be for Alpha 66.
 One of the Cubans bragging about “taking care of Kennedy” occurred just before the assassination took place . So here we have, surfacing within a few days after November 22, a network including militant Cubans and Mafiosi with connections to Lee .
 As we see, over and over, leads were there which could possibly have cracked the case wide open . As well as leads there were there, the case was never solved . The case is still unsolved, but the case has been solved .
 Another example of foreknowledge of the assassination linked to Cuban exiles were the statements of Joseph Milteer which have been mentioned briefly in previous chapters . The statements were made by the Cuban ex-Cuban exiles in the 1960s and 1970s .
 Milteer was a right-wing extremist active in supporting the Cuban exiles . He was active in the support of Cuban ex-Cubans .
 The evidence has to do with a Miami police informant, who notified the FBI that he had tape recorded a threat against Kennedy made by Joseph Milteer on November 9, 1963 in Miami . The FBI says the threat was made by a police informant in Miami, Florida .
 Somersett asked if Milteer actually had known of the assassination before it occurred or if he had just been guessing . Somersett also asked if he actually knew about the assassination or if it was just a guess .
 Milteer asserted that he had been certain beforehand about the inevitability of the assassination . He said, “Everything ran true to form. Everything ran true form.”
 The FBI had received this information about Milteer but did not pass it on to the Warren Commission until two weeks before its work was to be concluded . The right-wing is in the clear...the patriots have outsmarted the communist group in order that the communists would carry
 FBI "stalling and maneuvering to suppress evidence that it could not destroy because the reporting entity was out of its control," FBI says . FBI: "We have the FBI stalling ... to suppress ... evidence" The FBI says it has no obligation to destroy evidence .
 She told the attending physician that Kennedy was going to be killed during his forthcoming trip to Dallas . Kennedy was killed in Dallas, Texas, during his trip to Texas .
 Victor Weiss, who was employed as a resident physician at the hospital in 1963, was a resident doctor at the time . Weiss was the son of Dr. Victor Weiss . Weiss died of a heart attack at a Chicago hospital .
 Dr. Victor Weiss...recalled that on Monday, November 25, 1963, he was asked by another physician, Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter said that on Nov. 25, 'Dr. Weiss' asked that on that day, he had been asked
 Bowers allegedly told Weiss that the patient, Rose Cheramie, had stated before the assassination that President Kennedy was going to be killed . Bowers told Weiss the patient had stated that the president would be killed, Weiss said .
 She had said the “word in the underworld” was that Kennedy would be assassinated . She did not have specific details of a specific assassination plot against Kennedy .
 She had been traveling from Florida to her home in Texas when the man traveling with her threw her from the automobile in which they were riding . She further stated that she was thrown from the vehicle in which she was riding .
 Cheramie was taken to the hospital by Fruge's wife . She was admitted to a psychiatric ward in New York City . Cheramies is now in stable condition .
 They had stopped at this lounge...and they’d had a few drinks and had gotten into an argument or something . They had had drinks...and had had a couple of drinks and gotten into a fight .
 Fruge said the lounge was a house of prostitution called the Silver Slipper . He said it was a 'house of prostitution' called the 'Silver Slipper'
 Fruge claimed during these intervals that Cheramie related the story she appeared to be quite lucid . She said she was quite lucid during the intervals .
 Fruge said he immediately called the hospital and told them not to release Cheramie until he had spoken to her . On November 22, when he heard the President had been assassinated, he said . He said he told the hospital to not release her until he spoke to her again
 Cheramie Fruge had to wait until the following Monday before she could speak to anyone . The hospital administrators assented but said she would have to wait to be well enough to talk to anyone again .
 Cheramie told Fruge that the two men traveling with her from Miami were going to Dallas to kill the President . Cheramies said she was traveling with two men from Miami to Dallas, Texas, to kill him .
 Cheramie had come in with two men who the owner knew as pimps engaged in the business of hauling prostitutes in from Florida . The bar owner, a Mr Mac Manual since deceased, told Fruge that two men were pimps .
 When Cheramie became intoxicated and rowdy, one of the men “slapped her around” and threw her outside, the woman says . The incident happened at a home in New York City, New Jersey, where she lives .
 Richard Case Nagell was assigned by the CIA to infiltrate and investigate Cuban exile groups that the CIA suspected were getting out of control, perhaps plotting to assassinate the president . He was assigned to investigate the groups, which the CIA feared would be plotting to kill the President .
 Nagell says he met Oswald in Mexico City where he met him in 1963 . He was assigned to investigate Oswald's murder .
 Nagell revealed that he was a double agent between the CIA and Soviet intelligence . He was ordered by the Soviets to murder Oswald to prevent Oswald from participating in the assassination of Kennedy .
 Nagell predicted the assassination of Kennedy while under arrest in El Paso, Texas, in 1963 . He was arrested on suspicion of the murder of Kennedy .
 The story of Robert Morrow, who claims that he knew about Richard Case Nagell’s assignment by the CIA, is that he was given the assignment to purchase four Mannlicher-Carcano rifles along with walkie-talkies for delivery to David Ferrie in 1963
 Morrow also claims he knew Cuban exile Eladio del Valle, who told Morrow that Kennedy was going to be assassinated . Morrow claims to have known delValle before Kennedy was assassinated .
 This added one more member to the list of people who had advance knowledge of the assassination . The assassination is the first known person to have been involved in it .
 Information concerning anti-Castro Cuban involvement in the assassination was provided at the Nassau conference that I attended in December 1995, 1995 .
 During this conference, the Cubans flatly declared that Eladio del Valle was involved in the Kennedy assassination . The Cuban president was assassinated in 1968 . The president was killed by a single gunshot wound to the head of the Cuban government .
 John Martino revealed before he died that he was involved with Cuban exiles in the Kennedy assassination plot . Martino said he had been involved in the plot to kill the president .
 This section will include a discussion of the activities of William Pawley, Henry Luce, and Clare Boothe Luce in promoting privately financed, covert operations against Cuba . This section includes a discussion about the activities conducted by the Luce family .
 These associations could prove to be important linkages between Pawley and General Charles Willoughby and other right-wing extremist elements . Pawley's associations with Charles will be an important link between him and other extremists .
 By examining these lines of evidence separately and then consolidating them, perhaps a more coherent picture perhaps will emerge . The Cuban exiles are part of a larger view of the master plot, says Julian Zelizer .
 These accounts, by necessity, will be greatly simplified and simplified .
 A method that will be used is to look for corroboration of the truthfulness in the attestations of Nagell, Morrow, Bishop, and Martino . A method of corroboration is to be used .
 They claimed to have been involved in the fringes of the JFK assassination, but not in the plot itself . They all claimed to be involved in a plot to kill JFK but not the assassination .
 If we can believe their individual statements in the main, then their combined accounts become invaluable, particularly their versions of the composition of a master plot . The combined accounts are invaluable, especially their accounts of composition of master plots .
 A major source for my work on Nagell was discussions with Dick Russell and information from Russell’s book The Man Who Knew Too Much . Double Agent .
 I commissioned Anna Marie Kuhns-Walko to search the National Archives for any further material . In addition, I commissioned her to look at the archives for further material.
 Nagell spoke to author about his role in the Kennedy assassination . He was able to contact him personally to discuss his role .
 At the time of his death, Nagell was sixty-five years old and a broken man . He died at the age of 65 .
 After Nagell’s death, I was contacted by one of his relatives, the executor of his estate, who had found my letters in his footlocker . He had found them in the footlockers of his footlockeder .
 Nagell had talked with his estate executor about me shortly before he died, he said . He had talked about me with his executor shortly before his death . He said: "Nagell was a good man. He was a great man."
 "The executor provided me with additional information of considerable interest," he said .
 Much of the material in this chapter was written before Nagell’s death and was reviewed by him . Much of this chapter has been written before the author's death .
 Richard Case Nagell is considered by many to be the most important witness in the JFK assassination . He is considered to be one of the most significant witnesses in the assassination . The JFK assassination was JFK's assassination .
 On September 20, 1963, Nagell was arrested in El Paso, Texas, for firing two harmless shots into the ceiling of the State National Bank .
 Nagell would later claim that prior to this incident he had sent a warning letter to J Edgar Hoover and to the CIA in which he had revealed a conspiracy to assassinate John Kennedy that he believed would take place in late September 1963 . He would also claim that he had also sent a
 He claimed that his letter provided information on Oswald and two of his associates, Angel and Leopoldo . He claimed to have been able to track down Oswald's associates .
 He's got that look that’s unusual, the penetrating eyes, that scar down one side of his face . He has been in the hospital for more than 20 years . He's been in hospital with a serious injury to his leg .
 It is a complex tale of a tragic spy who tried to come in from the cold . It is the story of a man who tries to come out of the cold. It is also a tale of the tragic spy .
 Nagell was sentenced to ten years in the federal penitentiary . He shot two harmless shots into the ceiling of a bank and waited outside to be arrested .
 The federal judge assigned to the case was Homer Thornberry, Lyndon Johnsons personal friend, whom he had just appointed .
 This is a strong indication that powers in government were aware of Nagell’s importance, and extraordinary measures were necessary to silence him . This is the strong indication of government's determination to silence the Welshman .
 A respected police officer in El Paso, Texas, confirmed Nagell’s story to a respected officer . The officer says he believes the El Paso Police Department officer's account of the incident .
 First, he was indeed a contract agent for the CIA . He was given the assignment of investigating Oswald in 1963 .
 Subject was employed as a special investigator for the State of California, Fraud Section, Department of Employment, and Department of Alcoholic Control . Subject worked for the state of California from 14 December 1959 through 22 June 1962 . Subject was a special agent for the California Department of Investigation .
 Subject was suspended for unauthorized release of information to the newspapers and the Los Angeles Police Department . Subject was subject of an arrest in June 1962 . Subject of the arrest was subject to an arrest warrant in June 1963 .
 During July, August, September, and on one occasion prior to this, subject conducted an inquiry into the activities of Lee Harvey Oswald, and the allegation he had established a Fair Play For Cuba Committee in New Orleans, Louisiana .
 The document does not state that Nagell claimed these facts . Of special significance is that the document doesn't state that he claimed the facts .
 Dick Russell asked Russell to prepare a list of reasons why I should believe Nagell's story . Russell said he would be prepared to make a list for Russell . Russell: "There are no good reasons to believe this story. It's a good story"
 I will address the significance of some of these items as this chapter progresses . I will also address some of the significance .
 He enlisted in the Army in 1948 on his eighteenth birthday . He was assigned to paratrooper school at Fort Bragg, North Carolina . He served in World War II .
 At the age of 19, he went into Army intelligence at a beginning level . Shortly after that, he became involved with the British Army . He is now a senior commander in the British Armed Forces .
 He studied Russian at Fort Bragg and took an extension course in Mandarin Chinese . He also took a course in Russian and Mandarin Chinese at the base .
 In the fall of 1951, Nagell was shipped to Korea to serve in the Korean War . He was assigned as a rifle platoon leader in Korea . He served in Korea in Korea as a member of his platoon .
 He had the reputation of being a top-notch lieutenant who commanded forty men in his platoon . He was a top lieutenant in the Army, commanding forty men .
 Even after being wounded he requested reassignment to Korea and was sent back to active combat where he was again wounded and again returned to the front lines after five days in the hospital .
 Nagell described himself as a young idealist who went to Korea voluntarily . He said he was an idealist and went voluntarily to Korea .
 Nagell was the youngest American to receive a battlefield commission to captain during the course of the war . He was also the youngest U.S. soldier to be promoted to captain in World War One .
 When the war ended in 1953, he was just nine days short of his twenty-third birthday . He was nine days before his birthday when he died .
 Nagell was the recipient of three Purple Hearts, a Bronze Star, the Korean Service Medal, and the United Nations Service Ribbon . He was also awarded three Korean War medals and a Korean War Medal .
 Richard Case Nagell was arrested outside the State National Bank in El Paso, Texas . He is being held in federal custody in federal court . Richard Case was arrested in the early hours of Tuesday morning .
 Robert Morrow, CIA contract agent, purchased four 7.35-mm Mannlicher-Carcano rifles shortly before Kennedy assassination . The rifles were intended for delivery to a group in New Orleans .
 He suffered injuries in a military plane crash near Andrews Air Force Base in Washington, D.C., on November 28, 1954 . During this period he suffered injuries .
 He was the only soldier of five to live through the ordeal . He survived by parachuting from the plane . He was only one of five soldiers to survive .
 He suffered a severe concussion and was unconscious for twenty-seven days after the crash . The crash left him unconscious for more than two weeks .
 When he was discharged from the Army’s Walter Reed Hospital, he was given a thorough psychiatric examination . He was cleared of any obvious personality changes related to his injuries .
 The FBI, CIA, and others would later use the fact of his injuries in the plane crash to trash his entire story .
 While still hospitalized, Nagell was assigned to duty with the Army’s Counter Intelligence Corps school at Fort Holabird, Maryland, in May 1955 . In May 1955 he reported to duty at the CIC's intelligence training center .
 Nagell graduated with honors; on August 12, 1955 he was designated a counterintelligence officer . He was designated as a counter intelligence officer in August 1955 .
 In September 1955 he was granted a top-secret security clearance . He was assigned to CIC duty in Los Angeles . He served as a CIC in the Los Angeles area .
 "We opened the mail of civilians with a postal inspector standing right next to us," says Nagell . Nageell recounted the experience of opening mail of civilian mail .
 Hunt is involved in ultra-right-wing, anti-Communist/white supremacist organizations worldwide . Hunt is also involved in anti-communist and anti-white supremacist groups worldwide. Hunt is a former member of the U.S. anti-White Supremacist Party. Hunt
 FOI was a top-secret division considered sacrosanct by military intelligence . The FOI division was considered a top secret by the British military .
 Nagell wrote about his indoctrination in the FOI concerning the various tools of the trade . He also wrote about the use of FOI .
 These devices also included miniature cameras, radio transmitters and receivers, code books, etc.
 Nagell was told he might come across an assassination device, a short metal tube, in his work . The assassination device was also included an assassination tube, which he had been told he may come across in his writing .
 This sophistication in assassinations had begun to reach its mature form in the late 1950s . This sophistication was reached its maturity in the mid-'60s and '60s .
 At that point, it seems clear that the CIA and military intelligence were heavily involved in the ‘pure science” of assassinations mentioned by James Jesus Angleton, head of CIA’s counter intelligence, to Dick Russell .
 In the autumn of 1957 Nagell was given a new assignment in the Japanese capital, after he had expressed moral and ethical dissatisfaction with the operations of Team 26 .
 Nagell had complained that in the course of his FOI duties he had participated in practically every major crime . He had complained he had been involved in almost all major crimes .
 It was on this assignment that Nagell would become privy to a vast amount of sensitive information . He would copy for safekeeping to protect himself later if the need should arise .
 Nagell learned of the name Joseph Kramer, which he would later use later in connection with JFK assassination . Kramer was a key figure in the JFK assassination case . Kramer's name was later used in the assassination probe .
 In 1957, a curious parallel path between Nagell and Oswald began to become apparent . Oswald was the leader of the Soviet Union in Russia in the 1950s and '60s .
 Nagell's assignment was to assist in the defection of Soviet Colonel Nikolai Eroshkin from the Soviet embassy in Japan . EroShkin was suspected of being among the top of Soviet military intelligence in Japan. He defected .
 Nagell and Oswald met in Tokyo with Dr. Oswald in late 1957 or early 1958 . Dr. O. Oswald was assassinated in February 1958 .
 Fujisawa had been a propagandist for the Japanese during World War II . He was acquainted with the alleged Soviet spy Mark Gayn . He also had a close relationship with alleged spy Mark Gennan .
 Fujisawa also may have attempted to recruit Oswald in Japan, thus launching Oswald’s career as a spy . Oswald may have been recruited in Japan by Fujisaw, who may have recruited Oswald .
 Oswald was passing along fake information to a KGB contact in Tokyo . Nagell and Oswald had girlfriends at The Queen Bee nightclub in Tokyo, where Oswald passed on information .
 8H Nagell married a Japanese woman; Oswald later had an affair in Dallas with a woman . Oswald had affair with Japanese woman in Dallas, Texas, in the 1960s . Oswald was married to Japanese woman .
 Both had connections with the Fair Play for Cuba Committee in the U.S. in the United States . Both men were connected to the Fair play for Cuba in the US .
 Both purportedly attempted to renounce their U.S. citizenship in what seem to be staged events . Both men are believed to have been in the United States illegally .
 Both attempted to reinstate their military discharges and were turned down on the same day . Both were denied reinstates their discharges .
 Nagell, like Oswald, may have been targeted as a patsy in the JFK assassination, may be a paty .
 In each of their military careers there was a strange pattern of insubordination and troublemaking in what appear to have been staged episodes to create their bonafides as defectors . At the same time their dossiers showed excellent performance records .
 Both men had a trail of supposed pro-Communist leanings which fit into a defector image . Both had a 'pro-communist' background . Both men were believed to have defected from the Communist Party .
 Both supposedly had histories of mental instabilities—fitting into an assassin profile . Both supposedly fit into a profile profile . The assassin profile is based on the profile of an assassin .
 Nagell may be just a waiting period before being used on his next assignment . This may have been just a wait period for him to get back on the job .
 It was at this juncture in my writing that Nagell died, much to my shock and dismay . The writer was shocked to discover that he had died at this time .
 I lamented that if only I had acted sooner to meet with Nagell, or had followed up more aggressively, I would have learned much more . I lamented .
 Nagell’s specific involvement in the Kennedy assassination apparently began with his assignment to penetrate the Cuban exile group Alpha 66 and to investigate Oswald .
 It has been postulated by Dick Russell that Nagell himself became an alternate patsy to Oswald for the Kennedy assassination . Dick Russell postulates that he may have been the patsies for Oswald .
 I will focus on Nagell’s version of the assassination plot and see how it compares to versions of the plot recounted by other CIA agents . I will also look at how it compared to other CIA accounts of the same plot .
 It is important to note that Nagell was probably involved in only one of the compartmentalized phases of the plot . What he has told could be in part from first-hand experience, and in part his own theory .
 Nagell claimed that the plot was a “domestic inspired, domestic-formulated, domestic conspiracy” to assassinate the president . The plot was ‘domestic-inspired’, he said .
 This could be a very significant statement and evidence of what many have long believed about the CIA, as an organization, was not involved in the Kennedy assassination except in the cover-up . It could be evidence of the CIA's involvement in the assassination .
 Nagell emphatically stated that the FBI had a major role in the assassination . What is important is that he said the FBI was involved in it .
 He also said that Communist powers inside or outside the United States were not involved in the U.S. involvement in the attack .
 He said Garrison and assassination buffs had ‘not wanted him in’ because he would not go along with their idea of Oswald’s innocence . Garrison said Lee Harvey Oswald was ‘in it up to his ears,” and that the reason Garrison didn’t
 To my knowledge, at no time did Nagell ever implicate Lyndon Johnson in the conspiracy . To his knowledge, he never implicated Johnson .
 Nagell claimed that he had stashed away photographs and a tape recording which would be revealed in the event of his death . He claimed he had photos and a recording which he would reveal if he was killed .
 To this date, this material has not surfaced, despite attempts by his estate executor to find it . The material has never been found, despite efforts by his executor .
 It is noteworthy that at least one of Nagell’s footlockers has not been located . At least one footlocker is still missing .
 Hunt/ Willoughby group working with right-wing extremist allies in the military and anti-Castro Cubans . Hunt/Willoughby: Group working with their right wing extremist allies .
 An important aspect of the Nagell story is his relationship with the Mafia . An important part of the story is the relationship between the mafia and the Mafia. The book is set to be released in October .
 As noted earlier, Nagell told Dick Russell that he had met Johnny Rosselli at the Friars Club in Los Angeles . As noted, he said he met Johnny at the club .
 Nagell’s strong early allegation that the FBI played a major part in the assassination is very significant in light of evidence later uncovered concerning the forgery of the Zapruder film and suppression of evidence in Dallas, New Orleans and Mexico City .
 Oswald visited Mexico City twice, says Nagell . Oswald visited the capital twice, including twice in Mexico City . Oswald was killed in September 1945 .
 Oswald visited the Cuban embassy twice in 1963, according to evidence . Oswald's visit to the embassy is evidence that he visited the embassy three times . Oswald was a member of the Cuban Embassy staff .
 In the material that follows, I will outline several significant items concerning Nagell that shed considerable light on the mystery of the JFK assassination . The material follows .
 Nagell’s investigation of the anti-Castro Cubans is of primary importance . The investigation was of primary interest in Nagello's Cuba investigation .
 CIA worried one of its covert operations had gone out of control in 1963 . CIA had begun to get very worried that one of their covert operations was out-of-control .
 Engineer and CIA Special Problem Solver Robert Morrow relates his first-hand experience in the fringes of the JFK assassination . Morrow was a senior agent for the CIA during the period leading up to November 22, 1963 .
 What follows is excerpted from Morrow’s book First Hand Knowledge . Morrow's book is based on First Hand knowledge .
 Barnes reported to Richard Bissell and General Charles Cabell, brother of the mayor of Dallas, Texas . Barnes reported on his experiences .
 Morrow's story corroborates major aspects of Nagell’s story and confirms involvement of anti-Castro Cubans and the Mafia in the plot . Morrow: “It takes on significance in that it corroborates aspects of the story .”
 "I had the opportunity to meet him in 1992 at a symposium in Chicago, and believe that he is generally credible," he says .
 Morrow started his career as an electronics contractor and then had a two-year stint as an engineer for the military contractor, Martin Aircraft Company . Author John Davis gave Morrow high marks in those parts of his writings that dealt with Morrow’s first-hand experience .
 He left Martin in 1958 and went into private consulting engineering and inventing . He went on to become a successful inventor .
 CIA soon recruited him for special projects . This resulted in contacts which brought his expertise in electronics to the CIA .
 Morrow wrote that at the time of the Bay of Pigs invasion he and David Ferrie flew from Florida on a clandestine CIA operation to take measurements of high-performance electronic signals that the CIA suspected were emanating from a Soviet installation for launching ballistic missiles .
 Morrow and Ferrie returned with the data which established the existence of offensive missile sites under preliminary construction long before it became official knowledge in the fall of 1962 . Despite a harrowing experience, Morrow says the data was crucial to the discovery .
 Robert McNamara disputes that there was any such construction of missiles in Cuba at the time of the Bay of Pigs invasion . McNamara says there was no such construction .
 It is also plausible that the Kennedy administration simply did not believe the information if it had, in fact, been presented to them .
 Morrow wrote that while on this Cuban mission with Ferrie, he first met Eladio del Valle, who was part of the CIA operation . Morrow also wrote that during the mission, he met delValle, a CIA operative .
 As earlier noted, del Valle was murdered within a day or two after David Ferrie mysteriously “committed suicide” when he was accused by New Orleans district attorney Jim Garrison of being involved in the Kennedy assassination . Ferrie had been accused by Garrison of involvement in the assassination
 Morrow was assigned to buy four 7.35mm Mannlicher-Carcano rifles from a surplus store in Maryland . Morrow purchased the rifles in 1963 .
 Morrow complied with his request by modifying four Motorola-made units . The antenna required an antenna several feet high . Morrow complied by modifying the antenna .
 Morrow solved the problem by strapping a wire to the intended user’s leg . The wire was concealed under the trousers, concealed under them .
 A combination of walkie-talkies and a Mannlicher-Carcano rifle suspiciously appeared at Dealey Plaza on November 22, 1963 . The rifle was used in the assassination of President Richard Nixon .
 Morrow says he saw one of his walkie-talkies in the pocket of a man standing on Elm Street near the spot where Kennedy was shot . Morrow wrote that after the assassination he was looking at photographs taken at Dealey Plaza and saw the walkie talkies in his pocket .
 Three of the rifles Morrow purchased, along with the walkie-talkies, were picked up by David Ferrie and flown to New Orleans . Morrow purchased the rifles and walked them up with Ferrie . Ferrie picked up the walkies and the rifles .
 Morrow’s story about David Ferrie receiving the rifles and the walkie-talkies was corroborated by Lou Krieger, a radio talk-show host . Gus Russo told me that Morrow's story about Ferrie getting the rifles is corroborated .
 Krieger visited the private airstrip near Baltimore where Morrow said he had turned over the equipment to Ferrie . Morrow told Russo that he was very skeptical of Morrow’s story .
 Krieger said that a man with David Ferrie’s red wig and Southern accent had arrived in a private plane and picked up some weapons . Morrow was told by Cuban exile leader Mario Garcia Kohly that the rifles were to be used in an operation against Juan Bosch,
 Barnes sent another CIA operative to New Orleans and Miami to infiltrate Ferrie’s connections to see what was going on . The operative used the name “Joseph Kramer,” which is the fictitious name that Nagell said he used .
 Tracy Barnes is concerned that bad things are underway in one of the CIA's covert operations . It is also an indication that we have at least one of CIA’s top people, Tracy Barnes, getting concerned . The CIA has been involved in a covert operation in the past .
 Barnes may have suspected that the operation was spinning out of control . Barnes may also suspect that he was trying to keep the operation under control .
 The manufacturer had re-barreled the 7.35mm model with a 6.5mm barrel . This can be partially explained by the fact that there was a plentiful supply of ammunition . The manufacturer re-arreled it with a .5mm instead of a .35
 My interest is whether or not Morrow’s writing about 7.35mm rifles discredits his story . My interest at this point is whether . Morrow's writing about . 735mm rifle .
 The purchase of 7.35mm rifles has made his story suspect to some, but it provides credence to his story . The purchase has made some think he bought the rifles suspect, but he says they are not .
 Morrow was CIA contact to Mario Garcia Kohly who is prominent in Morrow’s story . He was a CIA contact . Mario was a key figure in the story .
 Kohly was slated by a right-wing faction of the CIA to be the next president of Cuba, once Castro was eliminated . Kohly had been slated by the CIA for the post-Castro administration .
 Kohly was close to Vice President Nixon and had been picked by him to take over Cuba after the Bay of Pigs invasion . Kohly had been chosen to take control of Cuba by Nixon .
 The story of Kohly is very interesting in that it explains much about the Bay of Pigs disaster and the political infighting that to some extent brought it about .
 Kohly was a prominent Cuban businessman and financier under the Batista regime . He was also a prominent businessman under the Cuban regime .
 He was a “distinguished statesman and diplomat,” spoke flawless English . He was highly regarded in international circles for his reputation in finance, having been one of Cuba's banking elite .
 8 Kohly was a big-time operator in Cuba . He had put together a number of heavy engineering ventures . One was an eighty-million-dollar project .
 All of this property and enterprise was seized by Castro, devastating the economy, in the conversion of Cuba to communism . Cuba's economy was devastated by Castro's seizure of the property and business .
 After Castro’s revolution, Kohly came to the U.S. and started to organize resistance groups . Kohly organized resistance groups and made plans for the overthrow of Castro .
 He allegedly had put together a large number of anti-Castro Cubans in an underground network in Cuba . The network was supported by militant groups in the United States, according to reports .
 Kohly had drafted the initial plans for an invasion of Cuba late in the Eisenhower administration, under Richard Nixon’s responsibility . According to Morrow, Kohly drafted the plans late in Eisenhower administration . Morrow: Kohly was the architect of the plans for a Cuban invasion .
 The plans were adopted by the CIA with Richard Bissell designated to implement them . Bissell has been designated to lead the CIA .
 In October 1960, Nixon, Kohly, and CIA Deputy Charles Cabell met on the golf course at Burning Tree Club in Washington, D.C., and decided on a plan known as “Operation Forty . Operation Forty would later become what we now call the Bay of Pigs .
 The plan was to take the leftist Cuban leaders to a location at Opa-Locka, at a deserted military base in southern Florida, and place them under house arrest . It was intended to place the leftist leaders at a remote military base .
 If the invasion proved to be successful, they would be taken to a beach in Cuba and killed . If they were successful, the soldiers would be killed .
 The transfer took place in Piraeus, Greece, where the arms were stored in a Permindex warehouse . The arms were kept in a warehouse in the city .
 The arms cache was later seized by the FBI on orders from the Kennedys . This was the arms cache that would later be seized . The FBI seized the cache in the 1980s and seized it .
 It was throughout the period from 1960 to late 1963 that Morrow describes himself as having contacts with Mafia figures and conversations with CIA’s Tracy Barnes and Washington, D.C., lawyer Marshall Diggs, that link Mafia .
 Barnes also told Morrow about Oswald being a CIA agent just back from Russia . Barnes also said Oswald was just back in Russia just back .
 Barnes expressed fear that this group might try to assassinate President Kennedy when aoe ca ae. a the Cuban missile crisis broke loose . Barnes expressed his fear that the group might attempt to assassinate Kennedy .
 Barnes gave Morrow the mission of determining the extent of Kohly's role in Banister’s group in New Orleans . Barnes: Kohly was a key member of Banister's group in the city .
 Tracy Barnes contacted Morrow telling him to buy the four MannlicherCarcano rifles . On July 2, 1963, Eladio del Valle called Barnes and asked for the four .
 By August 1, 1963, Morrow had completed his assignment of procuring the rifles and . preparing the walkie-talkies . Morrow had procured the weapons and equipment for the first time .
 Three rifles and walkie-talkies were picked up by David Ferrie at a private airstrip in Maryland in August 1963 . Ferrie picked up the rifles and the walkies .
 Morrow relayed this information to attorney Marshall Diggs, who worked with Tracy Barnes . Diggs worked with Barnes and Barnes to secure the release .
 The day after Kennedy was assassinated, Morrow contacted Barnes when he realized that del Valle’s talk of hitting Kennedy had been real .
 Barnes told Morrow not to worry, that everything had been taken care of . Barnes said that everything was in the best interest of Morrow .
 Marshall Diggs told the story of the panic that rocked Langley almost a year after JFK’s assassination . The incredible story was told to me almost one year later . The panic was described by Diggs as a panic .
 Diggs explained that, in order to cover up some monumental errors, a massive governmental conspiracy was instituted almost immediately . Diggs said that a massive government conspiracy was created almost immediately. Diggs also said that the government was trying to hide some of the errors .
 This resulted in one of the greatest smokescreens in history; one that would prevent anyone from discovering the President’s real assassins . The President's real assassins were never found out . This was a smokescreen .
 The Kennedy assassination was the work of the Mafia, elements of the CIA, and right-wing Cuban exiles aligned with Guy Banister, Clay Shaw, and David Ferrie, all were ClA-connected .
 This is consistent with Richard Case Nagell’s version of the assassination that he revealed over the years, except that Morrow goes further in implicating the CIA than did Nageell . This is similar to the CIA, but Morrow implicates the CIA more .
 In the spring of 1992, Morrow told Russell that he should get in touch with Colonel William Bishop, who knew about Nagell and his activities in the Kennedy assassination plot .
 Morrow had first met Colonel Bishop in the early 1960s . Bishop was training a group of anti-Castro Cubans at a CIA camp in No Name Key in the Florida Keys .
 Morrow contacted Morrow after reading Morrow’s first book Betrayal, published in 1976 . Morrow had contacted him after reading his first book . Morrow's first book, Betraya, was published by 1976 .
 Morrow said Colonel Bishop wanted to get his conscience clear by talking about the Kennedy assassination . Morrow said that Colonel Bishop was dying of cancer and wanted to talk about the assassination . He said he wanted to clear his conscience .
 Russell contacted Colonel Bishop through Gary Shaw, who lived in the same town as Bishop, and had heard from him . Morrow suggested that Russell contact Colonel Bishop . Shaw lived in Bishop's home town and said he had heard of him .
 Jimmy Hoffa, through Carlos Marcello, provided money to anti-Castro Cubans for the assassination . Further links William Harvey to the plot . Hunt and the “Texas High Cabal” in the plot; Confirms that Jimmy . Hoffa .
 General Fabian Escalante and his Cuban study group discussed Colonel William Bishop at the Nassau conference in 1995 . Bishop was the subject of discussion at the 1995 Nassau Conference . Bishop's death was one of the most important things learned at the conference with Escalantes .
 General Escalante said that in March 1964 the Cubans arrested a man by the name of Felipe Vidal Santiago when he was in a boat raid on the Cuban coast for a sabotage operation . The man was arrested by the Cuban government in 1964 .
 Felipe Vidal Santiago 2 told his Cuban interrogators that in early November 1963 Colonel William Bishop picked him up in a car in Miami and drove him to Dallas where he gave him a room in a secondclass hotel . Santiago 2 said he was taken to Dallas by Bishop in November 1963
 While in Dallas, he said he attended a meeting with a few wealthy people in the Dallas Petroleum Club .
 General Escalante told our group that this conversation was recorded on tape by Cuban intelligence because it was seen as being very important . The conversation was taped by Cuban Intelligence because it is seen as important .
 According to Escalante, Vidal had been running operations for the CIA since 1962 . Vidal was a CIA agent, according to the former CIA director .
 General Escalante found Vidal's name in Dick Russell’s book, and that prompted him to tell us the story of Vidal’�s obviously important statement . Vidal said, “I don’t want to be left alone. I want to
 Dick Russell had written in 1992 that Gerald Patrick Hemming had earlier told him a similar story about Vidal . Dick Russell wrote that Hemming told Russell that Vidal was a good writer .
 I’d heard of other meetings, where the conversation got steered around toward hitting JFK instead of Fidel . I'd heard of others meetings where the discussion was steered around to hitting JFK rather than Fidel .
 I’m talking about some friends of Somoza, and about some people in Dallas, Texas . I'm talking about people in the Dallas area, including some people who live in Dallas .
 Escalante: Vidal placed himself in Dallas in early November, whereas Hemming placed Vidal in Dallas the week before the assassination . Hemming’s story is that Vidal . Vidal had been all through 63,514, and had been in Dallas .
 Vidal had taken two trips from Miami to Dallas in November 1963 during the three weeks before the assassination . Hemming and Escalante were telling their stories .
 Evidence linking Vidal to Colonel Bishop was confirmed at the Nassau conference in 1995 . Hemming’s story about Vidal was confirmed by Hemming in 1995, Hemming says .
 It was important to note that it was Escalante, not Hemming, who linked Vidal to Colonel Bishop . Hemming was not Vidal's alleged connection to Bishop .
 Hemming’s stories, which have been scorned by some writers, now have some genuine credence . Hemming himself was at one time a suspect in the Kennedy assassination and seemed to be such an unreliable character . Also, Hemming's stories have been .
 I determined to make an effort to interview Hemming; I had avoided him for too long . I determined that I should make a good effort to talk to Hemming . Hemming is a well-known author and author of a novel .
 Earlier, when I was in Dallas in 1994, I had met with Gary Shaw to discuss some of the forensic evidence . Earlier, Gary Shaw had met to discuss forensic evidence in Dallas .
 I told him of my interest in Colonel William Bishop, because I was seeking confirmation of Nagell’s story, he said . He added that he was looking for confirmation of his interest in the Colonel's story .
 Gary decided to drop out of research in the Kennedy assassination, having had enough of it in many years of effort while maintaining his architectural practice in Dallas, Dallas .
 I telephoned Gary a couple of times to try to set up an appointment with him, but all I got was his answering machine . Gary is a father-of-two who has been married for more than 20 years .
 "I could understand, because that was exactly what I intended to do when my book was published. I could understand," she said .
 This subject can consume one’s life 1f one doesn’t know how to bring the endeavor to an end . This subject is the subject of the most difficult task of life .
 With this new information from the Nassau conference, I knew I had to find more on Colonel Bishop . Colonel Bishop is a former member of the Royal Family .
 CNN's John Sutter visited the Assassination Archives in Washington, D.C. to see what might have been revealed .
 CIA hit man John Adrian O’ Hare reappeared in Dallas with his old name, William Bishop . O' Hare appeared to have been made to disappear, then to reappear in Dallas .
 Bishop knew he was going to die he was compelled by conscience to say something . Bishop was compelled to do so when he knew he would die he said something .
 The story related to a Rotary Club meeting on January 27, 1983, at which the principal speaker was Henry Hurt of Reader's Digest . Hurt is authoring a large update on the JFK assassination, to be published by Reader’s Digest Press .
 The story prominently mentioned Gary Shaw, Hurt’s sponsor, who is a local architect and well-known assassination researcher . Shaw is a well known assassination researcher and well known architect and researcher .
 On the day that the story was published, Shaw received a telephone call from a man who introduced himself as “Col. David Shaw’s” Shaw . Shaw says he received a call from the man who said he was Col. David Wilson .
 He said he had “been close to” the President, and was a “friend” of Senator Ted Kennedy . He said that he had been close to the President .
 He related that he had been in Dallas on November 22, 1963, helping put JFK’s remains in a body bag . He was involved in the pushing incident with the Dallas J.P. who wished to retain the body for a Texas autopsy .
 Colonel Bishop asked Shaw if the name Charles Bennett meant anything to him . Colonel Bishop told Shaw that Bennett's name had nothing to do with his life .
 Bishop was asked about the name Maurice Bishop, the code name for a CIA employee who allegedly met Lee Harvey Oswald in Dallas prior to the assassination . Bishop was then asked about his role in the CIA's cover-up of the Dallas assassination .
 Capt. Bishop suggested that Shaw assure himself of Bishop’s credibility by “checking with the Senator.” 1963 records show a Capt. Shaw suggested that Bishop should be assured of his credibility .
 Shaw has no physical description of Bishop, as he has only talked with him on the phone . Shaw says he doesn't know how long Bishop has lived .
 Bishop estimates from this that Bishop is probably in his 60s or early 70s . Bishop is believed to be in his 70s or 60s at the time of his death .
 Bishop is suffering from bone cancer and commuting to Dallas for treatment . Bishop is commuting from Cleburne to Dallas to get treatment for the disease .
 I telephoned Shaw on June 6, 1996, to discuss the information that General Escalante had revealed about Felipe Vidal Santiago . "I told him about the information," Shaw said .
 Inasmuch as Dick Russell had not linked Vidal with Colonel William Bishop in his book, this was corroboration of General Escalante’s statement, and, by simple logic, corroboration, of Colonel Bishop and Hemming’�s statements about Vidal .
 Shaw says he doesn't believe Colonel Bishop's story about placing Kennedy's body in a body bag . He says he was involved in the pushing contest at Parkland Hospital on November 22 . Shaw: "I'm not sure if Colonel Bishop is lying"
 A document shows a CIA man, identity unknown, was at Parkland Hospital in Dallas on November 22, 1963 . Shaw mentioned that there was a document showing that the CIA man was there .
 An FBI man told Bud Fensterwald that John Adrian O’ Hare had traveled to Dallas on November 21, 1963, he said . He also remembered that an FBI man had told him that O' Hare had visited Dallas, Texas, in 1963 .
 Colonel Bishop had told Dick Russell that he had traveled to Dallas on that same date . This was more corroboration of Colonel Bishop’s credibility . Dick Russell had traveled with Colonel Bishop to Dallas .
 Shaw tells how important, in his view, is the story of John Adrian O’ Hare . Shaw says O' Hare's story is important to his view of the story .
 Bishop said he used the name O' Hare because he was at Chicago’s O’Hare Airport when it was decided that he needed another pseudonym . Bishop said Bishop had, in fact, told him that Bishop had used the pseudonym .
 Shaw added that Colonel Bishop became very upset when asked about O’Hare matter . Shaw said he and Bernard Fensterwald had pressed Colonel Bishop on the matter .
 Bishop mentioned once working for General Charles Willoughby, Shaw said . Shaw asked Shaw if Bishop had ever mentioned once . Bishop had worked for General Willougby . Shaw said Bishop had never mentioned once once working .
 Bishop did mention working in military intelligence under General Douglas MacArthur, Shaw said . Shaw said Bishop did not mention working under MacArthur . Shaw added that Bishop also mentioned working in intelligence .
 Colonel William C Bishop worked closely with Cuban exile groups and said he ordered surveillance on Richard Case Nagell in New Orleans in 1963 . Shaw agreed with him that by inference, Bishop probably would have worked for Willoughby . Bishop was chief of MacArthur's military intelligence .
 Colonel Bishop told writer Gary Shaw that General Edwin Walker met with Cuban exile Felipe Vidal Santiago in 1963 with two others . Colonel Bishop said Walker met Santiago with two other Cuban exile .
 Bishop attended meetings with General Edwin Walker and retired General Charles Willoughby in Dallas . Bishop said he had meetings with Walker and Walker in Dallas, Texas .
 John Adrian O’Hare thought to be responsible for the murder of Manuel Rodriguez Quesada and Gilberto Rodriguez Hernandez in 1964 . O'Hare is a CIA mercenary and assassin .
 Washington attorney Bernard Fensterwald lifted fingerprints belonging to Bishop from a drinking glass and discovered that they matched fingerprints of O’ Hare . Bishop's fingerprints matched that of O' Hare's of O
 Shaw said Colonel Bishop called Veciana on the telephone while in Shaw’s office . Shaw said that at one point, to prove that he knew Veciana, Bishop called her on the phone .
 I asked Shaw if Colonel Bishop had ever indicated that he was looking for money . Shaw said Bishop had never indicated he was interested in money . Bishop has been in prison for 18 years .
 Shaw said he once loaned Bishop $250 and kept one of Bishop’s pistols as collateral . Shaw said Bishop used the pistol as a weapon as a security device . Shaw: Bishop was a good friend of Bishop .
 Bishop never paid back the money, but Shaw eventually sold the pistol and recovered his $250 . Bishop never repaid the money . Shaw recovered the pistol, but Bishop was never found .
 Shaw said this was the only indication that Bishop was exploiting his information for money . Shaw said it was not a very significant thing and that it is not a significant thing .
 Bishop was arrested in Dallas by the Secret Service for carrying an automatic weapon, Shaw said . Shaw added that during his long series of interviews with Bishop, he was arrested for carrying a weapon .
 Bishop was put on trial and, with the aid of a high-priced lawyer, got off . Bishop's lawyer says he got off with the help of a 'high-priced' lawyer . Bishop was convicted of attempted murder in 2007 of raping a woman in a car crash .
 Bishop pulled out a gun because he thought someone was coming in the back door, Shaw said . Shaw said that once when Bishop was in his office, he suddenly pulled out of his office . Shaw: Bishop pulled a gun when he was in the office and pulled it out .
 Shaw said he didn't know Bishop was carrying a gun . Shaw said it shocked him because he didn’t know he was carrying the gun . Bishop was arrested in connection with the shooting .
 Shaw said he had attempted to obtain Colonel Bishop’s military record through a friend in the Pentagon . The friend instigated a search and found that there was no record of him . Shaw said that he had tried to obtain the record of Colonel Bishop .
 Bishop had a green military identification card similar to that found in Oswald’s possessions that could get him into any military base at any time, Shaw said . Shaw said Bishop had green military ID card that could be used to get him in the military base .
 He said that he could get in Carswell Air Force Base, or any other military place . He said he would be able to get in any military place he wanted .
 David Sanchez Morales was buried as a sergeant when he was a major general in the Army, Reuben Carbajal says . This reminded me of Bob Walton’s story about a mysterious little black card that could get him in anywhere .
 I mentioned to Shaw that from my reading of Dick Russell, Bishop was very emphatic that he had been subjected to the MK ULTRA mind-control program . Bishop was emphatic in his interview that he was subject to the program .
 Bishop claimed it had made him impotent, Shaw said . Shaw said yes, that was true, and that Bishop said it was true . Bishop said he was impotent. Shaw said Bishop said yes .
 Bishop did not actually use the name MK ULTRA, Shaw said . Shaw said Bishop described it as mind control using drugs and hypnosis . Bishop said it was mind control with drugs and hypnotism .
 He added that he was certain there were probably more things of interest, but he wouldn’t be able to get to it for a few days because he had a project to complete .
 I asked him if he would provide a complete copy of his files on Bishop, Bishop, and he replied that he would be glad to . He said he was happy to provide a copy of the files .
 "When I hung up the phone, I reflected that things were really falling into place," says author . "Things are really falling in place," she says .
 The combination of Nagell's, Morrow’s, Morrow's, and Bishop's stories seemed to be an outline of a major compartment of the assassination plot, and the stories seem to corroborate each other, fitting together very well indeed .
 While waiting for Shaw’s files on Bishop to arrive, I decided to go into the John Martino story, then come back to Colonel Bishop and incorporate what I would learn from Shaw's files . The author decided to incorporate what he would learn about Colonel Bishop into the story .
 Mafia/CIA Operative John Martino is one more CIA-Mafia operative who had foreknowledge of the JFK assassination . Martino was one of the CIA/Mafia operatives involved in JFK's assassination .
 Martino had instructed that it not be revealed until after his death . Martino's wife and son confirmed it to Newsday reporter that it was confirmed by his wife .
 Anthony Summers and his wife Robbyn interviewed Martino’s widow Florence, age eighty, and her son Edward, aged eighty, in 1994 . In 1994 Anthony Summers interviewed Florence and Edward Martino and his son Edward .
 Martino was with her husband at their home in Miami Beach on November 22, 1963 . Martino said she was with him at the time of the shooting .
 Martino told Cummings that anti-Castro Cubans were involved, that there had been two guns and two people involved . He asked me not to write it while he was still alive aUU Martino said .
 John Martino made an astonishing claim to reporter John Cummings last week . Martino says he has never met Cummings before . He says he will meet Cummings again .
 Oswald was introduced to Oswald by name by an FBI agent, he says . He says the FBI agent asked him to come to a boat docked in Biscayne Bay, Florida, to meet Oswald .
 The impression John got was that Oswald didn't know his ass from his elbow, didn’t know what he was involved in, he said . Oswald’s impression of Oswald was that he had no idea of his involvement in the assassination .
 Cummings' description of a Miami agent has not been found . Cummings was shot in the head in Miami, Florida . Cummings is believed to have been killed by a Miami police officer .
 F.B.I. files show Martino did have contacts after the assassination with an agent named James J O’Connor, whom we tracked down in retirement . Martino had contacts with O'Connor after his assassination with the agent .
 O’Connor said he cannot recall whether he was in touch with Martino before the assassination . He said he has no recollection of Martino's assassination .
 Cummings, an investigative reporter for more than 30 years, does not think the Martino allegation was just a crook’s slur against a law-enforcement officer . Cummings: The Martino allegations are not just a crime, but a slur .
 I was told that Connors, the agent he named, was in Counter-Intelligence . Connors was told he was in counter-intelligence .
 John Martino died on August 3, 1975 at the age of sixty-four . Florence Martino passed away one month after Summers’ interview in 199415241 .
 John Martino’s story takes on even more significance in that he was associated with Santo Trafficante . Martino was a member of the gang that terrorized the city in the 1980s .
 Martino was closely associated with William Pawley, a co-founder of the Flying Tigers, ex-ambassador to Peru and Brazil, and right-wing multi-millionaire . Martino died at the age of 92 on December 31, 1981 .
 John Martino was deeply involved with William Pawley in a plot to discredit JFK by proving that Soviet missiles were still in Cuba . Pawley was a CIA contract agent, close to Allen Dulles .
 The plot included the use of Pawley’s boat Flying Tiger to tow a small boat that would be used in a covert operation to land a group of Cuban exiles in Cuba . Pawley's Flying Tiger was used to tow the small boat used in the operation .
 It was thought that they would be able to bring back witnesses to verify that offensive missiles were still in Cuba, thus embarrassing the Kennedy administration . The Kennedy administration had hoped to embarrass the government .
 William Pawley’s involvement in anti-Castro activities began to surface in the late 1970s . Pawley was involved in the Cuban government in the 1970s and 1980s .
 One week after his name was added to the list, Pawley committed suicide with a gunshot wound in the chest . Around that time Pawley contracted a nervous ailment and—one week after he was added, he committed suicide . Pawley's suicide was one of the first known suicides
 This was one more key person dying suddenly when investigators were zeroing in on him . This is one more person who died suddenly in the line of investigation .
 The list includes David Ferrie, Johnny Rosselli, Sam Giancana, David Sanchez Morales, and George de Mohrenschildt . The list also includes Sam Giancaana, Sam Granran, Sam Sanchez Morales and David de Mohranschildt.
 Pawley emerged as potentially a very important person in the Kennedy assassination . Pawley has emerged as a potentially significant figure in the JFK assassination .
 Pawley was a virulent, high-level anti-Communist . He had financial motives to see John F Kennedy eliminated . Pawley lost considerable properties in Cuba when Castro took over .
 He was a long-time friend of Richard Nixon and one of the planners of the Bay of Pigs . He was also a friend of Nixon .
 Pawley was involved over the years with David Atlee Phillips, Tracy Barnes, and E Howard Hunt . Pawley has appeared in the evidence surrounding the Kennedy assassination .
 CIA operatives were the leaders in the successful 1954 coup in Guatemala . President Jacobo Arbenz was deposed and replaced with a government that had the blessings of the United Fruit Company, which had large banana holdings in Guatemala.
 President Eisenhower approved the coup as part of the Cold War effort to stop the spread of communism using covert means as found to be necessary . The coup took place in 1953 in Czech Republic .
 The Bay of Pigs was a plan to overthrow Castro’s Cuba using Guatemala as a staging ground . Its success led to a similar plan, using Guatemala to stage a similar operation .
 Pawley is one person who could have been used by a powerful civilian group to bypass Allen Dulles, the CIA hierarchy, the Executive Branch, and the entire U.S. government . He communicated directly with Dulles and had numerous connections to both the Eastern High Cabal and the
 Ménage of millionaires, industrialists, extremists, and corrupt politicians brings into the scene their secret transgressions and liaisons .
 Clare Boothe Luce was at one time the mistress of Allen Dulles and another time bedded with the anti-Communist fanatic General Charles Willoughby . Luce also had affairs with Allen Dullsman and General Charles W.
 Allen Dulles’s ex-mistress, Mary Bancroft, had an affair with Henry Luce, husband of Clare Boothe Luce and owner of Life magazine . The affair took place between Dulles and Luce .
 Hunt with his three wives simultaneously; now adding in the crackpot General Edwin Walker, who turned out to be a closet homosexual; and J Edgar Hoover and Clyde Tolson and lackey Roy Cohn all in the same category .
 The Kennedys’ involvement with the Mafia in buying the 1960 presidential election . Mix this with John F Kennedy’s multiple adulterous affairs, including one with Marilyn Monroe, and his affair with Robert Kennedy .
 Out of this mise en scene exotique emerged the decision to assassinate John F Kennedy . The decision to kill Kennedy was made out of a mise-en scene .
 John Martino is a well-known figure in Washington, D.C. and New York City . Martino has been a key figure in the Democratic Party for decades . He has been accused of being a fraudster in Washington .
 The HSCA became very interested in Martino in 1977 when an anonymous informant called “Fred from Fort Worth” telephoned the committee several times and indicated a close relationship with John Martino, who had recently died . In 1977, an anonymous caller called ‘Fred
 Fred” said Martino told him he “worked for the CIA” and that Kennedy was killed by anti-Castro Cubans . Fred’s friend says Martino said that Martino was a CIA agent .
 Martino said the assassins knew the motorcade route before they went to Dallas . Martino: "They knew the route" before going to Dallas. Martino says the assassin's motorcade was known by the assassins .
 Fred said Martino's widow would have knowledge of such information . Fred said that Martino’s widow would be able to provide such information to Fred .
 Fred suggested that former employer of Martino, Alan Roth, would provide information . Fred also suggested that Roth's former employer would provide more information about Martino .
 John Martino denied his wife ever had any association with the CIA . She produced names of her husband’s associates who were involved in CIA operations . The Martino family has been married for more than 20 years .
 She said her husband was arrested by Castro in Cuba because he was mistaken for a Navy Commander with the same name . She said he was arrested because he had been mistaken for the same Navy Commander .
 Police say they believe Martino was related to Mafia boss Angelo Bruno of Philadelphia . Martino is believed to be related to Bruno's brother, Angelo Bruno .
 Martino is accused of involvement in gun dealing . Martino family members say he was involved in a gun deal with a gun dealer .
 Martino's involvement in or knowledge of the Kennedy assassination is not known . Martino’s family could not provide any information of his involvement in the assassination .
 It was nineteen years later that Anthony and Robbyn Summers interviewed Mrs. Summers . Mrs Summers was interviewed for the first time by Anthony Summers .
 The HSCA had been hot on the trail of one more suspect who could have led to the solution of the crime . The committee was prematurely shut down before the investigation led to agencies of the U.S. government .
 Alan Roth said: “I knew Johnny from back in ’32 when he was sent from Atlantic City. I knew Johnny’s from back to ‘32’
 I represented a strip of South Beach real estate and I leased a few places for bingo and slot machines, which were legal then . I represented South Beach, Miami Beach, in the 1980s .
 Alan Roth said that Martino “was around me doing odd and end jobs” when he was building the Deauville Hotel in Havana . Alan Roth: Martino was around me “doing odd and ends jobs’ when I was working on the hotel .
 Roth says Martino got in trouble with Castro because he "was doing things" for a couple of Cuban brothers, he says . Roth: Martino was doing things for two brothers involved in anti-Castro activity . Roth says he got into trouble because he was involved with anti-
 Kenneth Roth said Martino told him he had gone on operations with the CIA to Cuba, but provided no details . Roth: Martino said he told him that he had been on CIA operations with Cuba .
 The Roths said Martino was sent to Guatemala to “look after” their accounts receivable from their real estate interests there . Martino worked for the Roths, who own a real estate company in Guatemala .
 Martino became very friendly with Jorge Maldanado, the secretary to the vice president of Guatemala, and was involved in several deals, including the sale of bulletproof vests and guns . Martino was also involved in the deal to sell bullets and weapons .
 Martino tried once to make a deal involving “some kind of machine guns” in Guatemala, Roths say . Roths: Martino’s contact was someone in Fort Lauderdale, but they have no additional details .
 John Martino would prove to be even more important as the evidence accumulated . Martino was a key figure in the investigation into the death of John Kennedy Kennedy .
 Interviews of Colonel Bishop by Shaw and others over a nine-year period, plus the results of research by attorney Bernard Fensterwald and others concerning Colonel Bishop . It was a package about four inches thick, and was absolutely astounding, representing interviews .
 I initially spent six hours rapidly poring over the information, during which I listed what appeared to be the most relevant points of evidence applicable in this book . I spent that time poring through the information .
 Shaw’s notes, neat and succinct, confirmed all that he had told me when I interviewed him on the telephone, and more . Shaw's notes confirmed all of what he had said in the telephone interview .
 FBI document says Vidal had been very close to John Martino . FBI document states that Vidal was close to Martino. FBI document also states that Martino had a close relationship with Vidal .
 Martino had used Vidal as his source on anti-Castro Cuban affairs . Vidal was Martino's main source on Cuban affairs, Martino said .
 Colonel William Bishop told Gary Shaw that Felipe Vidal Santiago was executed in March or April of 1964 . Santiago's execution took place in 1964 .
 This agrees with the information given by General Fabian Escalante at the Nassau conference in 1995 . General Escalantes gave the information to the press in 1995, according to the information .
 Bishop's comments seemed to be confirmation of his knowledge of Vidal and anti-Castro Cuban operations, at least insofar as his statements about Vidal .
 Gary Shaw's memory about Colonel Bishop’s failure to mention General Willoughby had not been correct . This occurred about one week after the Walker sniper incident in April I 963, P34 .
 Bishop told Shaw that he had gone to see Walker a few times and, during their meetings, General Charles Willoughby was present . Bishop said he had visited Walker several times and met with him at the time .
 Bishop had just had two heart attacks when he revealed that information to Gary Shaw . Bishop revealed that he had suffered heart attacks in the past .
 He died within a few days, and his funeral services were held on July 5, 1992 . He was buried in 1992 .
 He described the vehicle as a 1957 Chevrolet bearing 1963 Florida license 1.33002 . The car appeared to be driven by a medium-sized Cuban with a prominent black mustache .
 Dallas Police said the hole was in it when it was found in Oswald’s possessions . Dallas Police were questioned by the Warren Commission about the photograph of the 1957 Chevrolet .
 Shaw says he saw a Cuban or dark-complexioned man in a 1957 Chevrolet cruising slowly back and forth in front of the Walker residence . Shaw says the man told Shaw that several days before the attempt on the general, he observed a man in the 1957 Chevrolet .
 As I went through Shaw’s notes, more and more pieces of the puzzle came together confirming what I had previously written . Shaw's notes: “More and more Pieces of the Puzzle came together”
 Shaw had written that when Colonel William Bishop was shown a photograph of David Morales, he said that it was a very familiar name and face and thought he was one of the CIA men he knew and saw in Dallas on the day of the assassination .
 This was three years before Gaeton Fonzi’s book was published revealing the evidence about Morales for the first time . Ht is important to note that this was . Three years later, the evidence had been revealed .
 Oswald's possessions included a photograph from the Appendix of the Warren Commission Report . Oswald was found among Oswald’s possessions . The photograph was found in Oswald's possession .
 It was taken outside the home of General Edwin Walker, presumably by Oswald . It is believed to have been taken by Oswald at the time of the assassination .
 Colonel William Bishop told Gary Shaw was driven to take Felipe Vidal Santiago from Florida to Dallas . The 1957 Chevrolet is the same make, color, and model that Bishop told Shaw was driving .
 Colonel Bishop told Shaw that Rolando Masferrer was given $500,000 by Jimmy Hoffa exactly seventeen days before JFK was killed . Colonel Bishop said RolandoMasferrer received the money from Hoffa 17 days earlier .
 Bishop said the transaction took place in a Miami hotel “man to man” and the money was in a briefcase . Bishop said that the transaction was a man-to-man transaction .
 Bishop said Masferrer had become deeply involved with the Mafia and had told him that he would kill Kennedy if he got the chance . Bishop said he had become involved in the Mafia, and that he had said he'd kill Kennedy .
 Masferrer was in Trenton, New Jersey, at the time of the assassination, he said . He said he was in New Jersey when the assassination took place . Masferrers was in the city when the incident occurred .
 Bishop told Shaw that he had just read the story of Nancy Perrin Rich in Fensterwald’s book . Bishop also said that Vidal was a member of Alpha 66 PAu and that he attended a meeting with Jack Ruby . Bishop said he had attended the meeting in which
 Bishop said he was at the meeting but did not know Jack Ruby, and had never connected him to the incident . Bishop: "I was at that meeting but didn't know Jack" Ruby .
 Bishop said that Felipe Vidal Santiago was present at the meeting . Bishop also said that he didn't remember that Genovese's son was present . Bishop said he didn’t remember that the son of Genoese was there .
 Bishop told Gary Shaw that Richard Helms gave the order for the assassination . Bishop told Shaw that Helms ordered the assassination in 1983 .
 Bishop said he personally killed Rodriguez by shooting him in the back of the head while on a fishing boat at sea, then dumped him overboard . One of the two gunmen, according to Bishop, was an expert rifleman . Bishop called Antonio Veciana from Gary Shaw’s office;
 Bishop told Shaw that he once ran for senator in the state of Georgia against Sam Nunn, and that he knew Ted Kennedy . Bishop also said he knew Kennedy and knew Nunn .
 Bernard Fensterwald later telephoned Senator Nunn who did remember Bishop . Nunn later called the Senator to ask if he had remembered Bishop .
 Fensterwald also called Ted Kennedy, but Kennedy couldn’t remember Bishop, saying that thousands of people pass through his activities .
 Gary Shaw obtained copies of certificates from Colonel Bishop showing that he was discharged from the Army as a colonel and that he had a large number of other credentials such as credit cards, ID cards, etc., in the name of Colonel William C Bishop . Bishop told Shaw he had been a member
 Shaw's notes were two envelopes filled with copies of Colonel Bishop’s card files from the early 1960s . Shaw: "In the notes, Shaw found copies of the files from Colonel Bishop's card files"
 "I went through the cards and there were addresses and phone numbers of an amazing array of characters and political figures," says the author of the book . "It was an amazing amount of information," she says .
 This included Eladio del Valle; Rolando Masferrer; Robert Hargraves . Names of members of RolandoMasferrer’s Tiger group; Mario Garcia Kohly Sr. address, apartment number, phone number, places where he could be reached .
 This incredible list of contacts of Colonel William Bishop deserves a detailed research project beyond the scope of this book in order to assess its significance .
 I can see why Gary Shaw described Colonel Bishop as the most amazing person he had ever met in his life . Gary Shaw said Colonel Bishop was 'the most amazing' person he'd ever met .
 Colonel Bishop’s statements to Gary Shaw that troubled me troubled me. However, at first reading, there were parts of Colonel Bishop's statements to . Gary Shaw .
 Bishop told Shaw that he had corresponded directly with President Kennedy, and that his letters had been ordered by President Johnson to be sealed for fifty years . Bishop also said that President Johnson had ordered his letters sealed for 50 years .
 Bishop said he was instrumental in getting Kennedy to delay the Bay of Pigs invasion for seven days . Bishop had arranged a meeting with Kennedy and told him that the Cubans who had been chosen by the Kennedy administration to head the new government in Cuba were hard-line Communists, worse than Castro
 When I read this in Shaw's notes, my first impulse was that it diminished Colonel Bishop’s credibility, but upon further reflection I decided that it did not . The author decided that Bishop's credibility did not diminish .
 Bishop’s alleged contacts with President Kennedy were incredible, but they were not without plausible foundation . Bishop's alleged contact with Kennedy was also plausible, according to CNN.com .
 Robert Kennedy visited anti-Castro Cuban exiles in the Florida Keys in the early 1960s . John Kennedy had personally discussed their plight with them, says Captain Bradley Ayers .
 I also recalled President Kennedy’s inclination to make first-hand contact with top spies and CIA operatives . President Kennedy also recalled his inclination to meet with top spy operatives .
 Robert Kennedy invited Green Berets to his home at Hyannis Port for first-hand contact with them . Kennedy invited them to his house to meet them . He invited them in for first hand contact with the military .
 Colonel Bishop was not out of the realm of possibility that he was telling the truth in this matter . He concluded that it was possible that Colonel Bishop may have been telling truth .
 Bishop’s address cards appear to show an appointment date of March 19, 1962 at 5m. at the northwest gate of the White House. In addition, he noted in his statements of personal contacts with Kennedy, as well as the date of the appointment .
 Bishop’s claim of personal contact with President Kennedy did not discredit the extreme importance of the Felipe Vidal Santiago evidence . In any event, Bishop's claim of contact with Kennedy didn't discredit the evidence .
 There was one more item in Shaw’s notes on Colonel Bishop that took me aback: “I’m not sure what happened to Colonel Bishop.”
 It has long been alleged that Hoffa was killed by the CIA because of his knowledge of the JFK assassination and the ZR/RIFLE program . Hoffa is believed to have been involved in the assassination of JFK JFK .
 It was noted in Chapter 15 that Tony Provenzano was involved in the Hoffa murder . Hoffa had been picked up and taken somewhere never seen again .
 It did not seem unreasonable to me that the CIA, knowing that Hoffa, Giancana, and Rosselli were involved in the JFK assassination, may have decided that they were about to tell all and systematically proceeded to silence them, with the help of Marcello and Traffic
 This would apply even if the CIA were largely innocent of involvement in the JFK assassination . The JFK assassination was largely innocent .
 "National security was at stake, you know, and anything goes goes to protect national security," he says . "Anything goes goes against national security. National security is at stake," he adds .
 Richard Case Nagell was a CIA operative involved in penetration of Alpha 66 and anti-Castro Cuban activities, Shaw says . Russell's interview of Colonel William Bishop in which Bishop confirmed the existence of Richard Case . Russell’s notes did not find reference to Russell interview of Bishop
 Russell had taken his own notes and Shaw had been only a bystander in that interview . I presumed that this was because Russell had . taken his . own notes . Shaw had taken notes and Russell had not taken notes from the interview .
 The interview was conducted at the home of Gary Shaw in Cleburne, Texas . Shaw was interviewed by CNN iReport .
 Russell’s book about Nagell was published about two years before Russell's book was published . Russell: "It was about two . years before he was published. It was two years later that Russell's work was published"
 Colonel Bishop told Russell that he had made the hit on Dominican Republic dictator Rafael Trujillo because both the CIA and the Pentagon had wanted him dead . Bishop says he made hit on dictator because both CIA and Pentagon wanted him killed .
 Bishop said it was more effective to kill one man than it was to lose a thousand with an all-out invasion . Bishop said killing one man is more effective than killing a thousand .
 He told Russell that he could still hit a playing card at five hundred yards with a rifle or a machine gun . Russell: "It was a professional challenge, no more and no less."
 Bishop said he felt an obligation, within reason, to bring about some realistic approach to U.S. history . Bishop said that the reason he was talking was because he felt that he was . within reason .
 He said he firmly believed that in “our system of government, if you don’t like the man, then vote him out of office,” he said . He said that in the U.S. system, “if you don't like the person,
 He added that he was still governed by the National Security Act, implying that there were other things that he could not tell .
 Bishop said he did not look into Oswald’s background, had never met him, but had seen him in a training film in New Orleans . Bishop had never looked into Oswald's background .
 Bishop said he just happened to be in the group out there at the Pontchartrain camp . Bishop said that he just . happened to . be in that group . Bishop: "I'm not sure what happened to me"
 Russell displayed a photocopy of a 1962 passport of Richard Case Nagell . Russell showed the passport without offering his name, passed it across the table .
 Bishop replied no, that they all used code names back in those days, but that the man was with Alpha 66 . Bishop replied that they had all been using code names .
 Russell replied that he knew Nagell had some cognizance at least of the Alpha 66 group in 1962 and 1963 . Russell replied: "Nagell was a member of Alpha 66"
 Russell responded that he had read about Operation Forty, the then-ultrasecret CIA assassination plan . Operation Forty was set up before the Bay of Pigs invasion .
 Bishop brought out a series of photographs of Latin-looking individuals . Bishop then brought out photos of Latin looking individuals . The images were taken by a group of Latin people in Latin dress .
 Russell asked if this meant that these particular people had operated out of Mexico . Russell asked whether this was the case . Russell said it was not the case that Mexico had been involved in the operation .
 Bishop conceded that he had been in Mexico City “two or three times in 1963,” but when asked about the purpose, Bishop replied that he would rather make no comment on that . Russell wrote that Bishop conceded .
 Bishop claimed to have met Nagell when he was an associate of Rolando Masferrer . Russell wrote that much later in the interview Bishop said he had met him at the time . Russell said Bishop claimed that he had a long-term relationship with the Spanish writer .
 Russell recalled in his book that Nagell had told him that one of his original assigned targets was to kill Rolando Masferrer . Russell said in his new book that he had been assigned to kill the Spaniard . Russell recalled that he was told by Russell to kill Masfer
 Nagell had made another reference to Masferrer in a letter to Russell not long after he was blown to bits by a dynamite bomb in his car .
 Colonel Bishop told Russell that he finally realized that Nagell was with intelligence under CIA contract and it was safe to assume that he was involved in Alpha 66 . Colonel Bishop said that he thought it was a mistake to think he was a CIA agent .
 Bishop said it was when he was in New Orleans that Nagell’s presence came up . Bishop said he was visiting New Orleans when he spoke to Nagello .
 Nagell had been there several times and was trying to get into the inner workings of the anti-Castro movement . He had visited the site several times to try and learn about the movement .
 He said Nagell was asking too many pointed questions about things he had no business knowing . He said he didn't want to know what he knew about .
 He said he called Bill Colby at the CIA, with whom he had participated in paratrooper training at Fort Benning in 1940 . He said Colby was with him when he was in the Army in the 1940 .
 Bishop said that it was several months after that when he heard about the Nagell shooting at the bank . Bishop said it was a few months after the shooting that he learned of the shooting .
 Bishop said he did know that there was a Cuban after Nagell and that Antonio Veciana had told him that . Bishop said Veciana told him he knew about the Cuban .
 There were rumors that Nagell had stumbled onto the fact that there was an assassination being seriously planned . He said rumors that there were rumors of an assassination .
 Bishop says the reason for the bank shoot-up was for Nagell to get himself picked up and protected . So, in Bishop’s opinion, he says, ‘Nagell was trying to protect himself’ Bishop says .
 Bishop told Russell that he was in New Orleans that summer to obtain additional funding from the New Orleans crime syndicate for Alpha 66 . Bishop said he was trying to get more funding for the organization . Bishop says he visited New Orleans to obtain more funding from New Orleans syndicate .
 Primarily the funding came through the syndicate because of Masferrer’s connections with them back in Cuba, he says . Primarily, funding came from a syndicate of people in Cuba .
 He said that Masferrer had ties with Santo Trafficante, Jr. and other criminal elements . He said he had ties to the criminal elements involved in the case .
 He said he thought Masferrer also had different ties with Jimmy Hoffa as far back as 1962 . He added that he thought he had ties with Hoffa also had ties to him .
 He said Masferrer was killed because he had sticky fingers and kept some of the money for himself . He said it was either that reason or because he knew about the Kennedy assassination .
 Hemming’s presence intertwines with almost all of the characters and episodes that have been related in this book, and his story adds important new material . We shall see that Hemming's presence .
 Too many key witnesses, who later turned out to have been telling the truth, had been trashed because they were, variously, ex-convicts, prostitutes, drug addicts, mistresses, strip-tease dancers, or embellishers . We shouldn't expect to find many
 John Le Carré, The Looking Glass Wars. 28 GERALD PATRICK HEMMING AND INTERPEN. I asked Fonzi if he would contact Hemming and arrange for him to receive my call. Hemming is a former journalist and author of The Looking
 Hemming had told Russell that Vidal had gone to Dallas for a “big meeting” the week before the assassination . Vidal dealt directly with Hunts in Dallas prior to that meeting, Hemming said .
 Gerald “Gerry” Patrick Hemming over a nine to ten-month period, starting in late August 1996 . Hemming is the author of a series of long interviews with Gerald "Gerry" Hemming . The most relevant excerpts are the most relevant excerpt from a series
 This information is from an alleged CIA operative who was on the fringes of the JFK plot, if not in the plot itself . This information comes from a source close to the CIA .
 Hemming knew Oswald but was deeply involved in the CIA’s assassination operations and tradecraft, and was willing to talk about it . Hemming not only knew Oswald, but also knew the CIA's assassination operations .
 Hemming was also known to have been in Los Angeles in 1963 with Loran Hall when they hocked a 30.06 rifle at a detective agency whose partners were Richard Hathcock and Roy Payne .
 With Hemming and Hall in this episode was a man who was described as having a Mohawk haircut . The description matched the description that Silvia Odio had given of one of the two visitors with Oswald .
 Hemming led the HSCA to Annapolis between Annapolis and the CIA, August 1958 . Hemming was a liaison with the U.S. Navy and CIA .
 Frank Sturgis’s right-hand man Larry De Joseph is pictured with him . On the left, according to Hemming, is the former mayor of New York City, New Jersey . De Joseph has been a key figure in the Republican Party since 1994 .
 Group allegedly sponsored by U.S. intelligence at No Name Key in Florida for the purpose of overthrowing Castro’s Cuba or assassinating Castro . So-called mercenaries in 1962 .
 The man at the bottom-center is the leader of the group, Gerald Patrick Hemming, who knew Oswald when Oswald was in the Marine Corps. Hemming is one of the leaders of the anti-Odd Oswald group . Hemming and Oswald knew each other when they were in
 Hemming has been linked in various ways to the assassination of John F Kennedy . Hemming is believed to have been involved in the Kennedy assassination .
 Others in the photo were identified by Hemming as Steve Wilson, Roy Hargraves, Lawrence Howard, Little Joe Cavendish Garman, William Seymour, Bill Dempsey, and Ronald Ponce de Leon .
 It was Jim Garrison, district attorney of New Orleans, who first alleged that the above men were the team that assassinated John F Kennedy . Garrison, then New Orleans district attorney, first alleged the assassination .
 He was in Dallas the day Kennedy was killed . He was a close associate of Gerald Patrick Hemming . Hemming was also close to Kennedy .
 General Fabian Escalante in Cuba, January 1996 . Be CENTRODEESTIN SORRE ASUNTOS DE SEGURIDADAD NACHO . Be Centrodeestin SORre Asunto Asuntos .
 Felipe Vidal Santiago was driven by CIA’s Colonel William Bishop from Miami to Dallas in November 1963 . Santiago met with wealthy Texans at the Dallas Petroleum Club at the time . Santiago was executed by Cuba in 1964 .
 This was independently confirmed in a similar story that Gerald Patrick Hemming had told Dick Russell, but Hemming did not mention Colonel William Bishop . Hemming told Russell that Colonel Bishop was a member of the family .
 Colonel Bishop told Gary Shaw a similar story of driving Vidal from Miami to Dallas in April 1963 to meet with General Edwin Walker and others, where discussions of killing President Kennedy occurred . Colonel Bishop said he drove Vidal to Dallas, Texas, where he met with Walker .
 Eladio del Valle was named by General Fabian Escalante as involved in the JFK assassination . General Escalantes named him as the man responsible for the assassination of JFK .
 Escalante obtained his information from Tony Cuesta, a leading Cuban exile involved deeply in anti-Castro activities . Cuesta is a prominent Cuban exile in exile .
 Del Valle was murdered within a few days after David Ferrie’s suicide in New Orleans . Ferrie committed suicide in the city of New Orleans, Louisiana, in 2009 .
 Tony Cuesta also named Herminio Diaz, an associate of Hemming, as being involved in the plot . Cuesta named Diaz as a member of the Hemming-led plot .
 On the left, Loran Hall, member of Hemming’s Interpen group, was in Dallas at the time of the JFK assassination .
 Hall, William Seymour, Lawrence Howard and William Seymour were first reported by the FBI to be the trio that visited Silvia Odio in Dallas in late September 1963 . Hall, Seymour, Howard and Howard were reported to have been the trio of men who visited Odio .
 Hall provided the FBI with the story, saying that Seymour could have been mistaken for Oswald by Odio . Hall said Seymour could be mistaken for Odio by the man who killed Oswald .
 Aguilar said he was an agent working with Luis Balbueno in U.S. Naval Intelligence in plots against Castro in 1959-1961 . Aguilar was working with Balbuño in United States Naval Intelligence .
 Seymour and De Torres were closely associated with Gerald Patrick Hemming at various times in the early 1960s . Hemming was a major influence in Hemming's work in the 1960s and '60s . Seymour and de Torres were associated with Hemming in the 60s .
 De Torres was a CIA agent involved in violent anti-Castro activities, including the Bay of Pigs invasion . De Torres worked for the CIA in the 1960s and 1970s .
 Seymour was linked to Oswald with Loran Hall, and both Hall and Seymour were part of Hemming’s Interpen group . Seymour was also linked to the group, and was part of the group .
 According to an HSCA report, Loran Hall had retrieved the 30.06 rifle ten days before the assassination .
 The day after the assassination an FBI agent came to the detective agency’s office to ask Roy Payne questions about himself and Loran Hall . The FBI agent also came to Roy Payne's office the next day to ask him about himself .
 Hathcock and Payne speculated that the FBI had come to their office so quickly was that the fingerprints of Payne, who had handled the rifle while it was in hock at the agency, had been found on the rifle .
 FBI's visit to Hathcock’s office was probably precipitated by a gun theft report that Hemming had made to the Miami police in November 1963 . Loran Hall had retrieved the rifle on his own, according to Hemming .
 Hemming told me he feared Hall was going to use the rifle to frame him in Dallas in the JFK assassination . But Hemming later found that the rifle was in Miami at the time of the assassination . Hemming has stated to others, and confirmed, that he met Oswald at the
 Oswald requested assistance from Hemming in defecting to Cuba to help Castro in the revolution . Hemming died in Cuba in 1961 . Oswald requested help from Heming in defection .
 Hemming volunteered to join the Castro revolution to fight on Castro’s side . Hemming had been discharged from the Marine Corps and had volunteered to fight in Cuba .
 Oswald had come back to the Cuban consulate three times after his first visit . Hemming told me that Oswald had become a pest, insisting that he wanted to infiltrate Cuba .
 Hemming had a friend who was a barber in a shop down the street use binoculars to watch Oswald after he left the consulate . Hemming said that Oswald was always walking when he arrived at the consulate, so a friend had to watch him .
 The barber saw that Oswald returned to a four-door car with military or police-type antennas . Oswald entered on the passenger side of the car, the barber says .
 Hemming said Oswald seemed to know a lot about him that he shouldn’t have known unless he had been provided the information . Hemming: Oswald seemed like he knew a lot more about him than he should have .
 Hemming went to the Marine Corps Air Station in Santa Ana and managed to finagle himself inside, where he located and confronted Oswald . Hemming says he confronted Oswald at the base .
 Hemming provided Oswald with paperwork and instructions about how to infiltrate Cuba . They then went outside the station to a pizza parlor, where they met Oswald . Hemming then gave Oswald instructions on how to enter Cuba .
 He said that Oswald later showed up in Cuba to see him, but the contact was never made because the Cubans wouldn’t let Oswald stay in the country . He said the contact never happened .
 Hemming said that he again encountered Oswald briefly in Miami on December 6, 1962 . That was the last time he ever saw him . Hemming says he saw Oswald again in Miami in 1962 .
 There is some corroborative testimony to support Hemming’s story . Hemming says he was killed in a car crash in 2010 .
 Nelson Delgado told the Warren Commission that Oswald had told him that he had been in contact with the Cuban Consul in Los Angeles . Delgado, also a Marine at the Marine Corps Station in Santa Ana, California, said Oswald told him .
 Oswald was seen talking for two hours with a visitor outside the gate at the base, Delgado says . Delgado said he heard that he had heard that Oswald was talking for about two hours . Oswald is believed to have been in contact with the visitor at the gate .
 Delgado also testified that he had seen an official-looking envelope in Oswald’s wall locker . Delgado said he assumed the envelope was from the Cuban Consulate. Delgado testified he saw an envelope with a Latin-looking seal .
 He said Oswald had told him before that he was receiving mail from them . Oswald told him that he had received mail from Oswald . Oswald said he would receive mail from the group .
 We shall see that Hemming voluntarily joined the Castro revolution and he claims that Angleton knew about it in advance . Hemming claims Angleton was aware of his plans to join the revolution . Angleton is said to have known about Hemming's plans for the revolution before .
 Hemming claims he ultimately made direct contacts with Angleton at his home in Washington, D.C., concerning Cuban matters and anti-Castro activities . Hemming also claims that Angleton also made contacts with Hemming at his Washington, DC home .
 Evidence will show that Hemming was very likely a CIA covert asset, or could be perhaps more accurately described as a “singleton” CIA agent reporting back to Angleton at infrequent intervals when Hemming could leave Cuba .
 He joined the Marine Corps at the age of 16 in April 1953 (using a false birth certificate) He was soon discharged in late summer 1953, then enlisted legally of age in April, 1954 and was finally discharged in 1958 .
 During part of that time he was running an air base in Castro’s rebel air force until 1960 . During that time, he was in charge of the Cuban air force . He was also a member of the Castro air force during the 1960s .
 After being arrested twice by Castro’s forces under suspicion of counter-revolutionary activity, he was jailed, somehow got out, and lived in Havana where he was ‘underground’ with both Major William Morgan’ and anti-Somoza Nicaraguans
 Morgan was ultimately executed by Castro forces for being a United States intelligence agent plotting against Castro’s life . Morgan was a U.S. intelligence agent who plotted against Castro .
 It was in a Havana safehouse that Hemming met anti-Somoza Nicaraguans, who later switched to backing Somoza . Hemming was in the safehouse when he first met the anti-Nicaraguan Nicaragans .
 Hemming left Cuba in 1960 for Mexico City, spent two weeks there, and returned to California . He contacted a CIA "Double 0" in Los Angeles and reported to him what he had learned thus far in Cuba . Hemming spent the last two weeks in Mexico City .
 He told me that as a youth he read an English/German version of Hitler’s Mein Kampf, thus learning to read German . As a youth, he read a German version of the book, and learned to read it .
 At the age of 14 Hemming had formed his own paramilitary operation with a gang of five teenagers . The gang accumulated an arsenal of twentynine rifles and handguns and three thousand rounds of ammunition by burglarizing three sporting goods stores .
 They practiced guerrilla warfare in the Mojave Desert near Los Angeles, planning to become a young “John Dillinger gang” and commit a “blitz of robberies” in the San Marino and Alhambra areas . The gang was planning to commit robberies in San Marino
 The youthful gang was rounded up by the police and their adventure was ended . Fortunately the police rounded up the gang and they were soon out .
 Hemming took over a group called the AntiCommunist Legionnaires in 1961 . Hemming returned to Miami from Cuba in 1961 and took over the group .
 Hemming said he parted company with Frank Sturgis and took part of the group with him . Hemming was in the group that he said he was part of . This group included Frank Strugis, who Hemming met with .
 According to Hemming, the purpose of Interpen was “long range penetration and reconnaissance intelligence work,” mainly in Latin America . Hemming: Interpen’s purpose was ‘long range penetrating and reconnaissance” intelligence work .
 Interpen offered protection services to Latin American officials . One service was for these officials to use Interpen as a threatening force to keep political foes in line . Interpen also trained guerrilla warriors .
 It was Hemming’s group that was first suspected by Jim Garrison of being the assassination team that killed President Kennedy . Garrison later dropped his suspicion for reasons not understood .
 Hemming volunteered to help Garrison conduct his investigation . Hemming showed up in work boots and work clothes with his associate, Roy Hargraves .
 Newspapers in Miami and New Orleans described Hemming as a handsome giant who looked like Errol Flynn, sporting a neat beard and an Australian bush hat . Hemming is believed to have been killed in New Orleans .
 He was said to be capable of firing two heavy machine guns from the hips at the same time . He was reported to have been able to fire two machine guns in cowboy style .
 He missed qualifying by two points for the Presidents One Hundred, the elite, top military rifle marksmen in the U.S. He said he could fly almost all types of aircraft, maintain the aircraft; operate and maintain power boats; handle explosives, electronic communications and underwater demolition .
 He had an impressive knowledge of U.S. political history, Latin America, the politics of Latin America and the anti-Castro Cuban community, he says . He also had a knowledge of United States political history .
 "I sensed that he possessed an enormous inner drive to do daring deeds, to be larger than life," says the author . He said: "He had an enormous drive to ... do daring things to be bigger than life"
 Hemming had a capacity for double-talk and cunning beyond anyone I had ever encountered . Hemming's cunning was beyond anyone else I'd ever encountered, he said .
 He also had a wide range of powerful emotions, from tears of anguish, to humor, to rage, to ferocious rage . He was also known for his humor and humor .
 Hemming talked about his participation in the planning and direction of assassinations . Hemming says he was involved in planning and directing assassinations in the U.S. Hemming is a former CIA operative .
 His conversation ranged from refined to such profanity as to make a seasoned sailor a piker . It seemed to vary as much as his mood and purposes required .
 He could speak articulately with perfect grammar, or lapse into street talk at will . He could also lapse into speech at will, or speak articially at will. He could talk articulantly with .
 'He could be charming and witty, or studied and calm, then suddenly become frighteningly intimidating, towering over me and thrusting his face into mine with loud, angry outbursts'
 Hemming remarked that he was still alive because others considered him to be a dangerous person, “a real bad ass,” but he had never promoted that image . Hemming said he was not promoting that image, but he was proud of his work .
 In 1982 Hemming was convicted of smuggling marijuana from the Colombian Cartel into Florida . In 1982 he was sentenced to incarceration in the Florida State Penitentiary for thirty years plus five, to be served consecutively .
 He said that he served eight-and-a-half years on the chain gang before his release . He said he served 8.5 years in prison .
 During his trial Hemming acted in his own defense, claiming he was working for the FBI and the federal Drug Enforcement Agency . Hemming said that the only way he could penetrate major drug-smuggling networks was to act as a smuggler himself himself .
 Hemming was an undercover agent in DEA operations in which the concept was that “to beat them you have to join them’” Hemming called “controlled deliveries from Colombia to U.S. networks for bust at street wholesale levels”
 Hemming's interviews with Hemming consisted of several telephone calls and meetings in San Diego, Fort Lauderdale, and Dallas . Hemming says he is proud of his achievements in his career .
 All of Hemming’s words not to be taken as Gospel. Keep in mind that these interviews are an evolving discovery process . Hemming's words are not taken as gospel.
 Gary Shaw sent me all of his original notes of interviews with Colonel Bishop and Bishop’s telephone cards . August 28, 1996; Telephone After a few perfunctory comments we got down to business .
 Bishop says there was a meeting between Vidal, Hargraves, and two others at General Edwin Walker’s house at about the time that Walker was shot at in Dallas . According to Bishop, there was also a meeting at the time of the shooting .
 Felipe Navarrette was loaned the car by one of his brothers-in-law . That was the car that he was given to Felipe by his brother in-law.
 Bishop also mentioned meeting once with General Willoughby and General Walker . Bishop also said he met with General Walker once . General Walker also met with Bishop . Bishop mentioned meeting with Walker .
 Colonel Bishop told Gary Shaw about this meeting about a week before he died . Colonel Bishop said he met with Willoughby a week earlier .
 I seem to be coming to the conclusion of a conspiracy involving anti-Castro Cubans, the Texas right wing, and LBJ and Hoover, says author . "I seem to have concluded that the conspiracy was a conspiracy," he says .
 The first thing was that they were trying to use us to do the job because we’d already been on the payroll for a couple of Latin American dictators for the same kind of work . ‘The first thing is that they’re trying to . . They were trying
 I inherited the people from Frank Sturgis and then severed relations with him in 1961 . I inherited people from the people I inherited, then severed ties with him, he said. I inherited them and severed them, he added .
 Harvey was running ZR/RIFLE and General Lansdale was running Mongoose . And from that time forward Harvey was . Running Mongoose. And from . that time onwards Harvey was. running Zr/RifLE .
 "Some very serious people" approached by some serious people to terminate Cuba's leadership, he says . "They wanted to terminate all of the paramilitary or special-operations-type plans"
 Guy Banister approached us when we were in New Orleans working with Larry LaBorde2 on the training page camp at Pontchartrain, and he made the same approaches, the same offers, and they were turned down . Later in the spring of 1962 he approached us as we were
 Most of these people expected to be turned down because we didn't know whether they were wearing a wire or not . Most of them were turned down as they were not wearing wire-wearing .
 It was just a formality to turn them down and then make preparations for cash transfers and what have you to make sure that the cutouts between the sponsor and the operators were completely severed at the a appropriate time .
 Sen. Keating was a key figure in the investigation into the death of George W. Bush in the 1990s . Senator Keating is accused of killing more than 1,000 people in the early 1990s.
 "We brought in the governor of Florida and the governors of a couple of other southeastern states," officials say . "We used Israeli contacts and others to determine that there were people in government such as Curtis LeMay and others that felt there was a possibility something was happening," they say .
 The U.S. could take Cuba and the Soviet Union without suffering excessive damage in the United States . But they were keeping JFK completely cut off from it, and their attitude was we can take ’em without suffering damage .
 The meeting in Dallas was with Robert Morris at the Adolphus Towers, and this was preparatory to meeting with Bunker Hunt and Lester Logue and other people .
 Twyman: "Oh, yes. Oh, yes, yes"
 I was the first one to establish contact for Cuba vis 4 vis the petroleum industry people . That came through my uncle who was a personal friend and former associate of John McCone .
 Bob Morris' uncle said to go out and see Bob Morris...well first he saw the president of Doctor Ross dog food in Los Angeles and he steered him to Morris . Bob Morris is a successful businessman and philanthropist .
 Congressman Rousselot also steered me to Morris, who was the cutout for meetings with Hunt and Logue and other oil people . At that time I was dealing with Congressman . He also steered us to Morris .
 It also involved touching bases with de Mohrenschildt and some of the other people involved in the project . The project is now in the hands of a British government .
 First of May of 1963 I was in a meeting at John Martino’s house where money changed hands . First of . May of May, 1963, was in . a meeting with John . Martino, who was a friend of John .
 I passed on $15,000 directly to Felipe Vidal that night and another $15.000 directly by Felipe directly by ; Martino the next day . Martino: "I passed on a lot of the money to Vidal, and I passed it on to him
 The way a team is placed in position, you could put them in Mexico City and they’d think they were in Havana, or on the outskirts of Havana . You could put ‘em in Kansas City and 'em in . Kansas City’s Kansas City . You
 The children are taken in at night and have no idea where they are . They are taken into care at night, taken in by the police . They have been taken in in the hope of being reunited with their loved ones .
 "They are put in a couple of safehouses, near the scene of the killing zone, and they do the job and get the hell out. They are put into safehouses," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 They're not allowed to know where they’re at, in case they had friends or if they tried to E&E...escape and evade . They would suddenly resort to their own knowledge of the real estate rather than going to the proper safehouses when the thing starts coming apart
 "They would feel insecure if things start coming apart -- that they were going to be eliminated," she says . Plus they would be insecure if they started coming apart, she says. Plus they feel insecure that they're going to get eliminated .
 Money came from Micky Cohen on the West Coast and Jack Dragna, representing the LA mob; Willie Bioff. Then Micky Cohen on the west coast and Jack . Dragna on the east coast, Micky . Cohen on West Coast, Jack . dragna on West
 Twyman: Hemming: Of course they did. Of course, of course, they did .
 We had a French team that worked in the Dominican Republic and Montreal . We had to work with the Canadian team .
 A team organized by Ramfis Trujillo, the son of the dictator assassinated by Kennedy’s people, as he believed it . A team of soldiers was organized by Trujillillo, who believed it.
 There were a number of people out there, including people in Lisbon that supported the OAS, who saw Kennedy as a threat as far as the Algerian problem as de Gaulle was .
 If you're in the business and you have a target, you find out if there are other paying enemies that could be brought in and it increases your venture capital . So you have to have a number of teams, well financed, and the big thing is that if you’re
 This models up the MOs and also their people that are linked directly to powerful people, like LBJ and others who are intentionally put there so there will be a cover-up . There will be confusion as to who the assassins and sponsors were, what they were doing. This models
 So many leads are given that are decoys and strays that when they finally get to somebody who could be proven to be a principal, an aider and abettor, they bypass them . They bypass them because they think there’s just more decoys or strangers or
 They were car bomb specialists and they had a vehicle laden with explosives on the other side of the underpass, police say . They say they were 'car bomb specialists' and were car bombs specialists .
 Souetre or someone using his name was in the Dallas area then, FBI documents say . FBI documents show he was in Dallas area at the time of the shooting . He is believed to have been in Dallas, Texas, in the early 1990s .
 "You can put a smile on the shooter's face because then he realizes that it’s a superpro job and there are backup and decoy teams and that's where those shots are coming from"
 "If you want a shot that gives you a pristine bullet, that gives it to you. If you want to give you the shot, that's a shot," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 I've talked to a guy that’s down in Vegas right now that was a cellmate with Christian David. I’ve talked to him about his cellmate . Christian David is a former cellmate of Christian David .
 So these people were busy and known before, and have kept up the good work since then. So they were busy, and they've kept it up since then . So they've been busy and well-known before, they've done so well, and kept up their good work .
 At that point in time he was working under Jake Esterline and JM/WAVE, and it’s very possible that they were monitoring, just as Richard Case Nagell .
 He was a Soviet agent, and the Soviets were trying to use Nagell and others to stop the assassination, he says . He says. He was trying to protect his life .
 Russell could never really get out the fact that the guy had betrayed his country . Russell was never able to get out that he was betrayed by the country .
 When Oswald showed up at the Cuban consulate in Monterey Park, I called my contact number for Angleton . Angleton's contact number was the number he had been given .
 I didn't talk to Angleton until I flew out to Anacostia about a week later, after I'd already dealt with Oswald two or three times and visited him at the base, LTA in Santa Ana . I didn’t talk to him until he flew out
 I said you put in a counterpart on me and I don’t want you putting it on me. And then when I got to Anacostia I dealt directly with Angleton, and I said that I didn't want Angleton to put a counterpart in on me .
 I don't need some clown that I’ve never dealt with regardless of the fact that he’s had similar training as me and all that. I don’t need some Clown that I .’m never dealing with,’ he says. ‘
 Hemming: Warned me once again about the federal statutes I was violating and that I was on my Own...as a singleton . Hemming and Twyman: warned him once again that he was violating federal statutes . Hemmming: "I was on his Own...
 "I think Magruder and Hoover and others got together and decided he had to go," says Hoover . Hoover: "Magruder, Hoover and other decided he must go. He had to be removed from his post"
 He worked in direct contact with Sullivan and Hoover, and while he was on the CIA payroll . He worked directly with Sullivan, Hoover and Hoover .
 A lot of these people had different loyalties because back in World War II they’d excluded OSS from the western hemisphere, so it was the FBI guys that had all the intell . CIA and INR and the State Department picked ‘em up’s
 Siragusa was the top agent in the Federal Bureau of Narcotics who did this kind of work . He worked for the FBI in the 1980s and '90s . Siragus was a federal agent who worked in the federal government .
 The only agency in the federal government, even to this date, that maintains an assassination capability is the narcotics people . "The only agency ... that maintains a capability is ... narcotics people," the author says .
 Narcotics is the only way to be on top of intell around the world because you’ve got everybody on your payroll and anything that moves you know about it. Narcotics . It's only way of being top of the world is to be .
 Most people cooperate with dopers because they don’t see them as being political or anything, or even being a security threat . And most people cooperated with the dopers as they don't see them being political .
 "I don’t see them sitting around with a tableful of snacks discussing this kind of business. But I don't see them talking about it,’s not possible," he says .
 Hoover’s biggest problem was he kind of took some things personal against me, he says . Hoover's "biggest problem" was he took things personally against me. Hoover's biggest problem, he said .
 He had attempted to blackmail Bobby Kennedy and our liaison with Bobby Kennedy...and we proceeded to get photographs and information that compromised Hoover, delivered them to Bobby Kennedy . Bobby Kennedy turned the tables on Hoover, and he turned the table on Hoover .
 "Right now we’re in the process of going back in to see what can’t be done with the confidential files that were seized," says police chief . "We’ve been looking at what can be done" with confidential files seized .
 "All these confidential files were seized and then sealed by people that I worked with," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "All the confidential files that were seized were seized, then sealed"
 "We were supposed to go down under the gun in Miami International Airport because that was one of the primary sites for the assassination," the author says .
 Researcher Gordon Winslow says research of photos at the airport do not show Hemming or his group at the event . Winslow: Research of photos of Hemming at airport does not show him at event . Hemming is believed to be a national figure in Afghanistan .
 I worked to get blackmailers off a number of the Texas people’s back that were being blackmailed by people that actually believe that they participated in the Texas civil war .
 Some of the assassins that were in the area at the time and were in Chicago and Miami attempted to get more money because they were promised more money . They were blackmailing people that had put up money for the job, and it was my job in the late ’60s and
 Anti-Castro Cubans could have felt they had been set up in Interpen group . Well, I can see where the anti-Cuba Cubans felt they were set up. Well, he said .
 Twyman: "That's what he called it. That’s what I called it."
 The prime financiers were the weapons manufacturers, Hanford and Rocky Flat’s people . Hanford was the site of a massive explosion in the Hanford area .
 They financed the movement of people, the equipment, the setting up of teams, so that if it went down in Miami it would be a particular team that was unknown to the other teams . The money was used to finance the move of people and equipment, and to set up teams .
 If it went down in Chicago or in Tampa or in San Antonio or in Dallas, these were totally separate financed teams, financed by different sponsors . If it goes down in Tampa, Tampa or San Antonio, these teams were totally different financed teams .
 "One of the problems is that what you talk about is so fantastic that it becomes unbelievable," says Simon Cowan . But one of the biggest challenges is to convince people to believe in his new book .
 If you’re a gunrunner, you have an in at the palace level throughout the planet . If you're a gun runner, you've got an in . You can be a . gunrunner . It’s not only gunrunner but gunrunner. You have an
 If you're a doper, you have control of the palace level in every country throughout the planet . If you’re a dater, you‘t have control over every country in the world’s every country .
 He'd been convinced that his participation had gone awry and that he’d become a traitor to his own country . He’s been convinced his participation went awry . He was convinced that he'd become a . traitor to himself .
 You attempt to assassinate a president, you’re a traitor to your country, you're a traitor, he says . You are a traitor if you attempt to kill a president. You are not a traitor. He says .
 I don't think I got it clear yet what you believe the purpose of these meetings were. I don’t think I’m clear yet,’s not sure what you’ve been told of the meetings. ‘I’d like to see
 We always treated them as a genuine operation when they were going down. But we always treat them as genuine operations when they are going down .
 Walker gets himself to doing the Old Miss situation which tended to alienate the Cubans from him . So here’s Walker getting himself to do the old Miss situation again .
 We had a number of former first Special Service force people in the loop . Walker had a bad reputation while he was in the Devil's Brigade as being a homosexual, and then in some of these meetings a couple of my people made rather frank comments in his living room .
 Walker could be utilized to head up a special campaign and that the funding would come from the right wing and they would accomplish certain goals . Walker would be the military guy that stood in front of the John Birchers .
 Walker excluded himself from participation in operations, Walker said . Walker said he would not participate in any of the operations .
 "We were kind of loosening our contacts with him. But to that point in time we were ... loosening his contacts," she says .
 Our last contact with Walker was July 4, 1963 when we flew out there for a meeting . Walker's last contact was in 1963 when he was in the U.S. Walker was in Washington DC .
 Walker doesn't even draw the drapes after a shot is fired through his window . Walker says he's "chagrined" that Walker would be so careless .
 We thought this is piss-poor tradecraft here because he's either a nut and he’s not keeping his cover up, because we figured he engineered the thing him-self...and that if ever important people had heard by chance remark that he spent hours, in the wee
 'He wasn't even conscious of the fact that whether you're brave or not you always draw your curtains, especially after you’ve been shot at. And that kind of turned us off too, because he wasn’t even conscious . And that sort of turned . off
 The code word at that point in time, post-missile crisis, seemed to be to hit on Fidel, don’t bother about commando operations or any of this kind of business .
 "I was going to do a book two years ago, spent months with an author, just to have threats made to various publishers," she says . "Yes, I was going for a book, but I was just going for it," she adds .
 Hemming talked unhesitatingly and naturally throughout the interview . Hemming indicated to me that he was either very candid or had carefully outlined everything he was going to say. Hemming's interview was either candid or not very candid .
 "He used none of the profanity for which he is renowned, and was generally very articulate and responsive," he said .
 I would report other relevant material and let the reader use his or her own judgment as to what to do with it . The reader should use his own judgment on whether to use it .
 Hemming’s confirmation of the white 1957 Chevrolet in which Vidal was driven to Dallas . Hemming confirms Vidal's visit with Walker and bringing Vidal into the Walker shooting incident . Vidal visited Walker in Dallas, Texas .
 Hemming's statements add believability to the suspicion that it was staged . Hemming’s statements about the shooting incident in April 1963 are believable, according to Hemming .
 Hemming’s acknowledgment that he himself attended some of these meetings in Dallas mentioned by Colonel Bishop . Hemming also attended a meeting with John Martino, Vidal, Sam Giancana, Chuck Nicoletti, and Santo Trafficante in Miami in which Hoffa money was
 This is consistent with Florence Martino’s statements and FBI reports in the preceding chapter, as well as the evidence of Giancana and Trafficante's involvement in the assassination . This is . consistent with statements from Martino and the FBI reports .
 As the interview came to an end, I invited him to visit San Diego for an extended face-to-face interview . The interview was an extended interview .
 "I offered him the option of my going to Florida or paying the expenses for him to come to San Diego," he said . "He was offered the option . He said he would pay the expenses of his trip to Florida."
 He chose to come to San Diego, saying he hadn’t seen two of his brothers (who lived in Pomona, California) for many years . He decided to take advantage of being in California to visit them .
 I offered to rent him a hotel room or have him stay as a guest at my home. I offered him a room or a room at my house, he said . I also offered to pay for him to stay in a hotel or stay in my home .
 Hemming chose to be a house guest, saying it would give us time to talk over more extended periods . Hemming is a guest at the White House for the first time in a week .
 JFK was only 23 years old at the time of the JFK assassination . He was only twenty-three years old when JFK was assassinated .
 More arrests and/or incarcerations continued through 1958 to 1963, for burglary, grand theft, shoplifting, vagrancy, and violation of United States Neutrality Act and National Firearms Act .
 The grand theft arrests resulted in sentencing to prison in Arizona for 2 to 3 years . Grand theft arrests have resulted in prison sentences ranging from 2 to 2 years .
 The arrests for violation of United States Neutrality Act and National Firearms Act were in 1962 and 1963 . He became associated with Hemming in a patriotic crusade, CIA sanctioned, to topple Castro .
 In 1968/’69, Hargraves became known as the “Mad Bomber” for bombing both the SDS Peace Center and the Black Panther Headquarters in Los Angeles . Operation CHAOS was an illegal CIA covert program to disrupt ’ae radical, subversive
 The following is a brief resume of this Agency’s relationship with Felipe Carlos VIDAL Santiago . In October 1959 VIDAL arrived in Caracas, Venezuela as the Cuban Naval Attache .
 In January 1960 a representative of this Agency contacted VIDAL when it became known he was disaffected with the CASTRO regime . VIDAL was contacted by VIDAL after it was known he had been disaffected .
 VIDAL defected from his position on 7 March 1960 and fled to Bogota, Colombia . VIDAL was a member of the Colombian National Guard .
 A POA was granted to VIDAL on 15 March 1960 and this was later superseded by a CSA granted on 27 October 1960 . VIDAL was granted a POA by VIDAL in March 1960 .
 VIDAL planned to be Chief of the FRD Maritime Force . This Agency planned to utilize VIDAL as Chief of FRD maritime Force . VIDAL is currently being held by the French Defense Ministry .
 It was later learned VIDAL was an opportunist and associated with people whom this Agency frowned upon . VIDAL is later learned to have been a partner with VIDAL .
 Interest in him was terminated in August 1961 . He was considered a security risk and interest in him terminated in 1961 .
 VIDAL appeared before the INS on numerous occasions for violations committed while engaging in antt CASTRO activities with the various exile groups . VIDAL has been accused of violations committed by VIDAL during the past .
 On one occasion he related to the INS and the FBI that he was at one time a CIA agent and furnished them some background information regarding his activities while working for us . The INS and FBI received information about his activities .
 There is no record that this Agency ever utilized the services of Roy Emory Hargraves . There is also no record of Roy Emory Hargaves' services .
 He may well have infiltrated Cuba on 22 October 1962 as he claims and also trained some men in VIDAL’s organization . But this was neither a CIA mission nor CIA men that he claims to have trained .
 The foregoing indicates that Vidal was recruited by the CIA and became a CIA agent after he defected from the Cuban Navy . Vidal defected to the CIA after he had defected .
 The FLN, a radical anti-Castro Cuban organization, was created by Vidal against the CIA’s wishes, Hemming says . Vidal created the FLN against CIA's wishes .
 CIA may be distancing itself from radical group, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "We may be seeing some distancing here by the CIA from that radical group"
 Based on what I had heard about him, I expected to see him as a very rough character, 4 la Hells Angels bikers . I expected him to be very rough . He said he was surprised by the reaction to the film .
 He also lugged a stack of newspaper clippings about the JFK assassination and about himself . The JFK assassination was JFK's assassination .
 None of the government documents tended to exonerate him; on the contrary, they tended to implicate him in the JFK conspiracy . The government documents tend to incriminate him in JFK .
 Fonzi had told me that Weberman had written a gigantic, unpublished book on the JFK assassination, focusing primarily on Hemming, in which he claimed that Hemming and his Interpen group were heavily involved in the assassination . The book was published by Weberman in 1998 .
 Hemming brought with him the Weberman material that he had been able to obtain . Hemming was able to get the material back from Weberman, who had been working on the project .
 Weberman indirectly involved Hemming in the assassination of Martin Luther King through Hemming’s Interpen group, and much more, if one can imagine it . Hemming's Interpen was also involved in King's assassination, and more .
 Weberman’s audacious act of putting this database on the World Wide Web must have been a shock . Weberman: "I’m not surprised that this database has been put on the Web"
 Hemming said that the number of hits on this Web site was an all-time high . Hemming: The number of people who visited this site has been at an all time high. Hemming says that number of visitors to this site was a record high .
 I wondered if perhaps Hemming was exercising damage control in meeting with me . Hemming's meeting was a 'damage control meeting' for the president of the UK .
 "I had decided ahead of time that this would be a long interview with no organization to it," she says . "I'm just rambling conversations, getting acquainted, exchanging ideas, and seeing what came of it as we focused on the Kennedy assassination," she writes .
 Hemming said his mission in life was to expose the plot and the cover-up so as to prevent it from repeating . Hemming would express extreme anger at those who had “set him up” and expressed extreme anger .
 "I admonished him to stop thinking about revenge, but he said he had to do it," he said . He said: "He told me that he was going to get revenge. He said he would do it."
 I must state that at this point I did not seriously consider Hemming to be a prime suspect in the Kennedy assassination, notwithstanding Weberman’s allegations . I must say at this time, I did .
 Hemming's involvement in the assassination grew from nil to nil, says Weberman . Weberman was right to say Hemming was involved in the killing, but Hemming is not, he says . Hemming left the scene of the assassination, leaving Weberman on the scene .
 "I had developed a compassion for Hemming; he was a very human and likable person," she says . Hemming was "a very human person"
 'I experienced the beginning of a sympathetic understanding of how he got where he now is, in a horrible dilemma,' says the author .
 The conversation over the three-day weekend was partly taped, partly recorded in handwritten notes, and very voluminous; therefore far too much to relate in detail . The conversation is partly taped and partly recorded .
 The documents Hemming brought with him form an evidentiary foundation for his statements about his and Vidal’s trips to Dallas in 1963 . We will examine the essence of the documents . But first, we will examine Hemming's statements about the trip .
 We will begin by focusing on a handwritten document summarizing CIA and FBI documents . The document was written by a handwritten FBI agent .
 The document consisted of forty-seven pages with a cover sheet entitled Select Committee on Assassinations, U.S. House of Representatives . The document was published in 1996 and 1997 .
 It is a chronology of Hemming's interrelated activities . It is cross-referenced to Loran Hall, Lawrence Howard, and William Seymor . Hemming was a major figure in the American Revolution .
 The document cites sources in a variety of secret or confidential FBI and CIA documents . The documents cite sources in various documents pertaining to Vidal, Hargraves and others .
 HSCA deliberately kept material from Fonzi and filed away in secrecy . Obviously there was extensive material that was deliberately kept from him . HSCa deliberately kept the material secret .
 This only served to reinforce my growing feeling that Hemming was indeed a very important character in the JFK assassination . Hemming's role in JFK assassination was a key figure in the assassination, author says .
 Claims press & left in U.S. supports Manuel Ray Rivero & Eloy Gutierrez Menoyo . Claims press and left in United States supports Rivero .
 Claims CIA responsible for raid in March 1963 which attacked and sunk Russian ship BAKU off the north shore of Cuba . CIA claims CIA was responsible for commandos L. L. attack on the ship . L. claims CIA responsible .
 Vidal visited Dallas 2 weeks before the assassination, stayed 5 days, and spoke with General Walker to get his views on the Cuban situation . Vidal also spoke to General Walker about the situation in Cuba .
 Walker was not interested in involving himself with Cuban revolutionary activities as he was running for governor . Walker ran for governor of Florida in 1996 .
 Arrested 10/21/63 with 21 members of anti-Castro group headed for Cuba . Arrested in Havana, Cuba, on October 21, 1963, with 21 other members .
 Hemming said to have been instigator of 1/5/64 attempt to land on Cuba . Hemming is believed to have instigated the attempt, which took place in Cuba in 1964 .
 General Escalante said Vidal stayed four days, but the document says five days . Vidal's visit to Dallas in early November 1963 was described by Escalantes as four days . The only difference is that Vidal spent four days in Dallas .
 We also have confirmation of Vidal’s relationship with Roy Hargraves, Edward Collins, and Edward Hemming, as well as his heroic exploits . Vidal's heroic exploits include heroic exploits with Hemming .
 Lauchli escorted by Hemming, Sturgis to meet different Cuban exile leaders in Miami . Lauchlli escorted to Miami to meet with exiled Cuban leaders .
 This entry links Hemming to Richard Lauchli, who was national cofounder of the Minutemen . Hemming is a member of the national Minuteman, a national co-founded by the Miners .
 Hemming’s involvement in supplying weapons to Cuban exiles and continuing contact with Frank Sturgis as late as June 14, 1963 . It also shows his involvement in providing weapons to ex-Cubans .
 Hemming said he “severed the relationship” with Sturgis in 1961 . This seems to belie Hemming’s statement that he ‘severed’ the relationship . Hemming ‘says it was ‘a matter of principle’ in
 Hemming left with a copy of a letter from Richard Lauchli, obviously a friendly letter indicating a long-term relationship . Also left a letter written to him from Mitchell WerBell, the infamous assassination weapons specialist and arms dealer . Hemming also left a note from WerBell from
 Hemming was closely linked with the entire gamut of right-wing extremists in the U.S. in 1963 . Hemming's involvement in the events in 1963 will be revealed in a new book .
 The Hunt family in Dallas, the Hunt family and Lester Logue in Dallas; . General Walker and Lester . Logue and Guy Banister in New Orleans . The extreme right-wing factions of the Cuban exiles in Miami in Miami .
 Hemming’s contacts included high-level officials in the State Department and a United States Marine Corps general, not to mention James Angleton .
 Hemming later told me that he had numerous contacts with William Harvey . Hemming told me he had many contacts with Harvey, including Harvey .
 Hemming had contacts with Sam Giancana, Chuck Nicoletti, Santo Trafficante, John Martino, and William Pawley . And, as previously noted, he had contact with several other people .
 Nowhere in JFK assassination literature have I found one person with all of these associations that link to the JFK assassination plot, either directly or indirectly . Nowhere has been found in the literature that links to JFK assassination .
 Boat owned by 3 young Americans—Jack LNU and 2 others who live and work on it . Boat is owned by three young Americans, including Jack LNNU .
 LaBorde staying with Hemming at 2753 N.W. 13th St. St., Miami, and constantly traveling between Miami and New Orleans .
 We will furnish attached data to the Attorney General for his information . We will not make any check into this matter but will provide attached data .
 Jack Lawrence worked at the Lincoln-Mercury agency in Dallas from which an Oswald impersonator test-drove an expensive automobile two weeks before the assassination . According to Hemming, this was the same Jack Lawrence who worked in Dallas .
 In my attempts at brevity in Chapter 17, I had discounted the significance of Jack Lawrence . Jack Lawrence had been a key character in the book .
 Oswald driving incident occurred earlier in the month at the Downtown Lincoln-Mercury Agency . He called the Dallas police after the assassination to tell them about the incident . He was temporarily employed car salesman at the agency .
 Lawrence had hurriedly come into the agency about thirty minutes after the assassination, pale, sweating profusely, out of breath, and with mud on his clothes, and had run into the restroom and vomited . It was later reported that Lawrence had rushed to the agency after the shooting
 Jack Lawrence stayed at the same YMCA in Dallas at which Oswald had stayed . Lawrence had worked at an auto agency in New Orleans before coming to Dallas HU .
 Meeting included Hemming, Hargraves, LaBorde, Eduardo Perez, Tony Cuesta, Ramon Font, Tony Farinas, Hal Hendrix, Theodore Racoosin and others .
 Later dismissed by U.S. District ET Judge, Miami, FL, because Justice failed to go ahead with prosecution . Later dismissed .
 This illustrates Hemming’s continued anti-Castro activities and his association with Roy Hargraves . Hemming is a former CIA operative who worked for the Cuban government .
 Hemming says he was operating under U.S. government approval . This tends to support Hemming’s claim that he was working for the government . Hemming is believed to have been operating under the influence of the United States .
 President Obama spoke to Walker at Walker's home in Washington, DC, on Thursday .
 Hemming had told me that Wallace Welch was one of his contacts in Dallas . Welch appears to be an FBI informant, Hemming says .
 Hemming was apparently being tracked very closely in every step he took . Hemming is believed to be being followed closely by the FBI .
 This fits with Hemming's statements to me concerning his visit to Walker’s house at a later date in 1963 . Hemming said he visited Walker's house in 1963 at the time of Walker's death in 1963. Hemming has said that Walker visited Walker in 1963, but
 Hemming's relationship with Loran Hall figures prominently in this story . Also it shows the relationship of Hemming to Loran .
 Hemming was adamant that Loran Hall was instrumental in trying to “set him up” in the JFK assassination . Hemming says Hall tried to set him up in the assassination . Hall was a key figure in the plot, Hemming said .
 While in Washington reportedly helped by Sterling Cottrell, Undersecretary of State for Cuban Affairs—and Marine Corps general stationed at White House .
 Report that Hemming in Washington, D.C., from approx Feb 6 to March 7 or 8—Allegedly visited a great number of people in State Department, Pentagon, i.e., Sterling Cottrell . Hemming is believed to have visited the Pentagon, State Department
 Hemming heard plan to control movements of go between local Latin American gov’ ts. and United States . Plan to have Mexican government photograph and fingerprint everyone going to and from Cuba. Hemming hears plan to have Mexico government photograph, fingerprint everyone .
 Hemming called, saying he was returning from California where his father had died; needed a place to stay . Hemming's father died in California, and Hemming was returning to stay in the house . Heming called, said he was going to stay, and needed a home .
 Welch says he remained in Dallas 3/24 & 3/25 but didn’t know where he stayed . Welch: “I'm not sure where I stayed. I'm glad I was in Dallas, Texas, when I was there,” Welch says .
 Hemming knew in early 1963 that the Mexican government was going to photograph everyone going to and from Cuba . This indicates that Hemming was aware of the plan to photograph all travelers to Cuba .
 In early 1963 Hemming was variously in Los Angeles with Loran Hall; in Dallas with Hall visiting General Walker on two occasions . Hemming also visited with top military brass in the White House and with other government officials .
 Interpen down to about 6 members—difficult to get money— worked part time as gardener . Interpen was down to 6 members, but it was difficult to get paid for .
 Despite the reports that Hemming was broke and hocking his rifle, he was doing all of this travel . He managed to get to Dallas and Washington, D.C., talk to high officials, and then ended up back in Miami working as a gardener .
 This is only one month after meeting with top brass in Washington, D.C., and Dallas, Texas . This is the first time the president has met with the Dallas Cowboys .
 Walker reportedly told him he wasn't interested in participating in Cuban affairs . Walker reportedly said he wasn’t interested in participation in Cuba affairs .
 Hemming conferred with Lester Logue of Logue & Patterson—geologists, oil man, rich . Hemming also conferred with Logue and Patterson, a geologist and oil man . Logue is a well-known oil expert .
 Logue has 6-8 man group interested in fighting communism but can’t participate with Hemming at that time—afraid of offending government officials . Logue: ‘I’m afraid to offend government officials.’
 Will be going to Washington for briefing—will return, then can assist Logue in some way . Will be returning to D.C. to help Logue .
 FBI contact report confirms in part two paragraphs from Patricia Orr's notes, but with a twist . Orr’s notes were taken from the FBI's contact report, but a twist.
 The informant to the FBI was named as Dick Whatley, one of Hemming’s cohorts . Hemming was a member of the Hemming gang .
 Edwin A WALKER would not back any specific cause as he wanted to remain free to fight Communism all over the U.S.
 Logue worked with a Colonel and a Major in the United States Army Reserve, both of whom were due for future promotion, and that shortly they would be attending a Government Intelligence briefing in Washington, D.C. and that when they returned and briefed LOGUE then be in a position
 LOGUE said he would visit Miami, Florida in about 10 days and set-up an intelligence unit, send men to handle the funds and also personnally see some people about donating boats to HEMMING’s Anti-Castro movement in Miami .
 Hemming says he was offered a contract to assassinate President Kennedy at the Petroleum Club in Dallas . Hemming: I was offered contract to kill Kennedy in Dallas, Texas, in 1963 .
 November 1961—Report that Hargraves associated with Rolando Masferrer Rojas; also active with Hemming . November 1961: Report that Harpraves was associating with Rojas . November 1962: Report of Hargaves associating . with Roland .
 Masferrer has appeared in numerous accounts as a prime suspect in the Cuban connection to the JFK assassination and as a link to, if not a part of, the Mafia . As noted in previous chapters, he has also been linked to the Mafia in Cuba .
 Documents link Masferrer to Hemming group through Hargraves, completing the circle back to meetings in Dallas with General Walker and Colonel William Bishop in which assassination of JFK was discussed . These documents (and other documents) link Masfrer to the Hemming .
 Patricia Orr summary nears the end of the week . Orr's summary is now a series of notations as the end approaches .
 Vidal reportedly just returned from Dallas where he visited Walker; now interested in moving to Guatemala or Nicaragua . November 11—Vidal reportedly visited Walker in Dallas; now wants to move to Nicaragua or Guatemala .
 Hargraves stopped by United States customs agents; Vidal infiltrated Cuba— captured and executed . Vidal was captured by U.S. agents; Hargaves was stopped by customs agents .
 Hemming furnished the Miami office with information in November 1963 which resulted in location and apprehension of a bureau UFAP subject . Hemming provided information to Miami office which led to capture of a U.S. subject .
 Vidal says he is loosely associated with Roy Emory Hargraves . Vidal: "I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to talk to him about that"
 Carlos Prio took over association with Cuban Committee for Liberation . In spring or summer ... meetings for Cuban Committee of Liberation were held .
 January 1964—1/5 Dickey Chapell, Edward Collins, Roy Hargraves on boat that sunk off Miami. January 1964 . January 1964--1/ 5 Dickey . Chapeell, Edward . Collins, . Roy . Hargaves .
 General Escalante's statement of Vidal’s trip to Dallas in early November 1963 confirms Vidal's visit to Dallas . We see in the above notations more confirmation of the statement . Vidal visited Dallas in November 1963 .
 We also see Vidal and Hargraves being closely associated between November 1963 and March 1964 . Then Vidal being in bad financial condition and his interest in moving to Guatemala or Nicaragua . Then we also see him being in financial trouble .
 Roy Hargraves and Vidal visited right-wing businessmen and retired military officers in Dallas in 1963, during which JFK's assassination was discussed .
 General Walker seems to be an FBI informant, as well as Hemming’s contact in Dallas, Wallace Welch . General Walker also appears to be a FBI informant . Hemming is believed to be the leader of the Texas Rangers .
 Vidal concluded that the U.S. government is “standing in the way” of his operations to free Cuba . Note that Vidal has now concluded that . Vidal concludes that the United States .
 This fits with the theory that it was the right-wing faction of the Cuban exiles that became disillusioned with the Kennedys when they started cracking down on their operations and taking control of the anti-Castro movement . This fits into the generally accepted theory that the right wing
 Felipe Vidal Santiago was captured by Castro’s forces and executed in April 1964, as was also reported by General Fabian Escalante at the 1995 Nassau Conference .
 From November, 1963, through March, 1964, HARGRAVES was closely associated with, and worked for, FELIPE VIDAL SANTIAGO, a Cuban revolutionist in Miami . HARRAVE'S was a member of the Cuban revolutionists .
 He transported boat and military equipment between Miami and the Florida Keys . He transported the boat and equipment between the Miami and Florida Keys.
 When HARGRAVES was stopped by United States Customs Agents, VIDAL clandestinely left the United States and infiltrated Cuba . VIDAL left the U.S. to infiltrate Cuba and infiltrated the island nation .
 VIDAL was captured and executed by a firing squad in Cuba in April, 1964 . He was captured by a Cuban government and executed in 1964 .
 Note that Hargraves was closely associated with Vidal and worked for him . Note that Vidal was close to Vidal .
 In 1963 he was in Miami, Florida, employed at the Royal Castle, Number Two, Flagler and Second, and met one Art Silva . Silva was a member of the Royal Family at the time .
 Silva at that time was living with one Phyllis at a small hotel across the street from Royal Castle Number Two . Silva was living at the time in a hotel near the castle . Silva is credited with saving the lives of one of the world's most famous women .
 They later moved to an apartment in a court near LaJune Road and Eighth Street which was behind a fruit stand . The couple later moved into an apartment behind a Fruit Stand . It is the first time they have lived in an apartment since they moved into a court .
 One of their neighbors in the court was one Roy who was living with some woman, name unrecalled, in a court next door to Art. Art. Roy . Roy was one of the neighbors . Roy and Art were in the same court .
 Roy, according to Art, had several telescopic sight rifles, grenades, mortars, dynamite, etc. in his room . Art, Art, says Roy, had a room full of weapons and ammunition . Art says Roy had grenades, grenades and mortars .
 Roy had made a trip to Dallas, Texas, in late 1963 and was reported by Art to have Secret Service credentials . Art reported that Roy had been reported to have been in Dallas .
 Roy was also associated with various Cuban resistance movements and was an ex-Marine . Roy was a member of the Cuban resistance movement and was a former Marine .
 Acker notes that instant article he read says a policeman stopped a man in Dallas who showed Secret Service credentials . Acker says he was stopped by a police officer in Dallas .
 Acker says Roy blamed former President Kennedy personally for the death of one of his close friends who was in the invasion at the Bay of Pigs . Acker: Roy blamed JFK personally for death of friend who was killed in the attack . Roy was a close friend of Acker's who
 Acker says that late in 1963 he met Art in an open air sandwich shop in Miami to have a beer . Art talked of his next door neighbor Roy and said Roy was working with the Cubans and would help Acker get in with the Movement if he wanted to help out in
 Acker says that he thought Art was talking about a robbery or something of that nature . Acker suspected Art as being mixed up with various underworld characters .
 At this time, Acker believes it was the assassination of President Kennedy after reading the article in the Post of January 14 . Acker says he believes the assassination was the Kennedy assassination .
 He confirmed that the ‘Roy’ was Roy Hargraves but said, in effect, without further comment, that the document did not tell the whole truth . He said that he would not comment on the document .
 FBI report said Acker, age 45, had served in North Africa, Italy, France, Germany, and Austria in World War II . He was admitted to a veterans’ hospital in Tennessee for a mental condition .
 He was discharged and advised by his doctor to go to Miami and get a new start in life, as he had separated from his wife . He was then discharged and told to go back to Miami .
 The suppression of evidence possibly at the heart of the crime. Here we have the suppression of . evidence possibly . at the centre of the . crime .
 The evidence is trashed in superficial, flimsy reports with no questioning of Roy Hargraves . The evidence has been trashed by the media, with no questions being asked of Roy . It is not the first time Roy has been questioned by the BBC .
 Have some government psychiatrist declare the person to be mentally ill? Have a government psychiatrist declared the person mentally ill. Have a psychiatrist declare that you're mentally ill .
 Another FBI document, dated July 18, 1967, is an FBI report about Jim Garrison’s trial in which Roy Hargraves is reported as having met David Ferrie . The document is dated July 17, 1967 .
 This was in an interview at Garrison’s office of Michael W LaBorde, son of Larry LaBordi . Michael W. LaBORDER: "Larry's son, Michael's son Larry, is not Larry's son"
 Roy Hargraves called David Ferrie a week, two weeks, or a couple of days before the assassination of President Kennedy in 1963 . A hotdog vendor who worked in the French Quarter in New Orleans said he had been told by a Pete that “Roy had called David
 Colonel William Bishop said he, Vidal, and Hargraves met with General Edwin Walker and two others in or about April 1963 . In this meeting assassination of JFK was discussed, Bishop said .
 Hemming says he himself was at meetings with Walker, Willoughby, and others, but not in the same meetings . Hemming: "I'm not sure if I was there at the same time"
 Vidal told General Escalante that he met wealthy Texas businessmen at the Petroleum Club in Dallas in early November 1963 . Vidal was executed in Cuba on about April 1964 .
 This is confirmed by an HSCA document showing Vidal in Dallas November 6 to 11 . Vidal was in Dallas, Texas, on November 6 and 11 .
 Colonel Bishop told Gary Shaw of a similar trip by Vidal to Dallas, but in April 1963 . Independently of this, Colonel Bishop said Vidal made similar trip to Dallas in March 1963 .
 Hemming independently told Dick Russell of a trip to Dallas by Vidal, but in the week before the assassination . Hemming separately told Russell of the trip . Vidal visited Hemming in a week before his assassination .
 Hargraves was with Vidal on an April trip in which assassination was discussed . And we see above that he was with him on the April trip to discuss assassination .
 FBI documents say Hargraves could also have been with Vidal on the trip the week before the assassination . FBI documents also say he could have been in the same week as Vidal .
 Witness said Hargraves was living in one of a group of cottages in Miami, Florida, in 1963 . Witness William Blanton Acker, Jr., Jr., said that he was living there at the time of the shooting . Witness said he was staying in a group
 Acker quoted Art Silva, saying that Hargraves had telescopic-sight rifles in his cottage . Silva also said that he had rifles in the cottage . Acker said Silva's work was done in the 1930s .
 Hargraves blamed President Kennedy personally for the death of one of his personal friends who was killed at the Bay of Pigs . In an argument with Acker at a Christmas party in 1963, he blamed Kennedy for the killing .
 Hargraves and Vidal were closely associated with Rolando Masferrer, who has been closely linked to the JFK assassination . Rolando received $500,000 from Jimmy Hoffa for a contract to assassinate President Kennedy, Colonel William Bishop says .
 Masferrer at one time was training assassination squads in the Florida Keys . He was trained to train assassination squads, including assassination squads .
 Vidal was linked to the staged shooting at General Walker by virtue of the 1957 black-and-white Chevrolet at Walker’s house at the time of the shooting . Vidal's car was found at Walker's house in 1957 .
 Colonel William Bishop said that he had driven Vidal to Dallas in that same make and model of car in April 1963 . Colonel Bishop also said that Vidal had driven the same car to Dallas .
 Hemming told me that Vidal borrowed this car from one of his relatives . Hemming said he borrowed the car from a relative . Vidal used to drive the car .
 Hargraves was part of Hemming’s Interpen group and involved with Hemming in numerous operations . He was also involved in numerous other operations .
 Hargraves and Felipe Vidal Santiago were involved in the Kennedy assassination in a big way . It seems to entangle them in the JFK assassination .
 FBI document dated April 18, 1975, and released by the National Archives on June 14, 1995, provides evidence that links Lawrence Howard to Oswald . Another FBI document of great interest was released by National Archives in June 1995 .
 Lawrence Howard was in Hemming’s Interpen group . As noted several times, Howard was a member of Hemming's Interpen .
 Sheriff Allen L Capwell Wyoming County, N.Y., personally appeared at the Buffalo office of the FBI and related the following info which he had obtained from Richard Monroe Margeson, DOB June 16, 1927 .
 Howard was engaged in collecting funds to support the anti-Castro forces in Cuba . Howard was involved in the Cuban revolution .
 Howard went to Florida Key in 1962 for purpose of training troops to invade Cuba . He was accompanied by Rudy Hernandez, Mexican, in his 20s, 5’2"", heavy build and un-sub AKA “Slim,” no other name known, white
 Howard’s specific address unknown but lived in East or Northeast Los Angeles . Howard lived in the area . Howard was found dead at a Los Angeles hospital .
 All were employed by a Jack Casey, not further described, painting and refurbishing the old Union Temple bldg. located behind the Los Angeles Greyhound Bus station . Jack Casey painted and refurbished the former Union Temple building .
 This building reportedly housed the Marquade Printing Shop in the basement, which was engaged in printing the original draft of Richard M Nixon’s book after he lost the presidential election .
 Margeson met a man called "Tex" who arrived from New Orleans in late 1962 or early 1963 . Margeson says he met Tex, a man who arrived in New Orleans from 1962 or 1963 .
 Tex visited Margeson’s house on Trigg St. in East Los Angeles and furnished his name as Harvey Lee . Margeson said Tex visited the house on . Trigg Street in East L.A. Margeson .
 Following President Kennedy’s assassination and pictures of Lee Harvey Oswald appeared in news media, Margeson realized that Tex and Oswald were identical . Tex and Lee Oswald are identical .
 Howard was subpoenaed by former District Attorney Garrison, New Orleans, Louisiana during course of investigation . Margeson said Howard was later subpoenaed . Howard was the subject of an investigation by Garrison .
 Margeson decided to come forth after viewing a recent TV documentary on the Warren Commission investigations where it was depicted Oswald was in Russia . Margeson says he came forward after seeing a TV documentary depicted Oswald in Russia while in fact Oswald was California .
 This caused Margeson to believe that a conspiracy could possibly have existed in that Oswald may not have acted alone . Margeson believes that Oswald's actions may not be alone .
 Bureau is requested to assess the above info and furnish Buffalo with pertinent info to assist Buffalo with interview of Margeson in event Bureau so desires . Bureau is also requested to interview Margeson if necessary .
 Margeson thought that Oswald was still in Russia in late 1962 or early 1963 when the incident occurred with him in Los Angeles . Margeson believed Oswald was in Russia at the time of the incident .
 Oswald had returned from Russia in June 1962; therefore, it could have been Oswald, using the name Harvey Lee, in Los Angeles, in 1962 . Oswald had used the name "Harvey Lee" in his name, but had returned to Russia in late 1962 .
 Source mentioned as an aside that during the build-up of 1963, a number of volunteer civilians was making their way across the United States into Florida .
 Source, at a later date, confronted with the question concerning his part in the alleged connection with the Kennedy assassination, “clammed up” and became nervous concerning the matter and avoided the subject completely . Source said he was nervous about the matter .
 Sources’ long involvement with military civilian movements against Cuba . Source’s long involvement in military civilian movement against Cuba led to his involvement in the Kennedy assassination .
 Source was unable to make identification but stated that Burton was in the employ of Jerry Hemming at the time of the incident . Source said Burton was working for Hemming when the incident occurred .
 Source was cooperative during the interview and provided names, addresses, and telephone numbers from a small address book in his possession . Source was completely cooperative with the interview .
 As a spotcheck for accuracy of information concerning individuals, the name and address of listed above was checked through the Los Angeles Field Office of the 115th MI Group .
 It was Hemming who displayed photos of Sirhan B Sirhan . Burton was in the employ of Jim Garrison, not Hemming, not Jim Garrison . Payne worked for Hathcock's detective agency where Payne worked .
 A CIA document released from the National Archives on March 3, 1995, brings William Harvey into the LaBorde story . The document was released in March 1995 .
 We are inclined to agree with your paragraph 3 in reference that the best thing to do at the moment is not to dignify the article with any additional comment or any effort to “correct” the record .
 We would like to hear what might possibly be done to make life difficult for Laborde . We would appreciate, however, receiving your views on what might be done .
 Any proposal you might have, including possible use of the will most certainly receive favorable consideration, and will probably be approved, will probably get favorable consideration . The proposal will be approved .
 Laborde's aim is to ensure that Laborde does not continue to be a source of misinformation . Laborde has been accused of being a 'general nuisance' to all of us .
 Document could either be genuine, or false to show LaBorde being purged when in fact he was being distanced from the CIA in preparation for a future operation involving him . This document could be genuine or false .
 Hemming is a troubled man who wanted to get many things off his chest . Hemming and I settled down for our discussions on Friday afternoon in my home in San Diego .
 One personal moment occurred Sunday afternoon in my upstairs office . It was a moment when I was in my office in the middle of the day .
 At his request, Hemming brought photographs of himself for inclusion in his book . Hemming had brought photos of himself to the author's book .
 He was a handsome, all-American specimen when he was in the Marine Corps . He was running a parachutist school in Florida when he ran it .
 All three were patriotic young Americans who joined the armed services to serve their country . All three had been patriotic young men and women in the military .
 All three were inducted into intelligence—they became spies—and later became sucked into the JFK assassination quagmire and used . They were later used as spies and used in the assassination of JFK .
 They were trained to violate the law; to become criminals; to murder, lie, and cheat as part of their patriotic duty . They were not only trained to break the law, but also to murder and lie, they were trained as criminals .
 Oswald was murdered by the CIA and other intelligence agencies . He was one of the most powerful men in the world to be assassinated . Oswald was killed by the assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy .
 Hemming came down from the upstairs bedroom, sat down across from me, and immediately said, “I want to apologize for being so rough on you.” The next morning at breakfast, Hemming sat down and apologized for being rough on me .
 Hemming: "Kennedy was our last chance" Hemming sobbed as he sat on the breakfast table at Kennedy's memorial . Hemming says Kennedy was his last chance .
 "His anguish went on for I don’t know how long —a minute or a half minute perhaps perhaps perhaps," he said . He said: “His anguish was so great that he was able to hold on to his wife’s face for about a minute or
 "My wife was in the kitchen and I waved her to leave the scene, which she quickly did," he says . "She quickly did. She quickly did."
 Hemming then said, “I’ve decided that I’m going to have you tell my story.” Hemming . Hemming: "I'm going to tell you my story" Hemming said, "I've decided to tell me my story."
 Hemming had told me earlier that he was going up to Pomona to meet his brothers and their families . Hemming told me that he is going to meet with his brothers' families .
 "Gerry, you listen to your brothers—you do what they say," says Gerry . "Gory, you listened to your brother," he says . "I found myself replying, “Gerry”
 I didn't ask any more questions of importance; we spoke only in generalities . I didn’t ask any of the importance of importance,’I didn't want to talk about importance, I said, but it was important to know .
 "I was severely shaken by my long encounter with Hemming. That night, and in the days following, I was shaken by his long encounter." Hemming's story is a cautionary tale of a man who has a troubled past .
 I had the surreal feeling that I had been with either one of President Kennedy’s assassins or one of the prime players that were caught up in the plot. I had a surreal feeling .
 Hemming gave the most important information to me over the weekend, Hemming said on Sunday afternoon . Hemming told me that Hemming had been working for the CIA for a year .
 I asked him again to go over the details of the contracts that he had been offered in New Orleans and Dallas to assassinate President Kennedy . He said he was offered contracts to assassinate Kennedy in Dallas and New Orleans .
 As he talked, I made notes which I later converted to a list that I mailed to him for his review and comments . I made a list of notes that I later sent to him .
 Hemming made some changes in his first interview in Fort Lauderdale, Florida . Hemming: "It turned out that we went over this list in our first interview with Hemming"
 The only exception is de Mohrenschildt, who is not mentioned in the documents .
 In March—April 1962 Gerald Patrick Hemming was approached by Guy Banister to assassinate John Kennedy . Hemming had been approached by Banister for the assassination of Kennedy in March 1962 .
 This meeting took place at Luis Rabel’s home in Metairie, Louisiana, a suburb of New Orleans .
 Frank Bartes, Luis Rabel’s son-in-law, and Larry LaBorde were present at the home but not privy to the offer .
 Also present was Howard K Davis, whom Hemming thinks may have overheard the proposal . Hemming says he thinks Davis overheard his proposal . Davis was also present .
 Hemming said it appeared to him that Larry LaBorde was working for Guy Banister at the time of the incident . Hemming says it appears to be a coincidence that he was working with Banister's former boss .
 Banister took Hemming aside by the fireplace out of earshot . This offer took place after Banister offered Hemming a chance to speak to him . Hemming's offer was offered by Banister, who was in the middle of the conversation .
 On July 4, 1963 Hemming and Howard K Davis met with General Walker at his home in Dallas . Hemming met with Davis at the home of Walker at the time .
 Hemming and Davis, without Walker, went to Welch's office to arrange lodging for the night . They first met in a park, after which they arranged to meet in a hotel room . Hemming, Davis and Welch met in the park, then went back to the office .
 Hemming and Davis then went to Walker’s home and talked with him until about 5:00 p.m. Hemming, Davis and Walker visited Walker's home . Hemming then went back to Walker's house to talk with him again .
 It was at this meeting that Walker left the window curtains open, which Hemming had mentioned in our first interview . Walker left curtains open at the meeting, Hemming said in his first interview, which he had mentioned earlier .
 The next day, July 5, 1963, Hemming and Howard K Davis had lunch at the Texas Club in Dallas with George de Mohrenschildt, Lester Logue, and others . Hemming, Davis and Logue had lunch in Dallas at the club .
 Hemming and Davis then went with Logue to the Petroleum Club that afternoon and met with a group in a large conference room . Hemming, Davis and Logue then met with the group at the club .
 Hemming and Davis were approached by one man at one end of the room . Four others were within hearing distance . There were clusters of people and two large, long tables in this room .
 Nelson Bunker Hunt was in the room but at the other end from the man who made the proposal . Bunker Hunt: "It's a good thing to say yes to the proposal. It's not a good idea"
 On November 18, 1963, Vidal left for Dallas from Miami; he was driven there . Vidal was driven from Miami to Dallas, Texas .
 He returned by plane on the evening of November 22, getting into Miami at nighttime at nighttime .
 Vidal did not have a driver’s license, thus explaining why he did not drive . Vidal was not allowed to drive in the 1970s .
 Vidal told the Cubans he was driven by Colonel Bishop from Miami to Dallas in early November, 1963, where he met with wealthy Texans . This fits with General Escalante’s statement that Vidal said he met wealthy Texans in Dallas .
 All of the above items are consistent with the statements of Colonel William Bishop and documents that Hemming gave to me . Hemming's statements were consistent with Bishop's statements, according to Bishop .
 Recall that Colonel Bishop spoke of meetings in Dallas with Vidal, General Walker, and others, in which assassination of JFK was discussed . Bishop: "I was in Dallas, Dallas, with General Walker and others"
 For the first time we have direct evidence that strongly tends to implicate the Dallas right wing in the JFK assassination . The evidence suggests that Dallas's right wing may have been involved in the assassination .
 It is tied together by independent statements of General Fabian Escalante, Colonel William Bishop, FBI and CIA documents, and statements of Hemming . Hemming's statements are tied together with independent statements from Escalantes and Bishop .
 Hemming had told Russell in 1992 about Vidal going to Dallas in the week before the assassination and meeting with wealthy Texans . Hemming told Russell that Vidal had met with wealthy Texans the week prior to the assassination .
 Hemming made this statement before Escalante’s statement in Nassau . Hemming said he did not know of Colonel Bishop's statements to Gary Shaw . He said he was not aware of the statements made by Colonel Bishop .
 All of this must certainly be considered a major breakthrough in the JFK assassination mystery .
 When we get to the first interview in Fort Lauderdale, we will go into more detail on the above five items to illustrate Hemming’s intricacy and specificity in making sure that I got this evidence correctly .
 Hemming had initially turned down the contract offers to kill Kennedy . The question is whether Hemming accepted them, as he described it .
 Hemming could have later been consummated with Hemming indirectly through cutouts . Hemming's contracts could have been used to consummate with the president, says CNN's John Sutter .
 David Sanchez Morales' interview with CNN's John Sutter was an exclusive interview with David Sanchez . Sanchez Morales was interviewed by Sutter for the first time in a decade .
 Hemming told Fonzi and me that he had met Morales once in a coffee shop in Little Havana . Hemming said Morales once met him in a Little Havana coffee shop . Morales has a history of drug use in Cuba .
 Morales was with the infamous “Carlos,” first written about in Fonzi’s book The Last Investigation . Morales said he was with ‘Carlos’ in this encounter . Morales was first seen in the book . Morales' encounter was with 'Carl
 Hemming said that Reboso intervened and told him that he was way out of line . Hemming says Reboso told him he was too much out of the line .
 Hemming was seemingly unaware of Morales’s relationship with Bill Harvey and Johnny Rosselli . Hemming seemed to be unaware of the relationship between Morales and Harvey . The two men were married at the time .
 Hemming was in partnership with Carlos in a weapons export group named Parabellum Corporation in Miami . Hemming and Carlos were in partnership in the group .
 This is revealed in a letter on Parabellum letterhead that Hemming gave to me, dated April 26, 1972, to the Office of Munitions Control, Department of State, D.C., requesting a permit to export certain arms .
 Carlos and Rolando Masferrer resign from the corporation . Carlos resigns from corporation, along with nephew of alleged assassin . Rolando is nephew of man who allegedly received $500,000 from Jimmy Hoffa as payment to assassinate President Kennedy .
 Hemming was noted in the application as being vice president and operations director of Parabellum Corporation . Hemming is also noted as vice president, operations director and vice president of the company .
 Hemming was in partnership with Carlos and Rolando “Rolandito” Pedro Masferrer at that time in 1972 . Hemming confirmed in 1997 that he was working with Carlos in partnership .
 WerBell’s specialty was assassination weapons, including his area of expertise, gun silencers . Recall that WerBell was an expert in assassination weapons .
 Gordon Winslow, researcher in Miami, told me that Lucien Conein was also with Carlos at WerBell’s operation in Georgia . Gordon Winslow, researcher . told me . that he was with Carlos . Carlos .
 Conein was with the OSS in 1941 in France and fought with the Corsican Brotherhood . He was also involved in World War II with the French Army .
 Later in his career he was a high-ranking official in the Drug Enforcement Administration .
 CIA documents show Carlos was at one time a high official in Brigade 2506, the antiCastro Cubans who survived the Bay of Pigs debacle . It was Conein who personally gave the green light to go ahead with the coup against President Ngo Dinh Diem on November
 Carlos, along with Hemming and Roy Hargraves, managed to insert himself into Jim Garrison’s investigation of the JFK assassination .
 Carlos has the reputation of being a cold-blooded assassin who would kill you if you went after him . Carlos has a reputation for being an assassin and would kill him if he tried to find him .
 The associations of Carlos extended to “intimate links ood with Nazar Haro, the chief of the Mexican government’s police force, who, as earlier noted, was deeply corrupted in drug trafficking and other criminal activities with Sam Giancana .
 Hemming confirmed Carlos' association with Haro Haro . Hemming said Carlos’ association with Carlos was true . Haro died in 1995 in a car crash in a helicopter crash .
 Richard Case Nagell told Dick Russell that two of his assignments by the Soviets when he was a double agent was to kill Masferrer and Oswald . The Soviets suspected that the two were plotting to assassinate President Kennedy, Russell said .
 The Soviets wanted it stopped, presumably fearing that the plot was to precipitate a war with Cuba, which would entangle them . The Soviets feared that it would precipitate war with the U.S. and Cuba .
 Hemming told me he seldom went to sleep at night with confidence that he would wake up in the morning . As we examine Hemming’s seemingly linkages with virtually every suspect in the JFK assassination, it is not surprising that he told me that he .
 First Interview in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, with Gerald Patrick Hemming . Fonzi was a consultant for Hemming's first interview .
 Fonzi agreed to meet with Hemming after some hesitation . Hemming agreed, and I called Hemming to set up the meeting .
 "My major objectives in this meeting were first, to review with Hemming the accuracy of the list of five major points just described," he said . "I'm not going to be able to get back in touch with the people I met with, I'm going to have a meeting
 Hemming: Twyman: Hemming. Hemming . Hemming for coffee. Fonzi. Heming: Heming for coffee . Hemmming: Hemmings for coffee, Twymen: Hemning .
 She’s still writing in her book about a guy named Gerry with her in the caravan . She's still writing about a man named Gerry .
 "It would be kind of hard if I’m sitting with Bill Baggs in his office—you know, Miami time. It would be hard if ... you know that Miami time is Miami time," he says .
 Felipe Navarrette says he thought Felipe was going in the caravan when he left for Dallas Monday night . He thought he was going to the caravan, but he was not .
 He's going to see Lester Logue, Bob Morris, and the whole crew, that he’s not even supposed to know about . He’ll be able to get back in touch with the cast and crew that he didn't even know .
 "I mean, without even hearing from these people, this guy’s showing up on their doorstep," he said . "I’m not surprised that this guy showed up on his doorstep. I mean, he showed up without any of us hearing from him," he added
 "If anybody even set up a meeting with me and comes back solo, everything is off," he says . "Everything is off. If anybody even sets up with me ... I'm not going to talk about it," he adds .
 Hall said it was to burn his contacts, which is what he had been doing all year . Hall: "Yeah, and I figured it was ... to burn my contacts"
 No, I didn't know what it was for and to this day I don’t know what I was doing,’s not sure what it is. ‘To this day, I’m still trying to find out what I am going to do. No
 'Had none of the tradecraft skills, knew none of . the language, couldn’t remember when he took a shit last' 'Had no tradecraft skill, knew no of the language' 'Couldn't remember when . he was last'
 He called me over whenever he interviews, used me as his memory bank for interviews time and again . He used to be used to record interviews with the world's most famous people . He said: 'He called me up whenever he interviewed. He used me up to be a memory bank
 Marcos Diaz Lanz went along with them. So you’re the first to hear that Marcos went with them . He's the first person to go with them, and it's a good thing for him to do so .
 I have heard nothing, seen anything, or even asked Sturgis or anybody what it was about. I have never heard anything, nor have seen anything. I'm not sure what it is about, but I've heard nothing .
 To think that Sturgis, other than as a patsy— somebody that you’d throw away, some Oswald-type assholes... is unbelievable . To think ... that somebody would actually use this guy Sturgi for something is unbelievable.
 "What I want to do now is read them off and get your approval to put them in my book," he says . "I want to be able to get the approval of these five items," he asks .
 In March-April 1962 Gerald P Hemming and Larry LaBorde were approached by Guy Banister to assassinate John Kennedy . Hemming was approached by Banister in March 1962 to assassinate Kennedy .
 I got nothing to do with Frank Bartes, who used to run the railroads in Cuba . He used to be the president of Cuba's railroads .
 Banister takes me aside by the fireplace, out of the hearing of Bartes, Rabel, and his gringo son-in-law, Howard Davis, and LaBorde . Banister says he wants to keep the hearing quiet .
 "It would take me awhile and work myself back into almost the language that he used. Now I can sit and it would take him awhile," he says .
 ’d seen him with Bill Harvey in Miami at Agustin Capo’s house, one of Aureliano Sanchez Arrango's bad-ass commanders . I didn’t like the looks of some of this .
 Capo hid out Orlando Bosch in Costa Rica at his gold mine . Capo was the guy that hid out Bosch at his own gold mine in the country . He was the man who hid out the crime .
 This is where the plot originated to kill Kissinger in San Jose, Costa Rica . The plot originated in Costa Rica where Kissinger was assassinated .
 In ‘79, I’d stayed at that gold mine in ’79 when I was doing some operations down there . Well, I'd stayed there in '79 .
 Hemming: "People and dealt with Banister in Miami" "Himming: people and dealing with people dealt with in the U.S. Hemming"
 Some weapons and equipment were needed off of some ships in storage . The U.S. Navy has taken some of the world's most dangerous weapons and ammunition .
 "I figured initially that these guys are mob people, it’s got to be mob people," he says of the mob people . "It's got to get mob people. I figured initially ... it's not mob people"
 "They go to where the stuff is mothballed, cut their way in, put it in an armored car, and off they go," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "They cut their . way in and get it in the armored car"
 Luis Rabel, his American son-in-law, Frank Bartes, Larry LaBorde, Howard Davis and Howard Davis, and Banister . Rabel died at the age of 92 .
 LaBorde started to move with Banister over to talk to me, and Banister waved him off, he said . Banister said he was going to make a move, but he waved it off . The former Texas Rangers manager said he would be happy with the move .
 "That told me right away, who’s running who, that it was a setup deal. And that told me . right away," he said, "that told me that . that was the case."
 I wanted to discuss an offer with him basically, is what the guy is saying, let's step over here. Let’s step up here. He said he wanted to talk to him basically . He said it was a good offer .
 On July 4, 1963, Hemming and Howard K Davis met General Walker with Lester Logue in Dallas, Texas . Hemming, Davis and Logue met with General Walker in Dallas .
 You first met in a park, then went to Walker’s house, and talked with him until 5:00 m. a. m.m. You first went to a park and went to his house, then visited Walker's house, where he stayed . Walker: "
 We went to Wally Welch’s office to arrange for a place to stay that night . Wally Welch's office was set up to help arrange a place for the night .
 W Welch, Sturgis’s buddy, arranged to arrange lodging, then you went to Walker's house . Walker was a friend of Sturgs' buddy Sturgi . Welch: "You’ve got to go back and forth to stay at Walker’
 Hemming: Fonzi: Hemming, Twyman, Hemming . Heming: Heming . Hemming. Hemming : Hemming Fonzi . Hemmming: Twymen: Hemmings: Hemings .
 Probably February 1963, during the return trip from Los Angeles with Loran Hall . The trip took place in Los Angeles and Los Angeles .
 The discussion was about Cubans—who the Cubans were, who to deal with, etc. etc. It was also about the Cuban people, and how they dealt with them .
 There had been a list, that came out in the press, of who the new Cuban leadership was, who were being recognized by the White House, in February .
 Walker had since been to Miami, had dealt with a number of people, he said . Walker has since gone to Miami and has dealt with many of them, he added .
 Walker had been in direct contact with any Cubans at all since this racial shit at Old Miss in September the year before...a few months before . Walker was in contact with a Cuban in September 2013 .
 The next day, July 5, 1963, Hemming and Howard Davis had lunch at the Texas Club in Dallas with Lester Logue . Hemming, Davis and Logue had lunch with Logue the next day .
 George de Mohrenschildt stopped by the table to chat 2831 And others . George stopped by to chat about his work on the planet .
 The maitre ’d always is this Cuban, that they want to hear me talk Spanish and raise his morale because he gets these $100 tips and shit . rarely is a Cuban allowed in this establishment. The owner of the eatery says he's not allowed to speak Spanish
 So this guy, he really gets his jollies every time I come by and we talk Cuban shit. So this man, he got his jullies, every time he comes by, we talked Cuban shit . We're not talking Cuban shit, we're talking about Cuban shit
 Hemming: Twyman: Hemming. Hemming . Hemming : Heming: Heminging:  Twyman. Heming . Heming : Hemming, Heming, Hemming and Twymen . Hemning: Twingman:
 I won't have these fucks sit at my table and dirty my god-damned shoes. I won’t have them sit in my chair . I’m not going to let them dirty my shoes,’S. ‘I’ll have these
 After you’ve gone out the door with me on a Cuban drop zone, when we jump into Cuba, we’ll go to Cuba . After you've gone out of the door, when you have gone to Cuba, you'll be able to fly into Cuba .
 Logue was the only one there at the Petroleum Club that we knew or had ever seen before . Logue is only one of the only ones we knew, or had seen before, at the club .
 You went with Logue, and Davis was there, to the Petroleum Club that afternoon, and met with a group in a large conference room . Logue: "I'm glad to have been able to get back in touch with the people I met with" Davis .
 "Once you’re up from the table you go to the conference room, talk to people," she says . "You’ve got to get up from your table and talk to your friends," she adds .
 We sat at the end of the long table, entrance door to the right, over at the other side . We sat in front of a long table at the centre of the conversation .
 "We deliberately walked to the opposite side of the room before we even shook hands. We deliberately walked out of the meeting before shaking hands," he said .
 Right-wing Americans, John Birchers, and all. They’re hard to deal with, them right-wing American, says CNN.com correspondent John Sutter . Sutter: "They're hard to . deal with"
 There were three standing, within hearing, that appeared to be participating in the statements . Three standing standing in the hearing appeared to participate .
 "It took a long time to do it. We’re discussing operational aspects and budgeting, what things would cost, and it took a lot of time" "We’ve got a long way to go," says the mayor .
 "The cocksucker blurts that shit out. And towards the end of the conversation, finalizing budgetary considerations and equipment purchases and proprietary corporations and all the shit that’s our business"
 "I told them, don't open no money and attache cases with money around me. And I told them don’t open no . money," he said . "And I told [the police] to keep quiet," he added .
 Why use this money for these operational aspects when we can go to the heart of the problem and take out Fidel’s boss with the money, he says . The money will be used to take out the boss of the country, he adds .
 We've already covered these things having to do with Fidel Castro and his brother and the whole thing . We’ve already covered this .
 "Don't dirty me up so somebody comes after me because I know too much. Indicating that, “Hey, don’tdirty me up.” “Don”
 Better hope JFK lives a long life, because if he has an accident you’re going first because you tried to hang a target on my ass . JFK's best friend: "If he has a accident you're going first"
 "We started this conversation in ’62 before the missile crisis, with these kind of people," he says . "We’ve had a long-term conversation with these kinds of people. It’s a good start," he adds .
 No. No, to support Tony Cuesta and Felipe and the rest of the operational people. No. to support Cuesta, Felipe, and the other operational people, she said .
 A year ago, President Barack Obama brought up the issue of the Iraq War . Now, a year later, he's coming back with the same horseshit he brought up a year ago . Obama: "I’m not going to back down. And now I’
 "I was breathing on the top of his head real quick when I stood up. Well, let’s say that I was breathing ... real quick," she said .
 Bunker Hunt was in the room but at the other end of the room, says Bunker Hunt . Bunker Hunt is said to have been at Bunker Hunt's side of the wall, but not the other side of it .
 CNN.com's John Sutter sat down with the White House to meet with the president . Sutter: "We talked about that yesterday, about when you were in his office," he said .
 Felipe Vidal Santiago met with wealthy Texans in the week before November 22, 1963, in Dallas . Santiago was assassinated in Texas in 1963 .
 You're going on an operation right now, that's what you're together for, it's not a coffee klatch . You’re going on a mission right now. That’s what you’ve got to do. You're not going to a coffee
 We’d done rode off his ass back in ’61 and told him to stay the fuck away,’61, says the singer . ‘He’s done rode of his ass,” he says .
 You're in an office, rich Texans, and there’s about 10 people in the room. You’re in a rich Texan office . You're not alone, you're in a room with 10 rich Texans .
 I spent a considerable amount of time proving who didn’t do it, and who had been extorted, so they could take severe action against their blackmailers . That’s why I spent time proving those who didn't do it and who were extorted .
 It is too bad these guys didn’t use the money for what they got it for . It's too bad they didn't use it for the money .
 When you’re in the business, when somebody tells you it's time, it’s time. When you're in the industry, when . somebody tells . you it”s time, he said. "When you”re in a business,  it
 "The people you financed went out and did some shit they weren’t supposed to do," he said . The people who financed the project "went out" and "did some shit"
 A lot of people think he was. That’s an important thing to say, because a lot of . people think it was. He was. The president of the United States, Barack Obama, has been accused of being corrupt .
 General Fabian Escalante said that Vidal told the Cubans when he was captured that Colonel William Bishop had picked him up in Miami and driven him to Dallas in November 1963 where he met with wealthy Texans . Vidal said he met wealthy Texans in Dallas .
 Vidal referred to the man who was going to take him to Dallas as his case officer . It's interesting that he referred to him as the man he was taking him to Texas .
 "We had seen him meeting with his case officer at his house and just turned around and walked out back to the car," police say . "He turned around, walked back to his car. We had seen his meeting with our case officer," police said .
 You’re dealing with snitches who are going to betray their own religion and their own country. You're dealing with ... snitches ... you’ve got to deal with them,’s the president .
 At this point in the interview I was reasonably satisfied that my first and second major objectives in going to Fort Lauderdale had been accomplished . At this time, the interview was at its most serious point .
 Hemming took a law book out of his briefcase and had me turn to the section that included the federal statutes regarding treason regarding treason . Hemming said the treason statute is a violation of the Constitution and the Constitution .
 He said that I should buy a copy of the book inasmuch as the title of my book is Bloody Treason . The title of his book is 'Bloody Treason', he said .
 The federal statute defines treason in a variety of forms, including participation in a discussion of a plot to assassinate any officer of the United States government .
 Hemming felt that he might be guilty of treason by simply being present in discussions about killing Kennedy . I surmised from this that Hemming . Hemming believed he might have been guilty of . treason by being present .
 When Hemming was in San Diego he had mentioned this statute to me after he had made his intriguing statement about “getting off the train,” indicating that he felt that he was guilty of treason for becoming involved in the Kennedy assassination and then bailing out somewhere along the way
 I hesitated to bring up the subject in front of Fonzi because I felt that it might inhibit Hemming from telling me more . Hemming is still alive and well, and Hemming has a long line of secrets .
 Hemming had decided after leaving San Diego to tell me no more . I had the distinct feeling that Hemming decided to leave San Diego . Hemming has been in the news for more than a decade .
 Felipe Vidal went to Dallas on November 18 and returned on the night of the 22nd, Hemming said . Hemming revealed that Vidal had gone to Dallas, Texas, on Nov. 18 and Nov. 22 .
 Vidal offered offer to have President Kennedy assassinated, but also a follow-through to have Vidal in Dallas with his CIA handler, Colonel Bishop, at the time of the murder . It showed a chain of evidence, not just of the Texas right wing making an offer .
 Colonel Bishop attended meetings with the Texas right wing and Vidal in the weeks leading up to the assassination . Colonel Bishop had been meeting with Vidal and Texas right-wingers .
 Vidal had expressed bitterness toward the United States . He was making plans to leave the U.S. for Guatemala at the time of the assassination . Vidal was planning to move to Guatemala when he was assassinated .
 Hemming had promised me something for the expense and trouble of the trip, Hemming said . "I thought that perhaps perhaps perhaps . perhaps Hemming was at least giving to me that important information," Hemming wrote . Hemming: "Perhaps perhaps . realizing that . he had promised
 He said he had decided to close the door on revelations of any deeper activity in the Kennedy assassination . But he still felt that he had . decided to . close the . door on any deeper . activity on his part in the assassination .
 I had advised him not to tell me anything that went against his brother’s advice, he said . After all, I had been told not to do anything against brother's advice . He said: “After all, he had advised me not to say anything against my brother
 "I was satisfied concerning the intense dialogue about the two different offers of contracts to Hemming to assassinate John Kennedy made by Guy Banister in New Orleans and wealthy Texans in Dallas . I was satisfied with the two . offers of . contracts to . Hemming . made by . Guy Ban
 "I felt that Hemming came off as being extremely truthful in his detailed and pointed correction of the items in the five-point statement that I had sent him to review," he said .
 "He was very specific, very certain, and very detailed in his criticism of what I had written," the author says . "It was very detailed, very specific"
 If he had made it up as he went along, he was a world-class actor and had missed his calling . He was a 'world-class' actor, says Simon Cowan .
 For myself, I believed him about the contract offers, and his and Vidal’s trips to Dallas . For himself, he said he believed him. For myself .
 The credibility of his statements in context was, of course, reinforced by the previous statements of Colonel William Bishop and General Fabian Escalante .
 In the Fort Lauderdale interview, I decided to put the “$64,000 question” to Hemming—to ask him, point blank, if he had anything to do with Kennedy’s death .
 Hemming says he last saw Oswald in a brief encounter at a Miami motel in 1962 . Hemming then answered that the last time he saw Oswald was December 6, 1962, in Miami .
 After meeting with Hemming again in Dallas and then returning to California, I contacted Weberman in mid-December by telephone . It was the first time that I had ever talked with Weberman, the author of the book .
 He quickly summarized, in eight flat statements, his conclusions about Hemming . Hemming is a national figure in the U.S.
 Weberman’s conclusions are based on interviews with Hemming and Weberman . Hemming says Weberman concluded that Hemming's conclusions were wrong . What follows is a discussion of Weberman's conclusions .
 These telephone conversations took place on December 23, 1996, January 10, 1997, and January 18, 1997 . The conversations were recorded in 1996 and 1997 .
 In an attempt to make a coherent story out of all this, I will use the vehicle of Weberman’s eight allegations against Hemming . I will interweave this with Hemming's responses, plus information from past interviews and government documents .
 Hemming intimated that he had introduced Oswald to Angleton, although not saying so directly . Note that in his first interview with Hemming he intimated he did so .
 In Weberman’s database he concludes that Angleton sent Oswald to Russia, after Hemming had introduced him to Oswald . Only Angleton's closest confidants in CIA's counterintelligence knew about it; 1.e. i.e., the CIA hierarchy was totally ignorant of
 This explains much about the mystery, including the lack of documentation in the CIA’s files about Oswald . Oswald's death is a mystery, and there is no documentation in CIA files about him .
 CNN's John Sutter says he told him to cite to authority instead of citing to CIA documents . He says he said, “What I told him, I said, how about citing to some authority?” Sutter said .
 Weberman doesn’t seem to have any evidence of this, other than intuitive inferences . Weberman: ‘I’m not sure if this is true, but it’s a good idea. We’re not sure how much of Weberman�
 Hemming set up the fake shooting at General Walker’s, actually fired the shot himself . Hemming said he was responsible for the shooting at the General Walker's .
 There is a possibility that Hargraves knew something about that, he said . He then added, “There is one possibility—I told him there’s a possibility ... that . He said there was one possibility”
 "I can spend hours going over material and data and say, this is the basic information," he says . "This is the most basic information I've ever seen," he adds .
 "It's just meaningless to me. He just wants to go off on tangents and speculate to this, speculate to that, and it’s just meaningless," he said .
 Nothing of what he says can be traced back to any form of logic, any legal theory, anything that a prosecutor or historian would do, he says . Nothing of this can't be traced to logic, logic or legal theory .
 Nowhere in Weberman’s vast database had I found anything to directly support this allegation, he says . “I found nothing in my vast database to support this claim," he writes .
 Hemming responded, ‘No, one or two have already been released...but these are speculations...and what interests me most is the documentation that I know exists that they leave out, that would give some credence to the theory, but they leave the good stuff out .
 As before, nowhere in Weberman’s database did I find documents to substantiate this allegation . ‘I found nothing in the database that substantiates this allegation,’ says Weberman .
 Weberman said he didn't have concrete evidence to support his allegation that Hemming flew Oswald around Louisiana and Texas . Weberman indicated that circumstantial evidence supported his statements . Also admitted that he didn’t have concrete proof that Oswald flew Oswald .
 Hemming didn't answer the question because of an apparent confusion in understanding between him and Weberman . Hemming said Weberman was wrong to say Hemming was wrong . Weberman said Hemming should have answered the question more clearly .
 This has to do with a Secret Service document that I had received from Anna Marie in December, 1996, and had sent to Hemming, Hemming . Anna Marie had sent a document that she had received in December 1996 .
 Weberman had the wording in his database, but he did not have the actual document . Weberman says he had a database of the document, but didn't know what it was .
 A man walking in the opposite direction on the same side of the street, whom HATHAway said was carrying a rifle . His attention was called to a man walking on the opposite side of a street . The man's attention was also called to the man carrying the rifle .
 This man was in his 30’s and was wearing a light colored business suit and white business shirt . This man is believed to be in the 30s .
 Weberman had only heard about this document and had been talking with Hemming about it . At this point in Hemming’s and his telephone conversation, Hemming and Weberman were talking about it.
 Hemming had thought that John Stevens Rutter Lawrence was the Jack Lawrence that had worked at the Lincoln-Mercury agency . The men walking with Lawrence were employees of that agency, Hemming said . Hemming thought he thought Lawrence worked for the agency .
 It gives a dead-ringer description of Hemming in 1963 except that he is apparently clean-shaven and has cut his hair . Hemming was apparently clean shaven and had cut hair in 1963 .
 Hemming said this man was his “doppelganger,” German for double or look-alike . Hemming says this man is his ‘doppelger’ Hemming is a man he met in the U.S.
 I wondered if it could have been Hemming, and that he had gotten back to Miami from Dallas in time to create a semblance of an alibi . Hemming had returned from Dallas to Miami in time for the shooting . He was shot and killed in Miami .
 He responded that he had met with him about 2:00 to 2:30m. After hesitating, he said he met him at about 2-30m .
 Hemming is believed to have been flying by supersonic jet from Dallas to Miami . This would be one and one-half hours after the sighting of the man in Dallas, for Hemming to have gone to an airport .
 I discussed the possibility of this with a friend who is an ex-marine fighter pilot and a seasoned pilot for a major airline .
 He got out his flight planning charts and a compass to scale off the distance from Miami to Dallas . He scaled off the length of the flight from Miami, Texas, to Dallas.
 Even a Korean War-vintage jet fighter it would have been easily feasible to fly from Dallas to Miami in less than one hour, he says .
 Hemming would not have been able to return to Miami to meet with Bill Baggs . Counting time to travel to and from airports it would have been barely feasible for Hemming to have returned to Miami .
 Hemming was only roughly estimating the time he says he was at Bagg’s office . But then, he was only about to estimate the time that he was there . Hemming: "I'm not sure what happened"
 We must realize that there is no documentation known to be available that substantiates Hemming’s alibi . Hemming's alibi is not substantiated by any of his alibi witnesses, police say .
 Hemming did tell me that Baggs wrote a memorandum about Hemming’s presence at the Miami News on November 22, and sent it to Bobby Kennedy . Hemming says Baggs sent the memo to Kennedy .
 CIA document describes meeting in Miami on behalf of the White House in which Hemming, Hargraves, and Baggs were present, among others .
 Hemming added that after meeting with Baggs, he had gone over to Little Joe Garman’s house to talk with him and others about things . Hemming said after meeting Baggs he had visited Garman's house to discuss things .
 Vidal had just returned from a trip to Dallas that Hemming had warned him against . This seemed very curious inasmuch as Vidal was in Dallas when Hemming warned him of the trip .
 Hemming would be able to clearly answer whether or not his close friend Vidal was there at Little Joe’s on that historic evening of November 22, 1963 . Hemming was a close friend of Vidal, who died in 1963 .
 Hemming at length went into how easy it was to fake an alibi, Hemming said at a meeting in Fort Lauderdale, he said . Another thing to keep in mind is that Hemming talked about the alibi at the Fort Lauderdale meeting .
 He also started to say, “Who’s going to check it if you have the F...” then he stopped his sentence .
 I went out on my own and ran into situations, and was introduced to Frank Wisner, and then later, through my uncle, to Angleton. "I went out of my own," he says . "I was introduced as a young man, and I was introduced by Frank
 Hemming had gone over this with me several times in previous interviews . Hemming has gone over the issue with CNN.com's John Sutter .
 It seems beyond question that he was brought into the Marine Corps with the intention that, after looking him over for a period of years, he would be moved into U.S intelligence work .
 Hemming described the amazing degree of freedom he had while in the Marine Corps . Hemming describes the amazing freedom he spent in the Marines . He also described the freedom of the Marine .
 He describes “accidentally inviting himself’ to go on United States training flights from the airbase in Olathe, Kansas . He described ‘accidentally’ inviting himself' to fly on training flights .
 At the Fort Lauderdale meeting I suggested to Hemming that he had been brought into U.S. intelligence without him even knowing it had happened . Hemming was not even aware of the fact that he was in the United States .
 Weberman cites the Warren Commission describing a big man with a reddish beard shooting with Oswald at the rifle range . Weberman: The Warren Commission described the big man as Oswald's big man .
 John Newman’s recent book, Oswald and the CIA, suggests Angleton sent Oswald to the Soviet Union . Newman shows a pattern of CIA documents that lead to an Angleton counter-intelligence operation in Russia .
 Analysis of the evidence concerning Hemming’s degree of involvement in the JFK assassination plot . I decided to develop scenarios varying from the most extreme involvement of Hemming to the least involvement .
 Worked from both ends of the spectrum of scenarios to narrow down to the fewest that were reasonably plausible based on the evidence . After that, I would eliminate the extremes if they were beyond common sense .
 Hemming saw a business opportunity in 1961 or 1962 to have JFK assassinated . He personally planned and promoted the assassination, sold the idea to his financial sponsors, raised the necessary capital . Hemming managed the Dealey Plaza operation, with his Interpen group doing the setting-up of Oswald
 The least extreme scenario, Hemming’s lowest degree of involvement that I could imagine, was that Hemming had nothing at all to do with the assassination and that everything he had told me was a fabrication and a con job to get a book publishing contract .
 Hemming masterminded the assassination, masterminded it, promoted it, and carried it out, and kept it secret for thirty-four years . Hemming was a wild, twenty-six-year-old renegade ex-Marine and his renegade, rag-tag group
 I ruled out the extreme of Hemming’s involvement in the plot because I believed Hemming in that he, at the least, did receive and turn down the contract offers in New Orleans and Dallas, and that he knew that Kennedy might be killed but said nothing .
 Hemming displayed too much remorse to me, and gave too much specific testimony, in repeated questioning by me and Fonzi over many days, for me to believe that he was making that all up . Hemming's remorse was too great to believe Hemming was making it up,
 Vidal's trip to Dallas on November 18, 1963, returned on the evening of the assassination . Hemming had told that story, essentially, to Dick Russell in 1992, in 1992 . General Escalante, General Bishop and Colonel William Bishop corroborated the story .
 Hemming's corroboration of Bishop’s story of Hargraves’ and Vidal’�s visit to General Walker in the spring of 1963 in which the assassination was discussed .
 "We see a very persuasive body of evidence that points to Hemming’ Interpen group as being deeply involved in the Kennedy assassination," the author says .
 Some of Hemming's men and associates, Vidal and Hargraves, went ahead anyway, leaving Hemming out of it . Hemming said he was offered a contract to kill Kennedy by a right-wing group in Dallas and another group in New Orleans .
 Vidal and Hargraves were in Dallas at the time of the assassination . Vidal may have participated in the General Walker incident .
 Hemming accepted one of the contract offers, but later accepted one, or both, through a cutout, received money in advance . He started the ball rolling in maneuvering Oswald around New Orleans, Texas, and Mexico City, setting him up . But when the crunch came, Hem
 Hemming might have become suspicious that he himself was being set up as a fall guy . Vidal and some of the Interpen group (perhaps Hargraves) went ahead anyway, ignoring Hemming's advice .
 Hemming said he had become suspicious that he was being set up . This is in line with Hemming’s many statements to me that he became suspicious . Hemming says Hemming became suspicious he was set up by the FBI .
 In this scenario, Hemming carried his role to completion with his Interpen group, including Vidal and Hargraves . Hemming and Vidal went to Dallas at the time of the assassination, but only Vidal .
 Hemming may have been excluded from going to Dallas, Texas, because he was too wild, reckless, or unreliable . Hemming was excluded from the Dallas rally because of his "wild" and "reckless" behavior .
 Based on the way Hemming described his behavior toward the New Orleans and Texas people who made the contract offers, I can believe that they may have made the decision to keep Hemming in the plot in a limited role, but to use his men for other roles .
 Hemming and his men could be considered as potential fall guys to be eliminated if ever things came apart . This scenario does not preclude Hemming or his men being considered as a potential fall guy .
 Hemming and Howard K Davis were ostensibly on Castro’s side . Both volunteered to help Castro in the revolution and could have been painted as Communists .
 Vidal was a Cuban who easily could have been portrayed as a Castro spy, who had doubled to the U.S. and acted as Castro’s man to direct the shooting in Dealey Plaza . Also a Cuban, Vidal could have acted as a Cuban spy .
 In all three scenarios, Hemming was not necessary to be in Dallas on the day of the assassination, or even in the days preceding . Hemming is not required to be at the scene of the shooting .
 Hemming and his crew were primarily motivated by patriotism (however tragic and misguided) and a need for adventure, fame, and noble purpose . In all three scenarios, Hemming was motivated by a desire for adventure and fame .
 They were caught up in the anti-Communist movement of the extreme right wing of that era . They felt that they were working for the best interests of the United States, sanctioned by their superiors .
 On Saturday night, about midnight, we were expressing our views on who it was that killed President Kennedy and the way he was killed . We were expressing views on the way Kennedy was killed and how he died .
 "I persisted with my feelings that the extreme right wing either was behind the assassination or a major part of it," he says . "Extremely right wing" was either behind the killing, he adds .
 The anti-Castro Cubans and Hemming had borne results. Thus far my investigation had been fruitless, but it had not so far been successful .
 Dallas right wing and CIA involved in plot to assassinate President Kennedy, author says . "I now had substantial evidence, if not courtroom proof, of complicity," he says .
 Colonel William Bishop, Larry LaBorde, and Hemming to the CIA’s William Harvey and his ZR/RIFLE program; and linkages to John Martino, to Mafia leaders, and Jimmy Hoffa . And direct linkages between Bishop, . Larry La
 A definitive structure of the plot at the operational and planning levels was taking form . The plot was taking place at the time of the operation and planning .
 Rolando Masferrer and his associations with Hemming, Vidal, Hargraves, Jimmy Hoffa, and organized crime loomed important .
 Hemming’s associates Loran Hall, Lawrence Howard, and William Seymour were an important part of the picture, at least insofar as their relationship with Oswald . Seymour and Hall were also important in the picture .
 Hemming had a key role in framing Oswald that he had not yet revealed to me . As to Hemming’s specific involvement, a modified scenario somewhere between scenarios 2 and 3 seemed to be the most accurate description .
 "I felt that there was too much important information in the book to delay getting it out to the public," says the author of the book . The book was published in October 2013 .
 Hemming and Fonzi go for another marathon session in Fort Lauderdale, Florida . Hemming is the author of a new book, "Fonzi"
 Weberman interviewed Hemming for the first time to see if he had more to say about Hemming than was in his massive data base . Weberman says Hemming was a great writer, but Hemming wasn't the best writer .
 Weberman confirmed everything that he had told me on the telephone, and more . Weberman confirms everything that Weberman had told him on the phone .
 He said he has now changed his mind about Hemming not being in the Marita Lorenz/Frank Sturgis car caravan to Dallas . He now believes that Hemming was in the caravan, and moreover, Hemming’s story of the November 18 incident at the Miami
 He says Hemming embellishes his stories and is beginning to recant on some of them . He also said that although most of what Hemming has told him over the years is true, most of the stories are true .
 He said that he had befriended him and helped him financially over the years . He said he had been a good friend of the victim .
 Only recently, Hemming sent him a copy of the document that I had sent to Hemming about a Hemming look-alike carrying a rifle in Dallas on the day of the assassination .
 One significant point came out in his discussions with Weberman when I told him about Colonel William Bishop and Felipe Vidal . He said Bishop and Vidal were the only two men in the world to be assassinated .
 Colonel Bishop had told Gary Shaw that the pseudonym “Maurice Bishop” was a composite of Colonel Bishop himself, E Howard Hunt, and David Atlee Phillips .
 Weberman remembered Hemming told him a few years ago, Hemming had told him the same story . Weberman said Hemming is a good man, and that Hemming was a good guy .
 Weberman admitted that he had put his theory together about Hemming from circumstantial evidence and intuition . Weberman said Hemming was the only person to know Hemming .
 Hemming is a key figure in the JFK assassination . Hemming was a key witness in the investigation into the assassination of John Kennedy .
 He mentioned the large number of members of Hemming’s Interpen group who were linked to the assassination . And he mentioned the number of people linked to Hemming's assassination .
 I agreed with Weberman on all of this, but still couldn’t bring myself to reach such positive conclusions as had Weberman .
 In Fort Lauderdale, Fonzi, Hemming, and I met in the Ocean Hacienda Inn for two days, April 28 and 29, 1997 . Second Interview in Fort Lauderdale
 "We had a frustrating, exhausting, but revealing discussion in the marathon sessions. We had to listen to each other's perspectives," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com senior editor .
 Hemming admitted that Interpen member Ronald Ponce De Leon was the ‘young, good-looking Cuban kid” who John Martino had told his wife was involved in the Kennedy assassination . Hemming’s admission, earlier noted, that Ponce de Leon was Ronald
 Fonzi brought up about the 1995 conference with Cuban intelligence in Nassau, Nassau . He brought up the 1995 meeting with the Cuban intelligence . It was the first time he had been to Cuba .
 Fonzi reminded me that General Escalante had told our group that when the Cubans captured Tony Cuesta had told him a Cuban exile by the name of Herminio Diaz was involved in the JFK assassination .
 Tony Cuesta was eventually released by the Cubans and returned to Florida . He was incapacitated by a missing leg and virtually blind . Cuesta is now virtually blind and incapacitated .
 Revolutionary forces surprised them and a battle ensued in which artillery pieces began to fire on the enemy transport that had brought them . Revolutionary forces surprise them and fire on enemy transport .
 Antonio Cuesta Valle , chief of the infiltration group and Eugenio Enrique Saldivar, both residents of Miami, were arrested and seriously wounded .
 Agents Armando Romero Martinez Martinez and Sandallo Heminio Diaz Garcia were killed while attempting to invade our territory . Agents Armado Romero Martinez and Sandallo Heminio Diaz Garcia were killed while trying to invade .
 They were involved in smuggling in weapons to assassinate Commander Fidel Castro . They smuggled weapons into Cuba to assassinate the Castro .
 Herminio Diaz was a known gangster linked to Mafia types such as Santos Trafficante . Diaz shared the same table at the Riviera Hotel in Havana in 1959 . Diaz was linked to the Mafia in Havana .
 The CIA admitted to the Senate Committee that it had used Santos Trafficante and other underworld figures in the assassination attempts on Castro . Trafficante was a key figure in the CIA's attempts to assassinate Castro .
 The Agency has made numerous attempts to demonstrate that those plans in which the Mafia and Trafficante were involved, never went beyond the planning stage . However, the Agency has . made numerous . attempts to . demonstrate that the plans in . which were in which . the Mafia . involved were involved
 Herminio Diaz was hired by Trafficante and recruited by him to work in the CIA . Diaz landed in Cuban territory with powerful arms to try to kill Fidel Castro . Diaz was a Mafia type hired to work for Trafficante .
 Hemming's associates have substantial evidence indicating their involvement in the assassination or its periphery . And so we have a growing list of Hemming’s associates, with substantial evidence of their involvement .
 Hemming claims Larry LaBorde and New Orleans Jack Lawrence were involved with him . Hemming says both were associated with him, but Hemming is not sure what happened .
 Hemming says he knew Oswald and was involved with him in assisting him in trying to infiltrate Cuba . Hemming: "He knew Oswald. He knew him and helped him get Cuba"
 Hemming claimed innocence to me of everything except being given offers to kill Kennedy, which he turned down . Yet Hemming himself claimed innocence of everything, including the offers he received from Kennedy .
 When we met in Fort Lauderdale, I showed Hemming the passage in Weberman’s book in which Hemming had told him about helping set up Oswald . Hemming told Weberman that Hemming helped set up the assassination of Oswald .
 He studied the book carefully, and handed it back to him without comment .
 Hemming has not denied unequivocally any of Weberman's accusations, leaving the degree of his involvement an open question . This follows a general pattern of Hemming’s not denying any of the accusations made about him .
 Hemming had made an astounding statement to me on the telephone before I left for Fort Lauderdale for the second interview . Hemming made the remark to me before I went to Fort Lauderdale, Florida .
 The book's author says he was triggered by his review of an earlier draft of his chapter about him . He had written that he could not imagine monied people giving a wild, young, rag-tag group like Interpen a contract to kill the president .
 Hemming said Interpen was modeled after U.S. Special Forces "A" teams . Hemming: Interpen is modeled after United States Special Forces “A” teams .
 Hemming showed Fonzi and me photos of handsome, clean-cut Green Berets . Hemming was the first things Hemming had shown us at Ford Lauderdale .
 "Your telling me that Interpen was composed of Green Berets puts a whole new light on things. I said, “Your telling . me that . Interpen is composed of ... Green . Berets," she said, "puts a new light" on things."
 Hemming nodded in agreement, but did not go further, except to say that they were one of several quasi-A’s teams that had been created . Hemming: "I’m looking forward to working with the U.S. military in the near future"
 Hemming was noncommittal when I suggested that the U.S. military or CIA supplied Interpen with finances . Hemming said he would not comment on whether Interpen is funded by the CIA .
 Hemming qualified his statement that Interpen was partially staffed with ex-Green Berets . Hemming said that they brought in ex-GIs and less qualified people to perform duties such as building campfires or maintaining the bush camps .
 The more we learn about James Angleton, the more it seems that he was in some way central to the JFK assassination plot . Angleton was a key figure in the assassination plot, according to reports .
 Angleton was very close to J Edgar Hoover, according to CIA’s John Scelso . Angleton worked for the CIA in the 1970s and '80s .
 Harvey has long been suspected of having been planted as a mole in the CIA by J Edgar Hoover . Harvey has been accused of being a CIA mole in Washington DC .
 Angleton acted as his handler and formed Interpen teams in 1960 as quasi-A’s teams, drawing on former U.S. Special Forces . Hemming says Angleton was Angleton's handler . Angleton is believed to be a major intelligence operative .
 Angleton took over the JFK assassination investigation, forcing Scelso out of the picture . Angleton was responsible for JFK's assassination, according to John Scecso .
 Angleton was one of those, along with the Mafia, who had compromising photographs of J Edgar Hoover in a homosexual act with Clyde Tolson . According to Anthony Summers, quoting Gordon Novel, Angleton .
 Angleton accused by fellow CIA officer, Clare Petty, of being a Soviet mole . Angleton himself has been accused by a fellow CIA agent of being an agent of the Soviets .
 Petty had made an exhaustive, highly praised investigation of Angleton over a period of years . Petty had investigated Angleton for more than a decade .
 William Colby fired Angleton from the CIA when Colby was appointed as director . Colby felt that Angleton had almost destroyed the CIA in his mole hunts . Angleton was fired by Colby because he felt that he had destroyed the agency .
 William Harvey overlooked British double agent Kim Philby, who was very close to Angleton . Philby was ultimately found to be a Soviet mole by William Harvey .
 The number of scenarios that can be created around Angleton are endless . Angleton is located in Angleton, Texas, near the city of Houston .
 Angleton did have the Israel desk at CIA . Mossad has been linked to Meyer Lansky, who, along with Trafficante, had lost millions in Cuba when Castro took over .
 President Kennedy was killed by a few of his political enemies in the U.S. (civilian and military) in partnership with the Mafia, with the blessings of Lyndon Johnson and J. Edgar Hoover .
 The U.S. government had created several special assassination teams having world-wide applications . Powerful civilian forces (the elusive High Cabal) had direct access to these teams for their own purposes .
 At the end of the second day in Fort Lauderdale, we were waiting for Hemming’s daughter Delores to bring his notes on my chapter . Hemming's daughter was waiting for Delores' notes on his work .
 Finally, at about 5:00 pm, not only did his daughter arrive, but also his wife Patti . Patti was the first daughter to arrive at the hospital .
 Hemming spoke with obvious sincerity, “Gerry and I were at our home on Just Island," Hemming said . Hemming and Gerry were at their home on the island of Just Island when the tragedy struck .
 We were listening to the radio commentary about the motorcade when I heard about firecrackers going off . Firecrackers went off as we were talking about the presidential motorcade .
 "We didn't have a television set. Right away we went over to Alan Kennedy’s house, about one or two hundred yards away, to watch television," she says .
 Gerry went to the airport in Miami on November 18 with Little Joe after calling Steve Wilson, she said . She said, “Gerry went to Miami on Nov. 18 . Little Joe was with Gerry when she called Steve Wilson .
 She added that she and Gerry were with ‘the guys’ at Little Joe’s house that evening that evening .
 She at first hesitated, but after some prodding from Gerry, she went through a reconstruction of events that I didn't understand, and concluded that Gerry must have been in Miami during that time . She said she was in Miami at the time of the incident .
 Little Joe was so happy that Kennedy had been killed that he was “dancing in the street” with yells of delight . Then she went back to November 22, remembering that Little Joe’s reaction .
 At this point my briefcase was packed, so I borrowed a pen from Delores and wrote down a list of notes from which I later composed the above conversation . Delores: "I don't know what I think about you. I think you're going to be a great guy
 Fonzi and I then left to return to my hotel, where my wife was waiting, where I was waiting . The pair then left the hotel and returned to their hotel .
 Hemming gave me a copy of his application to the CIA, which had been left in the CIA files with no action taken . Hemming was handing out documents to me on that Sunday in San Diego, California .
 Hemming said he worked for Kleins for a short period in the late 50s . Hemming: "That’s right, I worked for them" Hemming worked for the Kleins in the '50s .
 "At the time, this bit of evidence was overwhelmed by everything else he was telling me," he said . "I don't know what happened to me. At the time I was overwhelmed"
 Hemming had told him that he had available to him blank identification cards for the Air Force and Navy . Hemming told me he had blank ID cards available for Air Force, Navy and Military personnel .
 Witness said Hargraves had false Secret Service credentials before he went to Dallas in 1963 . Witness said he had false credentials before going to Dallas, Texas, in late '63 .
 Hemming gave me a short course on how to forge identification cards . Hemming was also giving me a lesson on forging ID cards .
 Before setting up the meeting in Fort Lauderdale, Hemming asked Hemming to try to arrange for Roy Hargraves to participate for four hours . Hemming: "I had asked to . try to . arrange for him to participate"
 Hemming said that Hargraves was due in Miami, and had previously received requests for interviews with Weberman but couldn’t reach an agreement on a price . Hemming says he had been contacted by Weberman, but couldn't reach a price for interviews .
 This was the first time that anyone had requested money from me for an interview. This was first time I had been asked for money from anyone for the interview. I'm not sure how much money has been spent on the interview .
 After much agonizing, I decided to offer Hargraves $500 for four hours, with the condition that all he had to do was review what I had written about him, and give his comments, yes or no .
 He would not be asked to add any new material unless he wanted to do so, he said . He would be not asked to . add new material .
 Hemming told me before he left San Diego that he would pass this message on to Hargraves . Hemming said he would send the message to the U.S. congressman .
 Hemming said that he had left the message, and it was up to Hargraves, and he wasn’t going to pursue him . Hemming: "I'm going to leave the message. It's not up to him"
 Eugene B Dinkin and Joseph Milteer predicted in advance the basic concept and composition of the plot . The most compelling evidence of all are the nine people who predicted the assassination .
 By examining the backgrounds of these nine people and John Martino, we see a Skeletal outline of the complete plot . By examining their backgrounds we see the background of the plot .
 Richard Case Nagell has been proven to be a very truthful witness in virtually everything he said . Richard Case is a very good witness in the case of Richard Case .
 The people who have attempted to discredit him over the years should take second thought . He said: "The people who've attempted to disparate him should take a second thought. The people ...should take second thoughts"
 His story has been corroborated in various parts by Colonel William Bishop, Robert Morrow, Gerald Patrick Hemming, General Fabian Escalante, and by all other evidence that I have been able to accumulate .
 Nagell was adamant that the FBI was behind the Kennedy assassination, and that it was a domestic plot . The FBI was involved in the assassination, but the assassination was not a domestic affair .
 Morrow seems to have been involved in a different group of Cuban exiles than that which was ultimately active in the assassination . Morrow was involved with a group of exiles that was ultimately involved in the killing .
 Morrow himself has quoted Kohly as denying to his deathbed that he was involved in the plot, and that seems to be supported by the facts . Morrow: Kohly himself has said he was not involved in any of the plot .
 There are still loose ends as to how Morrow’s story of Eladio del Valle overlaps into the Hemming/Interpen story . Morrow's story is set to be told in a new book, "Eladio"
 The Marita Lorenz story of the car caravan to Dallas remains a conundrum . Lorenz's story remains a mystery, but Lorenz is still alive and well . The story of Lorenz and Lorenz has never been solved .
 It boils down to her word against Hemming’s, or neither telling the full truth . Hemming and Hemming have been accused of lying to each other .
 The John Martino story and his confession are of utmost importance, particularly when the material in this chapter is added . The story and confession of Martino will be added to the book .
 The Mafia, Cuban exile Felipe Vidal Santiago, Gerald Patrick Hemming, Ronald Ponce De Leon, and William Pawley were involved in the JFK assassination . They link together the Mafia, the Cuban exile and Gerald Hemming into a cohesive picture of the assassination .
 Hemming’s claim that he lost control of his people and they went ahead without him is not totally implausible . Hemming claims that he was not in control of the people and that the people went ahead with him .
 Hemming says he found himself after the JFK assassination amidst some of the people he thought were involved . Hemming: "No one was talking to anybody about anything about anything" Hemming found himself in the wake of the assassination .
 "We are getting very close to understanding the broad structure of the master plot," says the author of the book . "But we are getting closer to understanding what is going on"
 We must realize that assassination of the president of the U.S. in a crossfire operation requires more than two people . The assassination of President Obama requires more people to be involved in it, says CNN's John Sutter .
 As noted in Chapter 15, Mafia hits sometimes employed up to twenty people in the total operation . Mafia hits often employed as many as 20 people in total .
 Researchers generally estimate somewhere around ten people were required, just at Dealey Plaza, to staff the operation .
 Except for the primary shooters, it is unlikely that foreigners would be brought in, unless they had a good command of the English language and could blend in as Americans .
 Hemming’s Interpen group and their English-speaking associates, along with a few Cuban exiles, would be prime candidates to make up the team that was necessary in both Dealey Plaza and Mexico City for performance of the ancillary functions .
 Although the available evidence does not prove this beyond a reasonable doubt, it is the best scenario that I have seen, and could well pass a preponderance of evidence test before a jury, in my opinion . It is not clear whether the case will pass a pre-trial of evidence
 The operational-execution phase of the plot was carried out with less sophisticated planning than I originally hypothesized . The operational .execution . phase of . the . plot was completed with less . sophisticated planning, the author says .
 Only by having extremely powerful sponsors with the capacity to cover up the crime for decades did the plot succeed, and everybody go free . Only by . having extremely . powerful sponsors . with the . capacity to . cover up . the crime .
 Hemming: Dealey Plaza and Mexico City operations in the plot were amateurish . Hemming seemed startled, even offended, when he suggested the operation was amateurish, he said .
 Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover were informed in advance that President Kennedy would be assassinated when he came to Dallas . The Corsican/OAS assassination teams, recruited by the Mafia (or William Harvey or the Texas right wing), were not the primary shooters .
 In the course of his conversations with Hemming over the months, there were several areas that he brought out that require further investigation beyond the scope of his time now available . Hemming: "Several areas that need further investigation need to be investigated"
 Hemming suspects that this automobile was owned by his associate and Interpen member Howard K Davis . Davis had loaned the car to Dick Whatley and Bob Willis, who were arrested in Mexico in 1962 in a gun-running operation to Guatemala .
 They were held in jail for six months and then set free through Hemming’s efforts to obtain assistance from General Edwin Walker . Hemming helped secure the release of the prisoners .
 Hemming says he suspects that this car showed up on November 22 at Dealey Plaza . Hemming said he suspects this car was the car that showed up at the scene of the terrorist attack .
 Richard Bartholomew in Pfleurgerville, Texas, is doing research on this subject . He says he hopes to learn more about the effects of this type of phenomenon .
 Patricia Orr’s notes, on which I based a large part of this chapter, were included in final typewritten form, verifying their validity as official documents . Orr's notes were published in a typewritten version of the book .
 Vidal was required by the Immigration and Naturalization Service to notify them when leaving Miami . He was required to notify the service when leaving the U.S.
 The trip to Dallas by auto, combined with Vidal not notifying the INS, looked like an attempt to keep the trip secret .
 Vidal’s return to Dallas by plane on November 22 (arriving at his home in Miami by 5:30m. ET) Vidal will return to Miami by November 22 . Vidal is expected to return to his Miami home by November 25 .
 The assassination would have been accomplished within four hours from the time of the assassination, Hemming says . Time to and from airports on both ends would likely have been by private or military jet, he says .
 Hemming agreed that the return flight by private plane was an indication of a secret trip . Hemming agrees that the private plane is an indication that it was a secret visit .
 Vidal disagreed that leaving Miami without INS permission was an indication of secrecy . Vidal did that all the time. Vidal left Miami without permission, he said .
 Mike Epstein of the Senate Intelligence Committee called to relay information that he had received from Jerry Treanor, attorney in Washington, DC, for Jorge Antonio Zimeri-Safie, a Cuban wanted for extradition to Guatemala on murder charge .
 Epstein said Treanor had told him that Zimeri had information pertinent to the Kennedy assassination . Epstein said he was told Zimeris had information relevant to the assassination of Kennedy . Epstein also said he had been told that the information was pertinent to Kennedy's assassination .
 Gerry Patrick Hemming's lawyer says his client has known Gerry since 1971 . Hemming has known Hemming for several years, perhaps since 1971, lawyer says .
 Hemming told Zimeri that he met Oswald in Atsugi, Japan, when they were both stationed there with the U.S. Marines . Hemming and Oswald met in Japan while they were stationed with the Marines .
 Hemming reportedly told Zimeri in bragadaccio manner that he had been part of the third back-up team in the Kennedy assassination . Hemming was reportedly in a building somewhere behind the TSBD at the time of the shooting .
 Treanor said the information was first revealed to a Washington, D.C. homicide detective who questioned Zimeri regarding the Orlando Letelier case .
 Treanor said this predated the allegations made publicly by Marita Lorenz in September 1976 . Lorenz's allegations predated allegations made against Lorenz publicly by Lorenz . The allegations were made public in 1976 .
 Hemming had served with the United States Marines from April 1954 until October 1958 . Hemming served in the U.S. Navy & Navy Reserve from October 1963 until October 1969 . He said that he had learned from an ‘unimpeachable source” that Hemming .
 Our records indicate Hemming only served in the Marines during the same period of time Treanor claims he was in .
 Treanor also know other details of Hemming’s Marine Corps training including his experience as a link trainer instructor and aircraft instructor . Hemming was also an instructor at the time of his service .
 This reminded me of repeated conversations in San Diego with Hemming about the origin of the shots . Hemming and Hemming have had repeated conversations about the origins of some of these shots .
 Hemming was adamant, seeming to be absolutely certain, almost as if he had been there, that some of the shots came from the Dal-Tex building on the fourth floor . The offices of Abraham Zapruder were the offices of the president of the United States . Hemming says
 Hemming says he was told the story by John Martino to protect him from being murdered in Guatemala by Jorge Zimeri . Martino had been involved in a plot to overthrow the government of Guatemala, Hemming said . He said Martino told him the story to protect Hemming
 Hemming: If Zimeri believed that Hemming had been part of the JFK assassination, he would fear he would create such a ruckus in the United States that he wouldn’t get away with it . The idea, Hemming explained, was that if Zimer
 Hemming didn’t explain why the document made no mention of John Martino . Hemming said the document didn't mention Martino, who died in 2008 .
 Hemming could have been part of the third back-up team, but still have been in Miami on November 22 . Hemming is a member of the team that could still be in Miami .
 Hemming denied that he had ever made such a statement to Zimeri in 1997 . Hemming denies that he ever made the statement . Heming denied that the statement was true .
 Hemming says Angleton promised him he “would take care of him’—presumably for retirement pay . Hemming had been in the U.S. Navy from October 1963 to October 1969 .
 Hemming met Jack Ruby, in September or October, 1959, at William Morgan’s house in Cuba . Hemming first met Ruby in 1959, in Cuba, at Morgan's house in Havana .
 Ruby sold inferior jeeps in the Cuban Air force, Hemming says . Hemming had a few choice words about the jeeps .
 Hemming had asked Hemming in San Diego if he had known Jack Ruby, and he replied that he had not . This was disturbing to me because Hemming said he did not know Jack Ruby . Hemming has never known Ruby, but Hemming did .
 Under oath he had testified that he met Ruby in 1959 . Now he was learning that, under oath, he'd met Ruby again .
 Hemming says he met Jack Ruby briefly at the Carousel Club for about sixty seconds in 1963 . Hemming admitted to another item in the summary that quoted him saying he had met Ruby briefly in the club .
 He said that he had been introduced to Ruby by Wally Welch . "We were having a couple of beers, Davis was with me, and he was sitting there banging on some bongos," he said .
 Upon leaving Cuba in September, 1960, he stayed in Mexico City for two weeks and had contact with Silvia Duran . He stayed with Duran for two years .
 Interview with Gerald Patrick Hemming, 2668 Hoyt Ave., El Monte, Calif., in the company of Lawrence Howard . Hemming was a member of the El Monte community of El Monte residents .
 A pilot named Bill BURCHETTE flew him, FRANK BARTES, LUIS RABEL, RICARDO DAVIS, and others to the north shore of Lake Pontchartrain to scout the area for a possible training camp .
 He said that BURCHETTE knew BARTES well and lived in Metairie, New Orleans . He said he knew BARTes well and knew him well .
 Edgar Eugene Bradley was one of Jim Garrison’s prime suspects . Garrison tried to extradite Bradley from California . Bradley is one of Garrison's prime suspects in the case . Bradley was convicted of attempted murder of Garrison .
 Lawrence Howard said he once met Gene Bradley at a house where a paramilitary organization held meetings and prepared ammunition . Howard said that he met Bradley at the house where he prepared ammunition for the organization .
 Jim Braden has also been reported as associated with radical right-wing groups in Los Angeles . Braden is also reported to have links to radical right wing groups .
 I told him I would have to refer to the document to get the year, and the conversation then shifted to another subject . He then said he would need to refer back to the year .
 Hemming told me that Howard K Davis, Larry LaBorde, and himself were on the flight . Hemming said that this flight did occur, but passengers on the plane were Howard K . Davis and Larry .
 PATRICK said that he had met CLINT MURCHISON, GORDON McLENDON, and NELSON HUNT at various meetings in Dallas . PATrick said he met McLendon, McLENDon, and HUNT in various meetings .
 Often at these meetings, there was talk of killing KENNEDY, but he can recall no specific instance where MURCHISON, McLENDON, or HUNT participated in this talk .
 Hemming had never told me about meeting Clint Murchison or Gordon McLendon in Dallas, but he had mentioned meeting with Nelson Bunker Hunt . Hemming met with McLendon, but had never been told about meeting with Bunker Hunt in Dallas .
 "These were the people who were standing around in the July 5, 1963 meeting at the Petroleum Club," he said . "Well, these are the people ... standing around," he told CNN.com .
 A number of these people who were running their mouths off, I guess McLendon was there, he said . McLendon said. "A number of [McLendon] people ... were running mouths off," he added .
 PATRICK also advised that ED COLLINS and ENRIQUE MOLINA were in Dallas during November, 1963 . EDCOLLINS was in Dallas, Texas, during November 1963 .
 Ed Collins is the one whom Weberman accused Hemming of murdering, and it was Ed Collins that Mrs. Hemming accused him of murder . Ed Collins was the one that Weberman said Hemming murdered .
 'No doubt, PATRICK did not provide anything near the total of information known by him. No doubt, PatRick did not .
 His knowledge of anti-Castro activities in the early 1960s is extensive, to say the least . He has been in touch with the Cuban government since the 1960s .
 His contacts in Miami, New Orleans, Dallas, and a lesser extent, Los Angeles, are considerable .
 It was obvious that he was determined not to help the investigation in any way . But it was also obvious that it was determined that he would not help .
 He would constantly begin a long description of some raid or preparations that I had not asked about and that was obviously irrelevant . He would often begin to describe some of the raid preparations that he had not been asked about . That is obviously irrelevant, he said .
 As HOWARD had warned me, I only got that information that PATRICK was willing to give me . I only had to get that information from HOWARD, who had been warned by HOWARD .
 It was obvious while questioning him further that he was referring to OSWALD’S trip in late September, 1963 . Although he was uncertain of the time, he said it was in September 1963 .
 Weberman’s accusation that Hemming had been the one who handled Oswald in Mexico City . Hemming ducked answering when I questioned him about it in an earlier interview . Weberman says Hemming was one of the agents who dealt with Oswald .
 Hemming testified that he was approached by the mob in the Fontainbleu Hotel to kill Castro . Hemming also testified that the mob approached him with the help of the mob to kill the Castro .
 Documents show Hemming did work as a contract agent for the CIA . Among them are applications by Hemming for CIA and documents which show he worked as contract agent . Hemming applied for CIA applications and documents show he did work for the government .
 Hemming's FBI case officer, when he was working for the Bureau, was James O’Connor, who, says Hemming, is now in San Diego . Hemming: O'Connor, now in the U.S. now, was O‘Connor's FBI
 Hemming’s claim that Hoover was trying to set him up, if he had been an FBI recruit . Hemming's claim made me wonder about whether he was a recruit for the FBI .
 The FBI didn't have all the evidence they had against him in the JFK assassination . And I thought it could explain the FBI’s not going after him with the evidence, he said .
 Hoover didn't know that Hemming and Oswald were FBI informants . Perhaps their number-one rule of “not embarrassing the Bureau” was in full effect .
 Hemming had been telling his story, in general, going back to 1967, about right wingers in Texas and New Orleans suggesting that JFK be killed and seeking someone to do it, but not nearly in as much detail as he told me and Fonzi . In reviewing all of
 Hemming is a master of obfuscation and cover stories, says Hemming . Hemming was a master at obfuscating and covering stories, Hemming says . He says he was "master of obfuscating" Hemming.
 Fonzi’s “Carlos,” an undoubted CIA agent, had done the same thing . He has been suspected of injecting himself into the Garrison case as a “consultant” with the objective of undermining the investigation . The case has been
 Of the 95 documents I requested from the ARRB, many were not available, having been referred to other agencies . Many of the documents he requested were not immediately available .
 The more documents I get and the more I talk with Hemming, I become convinced that he was involved more deeply in the JFK assassination than he is willing to admit . Hemming was involved in the assassination of JFK more deeply than he would admit, CNN's John Sutter says .
 He told me that he had inadvertently helped in the planning of Oswald’s trip to Mexico City . But he claimed innocence of knowing that the planning involved Oswald .
 Rorke, along with pilot Geoffrey Sullivan, left Florida in a light, twinengine, five-passenger Beechcraft plane . He said they left Florida with a light twin engine plane .
 Oswald stayed in Mirada, Mexico, while someone else was posing as him in Mexico City . Oswald was picked up in New Orleans, then flew to Austin, Texas, for the Selective Service meeting, then to Dallas .
 Oswald impersonator attempted to obtain a visa for Oswald to get into Cuba from Mirada, Cuba . The man attempted to get a visa to get in Cuba .
 Hemming said the operation in Mexico City was bungled by Winston Scott . Oswald, unable to enter Cuba, was returned to Dallas .
 Hemming says Oswald was never in Mexico City and the appearance of trips to and from there was fabricated . Hemming said Oswald was not in Mexico city and the trips were fabricated .
 This is another subject that requires more research before conclusions can be reached, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 The timing of the Rorke flight and its layover in Mirada is consistent with Oswald’s trip to Mexico City and Hemming’�s story . A document about the search party, headed by Hemming in a DC-3, does show that the timing
 Hemming seemed to be in the plot but claimed innocence of direct involvement . Hemming is the latest example of Hemming seeming to be involved in a plot to kill people .
 This could be Hemming’s cover story for having told Weberman in a confessional moment that he helped set up Oswald; or it could be a valid explanation of that statement . Hemming's cover story could be for telling Weberman that he set up the Oswald plot .
 It staggers the mind even to contemplate that the entire Secret Service contingency in Dallas and high officials of the Secret Service in Washington, D.C., were involved in an orchestrated conspiracy to kill the president . William Shakespeare Julius Caesar 29 THE SECRET SERVICE .
 Any participation from the Secret Service may have involved only a few key agents with limited knowledge of the plot who manipulated other agents . Those key agents could have been susceptible to bribery .
 The potential for bribery of government employees is enormous, particularly those who are close to the seats of power and witness to its frequent hypocrisy and sham . After all, the potential for corruption of government officials is enormous .
 Many of these people are of modest means, draw a meager salary, and are subject to being servants to the personal whims of the powerful . Many of them are of meager means, drawing meager salary .
 It is small wonder that some of them might be tempted by the promise of protection from prosecution and large sums of money in untraceable bills .
 A few key people in the Secret Service could have been approached by others in the conspiracy and brought into it through bribery . These people were well aware of John Kennedy’s flagrant philandering and probably knew much more about him .
 There are stories of John Kennedy using the Secret Service to arrange for his liaisons with women . There are also stories of using agents to do menial chores, act as “go-fers” and “lookouts”
 All of these men, even with their individual transgressions, were paragons of virtue . Jack Kennedy was a paragon of virtue compared to Jack Kennedy .
 There is some evidence of conflict between the Secret Service and Kennedy . In addition to the possibility of bribery combined with loss of respect, there is also some evidence .
 We still need substantial evidence of the Secret Service’s complicity in the JFK assassination before reaching such conclusions . But having said that, we still need to .
 Much of this evidence has been reported in previous chapters in this book . The most salient of which I will outline briefly in the paragraphs that follow, along with new material .
 First, we will examine the evidence of the selection of the fatal motorcade route . We will examine whether the route of the motorcade was chosen by police . We also examine evidence that the route was selected by the police .
 Two locations were considered, one at the Dallas Trade Mart and the other at the Women’s Building auditorium at the state fairgrounds . Two locations are considered .
 Connally traveled directly to the White House over Bruno’s head, adamantly insisting on the Trade Mart site . Bruno disagreed with Connally and protested to the Secret Service in Washington, D.C., advising them that security be used as the reason not to go .
 The die was now cast. We’re going to let Connally have the Trade Mart site site . We're going to give Connally the trade Mart site .
 Kennedy would be passing through Dealey Plaza down Elm Street at a very slow speed, in a perfect spot to conceal assassins at several possible locations . The best places to hide assassins would be behind fences, walls, and shrubs along Elm Street .
 The following Secret Service personnel returned on Air Force One from Dallas to Andrews AFB: Robert Steward; Glenn Bennett; Rufus Youngblood; Clinton P Hill; Clinton Hill; William Greer; Roy Kellerman; Paul Landis; Thomas John; Jerry Kivett Kellerman
 Kellerman summoned Clinton Hill to make final examinations of JFK wounds after completion of autopsy . Kellerman called Hill to examine JFK wounds . Hill will examine JFK's wounds after completing autopsy .
 Kellerman, Greer, Hill, and Landis accompanied JFK body to White House after embalming at Bethesda . Landis, Kellerman and Hill accompanied JFK to the White House .
 Another option would have avoided Elm Street would have been to go straight down Main Street and beyond Dealey Plaza . The Trade Mart on Industrial Boulevard would have made it to the Trade Mart .
 Hunt in his election bid for the Democratic nomination against John Kennedy . Hunt ran for the nomination against Kennedy in 1964 . Hunt won the Democratic presidential nomination in 1968 . Hunt was the first person to win a Democratic nomination for president .
 Only by concerted pressure from John Connally did the Trade Mart get selected for the luncheon, making it possible to have the motorcade pass through the crossfire ambush .
 I want to make it clear that I have not seriously considered that John Connally was a conscious part of the plot. I have no doubt that he was part of it, he says. I want it to be clear that he has no doubt .
 Connally would not likely have been so stupid as to allow himself to be used to set up the death trap . The finger of accusation inevitably would have pointed directly to him, and he certainly would have known that .
 He was most stalwart in contending over the years, until his death, that he was hit by a second bullet, which undermined the Warren Commission’s thesis of one gunman . Second, he said, ‘I was struck in the second bullet. Second,’
 It would not seem reasonable that a well-planned plot would have a key high official in its conspiratorial group aggressively arranging a parade route that was so patently perfect for assassination .
 Trade Mart would be backup assassination site to Dealey Plaza if that plan had to be aborted for some reason . Trade Mart was chosen for luncheon site as a backup site for Dealey's assassination attempt .
 Evidence supporting the reasoning that the Trade Mart was a back-up site is that John Adrian O’Hare (a.k.a. John Adrien O'Hare) used to be the owner of the trade mart .
 Colonel William Bishop, a professional sniper assigned to the CIA from Army intelligence, was stationed at the Trade Mart on November 22 . Colonel Bishop was stationed in the area at the time .
 The Trade Mart would have been a good spot for an assassin to conceal himself and escape afterwards . Also, the Trade Mart was a difficult building in which to protect the president due to its architecture, having a large number of entrances and exits .
 The final step fell into place on November 18 when Ken O’Donnell yielded to Connally . Connally was elected to the governor of Texas in 1978 .
 Researchers over the years have tried to break down the Ruth Paine story, but to no avail . Researchers have been trying to find out why Paine's story exists .
 Oswald was hired the next day . He confirmed that there was an opening and was hired that day . Oswald was the first person to be hired by the White House .
 We have discussed in previous chapters that there were plots to kill Kennedy in Miami, Chicago, and Los Angeles that did not materialize for one reason or another .
 The plot in Dallas could have been planned for several locations depending on how everything came together . Similarly, the plot could have planned for other locations .
 Oswald would be maneuvered to any of the assassination sites found necessary—the Trade Mart as an example . Oswald would then be moved to any assassination site found necessary, including the Trade Mart .
 "It does not appear that the Secret Service was the primary instrument for arranging the fatal motorcade route," he says .
 This doesn't imply that key persons in the Secret Service were not aware of the importance of the motorcade route to the plot . This does not imply, however, that key people in the . Secret Service did not know of the significance of the route .
 In point of fact, they did go along with it without serious resistance . They later used the excuse that they had yielded to the politicians in the selection of the route . The route was selected by politicians in order to get the route across the country .
 "The crimes of the Secret Service were crimes of omission," says President Obama . "Their role was not to do certain critical things," he says . "They did not do critical things. Their role was to protect the nation," says Obama .
 As Colonel Fletcher Prouty wrote, all that is needed to get a president assassinated is to compromise the Secret Service . Someone, fanatic or conspirator, will come forth to do the deed, and someone will let down their guard .
 From the day that John Kennedy was murdered, it has been widely accepted that the performance of the Secret Service was unbelievably lax, before and after the shooting . The Secret Service's performance in the wake of the Kennedy assassination was incredibly lax .
 No effort was made to see that windows were closed in tall buildings along the parade route, even at Dealey Plaza where the president would be most vulnerable . The president would have been most vulnerable if he had been killed in the attack .
 No effort was made to secure the area behind the picket fence and wall on the grassy knoll .
 No effort was made to check that area or station a Secret Service agent or a Dallas policeman there . The incident occurred in Dallas .
 A single Secret Service agent could have prevented the assassination of President Obama . A single agent would have been able to prevent the assassination .
 Only some people had bogus Secret Service identifications . But there were none, only some people who had bogus IDs .
 As discussed in Chapters 11 and 12, the failure of the Secret Service agents, with the one exception of agent Clint Hill, to respond at all when the first round of gunfire occurred, defies explanation other than in sinister terms .
 Zapruder film says six to seven seconds elapsed after the first sound of gunfire before the presidential limousine sped up . According to the film, the president's limo sped up after the shooting .
 The agents' feet were glued to the running boards of the cars behind the presidential limousine, with the exception of Agent Hill . Agent Hill was the last agent to step into the limo .
 The first duty of a Secret Service agent is to protect the president by shielding him (using the agent's body) at the instant of hearing gunfire .
 Special Agent Kellerman sat on the passenger side of the presidential limousine looking straight ahead as if transfixed until after the fatal shot . Kellerman was shot in the head .
 He made no effort to vault over the back of the seat to shield either John Connally or the president or their wives as was his duty . The president and his wife were also in the plane at the time .
 The fact that the limousine slowed almost to a halt at the point of the fatal shot similarly defies credible explanation . The limo's slow reaction to the shot at the scene of the shooting also defies reasonable explanation .
 Secret Service agent William Greer told the Warren Commission that he was not looking at the president at the time of the fatal shot . The fact that the Secret Service was aware that Kennedy was scheduled to be shot leads one to suspect that it deliberately cooperated in placing him in a deadly cross
 He postulates that a “security stripping test” was put into effect during the Dallas trip . He says a security stripping test was put in place during the trip .
 Palamara bases this on statements by Secret Service Chief Rowley that studies were under way before the assassination about presidential security protection . Palamara says this is based on statements made by Rowley about security .
 In this scenario, many of the agents may have been led to believe that there was going to be a staged, fake assassination attempt, possibly as part of a covert operation to precipitate an invasion of Cuba . The agents were not to respond .
 It does make some sense to explain how so many people could have been involved in the disinformation phase of the plot, it says .
 Even if this scenario is true, there would still probably have to be one or two Secret Service agents who would be aware of the real plot and have the power to get all the other agents to keep quiet .
 Secret Service agents who were in the presidential protection contingency realized immediately that their agency had been set up . The agents became very frightened for their careers and of the powerful forces behind the plot .
 They all did keep their mouths shut, at least enough to keep it from the news media . And, they all kept quiet, but not enough for the media to report it .
 Special Agent Kellerman and Chief Rowley immediately commented after the shooting that it was a conspiracy . In that regard, both Special Agents Kellerman .
 At one point in my studies this confused me because I thought that if they were that candid about believing it was conspiracy it was an indication that they were not involved in it, it was not a conspiracy . I thought it was a sign that they didn't want to be involved in conspiracy
 It would not be unreasonable to explain Kellerman's and Rowley’s statements about a conspiracy as being no more than a continuation of the original intention of the plot . The original intention was to make it look like a conspiracy involving Communists .
 Only after Oswald was captured and other things went wrong, leaders of the plot decided to switch to the lone-gunman story . The leaders decided pragmatically to switch after Oswald's capture, they say .
 This, as we know, gave the plotters grave problems because the evidence clearly showed more than one gunman . The evidence was clearly clear enough to show the gunman was not a single gunman . This, however, was not the only gunman involved .
 The Secret Service failed to send to their Dallas office information from Miami police informant William Somersett in a recording of a conversation between Somersett and Joseph Milteer . The recording indicated that a plot was underway to assassinate the president with a high-powered rifle from a tall building .
 The Chicago Secret Service office received a teletype from the FBI warning that an assassination attempt would be carried out in that city by a four-man Cuban hit squad . This information was sent to other Secret Service field offices but not to the Dallas office .
 Bolden said that the entire office was involved in this, but that it was kept top secret . Bolden: "It's been a top secret. The entire office is involved in it, but it's been top secret"
 Kennedy’s trip to Chicago was canceled, but, again, that information was not transmitted to the Dallas office . Kennedy was scheduled to travel to Chicago, but that information wasn't transmitted .
 After Kennedy’s death, Bolden discovered that the information about the Chicago threat was being kept from the Warren Commission . Bolden made a trip to Washington to tell them what he knew .
 He was taken back to Chicago where he was charged with discussing a bribe with two counterfeiters . He was brought to trial and convicted even after one of the counterfeiters admitted perjury .
 Secret Service admitted that the Chicago threat occurred but refused to clarify the matter . The Secret Service has refused to comment on the threat .
 The fact was, however, that two threats to assassinate President Kennedy with high-powered : . rifles, both occurred in early November 1963, were not relayed to the Dallas region . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 .
 The HSCA looked at Secret Service files to see if they contained what could have been recognized as significant threats . The Secret Service says the Dallas trip was a "significant threat"
 The committee discovered that the 1963 Protective Research Section files had since been summarized and computerized . The original files were then destroyed, the committee discovered .
 A small, tightly controlled group with only one hundred people in its Washington, D.C., contingency . Only about thirty of them worked directly on presidential protection . The group was tightly controlled, with only about 30 of them working directly .
 The primary assignment of the Secret Service is the protection of the president . The Secret Service's primary assignment is to protect the president from harm .
 Witnesses at the scene of the assassination reported encountering unexplained civilians who had Secret Service identification or Treasury Department identification .
 Witnesses report Secret Service agents leaving the motorcade and running to various locations in Dealey Plaza . Other witnesses reported Secret Service agent running from motorcade to Dealey plaza . Witnesses reported seeing Secret Service officers leave motorcade .
 Critics have alleged that Secret Service agents either participated in the assassination itself or were involved in a cover-up of the evidence . Warren Commission critics have alleged the agents were either involved in the murder of President Kennedy .
 Warren Commission: Secret Service agents in Dealey Plaza were not supposed to be there . The problem is that they were supposed to have been there . Warren Commission says they were not allowed to be in the area .
 Committee interviews or depositions with 11 of the 16 agents who were on duty with the motorcade and with their supervisors produced evidence that only one agent had left the vehicle at any time prior to arrival at Parkland Hospital .
 Thomas "Lem" Johns was riding in Vice President Johnson’s follow-up car . This agent, Thomas “Lem’ Johns, had been riding in the Vice President's car . Johns was the agent who was killed in the shooting .
 In an attempt to reach Johnson’s limousine, he had left the car at the sound of shots and was momentarily on his own in Dealey Plaza . He was picked up almost immediately and taken to Parkland Hospital .
 The committee was able to establish the movement and the activities of Secret Service agents, the committee says .
 Dallas police officer Joseph M Smith was one of the Secret Service agents who observed a plainclothesman in the presence of uniformed police officers .
 Smith was riding as a motorcycle escort in the motorcade when he was shot . Smith ran up the grassy knoll immediately after the shooting, police say .
 He testified to the Warren Commission that at that time he encountered a man who stated that he was a Secret Service agent and offered supporting credentials . He testified that he encountered the man who said he was an agent .
 Smith indicated that he did not examine credentials closely, and he then proceeded to search the area unsuccessfully for suspicious individuals . Smith said he then went on to search for suspicious people .
 The committee obtained evidence that military intelligence personnel may have identified themselves as Secret Service agents or that they might have been misidentified as such . The committee did obtain evidence that . military intelligence . personnel may . identify themselves as . Secret Service .
 From 8 to 12 military intelligence personnel in plainclothes were assigned to Dallas to provide supplemental security for the President’s visit .
 He indicated that these agents had identification credentials and, if questioned, would most likely have stated that they were on detail to the Secret Service . If questioned, the agents would likely have said they were Secret Service agents .
 The Committee sought to identify these agents so that they could be questioned . The Committee wanted to question them .
 'Here we have possible suppression of evidence by Army intelligence, which we have seen became a habit with them,' says author . Army intelligence personnel may have been involved in the assassination, he says .
 The 112th Military Intelligence Division was told to “stand down” that day rather than report for duty in Dallas, over the protests of the unit commander . Colonel Fletcher Prouty’s reporting from Chapter 23 said the 112th told to "stand down" rather than
 In Dealey Plaza, we have indications of Army intelligence involvement in the form of bogus Secret Service agents . We have indications that the Army intelligence is involved in the creation of bogus agents, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Jean Hill, a school teacher in Dallas, witnessed the Kennedy assassination from a position almost directly opposite the grassy knoll on Elm Street . Hill was a witness who encountered unexplained personnel flashing badges in Dallas .
 She said she then ran toward the picket fence and when she got behind it she saw a uniformed policeman who seemed to be guarding something . She then ran behind the fence and said she saw him guarding something from behind .
 A man in plain clothes flashed a badge, taking a firm grip on her shoulder . Confused, she turned around and encountered a man in uniform . Confusion, she said, "I'm not sure what happened to me"
 She said she told the man she had to catch the man who was running away . She said the man ran away from her .
 She was restrained by a second plainclothesman, whose grip on her other shoulder was even stronger than the first’s .
 Unceremoniously, the second man jammed his hand into her coat pocket and deftly withdrew the handful of still-damp Polaroid prints she had deposited there a few minutes before . The second man then deftly withdraws the prints from her pocket .
 "Just start walking and keep smiling, just like we were all real good friends. That’s what we’re going to find out," she said .
 She never found the man with the gun either, but she can close her eyes today and see him with the same distressing clarity as she could see him then . She says she never found him either .
 Jean Hill testified before the Warren Commission on March 24, 1964 in lengthy testimony in which she told of seeing the man in the brown brown coat running away . Hill did not tell of seeing muzzle flash or seeing the muzzle flash .
 She said she was embarrassed because before her testimony she had told others that she had seen a dog sitting between Mr and Mrs. She also said she had been embarrassed because of her story .
 She said she found out after she had made this statement that it couldn’t have been true because there was no dog there . She said after she made the statement, she was told there wasn't a dog .
 She postulated that possibly . possibly she had seen a bunch of flowers instead of a . dog .
 Jean Hill has generally been considered to be a credible witness over the years . Despite her disbelievers, Jean Hill is generally considered to have been credible .
 In person, Hill appears to be a very bright person and still teaches school in Dallas . Hill still teaches in Dallas, Texas . Hill is also a teacher at Dallas schools .
 Secret Service agents who shouldn’t have been at Dealey Plaza shouldn't have been there, says HSCA . Secret Service agent testified about the incident in a press conference .
 He must have been embarrassed that he didn’t ask them for their identification, he said .
 "We still didn’t know the President was shot, came from the wall. Of course it was speeding away and somebody said the shots or the firecrackers, whatever it was at that time, came out of the wall," he said .
 Yes, sir, sir; I scaled the wall and, apparently, my hands rubbed steam pipes . "Apparently, apparently my hands rub steam pipes," she said . "Yes, sir," she replied .
 We noticed numerous kinds of footprints that did not make sense because they were going different directions . We noticed many of the footprints that didn't make sense .
 It strongly suggests that the men may have been Army intelligence agents . And it strongly suggests they were Army agents . The men are believed to be from the Army .
 Even if not, it is difficult to believe that the Secret Service would not have known of their presence . The Secret Service was there at the time of the incident .
 The Secret Service deliberately left the area behind the picket fence open for the shooters . It seems inescapable that the Secret Service intentionally left it open for them .
 Trade Mart site for luncheon was selected on November 18 against the adamant recommendations of advance man Jerry Bruno . It just happened that the Trade Mart . Site was selected against the wishes of Jerry Bruno, the president's advance man .
 It just happened that there was no effort made whatsoever to station security agents on the tall buildings around Dealey Plaza, or to see to it that all windows were closed .
 There were no Secret Service agents on the rear portion of the limousine to shield the president . It just happened that there were no . No Secret . Service agents were there to protect the president from harm .
 There were no motorcycle escorts on either side of the limousine to shield the president . It just happened that there were no motorbike escorts for the president to shield him .
 Not one of the agents reacted to shield the president after the first shot rang out. It just happened that not one of them reacted to the president's actions .
 Reports and evidence of two different plots to kill the president were not transmitted to the Dallas field office by the Secret Service . That information was transmitted to other field offices .
 Secret Service agent Greer watched the back of the president's head get blown out . It just happened that the limousine slowed down to almost a complete halt in the perfect position for the shot .
 On its face, without a statistical calculation, it is ridiculously improbable that all of this is coincidental . Without statistical calculations, it would be ridiculously improbable to think that all this was coincidental.
 The involvement of the Secret Service in the assassination is a central piece of the puzzle . The Secret Service was involved in the shooting of President Kennedy Kennedy .
 The evidence concerning the Secret Service supports the conclusion of a conspiracy involving persons in the federal government planning the assassination before the fact . But even so, the evidence concerning Secret Service support the conclusion, the author says .
 The first thought of any conspiratorial group would be to neutralize the protection of the president . Indeed, it makes sense that it would make sense that the first thought would be neutralizing the president's protection .
 Evidence shows a complex plan involving a sophisticated group who hired professional assassins . In the Kennedy case, the evidence shows a sophisticated plan involving professional assassins.
 If we could discover who it was that compromised the Secret Service and who was giving them their orders, many other pieces of the puzzle would fall into place .
 Chief Rowley was a good friend of J Edgar Hoover, according to Vincent Palamara, who was his former boss . 630[631 was Rowley's former boss, 630][631 .
 Other key suspects in the assassination were former FBI employees William Harvey and Guy Banister . Harvey and Banister are former FBI agents .
 There has been much speculation on the subject of J Edgar Hoover’s using infiltration agents in other government departments and private groups . Hoover's use of infiltration agents is a subject of speculation .
 Hoover had a pathological need to know everything and control everything, as shall now be discussed . After all, Hoover had to control everything in order to get the answers .
 CIA and FBI "deliberately misled us," says Sen. Ted Cruz . "What is most disturbing to me is that two agencies of the government ... deliberately misled us"
 The assassination of President Kennedy brought out the Hoover-Johnson team at its precision best . Hoover and Johnson were at their precision best during the Kennedy era .
 As Congress cranked up to investigate the momentous crime, Johnson took over with the announcement that he was forming his own blue-ribbon commission .
 Hoover handed the president a confidential summary report that concluded there was not a conspiracy . Less than three weeks after the assassination, far too little time to cover all the ground, Hoover said .
 The Warren Commission was handed it as a fait . accompli . Thus was the public inculcated with the ‘no conspiracy’ theory .
 Even after Hoover’s death in 1972, the stonewalling by the FBI and the Department of Justice continued . The FBI and Justice Department stonewalled the investigation .
 After completing its inquiry report in 1978, the HSCA recommended that the Justice Department should continue the investigation . After completing their inquiry report, the report said the investigation should continue .
 All the Justice Department did was hire consultants to try to undermine the acoustical evidence developed in the investigation . The HSCA had concluded there were at least two gunmen. The Justice Department hired consultants to undermine that evidence .
 As recently as 1992, the Justice Department continued to stonewall, issuing an eight-page, single-spaced letter to the House of Representatives citing executive privilege as the basis for not opening all the assassination files .
 FBI failed to inform Kennedy that there were two very serious plans underway to assassinate him . FBI knew about the Joseph Milteer tape predicting Kennedy’s murder“ and failed to tell Kennedy of plans to kill him .
 Hoover did inform the Secret Service, which bureaucratically was his duty . Hoover did not tell Secret Service about the incident . Hoover told Secret Service .
 Secret Service failed to inform Kennedy, Dallas office of the threats . Secret Service didn't inform Kennedy of threats, and failed to tell Dallas office . Kennedy's office was informed of threats by Secret Service .
 FBI did nothing to pursue the Milteer matter after the assassination except to interview him on November 27, 1963, whereupon he denied involvement . Even more damning against Hoover is the fact that the FBI did not pursue the case after the shooting .
 This interview had the effect of tipping off Milteer that Somersett was informing on him, thus destroying Somersett’s ability to get additional information from him . The FBI should have done, of course, was to have Somersett wired and once again engage Milteeer
 The FBI never told the Commission that it had received another message concerning a threat against Kennedy told to another of its informants, José Aleman, in a private conversation that took place sometime in September 1962 .
 Hoover’s FBI didn't pass on information to President Kennedy or Secret Service . The Warren Commission was not informed at the 38loni explosive evidence, tying the assassination directly to a Mafioso chieftain in Miami, was kept secret .
 J Edgar Hoover systematically kept from the Warren Commission any significant information or evidence whatsoever that the Mafia could have been involved in the assassination conspiracy . Hoover kept any significant evidence of Mafia involvement from the Commission .
 Hoover and the FBI knew there were major connections between Carlos Marcello, David Ferrie, Lee Harvey Oswald, and the assassination . This evidence was concealed despite the fact that Hoover knew of the connections between the three men .
 The FBI failed to inform the Warren Commission that FBI informant Eugene De Lapara had told the FBI about Marcello associate Ben Tregle’s foreknowledge of the assassination . For example, he said that “there is a price on the president’�s head
 Within five days after the assassination, FBI agents uncovered all of the foregoing evidence of a Mafia connection in a conspiracy to assassinate the president . This team was in a position to crack the case wide open if it had only pursued the evidence of the Mafia connection .
 No mention of David Ferrie or Carlos Marcello was made to the Warren Commission in its supplemental report of January 13, 1964 L038 . Another egregious example of proof that Hoover’s FBI engaged in suppression of potentially important evidence involves information received from an FBI informant .
 Sumner was a respected FBI informant who later became mayor of Darien, Georgia . Sumner served as mayor of Georgia .
 On November 26, 1963, only four days after the assassination, Sumner informed the FBI that in March or April 1963, he saw someone resembling Lee Harvey Oswald accepting a payment from Joseph Poretto, the owner of the Town and Country Restaurant .
 The Town and Country Restaurant was a known hangout for hoodlums . It was owned in part by Carlos Marcello and managed by Poretto, who had a criminal record .
 When Sumner was shown a photograph of Oswald, he reiterated his original allegation . Sumner said Oswald was a member of the Oswald family .
 He asserted that the photograph resembled the individual he saw accepting the payment in New Orleans . He said he saw the individual in the photograph accept the payment .
 The FBI did not inform the Warren Commission of this obviously critical connection of Oswald to Carlos Marcello . The Warren Commission did not tell the FBI of this connection . The FBI never told the Warren .
 This was all documented in a series of teletypes from the FBI’s Savannah and New Orleans offices .
 The FBI was in possession of the Zapruder film and the Nix film when they were altered . The FBI had the film when it was altered . It was released to the public in 1977 .
 It follows inescapably that the FBI altered these films themselves or cooperated with others to have it done . The FBI altered some of the films themselves themselves or helped others do it .
 Ballistic and testimonial evidence showed overwhelmingly that at least two people and two guns were involved . Tippit solely on Oswald, when ballistic evidence showed that Oswald was involved, was wrong .
 J. Edgar Hoover knew very soon after the assassination that separate shots had hit John Connally and Kennedy, therefore there had to be a conspiracy . J Edgar Hoover also knew there had been a conspiracy to kill Kennedy .
 Hoover s knowledge of this fact was revealed in tapes of a conversation between Hoover and Lyndon Johnson on November 29, 1963 . Hoover and Johnson were in the midst of a civil war .
 The FBI cooperated with the CIA to suppress evidence of an Oswald impersonator in Mexico City . However, tapes reveal that Hoover knew there was an Oswald- impersonator .
 Hoover did not provide them with any of the material leading to Hunt that he had in his possession . Hunt was found dead at the scene of his murder .
 Hunt was the number-one suspect whose investigation would have exposed the Texas right wing’s involvement in the JFK plot and led to Hoover himself . Hunt was Hunt's number one suspect . Hunt would have uncovered the right wing's involvement in JFK plot .
 The FBI concealed the record of John Elrod’ arrest on November 22, 1963, thereby concealing the gun-running operation in Dallas . John Thomas Masen, militant Cuban exiles, the Minutemen, and Jack Ruby were involved .
 The FBI did not reveal information about Jean Souetre being in the Dallas-Fort Worth area on November 22, 1963 . The FBI was forced to do so after notification from French intelligence .
 On November 22, 1963, the FBI had in its possession numerous documents that would have provided the basis for the indictment of Gerry Patrick Hemming and his Interpen crew for the assassination of John F. Kennedy . The FBI was in possession of the documents in the days before Kennedy's assassination
 The FBI suppressed these documents and the evidence, or information, was never presented to the Warren Commission . The Warren Commission never presented these documents to the FBI .
 If this information had been made available, it would have revealed meetings between the Dallas right wing and Hemmings Interpen associates, and Hemming . Hemming is a former member of the Dallas Republican Party .
 Hoover had received financial favors from organized crime in the form of racetrack tips, information on fixed races, and hundreds of thousands of dollars of free rent for his annual vacations in La Jolla, through Clint Murchison, a partner of organized crime . Hoover received thousands of thousands
 Hoover also received “safe’”’ oil deal SAA through Clint Murchison . Hoover also had received ‘safe'’s oil deal with SAA . SAA also had 'safe'
 Hoover stands out singularly as one person lacking redeeming human qualities . Hoover was one of all the major participants in the assassination, but Hoover lacks redeeming qualities .
 Lyndon Johnson had redeeming human qualities, even the mobsters had likable qualities, but not J Edgar Hoover . Hoover had redeemable qualities . Hoover was a good guy, not a bad guy .
 "I searched the literature and found nothing good about his character except that he was devoted to his mother and Clyde Tolson and loved his dog," says author . "He loved his mother, Clyde and loved Clyde and his dog"
 Hoover was a tyrant, a sadist, and a criminal . Hoover was thoroughly despicable; he was a tyrannical tyrant, sadist and criminal . He was a criminal, a tyrant and sadist .
 Hoover was sixty-nine years old at the time of John Kennedy’s assassination . Hoover was nine years old when JFK was assassinated .
 He died of “a hypertensive condition” at the age of seventy-seven, nine years after the assassination . He died in his bed at home in an upper-class neighborhood in Washington .
 Hoover had been head of the FBI for forty-six years, the only director since its inception . Hoover was the only FBI director since the inception of the bureau . Hoover is now the FBI's only director .
 He lived with his mother until her death, at which time he was forty-six years old . He lived in the house with her until she died .
 Except on rare occasions, he did not date a member of the opposite sex . Except for rare exceptions, he didn't date anyone else . He was married to three women in a row .
 Many people in Washington, D.C., believed that Hoover was a closet homosexual . Hoover believed that he was closeted .
 This, if true, would leave him even more subject to blackmail and to a total loss of power if his secret were revealed to the general public . If true, he would be even more vulnerable to blackmail .
 Rumors were so prevalent and consistent that it became widely accepted as fact . Rumors became so prevalent that it was widely accepted in fact .
 One basis for this suspicion was that he and his assistant director, Clyde Tolson, were inseparable intimates . They saw each other seven days a week and took month long vacations together .
 Hoover and Tolson dined together every Sunday night at Hoover's home and every Monday night at Tolson's apartment . When in Washington, Tolson and Hoover dined at Hoover’s Washington home .
 In 1993, a major story on PBS television Frontline was aired on Frontline . The story was supported by witnesses, according to witnesses in the case .
 The television program was based on the book Official and Confidential by Anthony Summers . The television show is based on a book written by Summers .
 O44 Cartha DeLoach, a retired FBI official and one of Hoover’s principal agents, appeared on Larry King Live on February 12, 1993 in a face-off with Anthony Summers . Summers interviewed witnesses who personally observed Hoover in homosexual encounters with young men . DeLo
 DeLoach called Summers’ book slime and garbage and vigorously defended Hoover’s sexual status . As might be expected, he also defended Hoover's sexual status.
 The evidence is extremely convincing that Hoover was, in fact, a homosexual . But the evidence is not that he was, or not a homosexual, is overwhelming evidence .
 Hoover's relationship with Clyde Tolson could have been asexual, says author . Hoover had been advised by one of his psychoanalyst consultants that it was just an example of sexual repression .
 "I could not find one person who did not take it for granted that Hoover was a homosexual. However, in my discussions with people who should know, I could not . find one . person who didn't think Hoover was homosexual .
 Even if Hoover were not a homosexual and transvestite, it can be said without fear of exaggeration that he was pathologically preoccupied with the subject of sex . But even if . Hoover were . not a . homosexual, he can be . said to be pathologically . preoccupied
 When Hoover wanted to get something on his enemies, he almost invariably looked for a sex angle . Hoover often looked for sex angles to get information from his enemies .
 The irrevocable harm he did to people, illegally using U.S. government funds and exploiting his agents, he says . It bears telling in some detail because it reveals the depths of his depravity, he writes .
 Hoover and FBI taped bedroom activities involving King and a variety of women . Hoover and the FBI had taped bedroom conversations involving King . King and other women were involved in the taped activities .
 Hoover sought to have this information leaked through various newspapers and magazines, but no one would touch it . Hoover sought the information, but it was never leaked through any of the media .
 Hoover became enraged when King was given the Nobel Peace Prize . Hoover was enraged and the bureau went into serious action . Hoover became angry at the decision .
 He sent transcriptions of the King tapes to the White House in the form of a thirteen-page printed booklet . The transcriptions ended up going to various department heads, including the secretary of state .
 FBI suggests sending material directly to Mrs. Michelle Obama's home . FBI says material will be sent directly to her .
 An anonymous letter was composed and a package was delivered to King’s office in Atlanta at a time when they knew he would be away and the package would be opened by Mrs. King .
 The accompanying letter, sent sometime in mid November 1964, was composed in an effort to get Mr King to commit suicide .
 "You better take it before your filthy, abnormal fraudulent self is bared to the nation," he wrote . "I don't like it," he said .
 The head of the nation’s police force attempted to wreck a man’�s marriage or induce him to suicide using intimate material obtained from wiretaps by his federal agents . What we see here is the workings of the deformed mind of a deformed man .
 The obsessive hatred that Hoover had for Martin Luther King, Jr. is almost beyond understanding, let alone description . Hoover had an obsessive hatred for the civil rights icon . Hoover's hatred for MLK is beyond understanding .
 Hunt's top aide John Curington says King's death was a 'conspirational incident' that took place in 1967 concerning King . Hunt's aide says the incident took place during the days of King's life .
 Curington revealed to Pepper that a much closer relationship between Hoover and Hunt existed than had heretofore been known . Their relationship went back to the 1950s when they were poker-playing friends .
 Pepper told Hunt Hunt that the only way to stop King was to “completely silence him’—the “final solution” as Pepper described it . Pepper said that the final solution was to silence King . Hunt told Hunt that King should be silenced .
 Curington was present at various meetings between the two men when Martin Luther King was discussed . He was also present at meetings between King and Martin Luther Luther King .
 Hoover’s animosity was more passionate and obsessive, more personal . Hoover's animosity against King was more personal, more passionate . King, Hoover, Hoover said, “I’m not going to let it go.”
 Hoover provided Hunt with a considerable amount of documentation and material to be used as ammunition against Dr. Dr. Hunt . Hoover regularly provided Hunt a lot of material to use as ammunition .
 The oil baron’s extreme right-wing, daily nationally syndicated Life Line radio broadcasts . King is featured on the Life Line, a daily nationally-sympedicated radio broadcast .
 King was a favorite and a regular target of Life Line venom, and Hoover provided the poison . Hoover was a frequent target of the venomous Life Line . Hoover provided Hoover with the poison.
 Hunt told Hoover that he could finish King by constantly attacking him on radio broadcasts, Hoover says . Hunt said he could kill King by attacking him daily radio broadcasts . Hoover says Hunt told him that he would kill King if he was successful .
 He said the only way to stop King would be to “completely silence” him . He said only the way to do it would be "completely silence" him .
 After King’s murder, Hunt acknowledged to Curington that Hoover had won that argument . Hunt acknowledged that after King's murder, he acknowledged that .
 He also said that the old man had a private telephone that he kept in his desk drawer . The old man also said he kept a private phone in his drawer .
 It was on this phone that he would receive and occasionally place phone calls about sensitive matters . The phone would be used to discuss sensitive matters with him and his family .
 Hunt's political allies included John Connally in Texas and Senator James Eastland of Mississippi . Eastland headed the right-wing Senate Internal Security Subcommittee . Other political allies of Hunt, including Connally and Eastland, included John Eastland .
 Curington said that all these people received payoffs or unrecorded contributions from Hunt, delivered in a variety of ways . Hunt's contributions were not recorded, but recorded .
 Connally or Eastland, for example, might sell cattle to Hunt, who would vastly overpay them . Hunt would buy cattle from Connally, Eastland or other companies . Connally's cattle would be sold to Hunt .
 A Louisiana state official was the conduit for cash payments to Jimmy Hoffa and the Teamsters Union, he says . The payments were made to cover up labor problems at any of the Hunt operations, he said .
 In one instance, Hoffa pulled the union out of a Hunt operation in Muncie, Indiana . Hoffa actually pulled out of the Hunt operation .
 Teamsters connections were often used to beat up or kill people who created problems at any of the Hunt operations . Hunt was often used in the deaths of people who were creating problems at the Hunt .
 Hunt’s daily liaison with President Lyndon Johnson on political matters was former FBI agent Booth Mooney . Mooney was personally close to the president .
 Mooney delivered communications back and forth between Johnson and Hunt . Mooney wrote over half of the Life Line broadcast tracts, including many of those attacking Dr. Hunt .
 I have avoided getting into the Martin Luther King, Jr., assassination in this book, except briefly where I felt compelled to bring certain aspects into the context of the JFK assassination . O46 Emphasis added: "I have avoided . getting into Martin Luther . King's assassination in the context
 "I have not been a student of the King assassination but the evidence of Hoover’s involvement is very compelling," author says . Hoover's involvement in King's assassination is 'very compelling'
 Pepper, a barrister from England, has long been an attorney for James Earl Ray . Pepper spent many years researching and writing his book about Ray .
 Pepper’s book presents convincing evidence and documentation that the King assassination was a joint effort of the FBI and Army intelligence with cooperation from the Memphis police . Pepper: King was killed in Memphis, Memphis, in 1968 .
 Pepper describes the King assassination as almost a mirror image of the JFK assassination . Pepper describes it as a patsy, a planted rifle, military intelligence involvement, and the Mafia in the form of Carlos Marcello .
 Hoover fed Richard Nixon material on Alger Hiss that led directly to Hiss’s conviction . Hoover fed Nixon material that led to the conviction of Hiss . Hiss was convicted of espionage in 1971 .
 This propelled the young Nixon into the national spotlight and launched his career to the presidency . The young Nixon was the president of the United States .
 FBI director kept massive files on the Kennedys from the time JFK was a young officer in the Navy . Hoover’s FBI recorded an affair with a woman alleged to have been a Nazi spy . Hoover's FBI recorded affair with alleged spy .
 Hoover is the one who blew the whistle on JFK’s affair with Judith Exner . Hoover is one of the men to blow the whistle . JFK's affair with Exner was an affair .
 President Johnson and FBI Director J Edgar Hoover met in the Speaker’s Office after a night Joint Session of Congress on March 15, 1965 . President Johnson reached up to put his arm around FBI Director Hoover, as they met .
 President appealed to Congress to enact without delay legislation guaranteeing Negro voting rights . The President appealed . Congress must pass legislation without delay to guarantee voting rights.
 Pepper's interview with John Curington reveals the close relationship between H L Hunt and Hoover . Cureton revealed the relationship between the two men . Hoover and Hunt had a close relationship .
 Hunt’s organization, which included retired Army intelligence General Charles Willoughby, was a worldwide right-wing anti-Communist apparatus . Hunt was a member of Hunt's organization, including his worldwide anti-communist organization . Hunt's group included retired U.S. intelligence
 Think of Hunt’s own paramilitary groups and his connections to the Minutemen and their splinter groups of even more extreme persuasion . Hunt has ties to both of his paramilitary groups, and his ties to other extreme groups of extreme persuasion.
 Hunt’s control of the city of Dallas and his linkages with organized crime in Dallas and elsewhere . Hunt was accused of having ties to organized crime . Hunt is accused of being a leader in organized crime circles .
 Think of J Edgar Hoover and his secret files and his having been compromised by organized crime, and Hoover’s vast organization of agents, wire-tappers, expert snipers, crime laboratories, and photographic laboratories . Then think of Hoover's vast organization, wire tappers, snipers,
 Think of Lyndon Johnson, who would become president upon Kennedy’s assassination, and who had the power and political cunning to manipulate Congress, the Supreme Court, the Executive Branch, and the military . Think of him as a president who manipulated Congress, Supreme Court and military .
 Think of Lyndon Johnson’s documented history of utter ruthlessness to seize power using any means necessary—legal or illegal . Think of his documented history as ruthless and ruthless .
 All three men hated John F Kennedy, were pathologically extreme personalities, driven by obsessive needs for power, and wanted Kennedy gone . And all three of these men hated JFK .
 Hoover learned that a magazine publisher was considering an exposé of the FBI and Hoover . Hoover's obsession with protecting his image was an example of his obsession with secrecy .
 Hoover obtained and distributed compromising photographs showing the publisher’s wife engaged in fellatio with her black chauffeur . The photographs were taken in Washington's Rock Creek Park . Hoover obtained the photographs .
 The identity of the woman was very clear and her name could be identified through the car’s distinctive license plates . Her identity was also clear through the distinctive plates .
 The publisher quickly capitulated and sent his personal representative to the FBI to beg Hoover to back off . Hoover’s representative, Louis Nichols, was Louis Nichols , Louis Nichols . The publisher eventually capitulated .
 The bureau chief was humiliated by the stories being bandied about the capital . Unfortunately, this episode did not remain confidential .
 Once Franklin Roosevelt was dead, Hoover went to work on attacking his new “enemy,” Eleanor . Hoover leaked outlandish stories about her alleged love affairs with various men and women . Hoover went on to leak stories about the alleged affairs of Eleanor Roosevelt .
 Hoover's use of scurrilous material and lies to smear anyone who crossed him continued unabated . Hoover’s use of lies and lies against anyone crossed him continues unabated. Hoover used the term ‘Hoover’ in his attempt to smear those who crossed
 Representative Cornelius E Gallagher, a Democrat from New Jersey, was killed in New Jersey . Gallagher was a member of the New Jersey state legislature . Gallagher is a Democrat who was elected to represent New Jersey in 2010 . Gallagher died at a New Jersey hospital after suffering a heart attack .
 Mr Speaker, this is corruption at its worst and its central figure is J Edgar Hoover . Mr Hoover is the central figure in the FBI, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker .
 It is he whose unchecked reign of absolute power has intimidated this Congress to the extent that a serious question has not been asked about his management of the FBI for 10 years—maybe longer .
 Hoover, knowing the congressman’s interest in this matter, had maneuvered to involve him in bureaucratic infighting that would embarrass former Attorney General Robert Kennedy, who had authorized the installation of FBI wiretaps . Hoover: The congressman's interest in the matter was to embarrass Robert Kennedy .
 In August 1968 Hoover planted a story with Life magazine that Gallagher had connections with organized crime . In 1967 a mysterious burglary at Gallagher’s house involved theft only of documents; police told the congressman it was “an FBI job job 22” In 1968 a story in Life magazine
 Hoover leaked a story that a minor mob figure had died of a seizure while making love to the congressman’s wife . Hoover leaked the story around town . Hoover then leaked it to the press that the mob figure died of an epileptic seizure .
 The threat of attack apparently worked, because the scurrilous material was never published and the spreading of the rumor about Gallagher's wife stopped . Gallagher’s wife was the target of the alleged attack .
 The congressman never carried out his threat to make the speech, but the rumors about his wife were never fully cleared . The congressman's wife was never cleared .
 Gallagher pleads guilty to one count of tax evasion and was sentenced to two years in jail . Gallagher also pleaded guilty to tax evasion in a separate case . Gallagher is sentenced to a two-year jail sentence .
 Hoover’s FBI had destroyed the congressman's credibility and his political future even before he rose to give the speech which accused Hoover of being the American Beria . Hoover's FBI destroyed his credibility and political future before he gave the speech .
 Roy Cohn signed a statement affirming Gallagher’s statements concerning the entire slander episode were truthful . Another episode occurred following the Kennedy assassination when a certain writer was becoming famous for his book which criticized the findings of the Warren Commission . In 1986, when Roy Cohn was dying of complications from
 Hoover investigated authors of several books critical of Warren Commission Report . Hoover was investigating authors critical of the Warren Commission report . At the time, Hoover was looking into authors of critical books .
 Hoover obtained photographs of this author with some prostitutes in an apparent sado-masochistic session in which one of the prostitutes was sticking pins into the head of the author’s erect penis .
 Hoover’s destruction of anyone who crossed him, or anyone whom he perceived as a political enemy, extended beyond the sex realm into the “Communist smear,” which reached its zenith during the reign of Joseph McCarthy and Richard Nixon .
 Hoover was the source of McCarthy’s material, which McCarthy waved in front of TV cameras . McCarthy smeared anyone he could identify as being a proCommunist or Communist sympathizer . Hoover provided Nixon with his Communist smear material which eventually catapulted him to the presidency .
 Hoover looked upon Kennedy as a soft-headed liberal dilettante who was selling out to the Communists . Hunt, and Willoughby, was still alive in 1963 when John Kennedy was assassinated +4 Hoover .
 Kennedy thus came under the double-headed attack of being soft on communism and having loose morals . Kennedy was accused of having a loose morals and being soft .
 The extent of Hoover’s abuse of his power and position is so extensive and widely documented that it would take hundreds of pages to cover it in its hideous detail . Hoover's use of the public treasury to blackmail major public figures in the United States is so widespread and so widely documented
 He investigated the sex life of actor Rock Hudson when there was no reason at all to believe that Rock Hudson was a menace to this country . He even investigated actor's sex life .
 Hoover’s secret files on government officials, celebrities, and powerful people were widely known to exist among knowledgeable circles in Washington, many from having been subjected to the brunt of them . Hoover's secret files are widely known among Washington circles .
 His files on personal matters of powerful people were sequestered in one of his eight offices in his personal suite in the FBI building .
 Hoover’s secretary of thirty-six years, Helen Gandy, claims she destroyed only those files that were related to his personal business and personal matters . Gandy says she turned all other files over to Attorney General Edward Levi .
 There is also reason to believe that the most secret files were removed from Hoover's home in Washington, D.C., and taken to the Blue Ridge Club near Harper’s Ferry, West Virginia, where John Mohr, an FBI official, held poker parties .
 When Senate investigators decided to inspect the club, it burned down the night before their scheduled visit . The club burned down night before they were scheduled to inspect it .
 One they identified as James Crawford [FBI] employee], another as John Mohr. The FBI has not confirmed the identity of the two men . The two men were identified as FBI employees .
 Mohr denied under oath that he took any of the files from Hoover’s 30th Street residence . Angleton occasionally played poker with Mohr and his group at the Blue Ridge Chup “28H ‘28H Mohr’
 Most of Hoover’s files on Donovan are missing . It was an interesting clue, if Angleton meant it as that, because most of Hoover's files were missing .
 Only a few hundred pages remain of what must have been thousands of pages . Hoover amassed on his longtime nemesis, aides say .
 Some believe that Hoover’s most secret files still exist somewhere and are being used as tools of power . Hoover's most secret documents are believed to still be in existence .
 Hoover's assistant director implied that the files on Senator Sam Ervin kept him from inquiring too deeply into the FBI’s role during the Watergate hearings . William Sullivan said the files kept him away from questioning the FBI's role in Watergate .
 The evidence is overwhelming that J. Edgar Hoover illegally participated in a massive effort to pin the crime of President Kennedy’s assassination on a lone assassin . The evidence shows that the Mafia and Dallas police in the conspiracy were involved in the assassination of JFK .
 It is true beyond a reasonable doubt that Hoover was an accessory to the crime of assassinating the president of the United States, before and after the fact . Hoover should have been sent to prison for his role in the assassination of JFK .
 He knew the assassination was going to happen and did nothing to stop it . He knew it was inevitable, but did not stop it. He knew nothing about the assassination .
 He knew that there was a conspiracy and did everything in his power to conceal it, including tampering with and destruction of evidence, court documents show .
 Hoover hated Robert Kennedy, had utter disrespect for John Kennedy, and was on his way out of his cherished position as director of the FBI and knew it . Hoover hated the Kennedy family and knew he was going to be out of the job .
 Hoover faced the very likely prospect of being dismissed before the end of Kennedy’s second term . Once Kennedy was reelected in 1964, Hoover was likely to be dismissed . Hoover was the president of the United States in 1964 .
 They undoubtedly knew of Hoover’s homosexuality and knew that they had this over his head, and that it would keep Hoover's mouth shut . They knew that Kennedy's womanizing would keep his mouth shut, he says . Hoover's homosexuality would keep Kennedy from speaking out about Kennedy's
 Hoover therefore had powerful personal motivations to see Kennedy gone . Hoover had personal reasons to see him go . Hoover's personal motivation to kill Kennedy was to get Kennedy out of office .
 Hoover realized that if he were removed as the head of the FBI he would lose his power to conceal his own personal secrets, he would be finished . Hoover realized he was finished if he was removed as head of FBI . Hoover believed that if removed he would have lost his ability to conceal
 Hoover also knew that the financial favors he had received from the Mafia over the years would ultimately be exposed if Robert Kennedy were left to his maniacal drive to put Jimmy Hoffa and Mafia chieftains in prison . Hoover knew that Robert Kennedy would not be able to find out if he
 The plotters logically would not have proceeded with the assassination of the president of the United States had they not been confident that Hoover’s response would be thoroughly protective of their role as perpetrators . Also, perhaps most critical of all, the plotters would have had to be confident that
 Frank Costello arranged for Hoover to have free bungalow in La Jolla used by Tolson over the years . Hoover and Tolson used the free Bungalow and race track fixes that Costello had arranged for him .
 Anthony Summers is right about Hoover, that the Mafia and the CIA had a photograph of Hoover and Tolson in a homosexual act . And it is very compelling to me that Anthony Summers was right .
 Hoover and Tolson stayed in the same bungalow in La Jolla every year . It was provided by Clint Murchison, a business partner of Jimmy Hoffa and the Mafia .
 It would have been a simple matter for the Mafia to get such a photograph . The Mafia would have had it easy to get the photograph, it is said .
 All they had to do was hire a private detective to take care of it for them . All they needed to do is hire the private detective .
 It was their standard practice to compromise law-enforcement officials and politicians, it was said . It was also standard practice for them to compromise with law enforcement officials, politicians .
 Evidence clearly and convincingly shows that Hoover was a part of the plot to murder John F Kennedy almost from the beginning . Hoover was designed to provide Hoover with perfect, plausible deniability, author says .
 Perhaps he didn’t know the complete details of the plot, but, again, that is an integral part of plausible deniability . Perhaps perhaps he didn't know the details, but that is part of his plausible deniable . Perhaps he knew the details but that's an integral
 At an absolute minimum, I believe that Hoover knew that John Kennedy was going to be assassinated and was aware of the general outline of the plot . Hoover knew John Kennedy would be assassinated, according to the historian .
 It would not surprise me to learn someday that Hoover was in the master plan up to his eyeballs, the archfiend behind it . Hoover was behind it all, and it's not surprising to learn he was behind the plan .
 Those who would like to exonerate Hoover from being part of the plot to protect his image are free to do so . But I for one would not bet one dollar on it. Hoover would not be exonerated .
 Lyndon Johnson was a "clear, swift, penetrating mind, with an abundance of its own type of imagination and subtleties," says President Obama . "I am sure I have never met a more intelligent person than Lyndon Johnson"
 Eric F Goldman, The Tragedy of Lyndon Johnson (Special consultant to President Lyndon B Johnson from 1963 until September 1966)
 It is not being asked by the Warren Commission, for all one knows . The Warren Commission is not currently looking into the issue .
 Joesten went on to say that never bothering to ask that all-important question alone stamped the Warren Commission’s seemingly painstaking investigation as a fraud . The Warren Commission never asked that question, he said, and it was a fraud.
 Find the person who stands to benefit the most from any given crime and you have found the most likely suspect . Find out who is likely to be involved in any crime .
 Find the person who stands to /ose everything if the crime is not committed and you have found the most likely suspect . Find out who is likely to be responsible for the crime if not committed .
 President Johnson was deeply involved in the planning and knew the details of Kennedy’s trip to Dallas, Texas .
 Hunt and J Edgar Hoover formed the most powerful and ruthless combination in U.S. history . Hunt and Hoover were the most ruthless and powerful combination in US history .
 The motorcade passed by Oswald’s workplace, passing by the Trade Mart . This was an excuse for the motorcade to go down Elm Street into an ideal crossfire setting . Oswald's workplace was the site for the luncheon speech .
 Hunt and powerful rightwing Democrats in Dallas and with a little help from the Secret Service, the arrangements could have been made . Hunt and others in Dallas could have arranged to meet Hunt .
 In criminal investigations, if a person actively attempts to cover up a crime and is a prime suspect in terms of motive, means, and opportunity, it is considered tantamount to proof of guilt . Johnson despised Kennedy and apart from that had a personal obsession, bordering on the pathological, to
 Johnson had the motive and, above all others, the means and opportunity, it follows . It follows that the first place to look is the evidence concerning his cover-up actions immediately after Kennedy was assassinated .
 In so doing, we can keep in mind that Johnson did not have Hoover’s reason to cover up . In doing so, we must keep in .
 Unlike Hoover, no one would have blamed Johnson's incompetence for the president’s death . Hoover's incompetence would have been blamed for Johnson's death .
 Within seventy-two hours, the limousine was shipped to Cincinnati where it was completely re-built . The limo was then shipped back to Cincinnati .
 This was all done through someone who had the power to issue sweeping orders and to have them obeyed without question . This is all done by someone who has the power of issuing sweeping orders . This was done through a powerful figure in the White House .
 This type of commandeering of evidence was a violation of the laws of Texas and was a federal crime . The case was the first of its kind in Texas and federal history .
 By federal and state law, JFK’s autopsy should have been performed in Dallas, Dallas, Texas . The case should also have been prosecuted and tried in the state of Texas .
 The unprecedented seizure of evidence could perhaps be benignly explained by Lyndon Johnson’s deep suspicion that the conspiracy originated in Texas and therefore he had to seize all the evidence to get it out .
 The evidence was seized so that it could be totally under the control of Lyndon Johnson and he could be certain that there would not be a real investigation . But a more sinister and believable explanation is that the evidence was . seized so it . could be . under control of the . control of
 A good example of how the case was influenced involves Dallas District Attorney Henry Wade . Wade would have been in charge of the investigation and prosecution in Dallas had he not been stopped on the orders of Lyndon Johnson .
 On November 23, 1963, Wade said preliminary reports indicated more than one person was involved in the shooting . Wade was quoted by the Dallas Morning News as saying that preliminary reports had indicated more people involved . Wade died in the Dallas suburb of Dallas .
 Wade’s story changed after he received a telephone call from Johnson aide, Cliff Carter . Wade says he was told by Carter that he had been in contact with Johnson's aide .
 Cliff Carter, President Johnson’s aide, called me three times from the White House that Friday night . Cliff Carter was President Johnson's aide . President Johnson called President Johnson three times that night, three times .
 President Johnson felt any word of a conspiracy would shake the nation to its foundation, he said . President Johnson said any news of a plot by foreign nations to kill President Kennedy would shake our nation . President Kennedy was assassinated in November 1963 .
 President Johnson worried about some conspiracy on the part of the Russians . President Johnson was worried about a conspiracy on some conspiracy .
 Oswald had all sorts of connections and affections toward Castro’s Cuba . Oswald had ties to the Cuban government .
 Washington’s word to me was that it would hurt foreign relations if I alleged a conspiracy, whether I could prove it or not, he says . Washington's word to him was that alleged conspiracy would hurt relations if he alleged it .
 I would just charge Oswald with plain murder and go for the death penalty, says author . Oswald would have been charged with simple murder and Oswald should have been tried for murder . Oswald was charged with the murder of his wife, who died in 1963 .
 Dallas police didn’t involve any foreign country in the assassination, says CNN.com's John Sutter . So, he went down to the Police Department at City Hall to see Captain Fritz .
 The day after the Zapruder film of the assassination had been shown on national television for the first time . Will Fritz and a small circle of old political cronies and businessmen were conversing over lunch when the discussion turned to the TV presentation .
 Fritz began to reminisce about his role in the events of that terrible weekend . Fritz began reminiscing about his part in the tragedy . Fritz says he will always remember his role as a hero .
 The captain continued to conduct the investigation until late Saturday, when he received a person-to-person telephone call from the new President .
 Gary Shaw noted that more research should be done to confirm the above . As Fritz put it to his circle of friends, “But when the President of the United States called me and ordered the investigation stopped, what could I doy t808l .
 She responded by giving me two names of retired Dallas police officers to call . The retired police officer gave her two names to call.
 Lyndon Johnson had called and ordered Captain Fritz to pull off questioning Oswald, he said . He said he remembered the lunch and confirmed that Captain Fritz had told that story .
 He said in “a couple of more hours he’d have broken Oswald, but they pulled Oswald out . He said that in ‘a couple more hours’ he'd have broken . Oswald out, he said .
 He said he didn't remember being at that lunch, but that he had attended luncheons with Fritz and other officers and that subject hadn't come up . He said that he didn’t remember attending that lunch .
 CNN's John Sutter says he didn't volunteer a lot of information about his father's life . Sutter: "I did ask him one time...I say think I asked him—he was not one to volunteer any information" He says he's not one of the people who
 I asked him one time, I can’t remember just about how I put it to him, just he and I were sitting in the office one day talking about something else and this came up . So I asked, "Just he and me were sitting on the office talking about
 He never indicated to me for sure that—he didn’t tell me outright —that the president had called him, he said . The president never indicated that he had been called, he says .
 "I feel like that he did, but I have no way of proving that," he says . "I don't have any personal knowledge that he [LZ] did," he adds .
 Leavelle said that Frank Harrell and Captain Fritz did get together once in awhile, but as to what Fritz may have said to Frank he had no way of knowing . The two men were both active in World War II .
 Leavelle remembered that when Chief Curry told Captain Fritz that the FBI was going to take over, “the captain put up quite a bit of argument’; that he “fought furiously about it,” but the chief said, "Cap, this is
 The implication as to Johnson’s involvement in the assassination conspiracy scarcely requires explanation . The implication is that Johnson was involved in the conspiracy to kill JFK .
 Lyndon Johnson called a Parkland Hospital doctor after he had been shot and asked him to talk with him . The call was made from Washington, D.C., to Parkland hospital in Parkland .
 As I was turning around, a nurse tapped me on the shoulder and asked if I would take a telephone call in the supervisor’s office . The nurse asked me to take the call, and I said yes .
 She had chosen me to take the call because I was the head of Surgical ‘B,” the team that began the operation . She chose him because he was the leader of the Surgical "B" team that started the operation.
 It is indeed strange that Johnson should be making such a call personally, Johnson said . Then, more questions followed, inquiries that had frightening, inconceivable answers“
 It seems that he must have been extremely anxious and in a state of desperation about something . It seems to be that he was extremely anxious .
 An obvious explanation is not that he was genuinely trying to seek a confession from Oswald . Instead, he was trying to find out what happened to Oswald .
 President Obama called Dallas Police to stop the interrogation of Oswald, obviously to keep him from talking . After all, he had called the police to keep Oswald from talking, he did so .
 It seems more likely that Johnson's strange telephone call was to create an image of himself as a man who believed in Oswald’s guilt . Johnson, Johnson, believed that Oswald, Oswald, had acted alone, according to the book .
 Johnson would have known that fact, if, as he said, he had a man there in the room who could have taken a confession . One would think that Johnson . He would have . known that . If he had, as well as Johnson, he would have been able to take
 Common sense tells us that Johnson probably knew that there was little possibility of Oswald saying anything to anybody, and made the call to create history favorable to himself . Johnson knew that Oswald would not have been able to talk to anybody .
 Johnson could have been paranoid, fearful that if Oswald survived, or could say anything, he would provide evidence for a conspiracy, with details . On the other hand, Johnson could be paranoid, fearing that Oswald could provide evidence .
 Johnson pondered the possibility Oswald would regain consciousness and start talking . Johnson wanted his man there to control the situation, who was privy to the information .
 Johnson grabbed the telephone to call the emergency room at Parkland Hospital . Johnson was rushed to the hospital with a broken leg .
 Johnson lied to Jacqueline Kennedy when he told her that Robert Kennedy had suggested he take the oath of office in Dallas . Add to this the fact that he lied to her when he said Robert Kennedy suggested he took the oath in Dallas, Texas .
 Robert Kennedy was surprised when he heard this and said that he had made no such suggestion . Robert Kennedy said he had never made such a suggestion . He said he was surprised by the revelation .
 Johnson lied again in his deposition to the Warren Commission when he stated that Robert Kennedy had asked him to take the oath immediately in Dallas, Texas . He lied again on this subject in a deposition .
 Johnson had proposed the idea on the telephone to Robert Kennedy, who was taken aback . Robert Kennedy was also taken aback by the idea .
 Loft Johnson lied in his Warren Commission affidavit when he said that Ken O’ Donnell, Kennedy’s aide, had twice urged him to take the presidential plane back to Washington . He agreed only to call Johnson back to answer his question “Who could swear me in�
 Johnson said he consented, with the stipulation that he would wait there until Mrs. Johnson arrived . Johnson said that “he consented” to the request .
 O’Donnell denied this, telling author William Manchester that he had no conversation regarding Air Force One . He added that if the Kennedy party had known that Johnson was going on Air Force Two they would have taken Air Force two .
 Johnson's insistence on taking the oath in Dallas raises the suspicion that he wanted to take control of Kennedy’s body, which was also placed on Air Force One . He said Air Force Two was an exact duplicate of Air . One .
 Johnson achieved an initial statement of succession that appeared to be in harmony with the Kennedy family . Also, by having the photo opportunity of standing beside Jacqueline Kennedy for the swearing-in ceremony, he achieved a photo opportunity that seemed to be of unity .
 Better to have them in his dominion than flying back to Washington where they could get their heads together and possibly start asking serious questions .
 One would think that it would be all-important for Johnson to get back to the White House and assume the complex duties of governing the nation in its time of shock and confusion .
 President Johnson held up the flight for over an hour and a half until Kennedy’s body was aboard Air Force One and Oswald had been captured . Johnson had been formally sworn in, perhaps to eliminate any possibility of a revolt on the part of the Kennedy camp had .
 There was no need whatsoever for Johnson to delay the flight and subject Jacqueline Kennedy to the agony of his presence in the formal succession . Johnson should not have delayed the flight, he says .
 Immediately after the assassination, Johnson ordered that the entire investigation be conducted by the FBI under the supervision of J Edgar Hoover .
 He ordered all other investigations by federal government or local government to be stopped . Furthermore, he ordered all investigations by local government or federal government to stop .
 This placed Johnson in virtual control of the investigation through J Edgar Hoover . Hoover detested the Kennedys and had everything to gain by John Kennedy’s death, and everything to lose if Kennedy lived .
 One of Johnson’s first acts after the assassination was to float the idea of creating a Texas Commission consisting solely of Texans to investigate the assassination .
 Johnson backed off and formed the Warren Commission, appointing all the members himself under the guidance of J Edgar Hoover . When this created objections, Johnson back off and backed off, appointing himself himself .
 The commission is investigating the crime but the evidence supplied to them is under the control of Lyndon Johnson . Thus, we have a commission investigating the murder of JFK's son .
 Johnson should have been a prime suspect, by all standards and precedence in criminology . How unbelievable, when Johnson should be prime suspect in the case, is how unbelievable .
 Medical team consisted of government employees who were under oath to do what they were told by their superiors . Johnson’s control of the autopsy was assured, he must have thought .
 It defies common sense that all of this could have gone on without his knowing about it, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm not sure what happened to him, but he should have been careful"
 In a court of law, evidence to establish proof of other crimes committed by the accused, if in context, or in a conspiracy, is considered admissible if it sheds light on the person’s capability and motive to commit the crime at issue .
 For years, men came into Lyndon Johnson’s office and handed him envelopes stuffed with cash . Johnson's office was filled with envelopes of cash . The president's office has been filled with cash for years .
 President Obama's office in which he sat was the office of the Vice President of the United States . The president's office is now located in Washington, D.C.
 Halfen revealed that his Mafia franchise network had given Johnson $500,000 in cash contributions over a ten-year period while he was in the Senate . Halfen also revealed his Mafia network had also given Johnson cash contributions to his Senate seat .
 Johnson used his influence to kill anti-racket bills and thwart investigations of organized crime . For that, he used his considerable influence to thwart investigations .
 There is another sinister series of events that points to the possibility that Lyndon Johnson was capable of participating in a plot to murder . Halfen substantiated his accusations against Johnson with a letter from Johnson to the Texas Board of Parole on his behalf .
 The scandal involved a Texan named Billie Sol Estes, who along with Lyndon Johnson was being being implicated in a major scandal . Among other things, the scandal involved Estes’ acquiring millions in federal cotton allotment payments on land which was under water or was actually owned by
 Estes was also implicated in a scheme involving fraudulent borrowings on thousands of nonexistent fertilizer tanks . 15,000 alleged tanks in one county alone were alleged to be in fact nonexistent .
 John Down, conducted an investigation on his own and, with an associate, purchased a newspaper, the Pecos Independent and Enterprise, to expose the scandal in a series of three articles . Oscar Griffen, the editor of the newspaper, received a Pulitzer Prize .
 The Estes scandals were being investigated by Henry Marshall, a Department of Agriculture official . Marshall was interested in Estes’ connections with Lyndon Johnson .
 Marshall was shot dead and found in a remote section of his farm near Franklin, Texas . Marshall was found dead before any official action could be taken by authorities .
 He was shot five times in the stomach by a bolt-action, .22 caliber rifle that lay near the body . He had been shot 5 times in stomach by the rifle .
 In what was common Texas justice at the time, a local justice of the peace ruled that Marshall’s death was a suicide without the benefit of an autopsy . Marshall's death was ruled a suicide by a local judge .
 Marshall's widow violently protested and after public complaints, Marshall’s body was exhumed . Later, after public outcry, the body of Marshall was re-exhumed, and the widow protested . Marshall's body was later ex-humed after a public outcry .
 Marshall had received a severe blow to his head and was asphyxiated with carbon monoxide . Estes ultimately went to prison (although he was never charged with the murder of Marshall). Estes testified before a grand jury concerning the death of Marshall .
 Estes linked Vice President Johnson and two other men to the execution of Henry Marshall . Estes said he and two others were responsible for Marshall's execution . The execution took place in 1881 .
 Two years ago this month, convicted swindler Billie Sol Estes told a grand jury in Robertson County, Robertson County . Estes was convicted of swindling a $1.2 million scam .
 The legendary con man claimed Lyndon B Johnson, about to become vice president, had ordered the 1961 murder of U.S. Agriculture Department agent Henry H Marshall . He claimed that Johnson ordered the murder of Marshall in 1961 .
 Estes said the future president was fearful Marshall, of Bryan, could link Johnson aide Clifton Carter to Estes' fraudulent activities . Estes: Marshall feared Marshall could link Estes’ fraudulent activities to Carter .
 Wallace had been convicted of murder with malice in the 1951 killing of Austin golf pro J Doug Kinser . Wallace was found guilty of murder in Austin, Texas, in 1951 . He was sentenced to life in prison for his role in the killing .
 Kinser, the thirty-three-year-old golf professional, was going with Lyndon’s sister Josefa . Lyndon's sister was also going with her sister .
 In what was apparently a jealous rage, Wallace drove up to the Pitch and Putt golf course where Kinser worked and shot him dead . Wallace then drove to the golf course and shot the golfer dead .
 The jury found Wallace guilty “of murder with malice aforethought” but, incredibly, the jury decided on a penalty of 5 only a five-year suspended sentence . Wallace was found guilty of murder in the first degree .
 The prosecuting attorney in the case was also an LBJ ally . According to the Dallas Times Herald article, the prosecuting attorney was also LBJ .
 The extreme nature of Lyndon Johnson’s obsession for power and his willingness to do anything to achieve it went back to his days at Southwest State Teachers College in San Marcos, Texas . The Austin Statesman commented that this case was “marked from the start to finish by the unusual
 A ruthless use of political power in San Marcos made faculty members and classmates reluctant to discuss those aspects of his career . Students and faculty members are reluctant to talk about his political career .
 This bizarre image of Johnson as a young man, arranging to have pages cut out of his college yearbook to protect his reputation, strikes one as being highly apropos to what occurred in the Kennedy assassination . The image fits a weird pattern of criminality that Johnson began to exhibit as a
 President Kennedy’s secretary, Evelyn Lincoln, described the president's peculiar behavior in her book Kennedy and Johnson .
 Mr Johnson started out, from the very beginning, to spend as much time as he possibly could around the White House . Mr Johnson, on the other hand, started out .
 There were two doors in my office that opened out on the colonnade that led to the South Lawn . The doors were open to the Colonnade, which led to a South Lawn.
 Mr Johnson chose to enter the West Wing through one of the doors of his office . Mr Johnson's visit to the White House was a surprise visit .
 "Nearly every morning he would open that door, grunt and pause for a moment to look around to see what was going on," he said . Nearly every morning, he would look around the door, grunging and pausing to look at what was happening .
 He would look into the President’s office to see if Mr Kennedy was there, or pause to talk to people who came in and out of my office . Mr Kennedy would also pause to speak to people coming into his office .
 Mr Kennedy was standing near Mr Kennedy's desk when he arrived at his desk . He was a little late coming through the door and Mr Kennedy stood near his desk, he said .
 Mr Johnson and Mr Johnson exchanged greetings and went on his way to the hall of honour .
 Johnson's driver let him out near the sidewalk leading to the President’s office on the South Lawn . I checked and learned that Mr Johnson was released from his car .
 He would then walk up the sidewalk past the President’s office to the door of his office . He would walk up that sidewalk . President's office would be at the bottom of the sidewalk .
 From his office he went out into the hall which led to the reception room . From my office I went out to the hall where he went to see the reception . I was delighted to see how he had gone from his office to his office .
 It was only a short distance from that room to his office in the Executive Office Building across the street . It was just a short way from that .
 By coming into my office, Mr Johnson was creating the image of working closely with Mr Kennedy at all times, especially if he was in the outer office when any Cabinet men or other officials came in .
 President Obama would be seen coming into the reception room from the area of the President’s office . Also, when he came out of the . reception room, the press would get the same impression .
 Johnson held Air Force One on the ground in Dallas until his image as president was broadcast to the world, with Jacqueline Kennedy’s tacit consent and approval . This was not a spontaneous act, but was part of a carefully crafted plan .
 Stories of Lyndon Johnson’s viciousness and cruelty prevail among virtually all who knew him .
 In all instances this cruelty was directed at subordinates who were in Johnson’s thrall; or hapless, powerless victims . In all cases, Johnson was cruel to his subordinates or victims .
 Johnson was openly proud of his ability to “break” people . He was proud of being able to ‘break’ people .
 He would deliberately set out to destroy a rival, or someone who threatened him, just for the fun of it . Nothing would stop him, no act was too gross or inhuman, until he had succeeded in whipping his target into abject submission or humiliation .
 Johnson would indulge in obsequious flattering and attentiveness to those who had power over him or could help him in his pursuit of power and control . At the same time, Johnson would indulge in flattering .
 Robert Caro describes Johnson’s pattern of ingratiating himself with those in power, attaching himself to them until he could rise above or succeed them . Caro: Johnson's pattern was to attach himself to those who were in power to rise above them .
 At San Marcos College he became the favorite of the college’s president, Cecil E Evans . At the same time Johnson was loathed and ridiculed by the student body . He became the college's protector and promoter in campus politics, while at the time Johnson loathed .
 His list of mentors grew to include President Franklin D. Roosevelt, who became another admirer and promoter of Johnson . Johnson's mentor included President Franklin Roosevelt .
 People in power were spared the wrath and cruelty that Johnson heaped with incredible venom on those who were dependent on him for security or emotional needs . Johnson was spared the cruelty that heaped on those in power .
 Johnson’s jealousy and contempt for John and Robert Kennedy were commonly known in 1963 . In 1963, President Johnson was known for his contempt for the Kennedy family .
 Johnson was offered the vice presidential nomination after he was defeated in his run for the presidency in the Democratic Convention in 1960 . Johnson ran for the Democratic nomination in 1960, but was defeated .
 LBJ reportedly begged and cried for it until LBJ reluctantly gave in after a phone call to John Kennedy . The Kennedys had second thoughts, but Robert Kennedy tried to withdraw the offer, but he gave in .
 By the fall of 1963, rumors were rife that Johnson would be dumped from the 1964 Democratic national ticket . Rumors were rife about the 1964 presidential election .
 President Kennedy told his secretary, Evelyn Lincoln, that Johnson would not be the vice president during Kennedy’s second term . On the day he left for Dallas President Kennedy said Johnson would be not be vice president .
 Robert Kennedy confirmed this in an interview with historian Arthur Schlesinger . He said that President Kennedy told him the night before the assassination that President Johnson was incapable of telling the truth .
 Robert Kennedy: "My experience with him since then is that he lies all the time" Robert Kennedy went on to say, “And my experience with . him since . that was that he lied all the . time.” Robert Kennedy said .
 By 1941, also the major patterns of his entire life are established and clear, says the author . And by 1941, he had already established his own patterns of life, he says .
 The pattern of Johnson’s predilection for corruption would continue into his presidency, as exemplified by the Bobby Baker affair . Johnson displayed a genius for discerning a path to power, an utter ruthlessness in destroying obstacles in that path .
 Johnson was expected to be dumped by President Kennedy from the second spot on the 1964 Democratic ticket .
 Bobby Baker’s corruption resulted in him being sent to prison on seven counts of tax evasion, theft, and fraud involving nearly $100,000 in political payoff money . Baker was convicted of seven counts, including tax evasion and theft .
 Bobby Baker was in position, with influence to peddle, and he believed in peddling it at a profit . Baker believed in selling influence at profit, and believed in turning it at profit .
 On a $19,600 job, he had in a relatively few years parlayed his influence into a two million dollar estate . The estate was built on a relatively small fortune .
 The Kennedy brothers, the cold and ruthless Attorney General and the President, knew what was going on . Meanwhile, the calculating Kennedy brothers were calculating themselves .
 They, their ivy leaguers and their Irish mafia, had never trusted Lyndon . Lyndon Johnson had never been happy with the political shotgun wedding that had dictated his choice .
 Evidence seems conclusive that the Kennedys had decided to ditch him as their running mate in the coming election . The evidence seems conclusive .
 The sharpest political observers in Washington are dead convinced of their design, to be effected probably in January . The new president is expected to be inaugurated in January 2015 .
 The Kennedys calculated the way in which to make him a thorough political liability, even beyond Democratic redemption, was to expose his close friend whom he had made Secretary to the Democratic Majority . This free-wheeling peddler of everything from favors for organized gamblers to the ardor
 President Kennedy was asked about the Bobby Baker scandal in November 1963 . Bobby Baker was a member of the Kennedy administration .
 Mr Baker is now being investigated, and I think we will have a good deal more about Mr Baker before we are through . Mr Baker has been accused of sexual misconduct in the past . He has been charged with sexual assault and sexual assault in relation to an alleged sexual assault .
 Evelyn Lincoln wrote that the day President Kennedy left for Dallas they discussed the Bobby Baker case and the effects of the scandal on the campaign . Lincoln: "We just try to do the best we can"
 I was fascinated by this conversation and wrote it down verbatim in my diary . It was the first time I had seen this conversation in a diary .
 I was also glad that I could be a part of the goals and ambitions he was striving for in the future. I'm also glad he was able to be part of his ambitions, he said. I was glad that he was also able to help him achieve his goals .
 He looked straight ahead, and without hesitating he replied, “At this time I am thinking about Governor Terry Sanford of North Carolina.”
 It had been my feeling for quite a while that Lyndon Johnson would not be the Vice-Presidential candidate in the next campaign .
 The hush on Baker may be explained by a conversation between Johnson and House Speaker John McCormack as reported in The Washington Payoff by ex-Washington lobbyist .
 Winter-Berger was discussing public relations with McCormack in Washington, D.C. on February 4, 1964, in his office .
 President Johnson barged in and began ranting hysterically, oblivious to the lobbyist’s presence .
 I practically raised that motherfucker, and now he’s gonna make me the first President of the United States to spend the last days of his life behind bars, he says . "I’ll be the first president of the U.S. to spend his last
 When Johnson finally noticed Winter-Berger’s presence, McCormack explained that the visiting lobbyist was a close friend of Nat Voloshen, who was a Mob fixer of enormous influence .
 Tell Nat Nat that he wants him to get in touch with Bobby Baker as soon as possible . Tell Nat that I want him to contact Bobby Baker again .
 Tell Nat to tell Bobby that he will give him a million dollars if he takes this rap . Tell Bobby to tell him to tell Nat that he would give him $1 million if he took the rap . I will give Nat a million dollar to Bobby for his rap .
 Johnson seems to have believed that even as president of the United States he would have been sent to the penitentiary had his role been uncovered .
 Imagine how he must have felt before the assassination when he was only the vice president and was about to be dropped from the ticket . Imagine how it must have been for him to feel before he was assassinated .
 It certainly appears that he considered his very survival to be at stake unless the Bobby Baker scandal was squelched .
 The Baker affair crystallized the more or less vague plans to eliminate Kennedy which had already been in existence . The roots of the drama undoubtedly go back to the 1960 Convention, as I have already set forth .
 The murder of a president is hazardous business under the best of circumstance . President Obama's murder is not the first time a president has been murdered .
 The threat of complete exposure which faced Johnson in the Baker scandal provided that final impulse . Johnson was forced to step down from the White House .
 He was forced by the instinct of self-preservation to give the go-ahead signal to the plotters . The plotters had long been waiting for the right opportunity to strike .
 In light of the damning activities of Lyndon Johnson immediately following the assassination, we should ask ourselves if there is possibly some explanation for Johnson’s actions, other than that he was part of the conspiracy from beginning to end .
 Several possible levels of involvement or scenarios in the conspiracy that could explain Johnson’s behavior after the assassination .
 We can examine the hypothesis that Johnson did not know about the assassination in advance . First, we can examine whether Johnson knew of the assassination .
 Madeleine Brown's incriminating statement about Johnson's advanced knowledge of the plot was set aside . She says she has no reason to set aside Brown’s statement about the plot .
 We then could conceivably explain his behavior as a fearful reaction that the American people could not deal with the truth . We could also explain that Johnson, in his presidential role, should embark on a cover-up to support the lone-assassin hoax .
 Shepard had been one of John Kennedy’s top military aides at the time of the assassination . Shepard was one of the first persons to brief Johnson when he returned from Dallas on November 22, 1963 .
 The admiral said there was a palpable sense of fear in the White House of an imminent nuclear war because of the assassination . CNN's John Sutter asked the admiral whether or not there was any palpable fear of war .
 He went on to say, “I know what that feeling is like. I know what it is like," he said .
 Admiral Shepard, who was in a position to know, also told me that, contrary to any accounts, Kennedy had always treated Lyndon Johnson very well and with respect . Admiral Shepard said Kennedy always treated LBJ very well .
 When I questioned the admiral about the autopsy and casket switch, he knew nothing of any decoy ambulance or casket switches, he said . The admiral also said he didn't know about decoy ambulances or caskets .
 Admiral Burkley was the one to talk to about the autopsy, but he was dead . He said that he was talking to the Admiral, who was dead, but was not alive .
 The evidence in this book shows that Johnson knew very well that the Soviets were not involved i and that he should have seen through the obviously false evidence of Cuban involvement in the war .
 JFK was informed by John McCone, head of the CIA, that its investigation had shown that the evidence in Mexico City of Cuban involvement was false . In fact, on November 30, 1963 we know he was informed .
 HSCA testimony of CIA’s high-ranking officer John Scelso reveals that his initial report informed Richard Helms that Cuba and the Soviet Union were not involved in the assassination . Helms forwarded the report to President Johnson .
 This demolishes any argument that Johnson’s actions in the cover-up were sincerely to prevent nuclear war . It demolishes the argument that any attempt to prevent a nuclear war was made to prevent it .
 It is therefore virtually certain that Johnson used the war scare for his own sinister reasons to manipulate the Dallas police, Chief Justice Earl Warren, the Congress, government employees, and military personnel, for the purpose of orchestrating the cover-up .
 Manchester wrote that Earl Warren first refused and then accepted the assignment to head the presidential commission .
 President Obama "took me in, and told me how serious the situation was," she says . "He took me in. He took me into ... and I'm glad he did," she adds .
 He said there had been wild rumors, and that there was the international situation to think of . He added that there were also wild rumors and that the situation was very serious .
 He said he had just talked to Dean Rusk, who was concerned, and he also mentioned the head of the Atomic Energy Commission, who had told him how many millions of people would be killed in an atomic war .
 The only way to dispel these rumors, he said, was to have an independent and responsible commission . There was no one to head it except the highest judicial officer in the country .
 He said that if the public became aroused against Castro and Khrushchev there might be war . He said the public might become aroused against the two leaders .
 One of Johnson's first acts as president was to extend the FBI’s mandatory retirement age so that Hoover could continue in power . Hoover's retirement age was extended to allow him to continue to lead the FBI .
 Vice President Richard Nixon visited Senator Lyndon Johnson in 1964 . Vice President Nixon visited LBJ with his mother, Mrs. LBJ .
 Sam E Johnson, of Austin, Texas, died of a heart attack in 1955 . Johnson was hospitalized in 1955 after suffering from a stroke .
 Both had close comnections to organized crime and wealthy, powerful right-wing extremists . Both men had close ties with organized crime, wealthy, influential extremists . Also had close links to wealthy and powerful extremists, police say .
 Johnson’s use of the false war scare to intimidate influential political figures to serve on the Warren Commission was revealed in telephone transcripts released by the Lyndon B Johnson Library in 1993 .
 Richard Russell would be a member of the commission in 1963 . Russell would have been a member in the commission .
 The reader should keep in mind that Johnson, the master of deception 2) had control of the recording with a switch at his desk, so again he could be manufacturing his own image, as was his pattern for his entire adult life .
 The President announced that he is appointing a Special Commission to study and report upon all the facts and circumstances relating to the assassination of the late President John F Kennedy and the subsequent violent death of the man charged with the assassination .
 Chief Earl Warren, Chairman; Senator Richard Russell, Georgia; Senator John Sherman Cooper, Kentucky; Rep. Richard Russell of Georgia, Georgia . Sen. Richard Sherman Cooper of Kentucky, Georgia, Kentucky, Tennessee, Georgia. Sen. John Sherman of Kentucky. Rep. Sherruth of
 The President stated a Special Commission is to be instructed to evaluate all available information concerning the subject inquiry . The President said the Special Commission will evaluate all . available information .
 The Federal Bureau of Investigation, pursuant to an earlier directive of the President, is making complete investigations of the facts . The FBI is investigating the allegations .
 An inquiry is scheduled by the Texas Court of Inquiry convened by the Attorney General of Texas under Texas law . The inquiry will be conducted by the attorney general of Texas .
 The Special Commission will have before it all the evidence uncovered by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and all the information available to any agencies of the Federal Government . It will also have all the data available to the Special Commission .
 All Federal agencies and offices are being directed to furnish services in cooperation to the Special Commission . The Special Commission has been formed to investigate the allegations .
 The Commission will also be empowered to conduct any further investigation as deemed desirable . The Commission is also empowered to investigate any further investigations .
 The President is instructing the Special Commission to satisfy itself that the truth is known as far as it can be discovered . The Commission must report its findings and conclusions to the American people and to the world .
 Dick...it has already been announced and you can serve with anybody for the good of America . This is a question that has a good many more ramifications than on the surface, Dick says .
 The reason I ask you is because you have that same kind of temperament...and you can do anything for your country and don't go giving me that kind of stuff about you can’t serve with any-body...you’ll do anything. The reason you ask you
 Mr President, you ought to have told me you were going to name me, he says . Well, Mr President. Well, he said . He said, 'Mr President, I should have been told you you would name me'
 You didn't tell me you were going to name him. You did not...you talked about getting somebody from the Supreme Court...you didn’t tell me, he said he would name him . You did talk about getting someone from Supreme Court, he says .
 I told you I was going to name Warren Warren and you said it would be better to name Harlan Clark . Warren: "I told you that Warren would be a better name than Harlan." Harlan: "Warren was a good name. I told him I would name Warren
 He's deeply concerned, Dick, about the idea that they’re spreading throughout the communist world that Khrushchev has killed Kennedy ...now he didn’t. He’s deeply concerned . Dick, Dick says, about spreading the idea .
 I talked to Tom Dodd...’ve talked to everybody...and not a damned one of them...all these folks are going to be a part of this," says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: "I’m not sure what’s going to happen, but
 "You’re going to be at my command as long as I’m here. Well you damned sure . Well, you’ve been at your command...you’ll be at his command," he says . "You're going to have to be there
 I'm going to do it and go through with it...and say I think it is a wonderful idea. I’m going to . I'm not afraid to say yes, but I'm sure I will do it .
 I have deleted a portion here related to the previously deleted portion that I considered irrelevant . The deleted portion of this article has now been deleted .
 President Obama ordered his son down to the White House, but he didn't want to come, he said .
 Johnson’s extraordinary ability to persuade politicians and officials in Washington to do his bidding, no matter how repugnant to them; and the weakness of seemingly strong and important men to be browbeaten and manipulated by Johnson . Johnson's extraordinary . ability to . persuade politicians to do
 Johnson’s use of the nuclear war scare when in fact he himself did not believe it was true . Johnson's use of nuclear scare was based on his own belief that he believed it .
 Johnson’s revelation that the only purpose of the commission was to evaluate the Hoover report, which placed Johnson in control of the results via Hoover . Johnson revealed that the commission's only purpose was to examine the report .
 The use of the “Mexico City incident” alludes to Oswald’s trip to Mexico City, which as earlier discussed was set up by the conspirators for the very purpose that Johnson is now using on Russell . Russell is now being targeted by the same conspirators as
 The White House had already received information from the CIA that discounted it . And the CIA had already given it to the White House that it was a hoax .
 The CIA had informed the White House that the Soviets and Cuba were not involved in the attack . The White House had been told by the CIA that the Soviet-Cuba-U.S. was not involved .
 Johnson’s crude and insensitive pleasure in telling how Earl Warren cried and broke down under Johnson's brow-beating—typical of Johnson's renowned grossness and disregard for the dignity of others . Johnson's crudeness and disrespect for others is typical of his grossness, disregard
 Transcripts tell a remarkable story of a man who appeared to know exactly what he had planned to do . He called dozens of influential people throughout the U.S. to sweet-talk them and appeal to their vanity .
 Johnson cleverly thought through every contingency related to how he would take over the government and cover up the crime . It seems as though Johnson had cleverly planned out every contingency .
 It clearly, in my opinion, shows his use of the false nuclear war scare to orchestrate the cover-up . And it clearly, I think, shows that he clearly used the scare scare to cover up .
 It seems reasonable to ask how all of this could have gone on so swiftly and smoothly if Johnson had not been brought into the conspiracy before the fact . Johnson was brought in by the government to help set up the government .
 It should be emphasized that the elaborate forgery and manipulation of the evidence, on a grand scale, is without plausible explanation other than for sinister purposes related to Lyndon Johnson’s culpability .
 We shall examine another counter-argument that might seem plausible, but on scrutiny falls apart for the same reasons as above . We shall now examine the other counter-arguments that might be plausible .
 Johnson did not know about the assassination in advance, but immediately after the shooting he was contacted by the conspirators . He was told, suddenly, that he would have to cover up the crime because things had gone wrong .
 Right-wing Texas interests had Johnson in their pockets due to his corruption . This makes some sense because the right-wing interests had him in their pocket .
 This scenario is of dubious believability because of the intricacy of the steps to be taken in the cover-up that would have required advanced planning . Johnson’s steady performance immediately after the assassination, which bordered on the eerie .
 "He was totally calm and composed, at least on the surface and in public," he said . "I'm not going to go to jail. He was totally composed and calm," he added .
 Johnson appeared to be in complete control of himself and seemed to know exactly what he was doing . While almost everyone else was in disarray, Johnson seemed to be unperturbed .
 If he suddenly had been confronted by others to conduct the cover-up, it would seem likely it would have thrown him into a state of confusion .
 It does not make sense that a group of conspirators would assassinate the president and depend on the vice president to react and behave appropriately if he had not been warned in advance of what was going to happen . Also, as mentioned before, it doesn't make sense why a group would kill
 The conspirators would certainly have known that they would be heavily dependent on him for the success of the cover-up and would therefore have insisted that he be in the plot from the beginning . The conspirator would have known they would have insisted he be involved from the start .
 This leads to a scenario that I believe makes the most sense . /t is that Johnson knew about the assassination in advance but was not involved in its conception .
 Madeleine Brown 12 has stated on national television that Johnson implied to her that the assassination was going to take place . The allegation that Johnson had foreknowledge is supported by his mistress of twenty years, Madelein Brown 12 .
 She said he told her after the assassination that U.S. intelligence people and right-wing oil men were behind it . She also said that he also told her that the United States intelligence people had been behind the assassination .
 In this scenario, Johnson could have been exempt from initial planning of the conspiracy, but was told about it before the event and told what he was to do in the cover-up . Johnson was not exempt from the initial planning, but told what to do .
 In other words, he could have been persuaded, before the fact, by the Texas right wing because of the incriminating evidence they had on him concerning other crimes . The Texas right-wing could have persuaded him, before he was convicted, to the fact .
 Johnson was influenced by the threat of the Bobby Baker and Billie Sol Estes cases that were unfolding .
 Johnson's obsession to become president of the United States . This would be his last and only chance— and his golden opportunity . Johnson: "This is his last chance"
 It seems very plausible that Johnson would have been too fearful to resist the blackmail . After knowing about the plot, his crafty, brilliant mind went to work with gusto to plan what he would do .
 We must also consider that blackmail was not even necessary—that only a suggestion by the “Texas High Cabal” was all that was needed to bring him aboard . And we must also . consider that . only suggestion by . the ‘Texas High . Cabal was all
 Johnson’s motive to orchestrate the cover-up was not for patriotic reasons, and Johnson was not out of the loop, he says . Johnson's motive was not to hide his involvement, he adds .
 Johnson’s cover-up actions began within one and one-half hours of the fatal shot at Kennedy . Kennedy's body was removed from the casket on Air Force One at Love Field in Dallas, Texas .
 Johnson’s motive, means, and opportunity could fit together to make it highly conceivable that Johnson was involved in the conspiracy, probably very deeply, but at the very least knew about it in advance . This, combined with Johnson‘s history of venality and his history of
 Perhaps more evidence will be forthcoming that will fill in some of the gaps in comprehending Johnson’s role in the assassination . Johnson was assassinated in 1968 .
 I am inclined to believe that the assassination grew out of a general revolt among Kennedy’s enemies and that Johnson was brought in as a necessary part of the plot . I'm not sure if the assassination was actually a revolt against Kennedy's enemies .
 Only by grasping the totality of the man Johnson as an extremely complex person can one appreciate how central and pivotal he was as part of the conspiracy to assassinate the president . Johnson was driven by his obsession for control, power, and renown .
 The assassination enabled Johnson to become president and save himself from political oblivion and disgrace . Johnson's assassination enabled him to become the president .
 Lyndon Johnson Viewed as Tragic Character in History . LBJ's presidency became a tragedy, says historian .
 By the time Johnson left office, the reverence of the American people for the presidency was shattered, undermined by his lies and duplicity . The reverence for the U.S. for the president was shattered when he left office .
 The Vietnam war was drastically escalated under Johnson to became one of the darkest stains on the history of the U.S. The war was one of America's darkest stains in history .
 Over 58,000 U.S. soldiers were killed and over 500,000 wounded in the Vietnam War . Over 50,000 Americans were killed in the war .
 The faith of the American people in their government has not recovered fully to the present day, says President Obama . The faith in the U.S. government in the past has never recovered fully, he says .
 Recognizing that Lyndon Johnson was part of the conspiracy to assassinate John F Kennedy is something that I have come to reluctantly reluctantly . Recognizing the conspiracy was something that has always been difficult for me to do .
 "Only in the course of writing this book has the realization fully penetrated. Only in the . course of . writing this . book has been fully penetrated," author says .
 Robert McNamara said in 1994 that he believed Johnson was part of a conspiracy . McNamara was interviewed in 1994 about his role in the CIA .
 He said it was impossible for him to believe that Johnson was behind a plot to kill Kennedy . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . He said he would not believe he was behind the plot .
 Lyndon Johnson will live in infamy for all of history for his role in Vietnamt 2 and the suspicion that he plotted to assassinate his president, John Fitzgerald Kennedy . He will live a life of infamy .
 Johnson deserves this dark place in history most especially because of his role in the cover-up of the Kennedy assassination . I believe that it can be said with certainty that . Johnson deserves a dark place .
 If he were innocent, or hadn’t been so corrupted, he would have gone after the killers, he says . If he weren't innocent, he’d have gone to the killers. He says .
 There is no doubt that after he became president Johnson set out to create a liberal revolution in the U.S. Johnson's "liberal revolution" in the United States .
 Kennedy pushed through Medicare and Medicaid to provide health care for the aged and poor . He articulated affirmative action rights and used the presidency as a pulpit to dramatize the blight of poverty in contrast to unprecedented wealth .
 Even Johnson’s admirers, those who worked with him closely, considered him to be an extremely complex and crude person .
 The Lyndon Johnson was brave and brutal, compassionate and cruel, incredibly intelligent and infuriatingly insensitive . The LBJ worked with a shrewd and uncanny instinct for the jugular of his allies and adversaries, says historian .
 He could be altruistic and petty, petty, caring and crude, generous and petulant . He could also be bluntly honest and calculatingly devious within the same few minutes .
 "Once he made up his mind, his determination to succeed usually ran over or around whoever and whatever got in his way," he says . "Once you made up your mind, your determination will always run over"
 He used his prodigious energy to mount a social revolution and control everyone around him . He used that energy to control everyone and everything around him, including allies and adversaries alike .
 This complex mixture of good and evil, of good deeds following evil doings, is one of the great paradoxes of human existence . We shall never know L241 .
 While pursuing legal research for this book, I came across a court case that struck me as being not only pertinent to the murderers of John Kennedy but also poetry of an almost Shakespearian quality .
 Daniel Webster pleading before the Supreme Court of Massachusetts in 1830 . Webster was using hearsay evidence of a remarkable kind of kind .
 Lyndon Johnson’s torment after the assassination . gave new meaning to the word Machiavellian, as he gave new hope to the disadvantaged .
 Prosecution claimed Knapp aided and abetted one Crowninshield, who struck the fatal blows . The prosecution, headed by Daniel Webster, claimed that Knapp . Knapp has been sentenced to life in prison for his part in the case .
 Crowninshield himself committed suicide before the trial . It was therefore crucial to the prosecution to show Crowninhield’s guilt .
 In his closing argument, Daniel Webster discussed the probative value of the suicide on the issue of Crowninshield’s guilt . Webster also discussed the value of a suicide .
 Webster first describes the murder, then goes on: "No eye has seen him, no ear has heard him" Webster: "He has done the murder"
 The whole creation of God has neither nook nor corner, where the guilty can bestow it, and say it is safe . The guilty can't bestow a corner, and says it's safe. God's creation is not safe, says the author .
 "Such secrets of guilt are never safe from detection, even by men," says the author . "Not to speak of that eye which glances through all disguises, and beholds everything"
 Those who break the great law of heaven, by shedding man’s blood, seldom succeed in avoiding discovery . True it is, that Providence hath so ordained, and doth so govern things, that those who break . law by shedding . man's blood, often . succeed in
 Discovery must come, and will come, sooner or later . Especially, in a case exciting so much attention as this, discovery must come .
 A thousand eyes turn at once to explore every man, every thing, every circumstance, connected with the time and place . A thousand ears catch every whisper; a thousand excited minds intensely dwell on the scene, shedding all their light, and ready to kindle the slightest circumstance .
 It is false to itself; or rather it feels an irresistible impulse of conscience to be true to itself . It feels a temptation to be false to its own self-image .
 "It labors under its guilty possession, and knows not what to do with it," says CNN.com .
 "It finds itself preyed on by a torment which it does not acknowledge to God nor man," he says . "It is preyed upon by a tor which it doesn't acknowledge to either God nor men," he adds .
 "A vulture is devouring it, and it can ask no sympathy or assistance, either from heaven or earth," the author says of the scene .
 The secret which the murderer possesses soon comes to possess him; and, like the evil spirits of which we read, it overcomes him, and leads him whithersoever it will . The secret that the murderer possess soon comes into possess him .
 "He feels it beating at his heart, rising to his throat, and demanding disclosure," he says . He says he feels it .
 He thinks the whole world sees it in his face, reads it in the eyes of his eyes, and almost hears its workings in the very silence of his thoughts .
 "It betrays his discretion, it breaks down his courage, it conquers his prudence," he writes . "It breaks down the courage, It conquers the prudence. It betrays the discretion."
 When suspicions, from without, begin to embarrass him, and the net of circumstance to entangle him, the fatal secret struggles with still greater violence to burst forth . /t must be confessed, it will be confessed; there is no refuge from confession but suicide, and suicide is confession
 Johnson was afraid of being alone at night at night and always wanted someone near him before he went to sleep . He would ask aides to sit outside his room until he could go to sleep, and would ask them to do so .
 On January 22, 1973 Johnson died as he was taking an afternoon rest at his Texas ranch . Johnson died at his ranch in Texas .
 His heart gave out just as he was picking up the phone to call the ranch switchboard for help from the Secret Service . The Secret Service was called to the ranch to help .
 He died at the young age of sixty-four, appearing to be a broken old man with hippie-like long white hair . Four years after he voluntarily left the presidency without seeking a second term .
 Doris Kearns Goodwin was persuaded by Johnson to write his memoirs with him in the final months of his life at the LBJ Ranch . Goodwin's memoirs were published by Johnson in his final months at the ranch in Texas .
 Goodwin wrote that Johnson could never concentrate his attention on his memoirs . Goodwin said Johnson could not concentrate on the memoirs. Goodwin said that Johnson's memoirs would never be able to concentrate .
 In her book Lyndon Johnson and the American Dream, she wrote of Johnson’s mental deterioration near the end of his term as president .
 He granted only one interview, attended a few public meetings, and rarely left the ranch . The ranch owner rarely left his ranch to attend public meetings .
 He talked obsessively of conspiracy—those out to get him, the news media, the Harvard eastern establishment, etc. The Harvard Eastern establishment, he said, was out of touch with conspiracy .
 Doris Goodwin interpreted this as largely having to do with his having become president only because of the assassination of Kennedy, and remorse about the Vietnam war . He had once expressed to her, after he became president, feelings that his authority had been wrongfully acquired .
 It may have been his remorse about having participated in murder, and particular, the assassination of his president . But he may have also been remorseful about participating in murder .
 Doris Goodwin only hinted once once that any possibility of a conspiracy to assassinate President Kennedy . Goodwin: "Doris Goodwin hinted once that a conspiracy was possible" Goodwin: 'Doris Goodwin was a great friend of President Kennedy'
 Two assassinations, each ghastly in its own right, each uncovering still another side of our social pathology . Fourthgrade children in the South cheering the news that a “nigger loving” President had been murdered .
 Bobby Baker was mentioned on only one page, with nothing about his scandals and crimes and their connection to Johnson . Baker's crimes and crimes were only mentioned on one page .
 She was attempting to look at the human and psychological side of Johnson based on her close relationship with him as a White House aide and while working at the LBJ Ranch .
 If she delved deeply into the possibility of his involvement in the JFK assassination conspiracy, it would have derailed the entire book, she said . I presume that she felt that if she . delved deep into the . possibility of him . involvement, she wrote, "I presume that .
 Robert Caro, Robert Dalleck, Robert Haley and Robert D. Haley have all written volumes of LBJ's biographies . The same can possibly be said of all of Johnson’s major biographers .
 These authors did not look into the abyss; or it they did, they soon looked away . These authors looked away.
 Doris Goodwin, in a recent television interview, commented that Johnson had tried to will his own death in his latter years at the LBJ Ranch . Goodwin: "I think he tried to try to will himself to die at the ranch"
 Johnson's deep depression and obsessions with Daniel Webster’s earlier noted portrait of Crowninshield . I suggest that the reader compare Johnson's depression with that of Daniel Webster's earlier noted poet .
 Johnson had told several people during and after his term in office that he believed John Kennedy had been murdered by a conspiracy . Johnson had said he believed JFK had been killed by conspiracy .
 Lyndon Johnson said to Pierre Salinger that he wasn't sure but that the assassination of President Kennedy didn't take place in retribution for his participation in the assassinations of Trujillo and President Diem . Johnson said he wasn’t sure but he said that Kennedy didn’
 Someone he knew hit his head and became cross-eyed, he said . He said he knew someone who had misbehaved was hit by a sled or something . The actor said he thought it was a bad accident .
 You should be careful of cross-eyed people because God put his mark on them, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: Cross-eyed cross-eyes are God's mark .
 President Kennedy may have been involved in the assassination of these two people, he says . And that this might very well be God’s retribution to President Kennedy for his participation in the assassinations, he adds .
 If so, it would not have been the first time that he sought to design his own image in history contrary to the truth . It would not be the first .
 As this book went to press, I received from author John Davis a copy of a letter by Evelyn Lincoln, President Kennedy’s secretary for twelve years before he was assassinated . If this is true, Johnson's story is an extraordinary American tragedy, says author .
 It was a pleasure to receive your kind letter concerning your desire to obtain my assessment of President Kennedy’s administration and assassination to pass along to your students . I was pleased to receive the kind letter .
 Muriel Pressman's article was recently reprinted in a current issue of the "Lady's Circle" It will give you an insight into my impression of the man .
 'There was a conspiracy because there were those that disliked him and felt the only way to get rid of him was to assassinate him. As for the assassination is concerned it is my belief that there was an assassination conspiracy,' he says .
 Lyndon B Johnson, J Edgar Hoover, the Mafia, the CIA and the Cubans in Florida, were conspirators, says author . "These five conspirators" were Lyndon B. Johnson, Edgar Hoover and J. Edgar Hoover," he says . "They were the CIA, the
 The House Intelligence Committee investigation, also came to the conclusion that there was a conspiracy . The House intelligence committee also concluded there was an investigation .
 Lincoln died on May 11, 1995, at the age of 86, seven months after writing this historic letter . Lincoln died seven months later, aged 86 . Lincoln wrote the letter in May 1995 .
 The seeds of the plot to kill John Kennedy began to grow because he and his brother were determined to seize control of the power structure in the U.S. John Kennedy's brother was determined to take over power .
 President Kennedy reached a decision to drop Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover from government roles . Also, President Kennedy had decided to remove Lyndon Johnson from government role .
 Both Johnson and Hoover were corrupt and bizarre backgrounds, which would have been exposed . Hoover and Johnson's backgrounds would have led to a personal catastrophe for both .
 The Kennedys tragically underestimated the reaction and power of those whom they threatened . But they also underestimated the reactions of those who they threatened, he says .
 The Mafia joined forces with a few Kennedy haters from the CIA, radical anti-Castro Cuban exiles, and others in the extreme right wing, both civilian and military . The Mafia was involved in the assassination of President Kennedy .
 The plan included tactics to make it appear that the assassination was the work of a deranged Communist linked to Fidel Castro or the Soviet Union . The plan was designed to make the assassination appear to be the result of a failed assassination .
 The resulting combination of forces became unstoppable because Johnson and Hoover controlled the law itself . The resulting combined forces were unstoppable because of Johnson's control of the law .
 Those who were being threatened by the Kennedys were saved from imprisonment or disgrace . The political power center of the U.S. shifted from the liberal Northeast to the conservative Southwest . Anti-Communist paranoia was accommodated .
 Hunt, Hunt, and Lyndon Johnson, all in the plot, had the blackmail, the money, and the political power to see to it that the crime would never be seriously investigated . Hunt, Johnson, Hunt and Johnson all had the power to stop the investigation .
 Most were on the fringes of the plot and did not know what they were involved in . Although the plot seemingly involved a large number of people, most were not involved in it .
 Many were deceived into believing that they were in anti-Castro operations . Many believed they were working for the CIA in Cuba .
 Hundreds of powerful people were glad to see it happen; some even expected it . Some of them were glad it happened; some were even expected .
 Only three or four key people needed to know the full nature of the plot, says CNN.com's John Sutter . But only a few key people had to know about the plot .
 Even Johnson and Hoover did not need to know the details of the cover-up if required .
 By the use of cut-outs the money providers did not need to know who did the job and the assassins didn’t need to . know the source of the money . The money providers used the cut-out to keep track of the job .
 The assassination was a mystery even to some of those who financed it and almost certainly to those who did the shooting . It was almost certainly a mystery to some who financed the assassination . The assassination is still a mystery .
 Action had to be taken in Dallas despite the fact that Dallas right wingers would be the first suspects . Dallas right-wingers were first suspects in the Dallas shooting .
 Earlier plans to assassinate Kennedy in Miami, Chicago, and Los Angeles had fallen through . Earlier plans for assassination in Miami and Chicago also fell through .
 With all of the leaks, it was bound to be picked up by the Kennedy family or the news media . Johnson and Hoover took over the government very soon and permitted ruthless silencing, by murder if necessary .
 The conspirators were already guilty of treason, having met and conspired to kill the president . They met, conspired, and planned to kill him, the president. The conspirator was already guilty .
 The detailed logistics of the shooting had to be finalized within the last few weeks before the fatal event, perhaps explaining some of the things that went wrong . So the detailed logistics must be finalized before the shooting .
 Solid evidence shows that no fewer than nine people told others, before November 22, 1963, that Kennedy would be assassinated .
 Joseph Milteer, Homer Eschevarria, Rose Cheramie, Richard Case Nagell, Eugene Dinkin . Jimmy Hoffa, Santo Trafficante, and Carlos Marcello visited Silvia Odio .
 All evidence went through J Edgar Hoover or the Secret Service, who either buried it or failed to take action to protect the president when he went to Dallas . This evidence was not acted upon because all of it went through Hoover or Secret Service .
 The assassination was a right-wing plot, did occur in November 1963, did include individuals in CIA/military intelligence . There was fabricated evidence of a meeting in the Cuban Consulate in Mexico City, in which it was falsely reported that Castro’s Cubans handed to Oswald and
 Joseph Milteer predicted that it would be a plot by the “patriots,” would be blamed on the Communists, would be by rifle fire from a tall building . Someone would be picked up to throw the public off the track, he said . And someone would be
 The prime scientific evidence tying the conspiracy to government officials in Washington is the alteration of the Zapruder film and the altered autopsy x-rays . The film was altered by government officials, the author says .
 There is no way that all of these actions could have been accomplished without the active involvement of the Secret Service, the FBI, and government officials—going all of the way to Lyndon Johnson .
 Other crucial evidence ties the crime to high officials involves the incredible vanishing brain . The theft of Kennedy’s body followed by surgery on the head to remove ballistic evidence .
 The evidence of the switching of Kennedy’s body from the bronze ceremonial casket to a shipping casket, leave no other tenable conclusion . Nevertheless, the evidence that the body was delivered secretly to the rear of Bethesda Naval Hospital leaves no other conclusion .
 A trial by an impartial and discerning jury, in my opinion, would have found this evidence to meet reasonable doubt standards . A trial would have been a fair trial by a jury, I think .
 Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover would have orchestrated or permitted these frantic, dangerous, last-minute criminal actions in the cover-up unless they themselves were part of the master conspiracy . It is virtually inconceivable that LBJ and Hoover would .
 A combination of U.S. intelligence operatives, Cuban exiles, and Texas right-wing extremists played a major role in the assassination, author says . "Extensive evidence leads to the inescapable conclusion"
 Retired Gen. Hunt, retired General Edwin Walker, and retired Gen. Charles Willoughby. Hunt . Hunt, Walker, Walker and Hunt were generals . Hunt and Walker are retired from the U.S. Army .
 These men met at different times with CIA assassination specialist Colonel William Bishop . The men met with different versions of Colonel Bishop .
 Cuban exile Felipe Vidal Santiago, who was a CIA agent, and Roy Hargraves, attended meetings with Walker and Bishop .
 Hargraves was a member of Gerald Patrick Hemming’s paramilitary group, Interpen, in Florida, which was sponsored by U.S. intelligence . He was part of a paramilitary group sponsored by United States intelligence .
 Vidal and Hargraves were closely linked to Cuban exile leader Rolando Masferrer, who was linked to Jimmy Hoffa and the Mafia . Vidal was close to the Mafia and was closely associated with the exiled leader of Cuba .
 According to Colonel Bishop, Masferrer was handed $500,000 of Hoffa money for the purpose of killing John F Kennedy . Colonel Bishop says Masferler was handed the money to kill Kennedy .
 Gerald Patrick Hemming has denied his direct involvement in the assassination . Despite a large body of evidence, Hemming denies his direct participation . Hemming is believed to be a key figure in the CIA .
 He was closely associated with Felipe Vidal, Roy Hargraves, and at least three others . All of whom were to various degrees entwined in the plot at an operational level .
 Hemming was closely associated with John Martino, who confessed to his involvement in the assassination before his death . Martino confessed to Hemming's murder to news reporter John Cummings, and his wife . Hemming also had a close relationship with Martino .
 Hemming has admitted that he once lived in a safe house with Herminio Diaz . Diaz, according to Cuban exile leader Tony Cuesta, was involved in the assassination .
 Hemming’s man, Ronald Ponce de Leon, according to Hemming, was involved with John Martino in the assassination . Hemming's man was also involved in the murder, Hemming says .
 Hemming said he was offered a contract by Guy Banister in New Orleans in June, 1962, to kill Kennedy . Hemming told me that he was . offered a . contract by Banister to kill JFK .
 He also said he was offered a contract to kill Kennedy by wealthy Texans and retired military men in the Dallas Petroleum Club in July 1963 . He said he also said that he was again offered a deal to kill JFK .
 Hemming claims that he lost control of his Interpen group and that some of them, and his other associates, went to Dallas on November 22, 1963, against his advice, while he stayed in Miami . Hemming says some of the group members, including some of his associates,
 Hemming associates, if not Hemming himself, played ancillary roles in the assassination . Hemming's associates may have been involved in his assassination, but Hemming was not .
 A full release by the government of all documents pertaining to Hemming will likely reveal the extent of this involvement .
 Felipe Vidal was involved with Oswald in the staged shooting at General Edwin Walker in April 1963 . In addition, there is substantial evidence, including statements from Colonel Bishop and . Hemming, that Felipe . Vidal .
 Colonel Bishop stated in a taped interview with writer Gary Shaw that he picked up Vidal in Miami in April 1963 and drove him to Dallas . Bishop knew that he was going to die when Bishop knew he would die .
 Vidal was picked up in Miami by his CIA case officer and driven to Dallas four days before the assassination, Hemming says . Hemming: Vidal returned by plane to Miami on the evening of November 22, 1963 .
 Vidal told Cuban intelligence in taped interview shortly before he was executed in 1964 . General Escalante says Vidal said he was picked up in Miami in early November 1963 by Colonel Bishop and driven to Dallas .
 Vidal was picked up in Miami by a CIA assassination specialist and driven to Dallas, Texas . He met with Texas oil men and a retired military officer, General Walker .
 General Willoughby was present during some of the meetings with Walker .
 One of the paradoxes of the Kennedy assassination is that the plotters and sponsors at the top of the conspiracy are more accurately identifiable than the shooters and helpers at Dealey Plaza . The plotters of the assassination are more accurate identifiable than those of the shooters .
 Hunt, Mafia chieftains—were required to personally intervene in the cover-up when things went wrong . Hunt was required to . intervene in . the cover up when things go wrong. Hunt was needed to personally .
 Hunt’s purchase on November 22 or 23 of a first copy of the Zapruder film and his inquiries as to the security of Oswald in the Dallas jail the night before Oswald was shot . Hunt's purchase of the film was part of his inquiry into the security in the jail
 Only a unique combination of conspirators had the cumulative power to make the assassination happen and orchestrate the cover-up . Only this combination of . conspirators could have the cumulative . power to . make an assassination happen .
 The shooters and the men at Dealey Plaza were, in effect, only ciphers—hired guns . The shooters were, for example, only a cipher, not a gun manufacturer .
 There were probably three assassination teams in Dallas, Dallas, Texas, on November 22 . The evidence suggests there was probably three teams involved in the Dallas shooting .
 Oswald slipped away, later was captured, and had to be shot by Jack Ruby on the orders of the Mafia . Jack Ruby shot Oswald in the head after he was captured by the mob .
 A second team of assassins was behind the picket fence on the grassy knoll . The second team was behind a second team, behind the fence .
 Extensive statements of French assassin Christian David indicate that this team was recruited by Mafia chieftain Santo Trafficante, Jr. through the Guerini family in Marseilles, France .
 This team was composed of French Mafia Corsicans led by Lucien Sarti, who performed the final, fatal shooting . This team of Corsicans was led by the Corsican Mafia Corsican, who died in the final shooting .
 A third team, French OAS terrorists, was in Dallas at the time of the shooting . A French terrorist team was also in Dallas, Texas .
 It was a backup team in case the Dealey Plaza operation had to be aborted . The backup team was in place of a backup operation .
 It also served the purpose of providing false leads if it were not otherwise utilized . It also provided false leads .
 Jean Souetre met with CIA’s E Howard Hunt in Madrid and with General Edwin Walker in Dallas in the spring of 1963 . One of these terrorists, Jean Souettre, met with Hunt and Walker in 1963 .
 He met in New Orleans with anti-Castro Cubans in an assassination training camp during that same period . He also met in the same period in New York .
 This operation was headquartered in Guy Banister’s office in New Orleans, which was frequented by Oswald . The operation was based in Guy's office in the city .
 This was during the same time span that the meetings between Vidal, Hargraves, Colonel Bishop, and Texas right-wing leaders occurred .
 Hunt and General Willoughby were leaders in a worldwide, extreme right-wing network linked with the John Birch Society and the Minutemen in the U.S. and therefore had access to the European assassins . Hunt and Willoughy were leaders of an extreme right wing network linked
 Hunt sponsored even more radical spin-off groups from the Minutemen, and terrorist groups in Europe . Hunt, with Willoughby, sponsored groups that were linked to CIA-front corporation Permindex in Italy .
 A CIA document shows that Jean Souetre, or someone using his name, was in Dallas on the day of the assassination . He left Dallas or Fort Worth 48 hours after the assassination, according to the document .
 Clay Shaw was active in right-wing activities and was on the board of directors of Permindex . Guy Banister and David Ferrie were members of the Minutemen . Clay Shaw is also a member of the PermIndex .
 Their role was one of omission—to minimize the protection of the president during his Dallas trip and to participate passively in the coverup . The White House has been accused of being complicit in a coverup of its own .
 Warren Commission was not part of the conspiracy, but its members either went along with the cover-up or were duped by Johnson and Hoover . The Warren Commission did not join the conspiracy but was duped .
 He was set up by the conspirators, who knew that he had CIA and FBI connections, and that the hierarchy of these agencies instinctively would contain the investigation to cover themselves . The conspirators knew he had connections to the FBI and the CIA .
 "The preponderance of available evidence is not sufficient to implicate the CIA, directed from the top, in master-planning the crime or ordering its execution," the author says . The CIA is accused of master-placing the crime and ordering the execution .
 Evidence does indicate that some of its midranking officers were involved in the assassination . However, the evidence does indicate some of the mid-ranking officers involved .
 These officers included William K Harvey, David Atlee Phillips, and David Sanchez Morales . The officers were involved in the deaths of William Harvey, William Atlee Philips, David Sanchez .
 Harvey and Morales had become very closely associated with Mafioso Johnny Rosselli, who was assigned to the CIA in the plots to kill Fidel Castro . Both Harvey, Morales had been closely involved with Rossella, who had been assigned to CIA in plots .
 The cumulative evidence that Harvey, Morales, and Phillips were a trio who planned and oversaw the assassination is very persuasive . The evidence is persuasive, says author .
 Harvey’s notes on assassinations are an exact blueprint of the JFK assassination . The use of French Corsicans as the shooters, and the use of disinformation schemes to blame the Communists, is an example of the CIA .
 Harvey had become personal friends with Mafia leaders . He was suspected by high-ranking CIA officer John Scelso of being the one who murdered Sam Giancana .
 By the time of the assassination, Harvey’s mental condition had deteriorated badly, and he was close to being a broken man with nothing to lose . Harvey's mental condition deteriorated badly in the days before the assassination .
 David Phillips hated John Kennedy and had long been involved with David Morales in CIA assassination operations in South and Central America to overthrow governments . Phillips hated JFK and was involved with Morales in the CIA assassination .
 Phillips was master of disinformation, and worked closely with Harvey and Morales in the plots to murder Castro . Phillips was the master of disinfo, and helped with the plots .
 Phillips was CIA’s monitor of activities in the CIA-financed Cuban exile organizations DRE and Alpha 66 . All three were Cuban exile groups that are prime suspects in the assassination .
 Phillips offered bribes through Cuban exile Antonio Veciana to get his cousins in the Cuban consulate to say that Oswald had been there in late September/early October 1963 . Phillips offered to bribe the consulate in Havana to say Oswald was there .
 Phillips had met with Oswald in Dallas in late August/early September 1963 . Phillips met Oswald in August/September 1963 in Dallas .
 David Morales told his close friends in Arizona of his assassination operations for the CIA in South America . Morales told friends of his operations in Arizona that he was a CIA operative . Morales was killed in 1993 in Colombia . Morales is believed to be the only person to have been killed in the country
 Morales was involved with another prime suspect in the assassination, Rolando Masferrer, in attempts to overthrow the Castro government in the late 1950s . Morales was also involved in an attempt to overthrow Castro's government .
 David Morales is the most likely candidate for managing the operations in Dallas, Texas . Morales has been in charge of the Dallas Cowboys since 2007 . Morales is a former Air Force Force pilot . Morales will be the first person to manage operations in the Dallas area .
 The key Mafia leaders in the plot were Carlos Marcello, Santo Trafficante Jr., Sam Giancana, Johnny Rosselli, and their partner, Jimmy Hoffa . The plot was led by the Mafia leaders Carlos Marcello, Sam Giancanana and Johnny Ros
 Their primary roles were recruit the French Corsican assassins, distribute the money obtained from Jimmy Hoffa, and provide some of the staffing at Dealey Plaza . Their primary role was recruiting the French assassins, distributing the money .
 The primary roles of the powerful Dallas right wing were control Dallas officials, bring Johnson and Hoover into the plot, and provide additional money . The primary role of the Dallas Right wing was to control officials .
 The extreme right wing considered the eastern power structure, both Republicans and Democrats, to be no better than Communists selling out the nation to a one-world government through the UN .
 By participating in the murder of President Kennedy and replacing him with Lyndon Johnson, the extreme right wing in the Southeastern and Western United States struck a mortal blow to the reign of power of the Northeastern establishment that had been largely in control of government .
 It was an evil idea that hatched at a lower level; then grew to where it was given the go-ahead by the ultimate sponsors at a high level . It was 'an evil idea' hatched at the lower level but grew to be given the approval by sponsors .
 The weight of the evidence indicates that the concept of the plot was designed by CIA’s mentally unstable William Harvey, working with the fascist-racist-paranoid General Charles Willoughby .
 Both had experience with the Mafia in assassination plots of political leaders . Both had been involved in plots to kill political leaders in Italy .
 Harvey could have coordinated his planning with Willoughby through Colonel William Bishop in Dallas . Colonel Bishop was part of Harvey’s ZR/RIFLE assassination program .
 Evidence of an elaborate scheme in Mexico City in late September-early October 1963 shows that CIA operatives laid down a scripted ruse involving Oswald . Oswald was portrayed as a Communist recruited by Cuban intelligence to assassinate Kennedy .
 The plan was intended to precipitate an invasion of Cuba by falsely setting up Castro as a sponsor of the assassination . The plot was meant to set up Castro's assassination as a pretext for an invasion .
 The plan was quickly abandoned when Oswald was captured and the plot began to unravel, thereby threatening exposure of the master conspirators . Oswald was eventually captured and his plans were quickly abandoned .
 This proved to be impossible to sustain because it was transparently false . This proved the case against the government, the BBC said . The BBC was forced to publish a new book, The Guardian, based in London, on Monday, to be published in November .
 Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover helped cover-up of the plotters . CIA ex-director Allen Dulles and CIA counter-intelligence chief James Angleton covered up the plot .
 The roles of Oswald, Clay Shaw, Guy Banister, and David Ferrie in New Orleans began as a counter-intelligence scheme by the FBI and/or the CIA under the direction of David Atlee Phillips . The scheme was converted to a cover story for the assassination .
 There is no evidence yet available that links the Joint Chiefs of Staff or any of its members to the plot or the cover-up .
 There is no evidence yet available that the military industrial complex or a world-wide high cabal were the originators of the plot .
 The enemies of the Kennedys came to obsessively loathe them and believe that the only way to protect themselves and stop the Kennedy dynasty was by assassination . The enemies were obsessed with the Kennedy family and believed that the best way to stop them was assassination .
 Many of Kennedy’s ideological enemies believed that the Kennedys were going to destroy the nation with their perceived ineptitude, weakness, appeasement of communism, and dismantling the military-industrial complex .
 The Kennedys may have helped bring on the assassination by their own duplicity, hardball politics, and reckless, self-serving behavior . Their behavior was perceived as jeopardizing national security .
 The Kennedys’ larger goals for the nation were admirable, but their faults were mild compared to those of the conspirators . Nonetheless, the larger goals were admirable and their faults are mild, the author says .
 It can be persuasively argued that if the Kennedys had succeeded in ridding the nation of organized crime, dumping Lyndon Johnson, taming the extremists, stopping the cold war, and retiring J Edgar Hoover, the U.S. would not have the legacy of gigantic problems
 The "power elite" in the United States, consisting of the liberal and conservative establishment, were willing to look the other way because of their own economic interests . The “power elite” in the U.S. was willing to stand down because of its economic interests, says
 No one wanted the crisis that would have erupted had the truth been revealed at the time of the assassination . The truth was not revealed until the assassination of President Kennedy .
 It would very likely have had a devastating impact on political stability and economic interests . It would have been a devastating blow to the country's political stability, it says .
 The truth would have shattered the nation, possibly with an irreparable constitutional breakdown . The truth, however, would have broken the nation's constitution .
 The news media and intelligencia were willing to go along with established authority, as was their accustomed role at that time . This was the case in the 1930s, when the government was in power .
 Congress is a more vigilant watchdog; the news media is far more critical of power, thus making it more difficult to contain a major scandal . The media is more diversified and critical of the power of power . Congress is more likely to be a watchdog than the media .
 Today we don't have a monster heading the FBI with a lock on government officials by blackmail, or a vice president with the criminal genius of Lyndon Johnson . Today we do not have such a monster head of the FBI, or vice president .
 The militant right wing, although still active, does not have the alliances with powerful politicians and wealthy industrialists that it had in 1963 . It is still active but has not had the same alliances with politicians and rich industrialists .
 New presidents are not taking on all of the evils of the world at one seating . And new presidents are often not sitting on top of all the evils at once .
 The assassination of John F Kennedy can be described as an immense national disgrace . The assassination revealed the incapacity of our Congress to confront and expose a coup d’ état within the executive branch .
 "The harm done to the nation, although not irreparable, has been enormous," says David Cameron . The harm done by the British government has not been irreparable .
 November 22, 1963 marked the beginning of a decline in the fundamental strength of our economy, the nation's strength . The beginning of an inexorable erosion of law and order, and a diminution of our sense of pride and confidence as a nation, President Kennedy says .
 The Kennedy assassination was the consequence of a national disorder of venality, deception, and hatred that had infected the nation long before 1963 . Kennedy assassination is the result of national disorder, deception and hatred .
 It does seem now, however, that our nation is healing and regaining strength, as we approach the new century .
 Our nation’s recovery from the disaster is a tribute to the resiliency and adaptability of the American people, President Obama says .
 This will require a great effort by our most honorable and wisest constitutional/governmental scholars, supported by the president, the Congress, and the Supreme Court . This will need to be done by scholars, the president and Congress .
 The task will be daunting, but a determined, long-term effort should be made . The task is daunting but it will be made, and a determined effort is needed to succeed .
 November 24, 1996 Location: Hyatt Regency Tower, Dallas, Texas . Time: 1:30m. to 3:00 m.m. November 24: 1996 . November 24 is November 24 .
 Madeleine Brown sits on the rotating restaurant on the 50th floor with a view of Dealey Plaza . The rotating restaurant has a spectacular view of Dallas, including the interconnecting streets and freeways .
 In 1963, Dallas was the scene of murder in Dallas, Texas, in a Dallas high circles . The murders were common practice in high-society circles .
 Madeleine Brown looks down at Dealey Plaza in Dallas, Texas . She talks about the Texas people, the people who ruled Dallas .
 I would be at socials, I asked where so and so was, they mysteriously had disappeared, we asked that question but they never surfaced . Well, it’s like I said, it's like a . well, it was like I . said, "I would be
 Looking down from here now at Dallas, I’d say that 90% of it didn’t exist back there . Dallas is a city that has a reputation for being a great city .
 He was in the Agricultural Department with Billie Sol Estes with Orville Freeman . He worked in the Department of Agriculture in the 1930s .
 Jesse told me that Puterbaugh came into town and changed the motorcade route . Jesse told him that Putbaugh came in and changed his motorcade . Jesse said Puterbaug changed the route .
 You see, I have no way of knowing; I’m just telling you what was told to me. You see . I have been told to tell you what I think is the truth,’s not what I really know. It's just what I'm told to
 Elm Street could have been a direct route to the Trade Mart from Main Street . The route would have included the freeway over here and be at the trade Mart .
 "You could tell it was an ambush, a total ambush. But they came down Main Street and made that turn, you could tell ... it was ambush," he said .
 I've also done a lot of reading on Billie Sol Estes, and you’ve got a big piece in your book on him . And I’m also doing much of the same thing, but I think it’s a good read on his work .
 You know it's so disturbing, this recent thing that’s come out about all these people that Billie Sol claims Lyndon had killed, you know . You know that it was so disturbing. You know what it was like to think that you could have been killed .
 "I said we would like to put you on a camcorder, interview you, and talk about things that we know," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "We want to interview you. I said we want to talk to you," he says .
 CNN.com: 'I turned the television on and he had been in an accident and died. So anyway, on Tuesday, I turned the TV on and turned it on and it was like he was in a car accident'
 The U.S. government made a turnover in 1963, says President Obama . Obama's administration has been in the midst of a major political crisis .
 It's just like the day that I got out of my car, and we parked in the same parking lot. It’s just like a day that . I’m not sure what happened to me, but it was just like that day. It was the same day
 In 1960, Hunt and Kennedy met in California and stayed behind closed doors for a day or two . Hunt: "I was told that in 1960, in the Kennedy-Johnson campaign, Joe Kennedy met H L Hunt and Joe Kennedy" Hunt: Hunt, Kennedy and Kennedy "met behind
 John Kennedy would go on the ballot and Lyndon would take the second position . So they made a pact that John Kennedy and Lyndon took second position. John Kennedy was a candidate for president in 1968 .
 President Kennedy was fixing for a lot of people, costing a little money here in Texas . President Kennedy's fix for the nation's problems cost a lot more money .
 Hunt told Lyndon Hunt, who they manipulated, that he had to do something . Hunt was manipulated all the time he was in Washington, I mean totally manipulated, he says . Hunt told Hunt that Lyndon was manipulated .
 Lyndon Johnson was in deep trouble, so there wasn’t much choice at the time but to eradicate Kennedy . By the same token, LBJ was also in trouble, Billie Sol Estes .
 You know, if you have any imagination or intelligence, it’s easy to see what happened. You know that if you’ve any imagination . You know what happened?
 The White family was close to President Taft, and J Edgar Hoover at the time he was starting in, all of them . And the White family had close ties with the White House .
 And we had Roosevelt, and he used to come to Texas all the time. And he came back to Texas, and we had a great relationship with him .
 "I don't know that he hunted, per se, but they would drive him around and they would hunt," he says . "They would drive them around and hunt. They would hunt. He would hunt."
 Jesse Jones from Houston wrote the program or whatever it was to get our country out of the Great Depression . Jesse Jones was a hero in the Depression .
 I am developing the idea that the Texas right wingers down here began to hate the Eastern establishment. "I am developing an idea that . I'm developing the . idea that Texas right-wingers . down here . began to . hate the . Eastern establishment, he said .
 "Wildcatters and renegades in Texas became personally very wealthy. And then out here you have these wildcatters ... who became very wealthy," he says .
 In killing Kennedy they accomplished many things, author says . "One of my theories is that in killing Kennedy, we have many things to do," he says . But one of his theories is to blame Kennedy's assassination .
 It reversed the trend that Kennedy was bringing on about getting out of Vietnam, disarmament, making peace with the Soviets . And it reversed Kennedy's approach to disarmament and peace .
 John McCloy was at the party at Clint Murchison’s home, the night before the assassination, with John J McCloy at that party . But I did notice in your book that you mention the party . John J
 He also put the money deals together for Murchison and Hunt, I mean the financials . He put the deals together, and I mean financials, for Hunt .
 I was one of the first, I guess, to say that John McCloy was close to these people. I’ve been asking about him because I was first to ask about him. He was a close friend to McCloy. He says McCloy is a good man who
 "I did not know until Connie started interviewing me and everything. See, I did . See, he did not realize until she started interviewing him and everything," he says .
 Fred Florence, of Republican National Bank, was a White Russian, in charge of the White Russian community . Fred Florence was a bank director at the time . Florence is a former banker at the GOP National Bank .
 President Obama was born in Texas but his family were immigrants, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com.com .
 Bobby Kennedy got him out of it—ran him off. Yes, and he started distributing John Birch Society literature, and Bobby Kennedy ran him off . Kennedy: "Bobby Kennedy was a good guy. Bobby Kennedy is a great guy"
 "They would all get together and go down here to Matagorda Bay off the coast of Texas, have parties," she says .
 I wanted to ask you, when Lyndon made this statement to you to the effect that after tomorrow the Kennedys are not going to embarrass me anymore, humiliate me anymore. After tomorrow, after tomorrow, they are not . After tomorrow they will not embarrass me, they won't
 "The party was almost breaking up. And I didn’t know whether I should leave," she says . "And I didn't know whether to leave," the author says .
 Pepsi Cola convention held in Texas on Tuesday for a big Pepsi cola convention . The convention was held in Dallas, Texas, on Tuesday .
 Clint's secretary called and said drop by, we’ll have a hell of a time. And then Clint’s secretary called, said drop here, we'll have a lot of time. We’ve been together for more than a decade .
 "I really thought, because Clint adored Hoover, or Edgar they called him, I thought it was a party," she says . "I thought it would be a party. I really thought ... it was fun," she adds .
 When Lyndon had this outburst, after the assassination, when you challenged him, tell me about that . Lyndon had an outburst after assassination, he said, "I'm not sure what happened."
 Everyone in Dallas thought Lyndon was responsible for the loss of his life, including his wife . "Everyone in Dallas—it was general gossip in the business group," he says .
 He screamed and hollered, and I was really frightened because he had told me many years before that you don’t see, hear, or repeat anything. He screamed . I was frightened because of his words .
 "He almost knocked the hinges off the door. And when he said that he went into the bathroom and he almost knocked it off the hinges," he said .
 "I was so ill I was sick to my stomach over all of it. Well, needless to say, I was so sick to the stomach over it."
 One account I read of this was that this was at a New Year’s Eve party . One account said this was a New Years Eve party in New York .
 It was the first time that I had seen him since he became president. I was so glad to see him, because it was the last time I'd seen him . It was a great time for the president to see his daughter .
 The first time I saw him or heard about this, I thought it doesn’t exist...in my mind . "The first time he saw him ...I thought it didn't exist," he says of his son .
 If things got in Lyndon Johnson’s way, he didn’t have a problem of getting rid of it at all, he said . And, again, I promise you, he would get rid of things that got in his way .
 You know the deeper I dig into this whole thing, the more incredible it gets. You know that the deeper you dig into the whole thing gets. It's incredible, it's incredible that this is the most incredible thing I've seen .
 Malcolm Wallace did the shooting at Dealey Plaza, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Wallace: "Now I find it really difficult to believe that this Malcolm Wallace . Wallace was responsible for the shooting, says Sutter. Wallace.
 I was at the Dallas gun club about three days before the assassination . "I was at a gun club," says John Sutter . He says he was at gun club when he was killed .
 I'd think that if it were a military intelligence or CIA operation they wouldn’t have anybody near there doing shooting who could be linked right into Lyndon Johnson . I’m not sure if it’s a military operation or a CIA operation .
 Maybe this whole thing is a lot simpler than one thinks . But, of course, maybe it's not all that simple .
 Mexico City, the Oswald impersonators, the Walker shooting attempt -- all of these things are described . Walker: "I'm not sure what happened to me. Mexico City" Walker: It's a good time for Walker to get back in touch with the world's most famous person .
 "You have to know who these people are and the position they played, to understand," he says . "You put all these ingredients together—you put all the ingredients together," he adds .
 Mac Wallace met with an untimely death down in Houston, Texas, Texas . Mac Wallace died at the age of 60 .
 Mac Wallace and Billie Sol were very close together . The car was picked up and sent to Houston and mashed without any investigation . Mac Wallace's car was sent to be mashed without investigation .
 "The exhaust system of my car was blown completely off. I was going across the toll way here in Dallas, Dallas, and the exhaust system was blown off," he says .
 "In those years a black didn’t mean anything in Dallas. I went down to the police department," he says . He says, "I went down and talked to the Dallas police department. In those years black didn't mean anything" Dallas police chief says .
 "I would like to think that I was something to Lyndon. And really, maybe my ego," she says. "I'm not sure what I was to Lyndon."
 "That really down deep deep in his heart he had some kind of feelings for me," she says of her ex-boyfriend .
 He said at that time if things had been different, if he hadn’t been a political figure, you know, things would have been different. He said .
 Anyone that worked downtown Dallas knew Jack Ruby, including police, police and the Carousel Club . Ruby was a fixture in downtown Dallas for decades . Ruby is believed to have killed more than a dozen people .
 If he didn’t know you on the street (I still have my Carousel card), he’d jump up and say, “Hey, Clancy,” he'd say; I mean he'd look him over . Clancy: "If he didn't know
 Henry Wade said he didn’t know Jack Ruby, and some of the others, he says they’re lying . So when Henry Wade . said he . didn't know Jack . Ruby, or others, it’s a lie, he said .
 It wouldn't be any trouble to go down to Jack’s, buy some drinks, smoke a Camel, play cards, or anything. And so it wouldn’t be a trouble to buy a drink or smoke a cigarette .
 Gerry Patrick Hemming is the author of a new book, "Gerry Hemming" Hemming's story is one of the world's most famous stories . Hemming has been in the news for more than 20 years .
 He told me that he’d come out here to Dallas, talked with the Hunts, and talked with them, and was later offered a contract to kill Kennedy . He said he'd come out to Dallas to meet the Hunts and talked about the Hunts .
 He had a group of guerrilla warfare people down in No Name Key, Florida, training assassination squads . He had been training assassination teams, he says .
 He said if I don’t have enough money to get what I want, I’ve got a squad that can take care of it . He said: ‘I’m not going to have a lot of money. He said he’s got a
 Hurt wrote that Hunt could just spread out cards, fold them up, and he could tell you every card that was there . Hunt was able to tell you all the cards that were there, Hurt wrote .
 "We were told immediately, of course, all of us thought it had something to do with this, in our minds" "That he had gone on a sabbatical to Mexico right after the assassination," she says .
 "I practically ran to my car to keep from seeing him. Or if I went first to the parking lot I practically ran . Or if . I ran to a car, or if I didn't see him, I almost ran to his car to avoid him."
 "I told Dick Russell when he called me, I said I can still see the old man picking up the phone and calling Jack Ruby," says Russell . Russell: "I said I still see him still picking up a phone call and Jack Ruby"
 If you wanted to waste someone in Dallas, all you had to do was get him wasted . $100 gets him wasted, $50 get the hell beat out of him, whatever. If you knew the right people, you could do so much .
 "I can still see the old man calling Jack, saying we don’t want that man down there in the city jail," he says . "And I can still . see him calling Jack," he adds .
 The day, I think it was a couple weeks prior to the . time the map was published about the motorcade, we were at Jack Ruby’s and we were playing cards . The day .
 It was made public in the paper, I think, only four days before the assassination . It was published in the newspaper just four days prior to the assassination.
 Some of the people that ran the JFK assassination were out of the Department of Agriculture . Gerry Patrick Hemming said that some of the . people that . ran the . assassination were from the Department . of Agriculture, Hemming says .
 Malcolm Wallace and a lot of other people in the Department of Agriculture who seem to have been involved . But now you tell me there was Malcolm Wallace . Wallace and others in the department of Agriculture .
 Bill Bank, the attorney that represented the Marshall family in getting this overturned, the suicide to murder, went to school with my son that died . Bill Bank's attorney represented the family in the overturned case . The Marshall family says the case was "suicide to murder" and "su
 He helped overturn the case from suicide to murder . Steven was found guilty of murder in Texas A&M case .
 If you have that number in Brady, he'll probably answer the phone and call me, he’s probably answering the phone, he says . If you've got that number, you'll probably call me. Brady .
 Ragsdale was LBJ’s “sideline,” and this guy was the intermediary . He says LBJ's "sideline" was his "ssideline," and this was his intermediary .
 The Ragsdale family in Smithville and the Carter family were big names . But I know that . I know . that I know some of the big names, but I'm not sure who they were .
 The only thing is that I had the letter that was left that I met with Jesse Kellam in Houston and Jerome Ragsdale. "I had a letter that is left that ... I met Jesse Kellan in Houston," he says .
 Jerome Ragsdale wrote it to assure me that my funds would continue to take care of Steven. Steven's father wrote to assure him that his son would be able to continue to live with his son .
 I've always thought that Jesse Kellam and Ragsdale went to splitting the money. And I’ve always thought they went to split the money,’s always thought .
 "There must be hundreds of witnesses who saw the two of you together over the years," she said . "Of course, there must be . hundreds of . witnesses," she added .
 "And he pulled out those checks, and my eyes almost fell out of my head," she says . "He pulled out his checks, he pulled them out of his head," the author says .
 Currington talks about Hunt and Hoover meeting, I think it’s in Chicago, he says . Currington talked about Hunt, Hoover meeting in Chicago . He interviewed Currington, and Currington was interviewed by Currington .
 From '69... the last time in Houston when the astronauts were having a big parade there. From ’69... from ‘69 ... the last . Houston . The last time the astronauts had a big . parade there .
 "You know, I marvel at the fact that intelligent people allowed him to operate, and looked to him for—whatever. You know, he marvels," he says .
 In your book, Connie writes that LBJ told you about how Hoover had his “you-know-what” in a vise . Connie writes about how LBJ said LBJ had Hoover's "you-known-what" in a . vise. Connie writes
 Kennedy was trying to kill the FBI and the CIA agencies...eradicate them . Kennedy was also trying to destroy the CIA, FBI and CIA agencies .
 He was trying to take them over and run them instead of having them run themselves. He was also trying to run them over, run them, he said. He said .
 He wished that he could splinter it into a thousand pieces, he said . And he said that he wished he had splintered it into thousand pieces . He said he wished to splinter the piece into a hundred pieces .
 He said it was the men that J knew, which of course were the oil people, you know. He said, "J knew" the men he knew .
 I wanted her to use an explanation of what it was; I don’t think she has done that . I wanted to use her to explain it, but she hasn't done that, it's not clear what it is .
 I was trying to find the page in here where he first told you about this, and I can’t find it, I can't find it . I'm not sure where the page is in here .
 Why don't we get a cab and I’Il take you back to your house and drop you off, and then I'1l go on to the airport and find out when I'm getting out of Dallas. Why don’t we take a cab? Why don
 I sent the full original transcript to Madeleine Brown for her final review, with the understanding that I would condense it. KKK I sent it to Brown for review, but she said she'd condense the transcript .
 She called a week later and said that it was correct, except for two spellings of names which she corrected . She said she corrected two spelling errors .
 I regret that I must end this book without further investigation of the Billie Sol Estes allegations, or the Department of Agriculture connection, I regret . The book was published in October 2013 .
 A thorough investigation of these areas might prove to be very fruitful in getting to the bottom of the complete story . The investigation could be very helpful in determining the truth .
 If proven to be true, it would implicate Lyndon Johnson more deeply into the assassination than I can place him with the material and time now at my disposal .
 "I don’t think that it would change my conclusions as to the structure of the plot," he says . But he says he doesn't think that would change his conclusions .
 It would just move Lyndon Johnson further into the inner group, and perhaps enhance Gerry Patrick Hemming’s contention that Larry LaBorde and the DOA were involved .
 Hemming told me that the DOA was a repository for CIA agents, which makes sense to me . Hemming said that he was a CIA agent, and that the CIA was behind it .
 The DOA had people all over the world doing agricultural and weather studies and the like . It was a perfect cover for secret agents, the author says .
 This compares to 55 items found in a computer search by personnel at the National Archives . The National Archives also found 55 items in its computer search .
 I was able to obtain a portion of these documents at the time of publishing Bloody Treason . The documents were obtained in the wake of the publication of this article .
 Many of the documents still had to be referred to another government agency before release .
 There is little doubt that there is much more about Hemming and his associates that will ultimately become available . Hemming's associates have a long history of criminal activity .
 Some of the documents that you have requested have been referred to another agency for review under the JFK Act . Unfortunately, some of these documents have been sent to another government agency .
 The third empty casing had an inward dent in its mouth which made it questionable evidence of having fired a bullet projectile . The problem that the Dallas police had was that the third empty . casing had been found with a dent in the mouth .
 When the Zapruder film was examined by the FBI, along with other forensic evidence, it became obvious there had to have been at least three shots fired . Therefore, the Commission had to find three—not two; and not four either—empty shell casings, to make their
 It was decided to ignore the initial FBI exhibits and other documents showing only two empty casings and, instead, show all three as valid evidence of shots fired from the sniper's nest .
 "My purported mistake, actually an omission, was to ignore the dented casing in the belief that it was not valid evidence of a shot fired," he says .
 The FBI, the Dallas Police, and many others initially believed the gunman was a Dallas police officer . He was killed by a single gunman in Dallas, Texas, on Sunday night . The suspect was found dead at the scene .
 Another criticism of Bloody Treason about the shell casing subject was my analysis of the photos showing cartridge cases on the sixth floor .
 Some details in the photos are questionable, although it seems quite obvious that at least one has been doctored . My critics said I should have questioned the quality of the photos . Admittedly, some details are questionable .
 FBI agents J Doyle Williams and Charles T Brown, Jr. signed FBI reports saying only two empty casings were found . The best evidence, which I did cite, was two separate handwritten reports .
 The accumulated evidence shows last minute scrambling in the FBI and the Warren Commission about the dented casing problem . FBI and Warren Commission were scrambling to fix the problem .
 The problem would not even begin to go away until the HSCA investigation, 14 years later, in which test firings were conducted with the alleged Oswald rifle to see if the dent could be caused by bolt action ejection of the cartridges in rapid firing .
 There was a possibility that the dented casing could have been authentic evidence of a third shot by Oswald . The casing was found to have been dented .
 First, the scrambling by the FBI, by the Warren Commission, and by President Johnson, to prove their case, reinforces the main thrust of my analysis, which is their willingness to meddle with and stretch the facts .
 There were six shots fired that struck Kennedy, Connally and other objects in Dealey Plaza that day . Second, to this day, there was solid evidence that there were six fired, according to witnesses .
 There is a mountain of other forensic evidence to prove conspiracy, prosecutors say . And there is also a mountains of forensic evidence, they say .
 We really don’t need the empty cartridge evidence, although it is of value . We don't need it, but it’s of value, and it's of value. We really need the evidence, but we need it .
 I believe that what I wrote on this subject presented the best evidence and the best conclusions . Moreover, after reviewing all of the above, I . believe that . what I . wrote about this subject was presented the . best evidence .
 The Warren Commission report depended upon Arlen Specter’s ludicrous argument for a Single Bullet that caused JFK‘s wounds and Connally’�s wounds . Specter argued that a single bullet could have killed JFK, Connally and JFK .
 This canard, I contend, helped them suppress other forensic evidence to the contrary . The canard is a canard that helped them to suppress other evidence, he says . This is not the truth, he writes .
 Meeting with Roy Hargraves DATE: February 10, 2001 PLACE: Law Offices of Mike Hemming on Mission Blvd., Pomona . Start time: 10:10 a.m.
 Roy Hargraves, Jerry Mings, Noel Twyman and Cliff Schoedl, Jr. were the original members of the cast .
 Before using this it should be checked against the tapes, where there is much more detail . Before using it, check the tapes before using it again .
 It should be noted that Roy Hargraves and Robert Hemming would occasionally step out of the meeting to call Gerry Hemming who presumably was in Florida, obviously trying to control the interview . It should also be noted the meeting was held in Florida .
 Roy said that he did not shoot JFK, didn’t even know that JFK was to be in Dallas . Roy said he didn't even know JFK was going to be there in Dallas, Texas . Roy didn't shoot JFK .
 At the end of the meeting, Roy reiterated that Vidal was the man on Elm Street with the walkie talkie . Roy: Vidal is the man who was on the Elm Street .
 He explained that Vidal did not know what was coming down and was following instructions to do exactly specific things, thus explaining Vidal’s arms being raised up . Vidal's arms were raised up in order to prevent the collapse of the stadium .
 "I suspect that this was Gerry at work in the telephone calls trying to control the interview," he said . "This was Gerry's attempt to control," he added .
 Roy said Colonel Bishop was Vidal’s case officer who gave him the “ereen light” on all their raids in Cuba . Roy said that Colonel Bishop provided him with the ‘ereen . light’ on the raids .
 Roy would not say who else were at meetings with Colonel Bishop, General Walker, Roy and Vidal, or who they met when they were in Dallas starting November 18, except to say that they were very dangerous people and no way will he reveal names .
 General Walker arranged it to make him look like a hero, Roy said . Roy said Walker arranged the shooting to make it look like he was a hero . Roy: Walker arranged to make the shooting look like an accident .
 He blurted that he and Gerry Hemming were arguing over who would take the shot . He said they were arguing about who would be the man to take a shot .
 Roy said if he met the torturer General Escalante he would kill him on the spot for what he did to Vidal . Roy said later that if he . met him he would . kill him . He said he would not be surprised if he killed Escalant .
 Gerry drove the getaway car in the LA Operation Chaos bombings for LAPD counterintelligence unit, Roy Roy said . Roy said Gerry drove getaway cars in Operation Chaos for LAPD Counterintelligence unit . Roy: Gerry drove car in getaway vehicle in the Operation Chaos .
 Roy intimated that he, not Ponce De Leon, was the “good looking kid” sitting on the couch mentioned by Florence Martino . When I started on this, he angrily said, “That’s not nice’”—got up and
 Roy mentioned Dick Whatley, Bobbie Willis, and Jim Lewis as important figures to investigate . Roy mentioned the investigation into Whatley and Willis . The investigation will focus on what happened in the 1970s .
 It would require an enormous amount of digging, travel, document research and interviews with the character’s friends and relatives . It would be a huge undertaking .
 Noel Twyman, 2009 APPENDIX E—Rival Authors I include in this category a book by Professor David R Wrone who believes in a conspiracy and, in fact, writes that a coup de’ etat took place . Noel Twynman wrote a book about
 "He does not discuss or mention the part of my work about the Z-Film that was authenticated in consultations with the late Dr. Dr. John Sutter," he says .
 Rod Ryan is a PhD in motion picture film technology, and academy award winner in that category . Rod Ryan: "I'm a great fan of film technology"
 My work was also authenticated by Hollywood motion picture film technician, Leon Carrere, and Wrone doesn’t mention him .
 John Costella’s work on the Z-Film or even list him in the index, although Wrone had access to this material at the time he wrote his book . Costella's work is not listed on the index .
 It is not difficult for me to have sympathy with an author who has based a career on the authenticity of a piece of evidence in an historical crime only to find in later years that he was mistaken .
 Only human to go into denial and on the attack against the revealer of the mistake . And only human to be on attack against someone who reveals mistake .
 Costella’s work, using scientific analysis to refute our conclusions and then let us all debate the subject . Costella's work is a rebuttal of our conclusions, and let us debate it .
 The remainder of his book, although worthy in some respects, is trivial or without consequence in his criticisms of others . Until then, I won’t go further except to say that the remainder of it is trivial .
 ARRB Senior Analyst Douglas P Horne interviewed a retired NPIC manager, Homer McMahon about the Zapruder film in 1997 . Horne and three other ARRB staff were interviewing McMahon .
 A man who claimed to be a Secret Service agent delivered an amateur movie film of the assassination . The film was the same type of film and specification as that in Zapruder’s camera . It was a double 8 Kodachrome II film unsplit .
 Bill Smith requested that 5” x 7° blow up prints be made of selected frames . The prints were made of 5’x 7° x . 7° prints .
 This meeting and others described in detail in reports about interviews with Hunter and McMahon . Murder in Dealey Plaza is published in the book "Murder in the Dealey plaza"
 In the months of June, July and August, 1997, there were four meetings and two telephone call reports conducted by ARRB staff . Doug Horne, all of whom were interviewed, attended the meetings and reports . The meetings were always accompanied by staff .
 McMahon said he produced the required 5” x 7” prints some of which were mounted by others on briefing boards at NPIC and delivered to John McCone at CIA and Lyndon Johnson at the White House .
 McMahon described the work as ‘an all night job’ and said they were instructed by Bill Smith that this was top secret . McMahon described it as an all-night job . He said he was instructed by Smith not to tell anyone, even his supervisor, about what they did
 Bill Smith guided McMahon to select frames that would show three shots from behind from the Schoolbook Depository, which was what they wanted to see . McMahon: "Bill Smith guided [McMister] McMahon to choose frames from behind"
 All but one of the foregoing statements by McMahon were confirmed by Ben Hunter (McMahon’s assistant who was present at the incident) in a separate interview of him by Doug Horne and ARRB staff .
 McMahon said President Kennedy was shot 6 to 8 times from three different locations . McMahon said this was ignored by the White House .
 We must remember that this interview of McMahon was from his memory, thirty four years after the event . The interview was from McMahon's memory, 30 four years later .
 The important points here are that he remembers seeing more than three shots that hit JFK, and even more important, from three different directions . Bill Smith restricted NPIC to selecting only three shots from one direction .
 McMahon's and Hunter’s stories were confirmed in a series of undated handwritten and typewritten notes . Some of the notes were identified by both of them as their handwriting .
 These notes were mostly a timing analysis of three shots at two shutter speeds (18 and 16 frames per second) in one case compared to that in Life Magazine . In one case, one shot was compared to one in Life magazine .
 NPIC was working on some of this after their initial overnight work before the funeral . NPIC said they were working on this after the overnight work .
 The top photo analyst watched in horror as the top of the president’s head exploded in a shower of crimson . Dino Brugioni, a photo analyst for the CIA, was watching in horror .
 We were asked to time it, which was difficult because the camera was spring-loaded . We were able to time the camera, which is spring loaded, to the point .
 Zapruder films assassination; returns to his office in state of shock . November 22, 1963 12:30 p.m. on November 22 . on November 23, 1963, at the White House .
 Four positives were developed at Eastman Kodak in Dallas, the first positive from the camera original, after which three reversed duplicates were developed from the three reversal duplicates made by Jamison .
 Zapruder and Schwartz deliver one copy of the film to Secret Service office in Dallas with understanding that it was to be sent immediately to FBI headquarters in Washington, D.C., by courier jet plane . The film was sent to the FBI headquarters by a courier jet .
 An analysis of the chain of possession of the film shows that in all probability it was in the FBI’s possession when it was altered . An analysis shows that at the same time the Nix film was altered, the film was in FBI possession at the time of alteration .
 The obvious problem with the Bill Smith story is that the copy of the original film had already been developed by Eastman Kodak in Dallas, not Rochester . The original film was developed by the same company in Dallas . The story is not true .
 This leads to support of those who suspect there were two films taken of the assassination . The films are thought to have been taken by a film company .
 The most direct answer is Abraham Zapruder himself, instead of a second cameraman, says the film's creator .
 If this is taken as truth, it brings a disturbing complication about Mr Zapruder . It is not the first time the truth has been revealed .
 If for the moment we assume that the copy that Bill Smith took to Eastman Kodak in Rochester was an undeveloped reversal duplicate from Zapruder’s camera it is disquieting to me because I detected not a whiff of deception from Erwin Schwartz or Bruce Jam
 If Zapruder had requested a secret extra reversal copy, it seems Jamison would have known . Jamison's copy of the famous film was a duplicate copy .
 All eyewitnesses have stated that Jamison made only three reversal duplicates . Jamison was only one of the three reversals he made .
 Zapruder film showed in high color fidelity the president being murdered by multiple shots from front and back, being developed or analyzed by the highest qualified photographic experts in the world . CIA's NPIC and Kodak’s Hawkeyeworks. developed the film .
 You’ve got to give these three diabolical geniuses credit for smarts and competence, aside from the fact that they were, arguably, certifiable mad men . You've got to be generous with these diabolically mad men.
 They must have seen that, without alteration of the film, the horrible and criminal secrets of all of them would be exposed to the world, and that they had to quickly order the fabrication of a new film or they would all be ruined or much worse, executed . The film was released
 The decision to alter the film would be an inevitable, natural step inasmuch as the horrific acts of altering of the president’s body had already been done . But the decision would be a natural step .
 Jack Ruby had been ordered to silence the incorrigible patsy, Lee Harvey Oswald, before he spilled the beans to the world . Jack Ruby ordered the assassination of Oswald in order to silence him . Ruby was killed in the September 4, 1945, assassination .
 First, create a new Zapruder film; and create a commission to cover up all critical legal evidence, 1.e. i.e., the Warren Commission . The Warren Commission was created in the wake of the discovery of the Cold War, i.E. Bob Greene says
 National security has become the standard rationale for covering up dirty national secrets for survival of our nation . It would all be done in the name of preventing World War I[I—national security] The U.S. would be doing the same thing in order to keep out of World War
 Both and are true regardless of the excursion to Eastman Kodak in Rochester, and whether or not there were two films involved . Both films were shot at Kodak's Rochester headquarters .
 LBJ and Hoover knew about their need for Z-film alterations within 72 hours of the murder of the president . Hoover and LBJ knew about the need for the alterations within about 72 hours .
 Hoover made a terrible mistake in using Oswald in a covert CIA counter-intelligence scheme that backfired . Hoover’s direct line to the exotic James Angleton was very close to Hoover and CIA's Bill Harvey .
 Search on Angleton or read chapter 28 for what I wrote about Angleton and Hemming . Read chapter 28 of Hemming's biography .
 Exactly where the final 8mm version of the altered Zapruder film was fabricated remains unknown by me at this writing . Exactly where exactly was the final version of this film remains unknown .
 The super secret Kodak Hawkeyeworks in Rochester could have done it all based on the selection of critical frames by NPIC . NPIC has been instructed as to the required results .
 When I was writing Appendix F, I tried to telephone Doug Horne because I felt he had obtained more information, particularly about the involvement of Kodak’s Hawkeyeworks in the Z-Film alteration .
 Horne was not receiving calls because of his total effort in getting his manuscript finished . Horne's total effort to get his novel finished was not to receive calls because he had finished .
 In the interim, I had read what Horne had written in Murder in Dealey Plaza and The Great Zapruder Film Hoax . In the meantime, I'd read Horne's work on The Zap Hoax, which he had written about the film .
 Dick Russell’s latest book, On the Trail of the JFK Assassins, interviews Horne . Horne interviewed Horne about the medical evidence and Z-Film alterations . Russell's latest book is on the trail of JFK assassins .
 I was debating if I should wait for Horne’s Magnum Opus because there was more material to come . But I was debated if I was going to wait for it to be released . Horne: "There is more material for us to come"
 In early December 2009 Horne’s book became available on Amazon.com.com .
 Horne's work proved to be a monumental 1800-page blockbuster, dealing mainly with the medical evidence and the Z-Film . Horne’s work dealt mainly with medical evidence .
 "I was pleased to find that he corroborates virtually everything I wrote in Bloody Treason on these subjects," he says . "The autopsy, the Zapruder film, and more," he adds .
 The “secret location” in which the body was altered, according to Horne, was in the morgue at Bethesda Naval Hospital; and the JFK body alterations were performed by Navy Doctors Humes and Boswell .
 Lifton will write about the differences in his forthcoming book Final Charade . Lifton's book is due to be published in 2015 .
 He believes that the primary body alterations were performed before the body was delivered to the morgue at Bethesda, Maryland . He believes Commander Humes altered the body .
 Horne readily acknowledges Lifton’s work as being the foundation of the medical evidence, and he is very generous in his praise of him . Lifton's work is the foundation for the evidence, says Horne .
 Doug Horne now believes that the Z-Film was altered by the conspirators to conceal the truth about what happened at Dealey Plaza on November 22, 1963 .
 Horne writes that he began his investigation believing that the Z-Film probably was authentic, but as the evidence of alteration grew, he changed his mind . Horne: "I began believing that it was authentic. But I changed my mind. I believe that it is not authentic"
 The Z-Film was altered, in part, to conceal the involvement of the United States Secret Service in the conspiracy, says Horne . Horne says the driver deliberately slowed down the car, if not stopping the vehicle entirely, during the shooting .
 He also raises the possibility that the driver turned around and shot the President . The driver may have also shot the president, he says .
 "I never came to that conclusion. Although I was aware of this long-standing allegation, I never thought it was true," he says .
 He wrote of his belief that Kodak’s Hawkeye plant performed the final alteration of the ZFilm .
 I had suspected this to be true but had backed away from the thought because I didn’t think I had enough solid material on which to base such an opinion . I had previously said this was true, but I had backed up from that .
 Life Magazine in Chicago may have been assisted by George W Colburn Laboratories there . It made sense, but there were other possibilities of alteration such as, maybe it was done in the hands of Life .
 Zapruder film may have been altered overnight in Dallas or even in Hollywood . Or maybe minimal alterations were done overnight .
 Life Magazine and the Warren Commission did it in steps to keep up with public releases by Life Magazine . Or maybe a combination of these elements .
 David Lifton wrote that he had closely read Horne’s chapter about the Z-Film, for the fifth or sixth time, and he now wanted to say, from the onset, that he did not agree with it as to the ‘when and where’ of
 Z-film alteration was done at the government’s top secret contractor, Hawkeyeworks . CIA Director John McCone saw only frames selected by LBJ, showing only shots from the rear .
 At this point in time I had only hastily read through Horne’s Z-Film chapter . At this time I only had read through the book's Z-film .
 Lifton and Horne disagree on specifics of what they say . Lifton is now the second disagreement on specifics between Horne and Lifton .
 The details of the time-line of handling of the Z-Film in Dallas, Chicago, Rochester, and Washington D.C. gets very complicated when all documents are studied .
 Two separate covert operations, secret from each other, took place on November 23 and 24, 1963, between White House people and NPIC in Washington D.C. The operation is based on memories of old men, 34 years after the fact .
 Evidence that has been proved true so many times that there’s no longer room for serious argument . By that term, I mean evidence that is so true that there's no room for argument .
 I decided that what I now had was enough for me, and that I would not pursue the fascinating detail further . I decided to decide not to pursue further .
 JFK assassination is a breakdown of the U.S. Constitution, author says . JFK assassination was a failure of the separation and balance of powers, he says . "What we now see in the JFK assassination are a breakdown"
 "It was and will be a fearful disturbance to patriotic U.S. citizens," says President Obama . "We will not tolerate this disturbance," he says .
 It seems to be in the year 2010 in a beginning process, fueled by ideologues, racists, war hawks, and national security paranoiacs .
 Horne wrote that it was ‘case closed’ regarding hand-painting of the mysterious blobs around JFK’s head . Horne has gotten corroboration from two other Hollywood film experts .
 David Sanchez Morales was very likely the man from CIA who directly managed the assassination, along with CIA’s Bill Harvey as a master planner, says Horne . Horne also joined in my belief that David Sanchez . Morales was likely to be the man who managed the . assassination,
 How LBJ Killed JFK, was very close to my interpretation except that Horne was a bit stronger than I . Horne went into more detail than I about Mac Wallace’s fingerprints .
 This book is a must-read for anyone who wants to learn more about the JFK assassination . The book is available on Amazon.com .
 The outline of the conspiracy he describes is much too simple . But it does have its share of serious faults and pitfalls, and it's not without flaws .
 If its key aspects prove to be accurate, it will be very important for the country .
 McClellan wrote of Lyndon Johnson’s near death confession to his lawyer Don Thomas . LB§J said, in effect, that “I had to do it; I had no choice; that damned Bobbie was closing in on me, stirring everything, surrounding me.
 McClellan readily states, understandably, that he doesn't have tapes or documents to back this up . He says he doesn’t have tapes, documents to support this up, but he does .
 High level criminals and traitors are not known for leaving paper or magnetic trails . And, I would add, such probably never existed—after all, high level criminals not known to leave a trail .
 McClellan wrote that LBJ’s hit-man, Mac Wallace, along with Oswald, were the gunmen on the sixth floor . A third gunman recruited by Wallace was shooting from the grassy knoll area, he wrote .
 This has been reported and written about extensively by others and is, by and large, convincing . This is not the first time I've heard from such a large group of people in the U.S.
 fingerprint evidence is backed up by a private fingerprint analyst and a key fingerprint expert at Interpol in Europe . The fingerprint evidence has been backed by private fingerprint analysts .
 McClellan was a partner in the Austin, Texas law firm that handled LBJ’s legal work and other matters over his entire political career . LBJ served as a senator from Texas for eight years .
 The name of the firm in 1960 was Clark, Mathews, Thomas, Harris, Harris & Denius . The firm was Clark Mathews and Mathews .
 The head of the firm was LBJ’s long time friend Edward Aubrey Clark . According to McClellan, Clark was the man who took care of the crimes including assassination of President Kennedy .
 LBJ was a close friend of LBJ and a partner in the firm . Don Thomas was another close friend and partner in LBJ's firm .
 McClellan joined the firm in 1966 and was there for about ten years before leaving . He joined the company in 1964 and spent ten years at the firm .
 Lawyer put together the story from discussions with Don Thomas and other lawyers in the firm, including associate attorney John Coates .
 This material, in its full context, deserves careful reading in McClellan’s book, keeping in mind that its most important parts are hearsay, or even double hearsay . It is hearsay from a “death bed” confession but admissible in a court
 Barr McClellan is being very honest about this terrible subject, particularly regarding his private conversations with the other lawyers in the firm . I am inclined to believe it because it fits into all the other evidence, and his sense is that he is honest .
 A fault I find in McClellan’s book is that he leaves out important evidence that could explain the larger plot, he says . A fault he finds is that the book leaves out some of the most important pieces of evidence .
 He writes essentially nothing about the New Orleans evidence (Bannister, Ferrie, Oswald, Clay Shaw, the CIA) The military, the mafia, the French connection, William Harvey and ZR/Rifle, anti-Castro Cubans, Angleton, and Oswald in
 I can see how a combination of these elements could have been joined into the conspiracy after the word was out that LBJ would be behind it . I can't see how it could have happened after word of LBJ was out .
 LBJ becomes a sort of scapegoat, albeit an evil and deserving one . McClellan tends to let other main culprits off the hook and, paradoxically, LBJ is a scapegoat .
 As the years go by, more and more is developed about this huge rupture in American history that occurred on that fateful day . It becomes clear that it went beyond the assassination of John F Kennedy . It goes beyond that assassination of JFK .
 Robert Kennedy and Martin Luther King were assassinated in 1968 . The assassinations of Kennedy and King show what it tells us about the psyche of our nation, or will tell us, if truth forces its way out of our minds-in-denial .
 There was only one substantial criticism of Bloody Treason I have found so far in Horne’s book . Horne also criticises the author of the book, which is published now .
 He wrote, in effect, that I was incorrect in stating that J Edgar Hoover was the one behind the alteration of the Z-Film . He said he was incorrect .
 Horne wondered if, in light of what he has written, I would change my mind . Horne wonders if he would change his mind. Horne: "I wondered if I would ... change my course. I'm not changing my mind." Horne said.
 The but being that I had focused on Hoover as the most likely guilty party, mainly because the documented information at the time showed that he was the first to get a first-copy of the Z-Film, sent to him by the Secret Service by special courier on the night of November
 Hoover was my number one suspect at the time because he had the motive, the means (the power) and the opportunity to direct others to do the alteration . My mistake in writing was that I was not careful enough to make it very clear that Hoover was the suspect .
 Hoover had to know early-on about Z-Film alterations and therefore was complicit from the beginning in the conspiracy to alter the film . The altered film had to be switched with the FBI’s first copy .
 For the first time thanks to Horne, we have convincing evidence that LBJ was in-the-loop and most likely the one who ordered the Z-Film alteration; but, with at least J Edgar Hoover’s knowledge, I want him to know I have changed my
 Maybe it's what the National Security State could sink to if given the necessary evil people in the right positions, and the right circumstances . Maybe it’s what the N.S. State could do .
 This is a far cry from claiming that the assassination was a simple Mob hit, from start to finish . But this is far from saying that it was a Mob hit from start-to-finish . It is not the first time a mob hit has been claimed to be a Mob
 The rapidity with which these criminal actions occurred is the surest indicator that the government was not simply covering up a Mob hit to hide the CIA’s use of the Mafia in the attempted assassination of Castro . Furthermore, the alteration of wounds on the body, the planting of bullets
 If the coverup was a benign one, then the government would first have had to establish that the Mob did it in the first place . That would have taken weeks, even it that were the case, even if the Mob was behind it .
 The President’s wounds were altered the day of his death; bullets were planted the day he died . The Zapruder film was altered during the weekend following his death . The film was released in the days following the President's death .
 The timing of these actions and the actors who performed them are the surest indicators that it was the national security state that killed President Kennedy, not the syndicate of Organized Crime .
 The identification of Oswald’s handler as David Atlee Phillips, and the confession of David Sanchez Morales, both prove that the JFK assassination was not a simple Mob killing . Finally, the identification of  Phillips as Phillips' handler proves that it was not just a simple mob killing .
 I agree with Horne on all of this and so stated in Bloody Treason, but maybe not as succinctly and not using the term National Security State . Horne: "I agree with [Horne] on all this but not with the term 'National Security State'
 Horne's book seems to be similar to that in Oliver Stone’s movie, JFK; that is, assassination of the President by the military industrial complex . Horne: “The assassination of JFK was assassination by the . Military industrial complex. That is the military .
 President Obama has been accused of being assassinated by his political enemies . The White House has a history of assassinations, including by ideologics, militarists and ideologues .
 We may never know for sure who initiated the plot, or if it went together all at once, as I described in the first publication of Bloody Treason . It may never be known if the plot was ever started or if all of it was coordinated .
 In closing, I believe that virtually all of my basic conclusions about the JFK assassination have been proven to be sound . The JFK assassination has been proven sound, says author .
 A Naz-Talgic Peek at PostWorld War II America ; originally published in The Rebel, November 22, 1983 .
 Carol Hewett, Carol, “Oswald Didn’t Talk—But John Thomas Masen Does,” unpublished article, 1996 . Hewett: “John didn't talk—but he did, but he did talk.” She says.
 Joesten, Joachim, The Case Against Lyndon B Johnson, Volume I . Published somewhere in Europe .
 A Naz-Talgic Peek at Post-World War II America ; originally published in Covert Action Information Bulletin, Fall 1990 .
 Summers, Anthony and Robbyn Summers, “The Ghosts of November,” Vanity Fair, December 1994 . Summers: “Ghosts of November”
 Marcus, Raymond, The HSCA, The Zapruder Film, and The Single-Bullet Theory, 1992. Marcus . Raymond . Marcus .
 Thomas E Davis II, Jean Soutre...and certain other individuals, dated January 16, 1981 . Thomas E . Davis II and Jean S outre were both assassinated .
 An interim report of the Select Committee to study governmental operations with respect to intelligence activities will be released . The committee will also examine governmental operations .
 U.S. Senate together with additional, supplemental, and separate views. United States Senate together . United States. Senate .
 Joint Hearing Before the Select Committee on Intelligence and the Subcommittee on Health and Scientific Research of the Committee on Human Resources . United States Senate, Ninety-Fifth Congress, First Session. Joint Hearing before the Select . Committee on . Intelligence .
 From the beginning, it was apparent that it would be impractical and an exercise in vanity to attempt to complete this book without help from many people . From the start, it would have been impractical and a project would be impossible to complete without help .
 In fact, the relationships with these people would prove to be among the most rewarding aspects of my endeavor . "In fact, these relationships would prove the most fulfilling aspects of this endeavor," he says .
 This ranged from private citizens whose technical and professional skills I sought, to actual witnesses to the assassination, or in the periphery and aftermath . This included private citizens who had technical, professional skills .
 Retired government officials who were close to John Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson helped write the book . The book is published in New York and Washington, D.C.
 CNN.com's John Sutter will spend the rest of his life in San Diego, California . Sutter says he has a lot of questions to answer about his life . He says he will start with one closest to home and go from there .
 Robert Livingston, M.D., is an expert on the structure and function of the brain . He provided many hours of consultation and advice .
 David Mantik, M.D., was a radiation oncologist at Eisenhower Memorial Hospital who had access to autopsy materials in the National Archives . Mantik shared with me the scientific evidence of conspiracy that he developed concerning Kennedy’s x-rays .
 Dr. Louis Kartsonis, M.D., who also had access to autopsy materials, provided guidance in the early stages of his investigation .
 "He provided help in understanding his work and gave constructive criticism on how to write a book of this kind"
 I hold his pioneer work to be the largest single contribution to the solution of the John F Kennedy murder mystery . He said: "I hold his pioneering work to the . largest contribution to . the . solution to the John . F Kennedy . murder mystery."
 David Lifton helped me extensively in my analysis of the Zapruder film . Lifton inspired me to give it highest priority when he lectured at a conference in Dallas . He shared his hard-gotten copy of the film with me .
 Richard Case Nagell is the author of The Man Who Knew Too Much . Author Dick Russell helped me understand why I should believe the story of Richard Case . Richard Case was a detective in the 1930s, but his story was not true .
 Russell’s book stands out as the single most comprehensive non-scientific compilation of new evidence yet published . Russell's book is one of the most comprehensive pieces of evidence yet to be published .
 Anthony Summers, whose works on the Kennedy assassination and J Edgar Hoover have been most valuable . Summers' work on the JFK assassination and Hoover has been invaluable . Summers: "It's important to know what happened in Kennedy's last moments"
 Paul Hoch, an invaluable critic of evidence, has tried to keep me on the straight and narrow path . And Paul . Hoch has been a good friend to me, and I've been a great supporter of my work .
 Anna Marie Kuhns-Walko is a dedicated genius at finding documents in the National Archives . She provided me with thousands of selected pages of newly released documents .
 Mary Ferrell generously gave her time and encouragement and shared her vast knowledge of the Kennedy assassination . Ferrell: "It's been a long way since the assassination. It's a long road to the truth"
 Mary Kennedy is a rare and colorful person, unique in American history . She is "deserving of the highest honors" for her relentless pursuit of evidence concerning the Kennedy assassination .
 Deborah Stockton and Lee Ann Hubbard provided their publishing and editing skills in the final stages of the book .
 A special word of thanks to David Swift, screenwriter, producer, and director, who encouraged me not to give up . David Swift is the screenwriter and director of the film, which is based in London .
 He devoted many hours trying to help me find a publisher, and he introduced me to motion picture editor Leon Carrere, from whom I learned about techniques of movie film editing . He dedicated many hours of time to help him find a book .
 I also thank George Kendall, who taught me about film editing machines and who introduced me to Peter Silverman, who introduced him to Dr. Peter . Dr. Silverman also gave me the opportunity to learn about editing techniques .
 I thank my good friend Vice Admiral Robert Baldwin, who introduced me to retired naval officers who had direct experience with naval intelligence . I thank Vice Admiral Baldwin for his support .
 A special acknowledgment is extended to the retired government officials, military officers, and private citizens who granted me interviews .
 Their hours of discussions shed much-needed light on the circumstances and state of knowledge surrounding the Kennedy assassination within the government in 1963 and to the present day .
 "This book is only a continuation of their sacrifices and labor over the past thirty years," says the author . This book is a continuing of their sacrifice and labor .
 He volunteered to conduct independent tests and analysis concerning my proof of the missing frames in the Zapruder film . The tests were conducted by independent tests on the subject of his proof .
 He worked many hours and weekends at his expense and provided me with the results of his tests which confirmed my original experiments . The results of the tests were confirmed by the author .
 Those who helped me gave freely of themselves, demonstrating the need of large numbers of American people to get to the truth of the assassination of John F Kennedy . The need for large numbers to find out the truth is evident in the testimony of those who helped .
 The conclusion and judgments that I have reached are my own, and are not attributable to nor endorsed by any of those who helped me along the way . But, in the end, the conclusion and judgements that he has reached are his own, he says .
 It is not necessary to start at the beginning of the book, read chapter by chapter all the way through the book . Instead, read the entire book at the bottom of the page .
 Some readers may wish to skip around as their energy level and interests vary . This article is an attempt to make the most interesting blog posts in the world .
 This is a method I learned as a systems engineer and businessman solving large, complex problems in the materials processing, electric power, and aerospace industries . Looking at all of the photographs first and reading their captions will be useful to become acquainted with the major characters .
 When approaching a problem, it is best to look first at the obvious; the broad picture; the tips of the icebergs, from which a tentative solution can be derived; then to proceed in depth . The best way to approach a problem is to look at the broad, broad picture
 The CIA mind-control programs have been thoroughly exposed and documented in the Church Committee Report . The Church Committee report was published in 2005 .
 The CIA penetration of news media is summarized in Namebase Newsline, Journalism and the CIA, April-June 1997, citing a wide range of sources .
 For simplicity, I use the term “Mafia” and “organized crime” interchangeably . There is a distinction between the mafia and organized crime, but there's a distinction .
 Evidence of CIA involvement with the Mafia is included in Chapters 20 and 21 . See Chapter 4 for a discussion of evidence that Marilyn Monroe was murdered .
 Robert Kennedy’s crusade against organized crime led to his death . See Chapter 15 for more on Robert Kennedy's crusade against crime .
 I still believe that the Commission, with the possible exception of Allen Dulles, did not participate in any cover-up, but that it was the work of others . I still think that the . Commission ... did not . participate in . any cover up, but others .
 A CBS poll reported by Dan Rather on May 30, 1996 for the CBS Evening News showed that 89% of the American people did not believe that Oswald acted alone .
 The reader is reminded that in constructing an hypothesis, one is allowed to speculate, if done rationally . The reader should be reminded of the dangers of speculation .
 The Kennedy brothers, above all others; if incriminating diaries and tapes about them could be confiscated and kept from public view, they would be the only ones to be protected .
 The term used by the CIA is “false sponsor’; that is, creating false information or planting evidence to direct the blame to an innocent, yet plausible, person or group . E. C.E.
 Please read Chapter 9, Questions of Evidence, for a discussion of the legal concept of “best evidence” as related to scientific concepts . EE. EE: Please read chapter 9 of "Questions of Evidence" for discussion of legal concepts .
 The possibility of an “induced cover-up” by the CIA or FBI will be considered as the book progresses . The book will look at the CIA and FBI as well as the CIA .
 Fear of exposure of their dark secrets if the crime were to be solved could have induced the CIA or FBI to cooperate in the cover-up .
 The United States did not promise never to invade Cuba under any circumstances, but for the purpose of this semi-fictional chapter I am taking a hypothetical point of view .
 Shortly before Robert Kennedy was assassinated, he had stated that only by becoming president would he be able to determine the truth about his brother’s assassination . Shortly before his brother's assassination, he said only by . becoming president, he was able to find out the truth .
 Perhaps the plotters underestimated Robert Kennedy’s resolve, and were forced to kill him later when it became apparent that he would very likely become president . The plotters may have underestimated Kennedy's resolve .
 The assassination of Robert Kennedy will not be included in the scope of this book . The full knowledge of what happened there, as well as the assassination of Martin Luther King, holds promise of finally rounding out the complete story .
 President Clinton said on November 22, 1993, that he believed Oswald acted alone . This was confirmed by President Clinton, a most intelligent and informed president . President Clinton told the nation on national television that he believes Oswald was the sole gunman .
 This, thirty years after his idol, John Kennedy, was murdered in Dallas, Texas, in Dallas . This, 30 years after he was assassinated in Dallas.
 President Clinton apparently had too many other problems on his platter than to deal with the past . President Clinton seemed to have more pressing business than dealing with it .
 He had just visited with the Kennedys at Martha’s Vineyard while on vacation .
 In the fall of 1993, a new book was published entitled Passport to Assassination by Col. Col. John Sutter .
 Oleg M Nechiporenko outlined his fundamental analysis of the nature and structure of conspiracies in an interview with CNN.com's Mr. Oleg . He also outlined the nature of conspiracy theories in the interview .
 Nechiporenko was an officer in the Russian equivalent of the CIA . He was stationed in Mexico City when Oswald went there in September 1963 . Oswald went to Mexico City, Mexico City .
 Nechiporenko wrote that the main attributes indicating conspiracy are the agreement of several people and secrecy . The main attributes of a possible conspiracy are agreement and secrecy, she said . The author of the book says the book was published in 2008 .
 He says these principles are universal and followed by the intelligence services, the Mafia, and any criminal organization . He says they are followed by intelligence services and Mafia .
 He says executioners would be professional killers, both primary and reserve . He says they would be both primary or reserve killers .
 He says the model makes a great deal of sense . He says it may appear to be too large or overly bureaucratic but that its structure makes great sense .
 He says the structure of the Mafia provides an example of this principle along with intelligence services’ operational work, which is based on the same principles .
 I noted that my hypothetical master plan seemed to include all these elements . Upon reading this analysis written by a KGB colonel who shared an office with Kostikov, a KGB officer in the "Liquid Affairs" branch .
 The colonel did not see that element as necessary in Russia, where brutal military repression would be taken for granted . Perhaps he didn't see that . Perhaps the colonel did .
 Russians would have the greatest insight into the nature of conspiracies to assassinate their leaders, he says . "Of any people, of any people," he says. "I reflected that of any . people, I reflected that . of any person, the Russians would ... have the . greatest
 Russia’s history of assassinating leaders perhaps exceeds that of any other nation in modern history . Russia has a history of assassination attempts, including assassinations, assassinations .
 Evidence of shots from the scientific acoustical analysis, although supporting a conclusion of more than one gunman, is not included here because of its controversial, maybe doubtful, validity . Also, evidence of shots is also not included because it is too controversial to include .
 Autopsy pathologists also did not dissect the throat wound to see where it went, despite being informed by telephone before autopsy to do so by the chief of the U.S. Neurobiological Laboratory at the time . Pathologists were informed by phone before autopsy that they should dissect the
 Appendix C for discussion of controversy regarding this subject . See Appendix C .
 Mary Ferrell is renowned as an authority and collector of JFK assassination documents . She is renowned for her knowledge of JFK JFK's assassination .
 The nature of Kennedy’s wounds will be examined thoroughly in the chapters immediately following . Kennedy's wounds are the subject of the next chapter .
 Charles Crenshaw was present at the Parkland Hospital emergency room when President Kennedy arrived there after the assassination . He says he was in the emergency room at the time of the shooting .
 JAMA's attack was based on false information and poor research . Unfortunately for the JAMA, its attack on the issue has been based on poor research and false information .
 Crenshaw and Shaw sued the JAMA and were awarded a large financial settlement . The JAMA awarded them large financial settlements .
 The JAMA was required by the court to print an article retracting its statements about Dr. Dr. John Sutter .
 All of the information from the original would be exactly duplicated on the copies, including edge images and film stock symbols . Bruce Jamison told me that the three copies were made using the contact printing process .
 This gave the forgers grave problems in preserving the original printing . This undoubtedly gave them grave problems . The original printing of the book was printed in 1881 .
 Schwartz said he personally delivered the original to Stolley at the Adolphus Hotel in Dallas on either November 26 or 27 . Schwartz says he delivered it to the hotel in Dallas .
 Schwartz does not remember Stolley getting a copy of the book on November 23 . Schwartz may have been given a copy on November 26 or 27 . Schwartz says he may have gotten the copy on Nov. 23 and then the original .
 Not shown in September 1964 issue were frames missing while the limousine was behind the freeway sign, explained as an inadvertent break in the film .
 Three “reversal dupes” were made on Kodachrome II camera stock furnished by Eastman Kodak in Dallas . From these, positive prints were developed later in the day at Eastman in Dallas.
 In 1995 the book Hoover s FBI by Cartha ‘Deke’ DeLoach, J Edgar Hoover’s numberthree man, was published . The book was published in 1995 .
 DeLoach made a curious statement when he wrote about first seeing the Zapruder film . He said he first saw the film in a very curious way .
 He said that he had viewed the Zapruder film in FBI headquarters “on television” at 3 m.m. on November 23, 1963 .
 Zapruder film was not shown on television until years later . This statement is certainly not true because the film did not appear on television for years later.
 It seems very unlikely that the film could have arrived at FBI headquarters in Washington, D.C., and been converted to a television tape in a short time .
 It seems much more likely that DeLoach was watching a projection on a screen of a copy of the actual film . It seems more likely than that he was actually watching the film .
 Zapruder film that we have all seen shows unmistakably the president’s head and body being thrust suddenly backward . President's body was thrust backward in the Zaprud film .
 DeLoach either has a very faulty memory or saw the original, unaltered film which could, indeed, have shown JFK being pitched forward only to have those frames deleted later in the alteration .
 This reporting of JFK being pitched forward was also made by Dan Rather of CBS who saw what was in all probability the original film on Saturday morning, November 23, 1963 in Zapruder's office in Dallas .
 "When challenged, when challenged, they changed their story to that of a backward movement," the group said . But when challenged they said they were 'backward'
 Allen enjoyed the company of hearty, opinionated women who talked tough . Allen's supportive wife had long since found her caring place in his diffuse life, but Allen enjoyed company .
 More than an optical printer would be required to reduce the 35mm film back down to 8mm on Kodachrome II film stock .
 Oswald, an avowed Communist, traitor, and “promoter” of pro-Castro literature, was employed in top-secret photographic work for the United States government . Oswald was being watched by the FBI .
 Photographic expertise for extensive alteration of film was available also in government at the FBI labs and the National Photographic Interpretation Center in Washington, D.C. loz Schwartz had told us in the interview that once the film print was made, Zapruder, and a few employees
 Marler and I had both hoped that when we advised him that he and his group were looking at the wrong frames he would back off and leave the rapid head/body turn subject alone until I could publish . Marler: "I had hoped that we told him that we were looking
 Livingstone acknowledged that we may have been looking at different frames than he did . Livingstone: "We may have had different frames to look at"
 He did not include photos of the actual frames that he was looking at for his reader to study . Unfortunately, he did not show the frames for his readers to see .
 This is unfortunate because both Lifton and Marler had presented my work based on missing frame counts . This was unfortunate because David Lifton had presented his work on missing frames . Lifton: "This is unfortunate"
 Head and body turns start with miniscule frame counts and build up in degrees as the turn accelerates . The angular velocity was the only way to analyze it because frame counts are very deceiving .
 I now regret that I agreed to let David Lifton present what we call the “rapid head turn” before I had finished my work and was ready to publish . I now regrets agreeing to give Lifton a rapid head turn before he had finished his work .
 This led to Marler’s articles and now, finally, my book, which was published only after extensive study and consultation with experts . This is the first time I’ve published a book in which I have been able to share my views of the world .
 I wish that Livingstone had held off until I could finish my work and publish, but he was unwilling to do so . Livingstone is unwilling to hold off until he could publish his work .
 Dr. Mantik spoke to Dr. Livingstone about this after I had seen that Livingstone had made that statement, and Dr. livingstone had said that . Livingstone's statement was made by Livingstone, who was a member of the Order of State of State .
 Mantik told me that he, indeed, agreed with the estimates of angles I am reporting here . Mantik said he agreed with Mantik's estimate of angles of angles he is reporting .
 Roger McCarthy, president of Failure Analysis, Inc., in a mock trial held by the American Bar Association in San Francisco in the summer of 1992 . McCarthy was president of failure analysis, Inc. Roger McCarthy .
 He went on to state that Kennedy would not have been hit any later than frame 221, at a minimum, and therefore Kennedy and Connally were hit by separate bullets . He said Kennedy would have not been hit by a single bullet at least .
 Presented by Sherry Pool Gutierrez, CSCSA, at COPA meeting in Washington, D.C., October 21, 1995 . Presented at COPa meeting in D.A.
 Of the twenty-one witnesses who said they saw the limousine stop completely, six were Dallas policemen . Six of the witnesses were Dallas police officers .
 These allegations are derived from David Lifton’s monumental and pioneer book Best Evidence . These allegations were derived primarily from Lifton's monumental and pioneering book Best evidence .
 Lifton’s work is essential to understanding the evidence concerning the autopsy, says Lifton . Lifton's work was essential to understand the evidence regarding the autopsy of the deceased .
 "I made a point of getting to know David Lifton early when I started working on this book," says Lifton . Lifton is the author of a new book, "David Lifton" Lifton: "I'm not afraid to be afraid to die"
 "We spent many long hours together discussing and debating the evidence. We spent long hours debating and debating evidence," he says .
 David Lifton is a man of intellectual integrity and would not write of anything that he did not believe to be true, he says . Lifton would only write of things that he believed, and only after exhaustive analysis .
 Lifton himself has written that he proceeded a little too rapidly in the early days of his research when he was very young . Lifton has said he proceeded to proceed too quickly in his early research days .
 Some critics still go back to Lifton’s early writings and try to discredit him . Lifton: "Some critics still try to . discredit him" Lifton was born in 1926 .
 None, in his view, has been able to discredit the main thrust of his work in Best Evidence . But none, in my view, can discredit the core thrust of Best Evidence.
 It took a huge effort to overcome my instinct to reject Lifton’s conclusions about the medical evidence . Lifton: "It took a gigantic, prolonged effort" to overcome his instinct .
 Lifton’s discoveries rank at the very top of the list, with the exceptions that are noted in the text .
 The specific wording of the above allegations, however, is my own; at this point they are only allegations, which do not necessarily agree with Lifton . Lifton has been accused of sexual misconduct in the past .
 Disguise and Deception in the Assassination of John F Kennedy, 600, 674; also my disussion with Aubrey Rike in November 1992 .
 Crenshaw confirms that the body was “wrapped in two white sheets” before it was placed in the coffin at Parkland Hospital . The body was wrapped in two sheets before being placed into the coffin .
 All of Kennedy’s aides and Jacqueline Kennedy were in a forward compartment of Air Force One at the time of the swearing-in ceremony . The coffin was unattended for a few minutes .
 The coffin could have been opened at that time and the body hidden somewhere on Air Force One . The most likely spot was in a cargo hatch directly below where the coffin was placed .
 Air Force One has a large cargo compartment, accessible by a trap door, underneath the carpeting in front of where the coffin was placed . The cargo compartment is accessible by an accessible trap door .
 It would have been a simple matter to open the coffin, remove the body, and drop the body into the lower compartment . The body would later be removed from the aircraft in a body bag, through a bottom cargo door . Air Force One landed at Andrews Air Force Base in Washington,
 He first told of the two ambulances and two caskets to the Washington News Sun, reported in its article on May 1, 1975, .
 Dennis David stated that he witnessed the arrival of the first ambulance at the rear of Bethesda Hospital . Dennis David said he witnessed first ambulance arrive at the back of the hospital in Bethesda, Maryland .
 He said it was a black Cadillac ambulance as opposed to a gray Navy ambulance . He said the ambulance was a Cadillac ambulance .
 Humes was present, plus the chief of the Army medical departments . Humes were present, as well as the chiefs of the Air Force and the Army Medical departments .
 David said the casket came in through the “back gate” from the east entrance off Jones Bridge Road at approximately 6:45m. David said it came into the area through the "back gate" off the road .
 Accompanying the casket were six or seven civilians whom he assumed were Secret Service people . Accompanied were six people who he assumed would be Secret Service agents .
 Two civilians in white smocks were driving the hearse and the other in the front seat, he said . He also said there were two civilians in the vehicle, including two civilians, in a white smock .
 David witnessed the casket being taken off the hearse and taken into the morgue . David witnessed seven or eight men carrying the body of the deceased into a morgue in New York City .
 He said it obviously wasn’t just an empty casket, because it appeared much heavier than that . He said he could see the strain on the men who carried it .
 Lifton asked David what the casket looked like, David said, “It was a gray metal casket.” David said he was buried in a gray gray metal .
 When Lifton asked him if it was a polished bronze casket, David replied, “No, it wasn't. It wasn’t.” David said. “It wasn”
 Jerrol Custer first told his story for public disclosure to David Lifton . Jerrol told the story of his struggle to overcome his addiction to drugs .
 Custer told me the President’s wound was enormous—‘“I could put both of my hands in the wound.”’’ ‘‘I could . put both hands in my wound. Custer’ said, ‘I
 He exposed the x-ray film and returned to the morgue, x-rays showing that the rear of the President’s head was blown off, he said .
 Custer then said that Jacqueline Kennedy was coming in through the main entrance of the morgue . Custer went on to say that after he had taken the x-rays, he left and as he was walking through the foyer, he saw Kennedy .
 Custer said he saw Jacqueline from a distance of ten or fifteen yards . Custer saw her from ten to fifteen yards away .
 Outside the hospital door stood the Navy ambulance, with the Dallas casket . The casket was placed in the hospital with a Navy casket.
 Jerrol Custer related this same story on KRON-TV in San Francisco in 1988 . Paul O’Connor, Dennis David, and Aubrey Rike also related their stories as stated in this book .
 The “ambulance chase’s” is a very complex story, possibly involving two Navy ambulances . The chase may have involved two ambulances, possibly including two .
 O’Connor’s visual estimate of the amount of brain remaining in the skull was independently confirmed three years later in an optical density analysis of the autopsy xrays by radiation oncologist .
 O'Connor’s testimony to the HSCA, released in 1994, tells of the hearse being at the rear of the hospital . O’Connor tells of Jerrol Custer's remarks to him about seeing Mrs. Custer .
 It does not state directly that there was a decoy ambulance at the front of Kennedy's hospital . Kennedy in the lobby afterwards .
 In November 1995 I obtained a copy of the tape of the Lipsey interview and listened to it carefully . To my knowledge, there are no government documents of Dennis David’s or Jerrol Custer .
 Lipsey did, in fact, talk of the decoy ambulance at the front of the hospital with Jacqueline Kennedy, just as the HSCA had written . Lipsey said he did, indeed, and that he did talk of a decoy .
 Lipsey said several times that while he was watching the autopsy he was absolutely and unequivocally certain that Kennedy had been shot three times . Lipsey also said he was certain that the autopsy showed Kennedy was shot at least three times in the head .
 This nullifies the Warren Commission’s theory that Kennedy was hit by only two shots which is absolutely necessary for their hypothesis . This, of course, nullifies . The Warren Commission's theory .
 Lipsey questioned the HSCA interviewer about conspiracy, referring to Jack Ruby’s shooting of Oswald . Later in the interview, Lipsey also questioned the interviewer . Lipsey said Jack Ruby shot Oswald in the head .
 The National Archives has released negatives of the autopsy x-rays . Positive prints are included in Chapter 14 of Chapter 14 .
 Robert Livingston explains how cerebellar tissue is distinguished from other tissues of the brain .
 He completed medical training and residency in Internal Medicine at Stanford . He conducted advanced neuroscience research at the Universities of Geneva, Zurich, Collége de France, Oxford, Géteborg, and Massachusetts Institute of Technology .
 He founded and directed the hospital for wounded Okinawans and Japanese prisoners of war during the battle for Okinawa . He also served on NASA’s First Life Sciences Committee .
 William Kemp Clark is a neurosurgeon . Clark is an expert in brain anatomy and therefore of its appearance in an opened skull . He is also expert in the appearance of brain anatomy .
 Anna Marie obtained a document from the National Archives that shows that the brain was severely mutilated . Anna Marie says she believes that the victim's brain was mutilated severely . The document is supported by a document she obtained from the Archives .
 HSCA memo of an interview of the autopsy physician J Thornton Boswell on August 16, 1977 . It is from the interview of Boswell, a physician who performed the autopsy of the deceased .
 There is a definite picture of the way the missile passed. I noted while cutting the tissue there is a . definite picture . of the . way the . missile passed .
 Boswell agreed with the drawing of the photograph of the brain in Exhibit 13-8 . Boswell said he was "in substantial agreement" with Boswell's work .
 This piece reportedly had reportedly been found in the limousine in which the President was riding . This piece was reportedly found in a limo .
 Doctors x-rayed a piece of bone after doctors found it had evidence of metal particles . The bone was found to contain metal particles in the bone . Doctors say the metal particles are a sign of life in the human body .
 When the body was first observed on the autopsy table, it was thought by the doctors that surgery had possibly been performed in the head area . Such was reflected in my notes made at the time, such was reflected on my notes .
 If we accept Sibert’s HSCA interview as his best reconstruction of what happened, then the “surgery on the head” statement in his initial report would be discounted . Sibert: "Surgery on head" statement in initial report is discounted . If
 Humes still puzzled about surgery on the head the next day when he phoned Dr. Dr. Humes to check out the results of the surgery .
 "I give credence to the original FBI report, and not to a rationalization twelve years later," author says . "These questions, combined with all of the other evidence that the brain was either completely or partially removed by the conspirators, leads me to believe in the original report
 I have viewed that program many times and concluded that I will not try to deal with its errors and distortions except for one item . "I have viewed it many times," he said, "but concluded that . I have . concluded that he will not . try to . deal with the
 In the Nova documentary, four of the Dallas hospital doctors, acting as consultants for Nova, were brought to Washington, D.C., to view the autopsy pictures and x-rays in the National Archives .
 All of them earlier had said that when they observed Kennedy’s body at Parkland Hospital they saw a large wound in the rear of his head . All of the witnesses had said they saw the wound .
 Nova permitted them to enter the viewing room for the photos and xrays, each for about one-half hour . Nova permitted the viewing of the xrays and photos for about a half hour .
 When they emerged from the room they said they had seen no evidence that the wounds had been altered . They said they did not see any evidence of the wounds being altered .
 "We should keep in mind that this was twenty-five years after their first testimonies. We should keep a . mind,’s first testimonies," she said .
 He restated his consistent past statements that the photographs did not agree with what he saw . "A large hole in the back of the head," he said .
 Dulany, Jenkins, and Peters, years earlier they had all clearly stated that there was a large hole in the back of the head . Years later, years later, they had clearly stated they had seen a hole in their head .
 The autopsy photos were released in 1988 for the first time in 1988 . They were released to the public for first time since then .
 In any event, their earlier testimonies are inherently more credible than later vague statements under pressure . In any case, they are inherently credible .
 We must remember that for the doctors to accept that the autopsy photos were not what they had seen at Parkland Hospital, would have been tantamount to accusing the government of involvement in a cover-up of the conspiracy .
 Some may not have wished to place themselves in such a storm of controversy . It is understandable that some may not want to be involved in the storm .
 The Nova program, from beginning to end, is flawed with faulty reasoning and incomplete evidence . Walter Cronkite’s good intentions, despite his good intentions . The Nova show is flawed, despite its good intentions.
 Cronkite, in his attempt to be balanced, makes the mistake of presenting the evidence for conspiracy in a greatly simplified form, then presenting remotely possible doubts that can always be raised for any evidence, no matter how powerful .
 Cronkite concludes, one by one, for each item, that there isn’t proof of conspiracy “beyond a shadow of a doubt’—an impossibility for any evidence, as legal scholars and trial attorneys know only too well . Cronkites concludes that there
 He studied JFK assassination perhaps harder and longer than any other network newsperson . He studied the JFK assassination maybe harder .
 I wonder if he realizes how much good he could have accomplished for our nation, if only he had come down strongly on what, in his judgment of his intelligence and reasoning power, he must have genuinely, deeply suspected—that a very sinister conspiracy assassinated his president .
 Dr. Humes’ handwritten notes on November 23, 1963 with Dr. Dr. Robert Humes . Humes' handwritten notes show that he and Dr. Bob Humes had a telephone conversation in 1963 .
 Humes wrote that Dr. Malcolm Perry described a puncture wound in the anterior neck in a letter to Dr. Humes . Perry describes the wound in his anterior neck . Humes said that Perry had punctured his neck in an attempt to kill himself .
 Mantik was chairman of the Cancer Committee at Eisenhower Hospital . Mantik practices in the Peter Lake Center of Eisenhower Hospital in Rancho Mirage . He is also a cancer expert at the hospital .
 Radiation oncologist is engaged daily as a practitioner of x-ray techniques and technology to examine cancer patients for life-and-death diagnoses .
 In this practice, he became intimately familiar with the practical application of the science of optical densitometry for interpreting x-rays and, more specifically, for detecting and measuring the dimensions and physical characteristics of tumors .
 This combination of practical experience and academic training, Dr. Dr. John Sutter says . Dr. Sutter is proud of his work in the field of medicine .
 Mantik has a Ph.D. in physics, uniquely qualifies him to speak about the x-rays of John F Kennedy and the autopsy following his murder . Mantik says the autopsy was conducted following Kennedy's death .
 Mantik has the courage and love of country to challenge the orthodoxy, while still working in the establishment mainstream . Mantik's courage and the love of the country is inspiring him to change the world .
 Optical densitometry for measurement of the dimensions, mass, and density of objects in x-ray films has been developed over the years to an empirical science . A large body of information available in the medical literature to facilitate reasonably precise calculations and interpretations .
 The HSCA appointed a panel of experts who concluded that the autopsy x-rays (and photographs) are all authentic . L101 was the first person to die in a car crash .
 "That conclusion boggles the mind in light of the evidence presented in this chapter," says author . "It's not surprising that this conclusion is a conclusion," he says .
 None of the experts on the panel made optical densitometer measurements of the x-rays .
 Mantik encountered a stumbling block in his concept of x-ray composite forgeries . The optical density in the Kennedy x-rays approached 4. in area F and in the background . Mantik initially believed that it was not possible to forge x .ray film using composites, due
 A composite forgery of an x-ray can achieve optical densities that he had measured in Kennedy x-rays . But with technical information he received from Eastman Kodak Company, he then went back to his laboratory and found that it was indeed possible to make a composite x-
 Mantik presented this update at the COPA Conference in Washington, D.C., on October 21, 1995 . Mantik: "Not everyone has since gotten the word. Not everyone is getting the word" Mantik says .
 A blow-out in the side of the head is another matter, because removal of a large number of frames (enough to remove the entire view of the side) would have been required, impossible to conceal . A blow out in the head would be another matter .
 I find this notion to be extremely implausible, to say the least. ; he mean transmission measured in area P by Dr. Dr. David Perry . Dr. Perry says transmission measured by area P is measured in P area P . He finds this notion 'extremely implausible'
 Mantik was 23.7%, whereas that measured in area F was 0.020%, a ratio of 1130:1 . Mantik is 23.3% of area F . Area F measured in Mantik had an area F ratio of 0.02% .
 This compares to an average ratio of area P to F of 1.37:1 in nine coroner’s cases . The ratio is higher than the average ratio between area P and area F of a coroner's case .
 Robert Kennedy probably learned of Mafia connection in a meeting with Richard Helms on May 7, 1962 . Robert Kennedy was likely to learn of the Mafia connection on that date .
 Hoover prepared a memorandum recounting what was said at the May 7 meeting . He then met with J Edgar Hoover on May 9, 1962, and Hoover prepared the memo .
 Robert Kennedy asked Sheffield Edwards to prepare a memorandum (dated May 14, 1962) relating what had transpired in the May 7 meeting . On May 11, Kennedy asked her to prepare what had happened .
 Edwards prepared the memorandum with the assistance of Lawrence Houston . Edwards prepared it for the president of the United States .
 Houston later testified that Kennedy was upset that the CIA had used Giancana . Houston testified that the president was upset about the CIA's use of the CIA . Houston said Kennedy was angry at the CIA for using the CIA in the assassination .
 Houston said that he did not remember Kennedy commenting about the operation itself . Houston said he does not remember JFK commenting on the operation .
 Inspector General’s Report on plotting against Castro, 53, was released in 1967 . Johnny Rosselli was a member of the CIA, CIA, FBI and CIA .
 In November 1993, a symposium in Dallas announced that, based on a telephone call, Karen Carlin may have resurfaced . Carlin's career spanned more than 50 years .
 At the time of his arrest, he confessed to killing JFK, but later recanted . He confessed to JFK's murder, but then recanted, he said he was not guilty .
 He strongly resembles photographs of a tramp arrested and released at Dealey Plaza . The tramp was arrested in New York City, New York, in 1968 .
 Even gangsters (some gangsters) can have a conscience, particularly if it involves country or family, thus violating their code of honor . An irony is that confessions are discredited if they fit too neatly into already public information, says author .
 No confession could ever be believed without irrefutable scientific evidence . Presumably, if all the details are public, no confession could be believed .
 Aleman testified that the conversation must have occurred in June 1963; the consensus of the Committee was September 1962 . Aleman also testified that Aleman said the conversation was between June 1963 and June 1963 . The consensus was September 1963 .
 When President Kennedy was murdered, Robert Kennedy's first thought was that Hoffa was behind it and had bribed the Secret Service . It is interesting to note that when Robert Kennedy was assassinated, he first thought it was Hoffa .
 This was in an article in Vanity Fair in December 1994 by Anthony and Robbyn Summers .
 I talked with Anthony Summers about this in Nassau, Bahamas, in December 1995 . Summers: "It's a good thing that you can talk to Anthony Summers in the Bahamas"
 Summers says Ragano’s story about Trafficante is not true . Summers said he is convinced that Ragano's story about trafficante is false . Summers: "I'm not sure what happened"
 Ragano said in his book that he met Trafficante on March 13, 1987 . Ragano says Trafficante met with Ragano in 1987 . Trafficante died in 1987, Ragano's book says .
 Trafficante’s widow, two daughters, and several neighbors say the meeting with Ragano never happened . Neighbors say Ragano had not visited Tampa since the Christmas holidays .
 Ragano later said that he was telling the truth and that he has three witnesses to prove it . Ragano said he had three witnesses and said he has proof of his story . The former mayor said that Ragano was not lying .
 Even if we discount Ragano’s story of the alleged Trafficante confession completely, there remains powerful evidence that Trafficante knew of the assassination plot beforehand, and that he had ample motive .
 The Bay of Pigs failure was the result of Operation Zapata, the report prepared by a committee chaired by General Maxwell Taylor for John Kennedy to assess the reasons for the failure . Also read the report by the committee .
 Morales would later become a prime suspect as the man who directed the field operation in the JFK assassination . Morales was later a suspect in the assassination of JFK JFK . Morales is believed to have directed the assassination .
 A Biography of Eleanor, Allen, and John Foster Dulles and Their Family Network by Leonard Mosley; also, Gentleman Spy: The Life of Allen Dulles by Peter Grose .
 The Cuban missile crisis is generally accepted as starting on October 15, 1962, when definitive evidence of offensive missiles planted in Cuba by the Russians was first obtained . The crisis was the first time Russians had planted offensive missiles in Cuba .
 The evidence that Oswald was in Mexico City on September 28 will be addressed in a later chapter . Oswald was reportedly in the country at the time of September 28 .
 'Bogard was beaten by some men so badly that he was in the hospital for some time,' Brown said . 'This was after he testified,' he said . Brown said, ‘Some men beat Bogard so badly . He was in hospital .
 He added, ‘I think he may have seen something important, and I think there are some who don’t want to talk.’ He added that he thinks there may have been something important .
 Robert D Rogers, 3821 Whitehall Road, Dallas, Texas, advised that she has known Miss Silvia Odio for about a year . Miss Odio has known Mr Rogers for a year, Mr Rogers said .
 Miss Odio's family were acquaintances of friends of her husband’s family in Miami, Florida, from pre-Batista days . She said she was friends with friends of Miss Odios' family before her death .
 Miss Odio’s parents were arrested and put in jail in Cuba by the Castro government . Rogers stated that Miss Odios and her brothers and sisters were able to get out of Cuba and they all came to the United States .
 Miss Odio went to Puerto Rico with her husband and children, but became involved in marital troubles in Puerto Rico and eventually divorced her husband . She said she became involved with marital troubles, but later divorced .
 She understands that her husband actually obtained the divorce from Miss Odio, but they have some sort of written agreement permitting her to have the children . She says she understands that she has the children with her husband .
 Miss Odio has undergone psychiatric treatment at the Southwestern Medical School in Dallas, Texas . She was quite upset emotionally when she arrived in Dallas .
 Miss Odio stayed a short time with the John B Rogers’ family due to the family ties that went back beyond the Batista days in Cuba . Rogers said she stayed with the Rogers family because they had family ties with Cuba .
 When she was able to bring her four children to Dallas from Puerto Rico, she moved into her own apartment . However, when she moved in, she had to buy a new apartment .
 Rogers described Miss Odio as a very well educated person who has a typical ‘Latin’ personality, that is, she is very excitable and emotional . Rogers said she is an "exceptionally emotional" person who is excitable .
 Rogers stated she is a truthful person, who is not believed to be the type who would make up a story to impress others of her importance . Rogers said she is not the type of person to make up stories to impress people .
 Rogers stated she has never known Miss Odio to lie to her about anything . Rogers said she never knew Odio would lie about anything about anything.
 Oswald would have been able to arrive in Helsinki by midnight on October 9 . There was no scheduled airline flight from England to Helsinki that would have allowed Oswald to arrive by midnight .
 Hoover may have been part of a disinformation scheme fed to the Warren Commission to connect Oswald ominously to the Soviets . Hoover may be part of an orchestrated disinformation scheme . We should keep an eye out .
 The white Chevrolet and the dark-complexioned Cuban will become very important in a later chapter . "The white Chevrolet" and "the dark-computing Cuban" will become important in later chapters .
 Reilly Coffee Company is suspected of having been a center of right-wing, anti-Castro activities with connections to federal intelligence agencies . The company is accused of having connections to government intelligence agencies.
 An inordinate number of people who left the company in that time period ended up working for NASA and government defense contractors .
 Curtis is a CIA code name for Winston Scott; he went by the name Willard Curtis . Curtis is the name of Winston Scott and Winston Scott . Curtis was a code name used by the CIA .
 This information has been revealed in studies of numerous CIA documents . This information was revealed in the CIA files .
 Knight Knight is probably a code name for either Richard Helms or David Atlee Phillips . Knight Knight was probably a secret code name . Helms is probably the same name as Phillips or Helms .
 Phillips was also occasionally referred to as Knight Knight . Most likely it is Richard Helms, but Phillips was often referred to Knight .
 This retraction was typical of many witnesses who revealed evidence incriminating the government, only to ‘change their minds” later when they realized the consequences of what they had said . The retraction is typical of other witnesses who reveal incriminating information .
 He said his name was Lee OSWALD and wanted to know if they had heard anything from him . He said he wanted to talk to the public about his disappearance . He wanted to speak to anyone who had heard of him .
 This report has been slightly edited by this author for ease of reading, by paragraphing and spelling out of abbreviations .
 LEGAT is a code for FBI representatives at the U.S. embassy in Mexico City . LEGAT code is code for agents at the United States embassy in the country .
 Yuri Gagarin appeared in Mexico City on October 11, 1963 (Nechiporenko, Elena Garro never appeared)
 The fact that the White House was aware of the Alvarado story is significant . The White House knew of the story, and the fact that it was significant .
 I have noticed on other CIA documents that McGeorge Bundy was on the distribution list . Bundy was also on the list of distribution list, according to documents . Bundy is a former CIA operative and CIA operative .
 This includes the original cable traffic concerning keeping the Duran interrogation secret from the American people from the U.S. government . This is the first time the American government has been involved in keeping the interrogation secret .
 Lyndon Johnson was getting up-to-date information on the Mexico City evidence . The CIA was not concealing anything from him, according to the president .
 When questioned by the FBI, the U.S. embassy said it had no knowledge or records of these telephone calls by Alvarado . The FBI said it was not aware of these calls .
 The words “respond to suggestion” and “psychiatric treatment” remind one of hypnosis and mind-control methods employed by the CIA in that era . The words "responding to suggestion" and ‘psychiatric . treatment’ are reminiscent of mind-
 The Nicaraguan secret service was under the control of the CIA at the time, he said . He said that the CIA was in charge of the country's secret service .
 It should be noted that this was over the strong objections of Thomas Mann, U.S. ambassador to Mexico .
 Ambassador Mann pointed out the detail in the Alvarado story . Ambassador Mann said that it was very believable .
 Station's Double Agents have not had meetings with the Soviets since the assassination . Station’s Double Agents are not meeting with the Soviet Union since the death of JFK .
 When doubt was expressed regarding this statement Giancana reportedly assured those present that Castro’s assassination would occur in November . When doubt of this statement was expressed, he reportedly told those present he would kill Castro .
 He allegedly indicated that he had already met with the assassin-to-be on three occasions . The last meeting took place on a boat docked at the Fontainbleau Hotel, Miami Beach, Florida .
 Hoover knew of the mob’s arrangement with the CIA and the plots against Castro . Within seven months after this memo, Hoover knew about the mob's arrangement with CIA .
 The significance of this in the JFK assassination is that Hoover knew very early about CIA dirty business with the Mafia . Hoover knew about the Mafia, and Hoover knew early about the CIA's dirty dealings with the mafia .
 In a previous chapter, I wrote that Hoover knew about Oswald and CIA connections while Oswald was in Russia . Hoover would have seen the opportunity to set up Oswald and the CIA in a plot to kill Kennedy, he wrote .
 If Alderson is correct, the FBI knew, on its own, about Souetre very soon after the assassination and attempted to conceal it, he says . Yet, if Alderson was correct, it is not the first time the FBI tried to conceal the assassination .
 Researchers believe there is no reason not to believe Alderson, who had no reason to lie about the matter . Researchers say Alderson was a good liar .
 This leads to the suspicion that the FBI never would have left a paper trail of its prior knowledge of Souetre had it not been forced to do so by the formal notification from the French .
 Hoover did not make the evidence available to the Warren Commission . The FBI had it in its possession before the completion of the Warren Report .
 British television program produced in November 1988 by Central T.V. was a welcome event . For those who wish to see no further progress in the Kennedy case, a much-trumpeted British TV program was produced in 1988 . The Kennedy case is still ongoing .
 The program named Gunman Two and Gunman Three two men whose names had come up during Rivele’s discussions with David, but who David had since specifically said were innocent .
 Rivele’s exclusive story suddenly appeared—however unjustifiably—to have been exploded . In the wake of the television program, one of the men produced a plausible alibi for November 22 .
 Rivele’s French publishers backed off, and no American publisher had been found as this book went to press . No American publisher has been found .
 CNN.com host David Bianculli: "I urge the reader to suspend judgment until this segment is completed, and reasons to believe David’s story are evaluated. But I urge the . reader to . suspend judgment"
 The picking up of the assassins on the Texas border by the Chicago Mafia was also reported in the Sam and Chuck Giancana book Double Cross .
 WI/ROGUE added there would be bonuses for special jobs . QJ/WIN said he not interested . WI/WJ/WGUE said there would also be bonuses if he was not interested in the job .
 WI/ROGUE claimed to have taken no steps . Station Officer tried to learn whether WI/OGUE had made approach to the station . The station was unable to find out if WI/rogue had taken any steps .
 David was knowledgeable of the CIA operation to kill Lumumba in the Congo . In any event, David was aware of the operation .
 Lucien Sarti was too young to be QJ/WIN, but seems very unlikely since he was a young man . Sartis was too old to be a QJ or WIN, but may have been a WIN .
 Of course, David, Sarti, and QJ/WIN could all have been in the Congo assigned to the Lumumba assassination, as well as later becoming involved in the Kennedy assassination .
 Christian David's description of the gunshots fits the evidence if the back wound was an entry wound at the base of the neck, resulting in an exit wound in the throat . Christian David’s description fits the . evidence that the . entry wound was a entry wound . at the .
 The bullet holes in Kennedy’s jacket and shirt were six inches below the collar line . However this would have required a very low position for the gunman in the rear, according to the police .
 We should keep in mind that we do not, to this day, understand Kennedy’s wounds because of forgery of films and alteration of autopsy results . We should also remember that we don’t know what happened to Kennedy .
 David could have constructed his own Dealey Plaza scenario from books available in 1986 . On the other hand, he could have used books from 1986 .
 It seems very unlikely that David would have had access to these notes in 1986 . David would not have been able to access the notes .
 Jim Lesar agrees with me that this gives credence to David’s statements . Jim Leser agrees with him that this is a good idea .
 Letter also suggests intended addressee attorney Thomas G Proctor donate to Johnson’s campaign . Letter also suggested that intended addresssee lawyer Thomas G. Proctor should donate to campaign .
 The Soviets knew about the project before “the first spade had been put in the ground,” says George Blake, a Soviet mole in British intelligence . Blake was kept current on the project by a British intelligence mole, he says .
 The Soviets had transmitted only innocuous information over the cables . It is not clear that Harvey had gone to Italy before June 1963 .
 The /nspector Generals Report states that when Harvey met Rosselli in Washington in June 1963, he had by then closed his home in preparation for leaving the country .
 It is possible that Harvey had gone to Rome, returned to Washington to close his home, and then gone back to Rome . Harvey had closed his home in Rome, but may have gone to close it in Washington .
 Ted Shackley was chief of station, Ray Cline was deputy to Shackley, David Morales was chief chief of operations . David Morales became chief of operation at the end of his career .
 Perhaps Vietnam was LBJ’s priority, or he simply wouldn’t continue anything that Robert Kennedy had been pursuing as a priority . LBJ's Vietnam policy may have been a priority, but it was not a priority for Kennedy .
 This raises the question of whether the prime motive for the assassination was to trigger an invasion of Cuba . Or whether the Cuban/Mexico City set-up was a false trail to lead investigators away from the real conspirators, whose motive was to get rid of the Kennedys and preserve
 Rosselli, along with others, concocted a scheme wherein a cohort, hidden in a space above the card room at the Friars Club, looked through a peephole drilled in the ceiling . The scheme was concocted by a group of men who looked through the peep
 The cohort would relay radio messages to others at the card table who had radio receivers strapped to their stomachs . They would relay messages to each other at a card table .
 Rosselli was indicted, convicted, and sentenced to five years in the federal penitentiary at McNeil Island . When the scam was uncovered he was indicted and convicted .
 Rosselli had finally talked too much about the JFK assassination and was dismembered and disposed of in an oil drum in the Florida waterways . It was on July 18, 1976, 1976 that Rosselly was finally killed .
 Richard Case Nagell had mentioned to Dick Russell that he had once met Johnny Rosselli at the Friars Club . Richard Case had mentioned that he'd met Johnny at the club . Dick Russell said he'd never met Johnny in the club before .
 Gaeton Fonzi, The Last Investigation; David Corn, Blond Ghost: Ted Shackley and the CIA’s Crusades; Charles Rappleye and Ed Becker, A// American Mafioso: The Johnny Rosselli Story; Bradley Ayers, The
 Crest told Dorff he was in Vietnam with Morales in 1964, in the Phoenix Program . Crest said Morales was in the Vietnam with him .
 Crest said he first met Morales in the Belgian Congo in 1960-1961 . Crest also said that he had met Morales first in the 1960s-1960s in Belgium .
 David Morales, at the time I knew him, was about 6’23, portly and reflecting a heavy drinking habit . David Morales was a heavy drinker who died at the age of 60 .
 He was foul tempered, suspicious, suspicious of all but a few staff members . He was extremely protective of his turf as Operations Chief .
 Morales held sway with Shackley and dominated the entire operational agenda at the Station . There was constant friction between Bob Wall and Morales but Morales dominated the agenda .
 I have vague recollection of David Morales being away from the Miami Station for extended periods when Bob Wall would serve as the Chief of Operations . Bob Wall served as the chief of Operations at the Miami station .
 It is my opinion that Morales’ frequent absence was a source of conflict between Wall and Morales . Morales' frequent absence from the U.S. government was a problem for Wall, Morales .
 Bradley Ayers saw Harvey, Morales, and Rosselli together in the Florida Keys . It was two to four months after this that Harvey and Morales were seen together again .
 This was probably Edwin Wilson, the renegade CIA man recently released from prison for selling arms to Libya . According to researcher Bob Dorff, Robert Walton first revealed this story in 1989 or 1990 to Bradley Ayers .
 Walton is correct on this date, the “leader” would have been General Rene Schneider, who was assassinated in 1970 . The story was not published until Fonzi’s book was published in 1994 130 years later .
 General Schneider was assassinated in 1970, shortly after the $10,000,000 was authorized . General Schneider and Allende were assassinated in 1973 . Allende was assassinated by Allende .
 Ruben Carbajal told Bob Dorff that he believes unequivocally that the CIA killed Morales . He said he believes that Morales was killed by the CIA . The senator says he believes in the death of Morales .
 Morales received a diagnosis of a minor enlarged heart at one time in his life, but there had never been any overt symptoms . Carbajal did say that Morales had received an enlarged heart diagnosis at one point in his career .
 When Robert Walton reviewed this transcript, he requested that I note that his experience with Morales as related to the JFK assassination occurred when he was a business partner of Morales . Walton was Morales' attorney, not his business partner, before he was Morales’ attorney . Walton requested that he note
 Walton did not feel that he was violating any attorney/client relationship in telling this story . Walton said he was not breaking any attorney-client relationship . Walton felt he was doing nothing wrong with the story .
 The following day, September 16, Director Helms called a meeting at the CIA to discuss the Chilean situation . The meeting took place at CIA headquarters in Washington, DC .
 The Director told the group that President Nixon had decided that an Allende regime in Chile was unacceptable to the U.S. The Director said President Nixon decided that President Allende's regime was unacceptable .
 The President asked the Agency to prevent Allende from coming to power or unseat him . The President has asked the agency not to unseat Allende . Allende was elected president of Chile in 1994 .
 The Agency is to carry out this mission without coordination with the Departments of State or Defense . Further, the Agency is not allowed to coordinate with the Department of State .
 Formed in 1963, they began robbing banks to aid the poor, but later resorted to terrorism in an effort to overthrow the government and set up a Marxist state .
 The FBI picked up a young man who was connected with a right-wing extremist group called the Michigan Militia . Within two days after the bombing, the FBI had picked up the young man .
 Right-wing extremist organizations had not just “sprung up” but had been in existence since before 1963, perhaps becoming dormant in the interim . But these types of right-wing extremists had been there since 1963, maybe becoming dormant .
 While seemingly new, their origins were in the Ku Klux Klan and Nazi-like movements . They were formed in the 1920s and 1930s .
 The extremists had aligned themselves with numerous members of Congress in 1995, as in 1963 . The extremists were aligned with many of Congress members in 1995 and 1995 .
 FBI and federal law enforcement were new targets of extremists in 1995 . The FBI and law enforcement was new targets in the wake of the terror attacks .
 Similar to 1963, some of the religious right wing and right-wing extremist radio talk shows fanned the flames of paranoia in continuous diatribes against President Clinton .
 In months before Oklahoma City bombing, fanatics had made two attacks on the presidency . One in the form of a small plane diving into the White House; and the other in form of an extremist who opened fire .
 A disturbed man had climbed over the White House fence with an unloaded pistol and was shot and wounded . Another disturbed man was shot by a White House officer .
 Another man was shot and killed when he brandished a knife in front of the White House . He brandished the knife before he was shot by police .
 General Walker denied that this incident occurred; but the fact remains that the newspaper had called him all the way from Germany the morning after the assassination and did print the story before anyone could have known Oswald was a suspect in the Walker shooting .
 I should add that if ever extremism was justified, it was in the case of the people in the antiCastro movement in Florida .
 Castro seized their businesses, forcing them into exile and imprisoning their families . After all, Castro had seized their business, they were forced into exile . Castro seized them and imprisoned their families.
 Go N ik General Charles Willoughby will be discussed in later chapters of this article . Go N.I. General Charles will also be discussed .
 Murchison had received large loans from Hoffa’s Teamsters Union, thus indirectly connecting him to the Mafia . The loans from the union were part of the Mafia's involvement .
 Murchison had direct financial ties to mobsters Vito Genovese and Carlos Marcello . He was linked to the Bobby Baker scandal and was tied to Bobby Baker . And he also had financial ties with mobsters who were involved in the scandal .
 The purpose of the conference was to conduct a major assessment of the United States involvement in Vietnam, and to prepare recommendations to the president for a continuing program .
 McGeorge Bundy prepared a directive— NSAM 273—which ultimately was approved by Lyndon Johnson . Bundy prepared the directive, which was ultimately approved by Johnson .
 The Honolulu conference itself was part of a master plot to send the key members of Kennedy’s administration out of the country while he was assassinated .
 This hypothesis included the notion that with these people out of the country, the stage would be set for a complete coup and takeover of the government by the United States military if things went so wrong .
 From research I have done, this appears to be utter speculation, without merit. From the research, this seems to be without merit, he says .
 It should be noted that Robert McNamara had returned to Washington, D.C., by the time of the assassination .
 Johnson approved planning for covert action against North Vietnam by CIA-supported South Vietnamese forces . But Johnson also approved planning to covert action by South Vietnam forces .
 Kennedy was killed two days before anyone who had attended the conference could speak with him . The results of the Honolulu conference were never reported to Kennedy because he was killed .
 There is no way to know whether Kennedy would have approved the change, but we do know that Johnson did . Johnson did, and Kennedy did .
 President Johnson felt more certain than President Kennedy that the loss of South Vietnam had a higher cost than would the direct application of U.S. military force . Johnson's view shaped his policy for the next five years .
 President Johnson made clear to Lodge on November 24 that he wanted to win the war . He wanted priority given to military operations over "so-called” social reforms .
 He felt the U.S. spent too much time and energy trying to shape other countries in its own image . He said he felt the United States should not try to shape others' image .
 From McNamara's perspective, Johnson continued Kennedy’s policies, albeit with a greater emphasis on winning the war . McNamara continued Kennedy's policies, but with a focus on winning .
 We should also keep in mind that there were hawk and dove factions in the Kennedy administration, and that with . Johnson now at the helm, the hawks would prevail .
 Even if McNamara and the doves had persuaded Kennedy to adopt the policy of early withdrawal from Vietnam, we cannot be certain that Kennedy was committed deeply to it .
 Early withdrawal from Vietnam made good politics for the upcoming election . And, of course, early withdrawal made good political . Early withdrawal was good politics .
 Only one air strike was withheld, according to a report prepared by a board of inquiry headed by General Maxwell Taylor for President Kennedy .
 This was a second air strike requested by the CIA to destroy three remaining Cuban fighter planes that had not been taken out in a first planned air strike that had been designed so it would not appear to be conducted by United States forces .
 State Department refused to approve the second strike because it would have revealed U.S. involvement . Kennedy (and McNamara) refused the move because of the State Department's advice .
 In Operation Zapata, Bundy wrote a letter to Maxwell Taylor stating that he had given the order refusing the air strike, but Bundy was ambiguous in his letter as to whether he received the decision from Kennedy .
 As described in an interview with McNamara, he clarified this important point . McNamara: "As described in my interview, he . clarified this . important point.
 Bundy wrote that the importance of the three fighter planes was never relayed to Kennedy by the CIA or the military . Bundy offered to have the military and the CIA speak directly to President Kennedy to try to change his mind, Bundy wrote .
 The supply ships were sunk by the Cuban fighter planes that had not been taken out because of Kennedy’s refusal to allow the air strikes . Kennedy refused to allow air strikes because of his refusal to take out the planes .
 Richard Reeves, President Kennedy: Profile of Power, 222. Richard Reeves' biography of President Kennedy, is published by Richard Reeves . Lyndon Johnson and His Times: Lyndon Johnson, LBJ, JFK and LBJ .
 This meeting was summarized in a sanitized, highly redacted copy of a document obtained from the John F Kennedy Library .
 It shows that there was a follow-up meeting in which the subject was again reviewed . The subject was reviewed by a second meeting, the report says .
 General Johnson confirmed to Kennedy that even if the United States attacked the USSR first, the loss to the U.S. would be unacceptable to political leaders . General Johnson then confirmed that the loss of the USSR was unacceptable .
 General Johnson did state that he was convinced from his report that you could resort to nuclear weapons in a limited situation without it expanding into all-out nuclear war . However, General Johnson said that he did not believe you could use nuclear weapons against all out of control .
 Document shows that it had been decided that an opportunity for a first nuclear strike had passed .
 I telephoned her several times but only got her answering machine; she never returned her calls . She never returned any of her calls to her .
 Eugene B Dinkin was still alive, living in some sort of rest home and only available through a third party . Anna Marie learned from Anna Marie that she had heard that Eugene was still living in a rest home . She later learned from her friend, Anna Marie, that Dink
 Time had run out for me in pursuing this story further— my publishing deadline had arrived . Time had already run out .
 William Manchester, The Death of a President, November 20-November 25, 1963, 67, 67 .
 An annual conference of COF in New Orleans on April 4-6, 1963, attracted wealthy right-wing extremists from across the nation .
 Setting up “a criminal activity to assassinate particular persons” was discussed, it was discussed . Setting up a criminal activity was also discussed .
 Report: High-ranking members of the armed forces secretly belonged to the COF organization . The report stated that high-ranking military officials secretly belonged .
 The compelling lesson is that organizations and talk-show hosts should be wary of fanning passions of extreme positions . Organizations and talk shows should be careful in fanning extreme positions, experts say .
 Hunt’s extensive ties to Hoover include discussions between Hunt and Hoover in 1967 concerning the assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr. Hunt . Hunt's extensive ties with Hoover included discussions between the two men .
 Hunt’s largesse to political figures John Connally and Senator James Eastland of Mississippi; and how he provided cash to Jimmy Hoffa through a Louisiana state official . Hunt also provided cash .
 She was described in Warren Commission documents as an alcoholic, a liar, a very nervous woman, intelligent, and a prostitute . She was also described as a very intelligent, intelligent woman, and intelligent .
 This list is a composite drawn from HSCA documents and a variety of other sources . Emphasis added 2 B 47 . The list is based on a composite of documents and other sources from the HSCAs .
 The Assassination of President Kennedy by Organized Crime, 8; also HSCA Vol. 8; . The assassination by organized crime was organized by the FBI .
 He said he never attempted to renounce his citizenship and reinstate his military discharge . He applied only to change his status for pension purposes, he said .
 He was particularly upset by my statement that he had a pattern of insubordination and troublemaking, he said . He said he was upset by that statement . He was upset that he'd said he'd been a troublemaker, he added .
 He also stressed the point that he had never had psychiatric treatment at any time . He said he never had any psychiatric treatment .
 Nagell said that he had only been observed in psychiatric examinations . He said he was only observed by psychiatrists .
 He defied anyone to show a document signed by a legitimate psychiatrist who ever said he had a mental illness or was mentally disturbed by the air accident . He said he would not be able to prove that he had any mental illness .
 I told him that I had interpreted his book to include potential evidence that the CIA was not involved in the assassination of Kennedy except possibly on a renegade level . I said I interpreted the book as potential evidence of CIA involvement .
 The leftist leaders who would be eliminated included Manuel Artime and Dr. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. The leftist leader would also be eliminated from office .
 Kohly’s group received notice that the remainder of the Cubans being held at Opa-Locka had been eliminated . Aureliano Sanchez Arrango was among those eliminated from the group .
 President Kennedy dispatched Schlesinger and Berle to meet with the Cubans at OpaLocka at the time of the Bay of Pigs invasion . President Kennedy found out about Cubans being held, he dispatched the pair to meet .
 Neither Kennedy nor Schlesinger knew the fate that was in store for the Cuban leftists . The Cuban leftists were killed by the Cuban government .
 He showed me his credentials & said he had received a telephone call from Director Hoover telling him to make himself available to us . He showed up his credentials and said he received a call from the Director Hoover .
 Agent Drain said the unidentified male was a doctor friend of his . Agent Drain was accompanied by an unidentified male . The unidentified male said he was a friend of Drain .
 E Anthony and Robbyn Summers, “Zhe Ghosts of November,” Vanity Fair, December 1994, i Anthony and . Robbyn . Summers . E WG N R Anthony, ‘Zhe . ghosts of November’
 For Willoughby affair with Clare Boothe Luce see Old Soldiers Never Die, Geoffrey Perret, 236, citing Luce’s papers in Library of Congress containing two folders of correspondence with Luce . Luce's papers are in Library's collection of letters to Luce
 For Allen Dulles’ mind-control program, read John Marks’s Search for a Manchurian Candidate . For more information on the program, visit John Marks' Search for the Manchuria Candidate .
 For General Walker’s being a closet gay, see footnote in Chapter 22 citing his arrest by undercover officers in Dallas . General Walker was arrested by undercover police in Dallas, Texas .
 For J Edgar Hoover and Clyde Tolson’s homosexuality, see Chapters 2, 5, and 29 . For more about Hoover and Tolson's homosexuality in this article, visit this article .
 Shaw files; interview with Colonel William Bishop, 1-18-90 . Shaw files: Interview with Colonel Bishop .
 He said he joined Castro's forces to get experience . He said this was in part his reason for joining Castro’s forces . Castro said he wanted to get more experience .
 He infiltrated Cuba as an arms smuggler, bringing weapons that he had purportedly “stolen” from the U.S. Naval Academy armory . The weapons were purportedly "stolen" from the United States Naval Academy's armory, he said .
 Hemming parachuted into Cuba during the 1961-1965 anti-Castro operations . Hemming also told me that he parachuted in Cuba during that period . He also parachuted to Cuba during those operations .
 He posed for a photo wearing a Nazi Youth uniform only once as part of a plan to establish his cover as a right-wing youth for future use . He said he posed for the photo only once .
 He had told me in San Diego that not everything in the San Diego interview was from first-hand experience . Some of it had been arrived at over the years in private investigations .
 A CIA document dated June 11, 1962 states that KUBARK had used LaBorde in CIA operations since early 1961 . The document also states that the CIA had used the company in its operations since 1961 .
 LaBorde was employed by the Department of Agriculture in Mexico from 1947 to 1949 as a small boat operator . The document states that he had formerly worked for the department of Agriculture .
 LaBorde acted as captain or chief engineer of a motor vessel called M/V Tejana III in CIA’s JM/WAVE operations against Cuba . Later, he acted as chief engineer in CIA's operations against the Cuban government .
 During or after the end of this period, LaBorde became associated with the Cuban Revolutionary Council—Sergio Arcacha Smith’s operation officed in the same building in New Orleans .
 CIA document describes LaBorde as indiscreet, addicted to alcohol, of unsavory reputation . Another CIA document says he was "addicted" to alcohol .
 At the time of the JFK assassination, LaBorde was 52 years old . In later discussions I tried to clarify this statement . At the . time of JFK assassination he was just 52 .
 "I asked him if he was certain that he wanted that impression to be conveyed," he said . "He said yes, yes. I asked him: 'I'm not sure that I want that impression conveyed'
 Hemming responded, somewhat upset, that he meant this to be a general statement regarding “tradecraft methods,” not that he had accepted the contract . Hemming: "Tradecraft methods" is a "tradecraft method" not a contract .
 Oliver Stone goes to great lengths to get realism in his movies, despite the criticism that has been heaped upon him . One must admit that Oliver Stone has been criticized for his lack of realism .
 Angleton may have found out about Oswald through Hemming, Hemming . Hemming may have been Angleton's way into finding out about the assassination of Oswald .
 Weberman speculates that Angleton, on his own, sent Oswald to the Soviet Union, without anyone in the CIA outside of his counter-intelligence group knowing about it .
 As chief mole-hunter for the CIA, Angleton was chartered to be on his own . Angleton had been chartered by the CIA to be alone . He was the CIA's chief mole hunter .
 No one in the CIA had the power to control him, except possibly Allen Dulles, if even Dulles . The CIA had no real power, except Dulles' wife .
 Hemming says Oswald had earlier been successfully ‘dangled’ to a Japanese-Soviet spy ring . Oswald later was one of four men sent to Russia to take blame for shoot-down of U-2 plane in 1960 .
 Mr. HEMMING received considerable newspaper publicity which caused adventurers from all over the United States to come and join his organization .
 Most of these adventurers and mercenaries later became police problems . A number of them have been arrested for vagrancy, larceny, bad checks, and other minor offenses .
 Members of HEMMING’s group usually stay in flophouses, eat at the Salvation Army and other relief organizations, beg money and food from Cuban refugees, and at times, form military training camps .
 The turnover is high, because the members soon become dissatisfied with the organization’s inactivity and leadership . However, the turnover is very high, with the members unhappy with the leadership .
 During the past two years, HEMMING has visited the majority of the Cuban refugee leaders in Miami and has offered his group’s services, and requested money contributions .
 At times, HEMMING has attempted to launch military invasions of Cuba . On December 4, 1962, he and twelve others were attempting to launch a military invasion of Cuba from Florida .
 Hemming later told me that by this time, J Edgar Hoover had targeted him because of Hemmings’ involvement in obtaining the compromising photographs of Hoover . Hemming said he was targeted by Hoover because he had obtained the photographs of him .
 Howard K Davis was Hemming’s most trusted associate, perhaps his equal or senior partner . Davis was perhaps Hemming's most trusted partner . Hemming died at the age of 80 .
 Davis, a decorated exArmy Airborne Ranger, was a pilot flying arms to Raul Castro during the Cuban revolution . He later became a pilot for an airline on the East Coast of the United States .
 Gary Shaw, who met Davis, describes him as quite different from Hemming in that Davis is very quiet . Gary Shaw says Davis is quiet and quiet .
 According to Fonzi’s notes in an HSCA document that Hemming gave me, Howard Davis was Interpen's contact man with the Mafia . Davis was Howard Davis' contact man for Interpen, according to the document . Davis' notes in the document were F
 Hemming expresses strong feelings that Larry LaBorde was involved in JFK assassination . Hemming expressed strong feelings to me that he believes the former CIA operative was involved . Hemmers says he believes he was involved with the JFK assassination.
 Hemming assumed that the Jack Lawrence in Dallas was the same person as the man in New Orleans . Hemming had come upon the information about Jack Lawrence a few years before .
 This had significance in that it would have been a direct link to Hemming and LaBorde in New Orleans . Hemming is believed to have been at the centre of the city's history .
 Hemming believed it was part of an attempt to frame him in the Kennedy assassination . Hemming believes the assassination attempt was an attempt at framing him .
 Jack Lawrence in Dallas, Texas, was shot by a Dallas police officer in the 1960s . He was shot in the head by a police officer who was killed in the 1980s . Jack Lawrence was shot to death in 1966 .
 Inkol believes that the Jack Lawrence in New Orleans is a different person from the one in Dallas . Inkol: "Jack Lawrence is not the same person in Dallas"
 He bases his conclusion largely on a physical description of the New Orleans Jack Lawrence that Hemming telephoned to him in 1994, compared to the known description of Dallas Jack Lawrence . Records show that Lawrence and Lawrence have different birthplaces and birth dates .
 Inkol also came to believe that the Dallas Jack Lawrence had nothing to do with the Kennedy assassination . Inkol believes Lawrence was not involved in the assassination .
 Inkol agrees with me that there are many disturbing questions concerning the events and people at the Downtown Lincoln-Mercury Agency in Dallas . Inkol: "There are very disturbing questions about the events"
 After several weeks off and on researching this subject, I reluctantly decided to shelve it, at least temporarily, as another curious and very suspicious set of coincidences that should be given in-depth study .
 Sheldon Inkol, Third Decade, Vol., Vol., #5, July 1991, 3 72, . Hemming handed him a four-page document explaining his trip to Washington D.C. in February/March 1963 .
 Hemming met with General Ted Clifton at the White House, Sterling Cottrell at the State Department, and General Victor J Krulak, U.S.M. and special assistant to the Secretary of Defense . Hemming was in Washington D.C. to meet
 In a telephone conversation with Hemming in July 1997, he told me that he did not know where Hargraves was during the week of November 22, 1963 . Hemming was repairing a boat with him at Christmas, 1963, when he was in 1963 .
 Fonzi’s source began with a Miami jail inmate, Rolando Otero, who led them to another source, a Florida State prison inmate codenamed Ten-One . Oswald was sent to Russia as a CIA agent and the decision had been made to kill Kennedy
 Ten-One said that Carlos was in contact with Oswald and was posing as a photographer at Dealey Plaza on November 22nd . Carlos was photographed with Oswald at the time of the assassination .
 Ten-One had a close link with Mitchell WerBell, the arms dealer whom Hemming and Carlos jointly represented . WerBell was a key arms dealer for Hemming, Carlos and Carlos .
 Otero said he understood from Carlos that most of the final planning and coordination took place in the Dallas YMCA building . Carlos: Most of the planning and coordinating took place at the YMca building .
 Oswald stayed for one night, and Jack Lawrence, Lawrence Howard, and Loran Hall were staying at various times in late 1963 . This is where Oswald stayed one night .
 "In extended conversations profanity distorts meaning more than it conveys meaning," he says . "I feel that in extended conversations, profanity is distorting meaning, rather than conveying meaning"
 Weberman had included all the profanity in his web site on the Internet . Weberman included all of the profanities in his Web site on his own .
 Explicit recording, in writing, of profanity conveys a much harsher impression of a person than is justified . Moreover, explicit recording in writing conveys an even harsher impression than it is justified.
 After all, many presidents, including JFK, used extreme profanity in private conversations . After all of our presidents, many of them used extreme language in private .
 Use of profanity does not necessarily mean that the person is a liar or unreliable . Use of profanity does not mean that a person is unreliable .
 In some cases, Hemming's profanity was necessary to convey his feelings and attitudes, it has not been deleted . However, in others cases, the profanity has been removed .
 Hemming later confirmed that this was the reported incident concerning Bill Harvey/Johnny Rosselli . Harvey/Rosselli were personally handling the transfer of weapons .
 State Department documents say de Mohrenschildt and his wife were living in Haiti at the time of the assassination . State Department: de Mohranschildt was in Haiti when he was assassinated .
 He was ostensibly in Haiti on a geological survey for oil, but, according to one witness, could have been on a CIA or MI undercover mission . Witness: He may have been contemplating the overthrow of Duvalier’s regime, contemplating overthrow .
 De Mohrenschildt was dealing with Haiti’s Duvalier in the sale of boats, weapons, and two T-28 fighter planes from Dallas that were reportedly flown to Haiti illegally .
 He also was reported to have had $200,000 or $250,000 deposited in his bank account in Port-au-Prince .
 It is entirely possible that he could have been flown to Dallas and been at the Texas Club on July 5, 1963 .
 De Mohrenschildt has demonstrated himself to be a . obfuscator in many aspects of his statements about his role with Oswald and the JFK assassination .
 De Mohrenschildt was a friend of Lyndon Johnson and corresponded with him after the JFK assassination . He was a close friend of Johnson .
 FBI used to infiltrate radical organizations with the intent of making them even more radical by provoking their tendency for violence . This made some sense to me in that it was a practice of the FBI at that time to infiltrate .
 The FBI's penetration of the Ku Klux Klan was supposed to break it up, but in reality to spur even more violence . An example of this is the FBI’s penetration of Klan, supposedly to break up .
 It is not beyond reason to imagine that a government agency in that era, such as the FBI, would conceive of an agent provocateur to infiltrate the John Birch Society, for example, and incite some of their more impassioned members to promote a plot to kill JFK . Hem
 Pawley was killed because he knew too much and might, to relieve his conscience, talk . Based on this exchange, I surmished that Pawley might have been killed because of his knowledge of the truth .
 Hemming had told me in San Diego that his hair had become bleached by constant exposure to the sun in his paramilitary training exercises . Hemming told me that he had bleached his hair from constant exposure .
 Hal Hendrix was the newsman who strangely knew all about Oswald . He knew he had defected to Russia, returned to the U.S., etc. He called Seth Kantor on November 22, 1963, from Dallas .
 Hendrix also knew about the coup that ousted the pro-Kennedy Bosch, of the Dominican Republic, twenty-four hours before it happened . Hendrix knew of the coup about twenty-two hours before the coup .
 There would be one scenario that describes exactly what happened, which we may never know with certainty . In reality, they would overlap and there would be more nuances, more nuances .
 See Appendix B for a list of 95 documents about Hemming in the National Archives . Hemming died in 1918 at the age of 92 .
 At the time of the cut-off point in publishing the first edition of Bloody Treason, many of these were “referred to other agencies,” pending release to the public .
 Bobby Kennedy instinctively believed that there was more to his brother’s assassination than Lee Harvey Oswald . William Turner, former FBI agent under J Edgar Hoover, wrote, “Bobby Kennedy instinctively . instinctively believed there were more to the assassination than Oswald .
 He was not in a position to turn the Justice Department loose to try to find out who was responsible for the loss of his life .
 Hoover was now a lame-duck attorney general, hated both by Hoover and Johnson . He was now an unpopular attorney general . Hoover was forced to resign from the Cabinet .
 Daniel P Moynihan, then Assistant Secretary of Labor and charter member of the Kennedy inner circle, secretly investigated the possibility that Jimmy Hoffa was behind the plot . He instructed Daniel P Moynihan to secretly investigate the possibility .
 Moynihan assembled a small team of trusted Justice Department agents to discreetly carry out the inquiry . In the end he was forced to report that no evidence of Hoffa’s complicity could be found .
 As we sat there, Connally began outlining the schedule for Kennedy’s trip . Connally outlined the schedule .
 It was firm, he kept insisting; it was his state, and if the President didn't like it, he could stay home . It was the President's state of the state, he insisted, and his state was his own .
 I'm here to get everybody’s recommendations, and I’1l forward them to the White House. I'm looking forward to them, he says . The White House will be looking at all the recommendations .
 Dallas Citizens’ Council, described as an oligarchy, was founded in 1937 . The Dallas Citizens' Council was described as a 'oligarchy' in the city .
 Doctors, lawyers, and professional people were not eligible for membership . Doctors and lawyers, not professional people, were also not eligible .
 Even if Connally had been in the same car with LBJ, the same ploy could apply . Connally was in the car at the time of LBJ's assassination .
 In November 1963, when JFK’s Chicago trip was scheduled, Bolden was a member of the Chicago Office of the Secret Service handling security . Bolden says JFK's trip to Chicago was scheduled for November 1963 .
 Harkness which reinforces Jean Hill’s criticism of Jean Hill, or without discussing innocent explanations for flaws in the testimony. Harkiness .
 Jean Hill's story was published at a Dallas symposium in November 1993 . Hill's death was the subject of much of the country's most famous unsolved unsolved mysteries .
 Researcher Wallace Milam made a presentation which drew a standing ovation from the audience . The audience at the event was impressed by his work on the topic .
 Milam presented a photograph and a film of a small, stuffed toy dog in Jacqueline Kennedy’s arms that had been handed to her by a little girl along the parade route . Milam said the photo and film was taken by a girl who had given her a stuffed toy
 This, after Jean Hill had been pilloried and discredited for thirty years by anti-conspiracy zealots like Gerald Posner . This, despite Jean Hill having been discredited for 30 years, she is still believed to have been a hero .
 Posner jumped on in his book that Posner had jumped on her statement about the dog . Posner said that the dog was a "flaw" that she said about her dog .
 Hill was vindicated and her testimony made much more credible, Milam said . With this discovery by Milam, Hill's testimony was made more credible . Hill was found guilty of perjury in a federal court case .
 Astonishingly, he had been totally immersed in the Kennedy assassination since he was twelve years old . He had been watching the assassination of the president since then at 12 .
 Palamara succeeded in getting interviews with key retired Secret Service agents who were with the Secret Service at the time of the assassination . Palamara was able to get numerous interviews with retired agents .
 In an exclusive interview conducted on 10/9/92, the author obtained the following new information: Underwood became “an honorary Secret Service agent” and served under Presidents Kennedy and Johnson .
 It should not be all that important, but it is very relevant in this case, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 In 1963 the persecution of gays in the U.S. had probably reached its zenith . The persecution of gay people in the United States had probably peaked in 1963 . In 1963 it was probably the worst year of persecution in America .
 Even today, it would probably be impossible for the head of the FBI to be revealed as gay and retain his or her position .
 Hoover’s homosexuality is relevant because of his overwhelming need to retain his power base in order to prevent revelation of even more damaging secrets and crimes that would have resulted in his removal from power, if justice prevailed . Hoover's homosexuality was relevant because he needed to retain power base to prevent
 Fields asked Fields, the old drunk, reprobate, and movie actor, to give him these paintings . Fields, who had a reputation for being a repulsive drunk, was given the paintings by Fields . Fields' paintings of Fields were painted by Fields' wife .
 Hunt was probably the wealthiest man in modern history, or for that matter, the richest man who ever lived . Hunt was the richest person in history . Hunt died at the age of 98 on December 18, 1911 .
 His reputed fortune of $5. billion in 1963, when adjusted for inflation, makes Ross Perot’s and Bill Gates’ wealth seem paltry by comparison by comparison . When adjusted to inflation, his reputed $5 billion was $5 . billion .
 John Mitchell, who had left the post of Attorney General in order to run Nixon’s reelection campaign, had the same worry . John Mitchell had left his post to run for President Nixon's reelection campaign .
 It was decided not to announce Edgar’s death publicly until eleven o’clock . It was . decided not . announce it publicly until 11 o'clock . Edgar's death was not announced publicly .
 Gordon Liddy, Nixon’s dirty-tricks specialist, thought it was vital to find the skeletons . Liddy: 'It was vital for Nixon to get the skeletons'
 As an FBI veteran, he had once worked with some of Edgar’s most sensitive political files . The FBI veteran had worked with Edgar's files .
 Neighbors recall seeing two men carrying a large object wrapped in a quilt out of the kitchen door . Two neighbors recalled in 1992 that, some time that morning, they had seen two men . The incident occurred in 1992 .
 "I never had...all they did was put me on the bottom of the car...face down...and some reporter, I guess, saw me with my hand, and they were pretty excited about that time...but J never felt better in my life"
 Telephone interview with Frank B Harrell, November 19, 1996, was published in 1996 . Harrell is a multi-million-selling music legend .
 Tape recorded Telephone interview with Frank B Harrell, November 19, 1996 . Tape recorded telephone interview with Harrell .
 The family reportedly was adamant that the body not remain in Texas . Apparently it was not resisted by the Kennedy party . The family was adamant about not moving the body .
 It would have been very difficult—even with a crooked coroner in Texas—for the incredibly complex, illegal, and unprecedented manipulations in the autopsy (to conceal the evidence of a second gunman) to have been done at Dallas Parkland Hospital, so close to the team of doctors and
 Much better for Johnson that the autopsy be under military control, performed by military doctors .
 Caro, The Path to Power: The Years of Lyndon Johnson, Volume I, xix. o° Caro. Caro . Caro: "The Path to the Power" is a memoir of LBJ's life .
 He says he learned more about the art of deception from LBJ than his father . "I think I learned more from him than I did from my father," he says .
 Johnson usually designed his approaches to other senators to seem to be wholly spontaneous —as an accidental encounter in a Senate corridor leading to a private talk . Johnson's approach to senators was designed to be spontaneous, as well as spontaneous .
 Had the Congress gone ahead with determination, the conspiracy would probably have been uncovered, history may have been radically changed . Millions of lives were lost that were lost in the Vietnam war and its aftermath .
 Hoover released the results of his report to the press before he sent it to the Warren Commission . The Warren Commission staff was put in the position of having to go up against J Edgar Hoover in public, a personally dangerous thing .
 Johnson now seems to be admitting to his confidant, Senator Russell, that he did not believe the nuclear war scare ploy, but still presses for a containment of the investigation . Johnson seems to now admit that he believes the nuclear scare ploy .
 John Scelso report said there was no evidence in Mexico City to implicate Oswald in a conspiracy . This was days after the White House had received the report saying that no evidence that Oswald or Cuba or the Soviets were involved .
 Johnson is still using the Mexico City fabrications to achieve his purpose . But Johnson is using them to achieve the purpose of Mexico City .
 Senator Russell had grave misgivings about the conduct of the Warren Commission and considered resigning from it . Russell later had grave doubts about the commission's conduct and considered quitting .
 After completing this chapter I had the opportunity to interview Madeleine Brown in Dallas on November 24, 1996 .
 She added that Lyndon Johnson was deeply involved in the plot from its inception and was involved in numerous other murders in Texas . She said she believes that Johnson was involved with the plot .
 A 1988 Louis Harris poll on presidential performance from Franklin Delano Roosevelt to Ronald Reagan consistently ranked Johnson near or at the bottom of eleven categories . The Years of Lyndon Johnson, xxvi .
 Asked which of these Presidents made people feel proudest of being an American, most inspired confidence in the White House, and could be trusted most in a crisis, respondents consistently put LBJ last along side of Gerald Ford and behind Richard Nixon .
 Three percent said Johnson, 1 percent more than said Jimmy Carter . Jimmy Carter and 2 percent more said Ford . Three percent of Americans said Johnson .
 Johnson stood alone in last place, chosen by only 1 percent of the sample . Johnson was the only person chosen by a single person .
 LBJ could have been laying down a cover story for history, realizing that the lone-assassin notion would be entirely discredited when all files were released some time in the twenty-first century, if ever . One should keep in mind that LBJ may have been setting up a cover
 As a senator, Johnson had moderately supported liberal causes regarding racial discrimination and the poor . His efforts in these areas escalated prodigiously only after becoming president .
 KPSI Radio in Palm Springs, California, attempted to contact Richard Duncan at Northside Middle School, but he had left there . To determine its authenticity, an attempt was made by Bob Clark to contact Duncan at the school .
 The school gave Clark a telephone number to reach him, but it had been disconnected . Clark's school gave him a number but it was disconnected .
 Former U.S. marshall who figured prominently in Billie Sol Estes case . Former marshall was a key figure in the case . Estes was convicted of murder of Estes .
 Estes claimed he and LBJ’s former assistant Cliff Carter had gathered evidence to prove that LBJ had ordered eight people to be murdered . Caddy wrote that Estes said Estes and Carter gathered evidence of LBJ's involvement .
 Although the Justice Department responded with a list of particulars, nothing came of it . The Justice Department has not responded .