 Radio quickly followed with its own nightmarish nuclear scenarios of all-American disaster . Within years, TV, while post-nuclear landscapes of horror were a dime a dozen .
 At 18, with most of my life still theoretically ahead of me, I believed him . 50 years later, in his new TomDispatch post, Noam Chomskyreminds us of just how close we truly got to a self-induced apocalypse .
 President Kennedy was “leaning towards military action to eliminate the missiles” in Cuba, to be followed by invasion, according to Pentagon plans . The CD operations were designed to make it crystal clear to the Russians that they were hardly even competing in the military confrontation, and could quickly have
 As the ExComm meetings were drawing to a close at 6m. on the 26th, a letter arrived from Soviet Prime Minister Nikita Khrushchev, sent directly to President Kennedy . It was evident then that the act might have led to terminal war, a conclusion fortified by revelations
 National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy said no such thought could be contemplated . Bundy, a Harvard dean, is reputedly the brightest star in the Camelot firmament . But that was unthinkable, Bundy said .
 A vastly more powerful U.S. missile force trained on the much weaker and more vulnerable Soviet enemy could not possibly be regarded as a threat to peace, because we are Good . Eisenhower, though not the National Security Council, explained it clearly . A great many people in the Western hemisphere
 We might have been “in even a worse position” if the world had known more about what the U.S. was doing at the time . And they prevail to the present, with only the rarest of exceptions .
 To this day, Okinawa remains a major offensive U.S. military base over the bitter objections of its inhabitants . Okinawa is less than enthusiastic about the dispatch of accident-prone V-22 Osprey helicopters to the base .
 Cuba’s “political subversion” consisted of support for those resisting the murderous assaults of the U.S. and its client regimes, and sometimes even perhaps even perhaps -horror of horrors -providing arms to the victims .
 The U.S. was defending a free people from “internal aggression,” as Kennedy’s U.N. Ambassador Adlai Stevenson explained . The primary example at the time was South Vietnam, where the United States was defending .
 The missile crisis officially ended on October 28th . That suggests that, in addition to cultural factors revealed in the hysteria of the Camelot intellectuals, there is a powerful state interest involved .
 The November 8th terror attack lends support to Bundy’s observation that the threat to peace was Cuba, not Turkey, where the Russians were not continuing a lethal assault - though that was not what Bundy had in mind or could have understood .
 Kennedy officially renewed the terrorist operations after the crisis ebbed . Shortly after came “the most dangerous moment in human history,” not exactly out of the blue .
 The American attacks are often dismissed in U.S. commentary as silly pranks, CIA shenanigans that got out of hand . The attacks often are dismissed in the United States commentary .
 Years later, Robert McNamara recognized that Cuba was justified in fearing an attack . The events just reviewed help explain why Cuba and Russia had good reason to take such threats seriously .
 These principles still contribute to the constant risk of nuclear war, JFK concluded . So “the Bay of Pigs was really right,” JFK concluded.
 India and Pakistan have come close to nuclear war several times, and sources of the conflict remain . We don't have Russian records, but there’s no doubt that their systems are far more accident-prone .
 In 1962, war was avoided by Khrushchev's willingness to accept Kennedy’s hegemonic demands . War threats in the Middle East, which might become reality very soon, once again escalate the dangers .
 Author of numerous best-selling political works, most recently,Hopes and Prospects, andOccupy .