 "The United States believes in a strategy of containment, does not like this," says U.S. President Barack Obama . The United States is trying to contain the Syrian refugee crisis .
 In 1961, the U.S. tried to use Cuban exiles to enter and invade Cuba at the Bay of Pigs . The CIA, the Kennedy Administration, used them to try to invade Cuba . The Bay of Pigeas was the first invasion of Cuba .
 The support for the Cuban exiles, the counter-revolutionaries, those were trying to oust Castro, it was kind of this half-hearted effort, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter says the support for Cuba's anti-Castro rebels was "half-
 "It didn't make anyone on the American side look all that competent, because of that failure," says CNN's John Defterios . "It's not a good thing for the U.S.," he says .
 The U.S. placed medium-ranged ballistic missiles in Turkey and in Italy . The United States was placing missiles in the late 50's, all the way into 1961 and 1962 . The missiles were placed around the Soviet Union .
 16 minutes was how long most of these missiles stayed airborne . The significance of that is that now these missiles could reach the major population centers of the Soviet Union in 10 to 20 minutes .
 There was a notion of getting to the other guy faster, they wouldn't be able to retaliate, he says . And in a situation where both sides have nuclear weapons, there was this kind of notion of well, maybe if you're able to get to the others faster, you wouldn
 "You want to get your missiles as close as possible so that they could reach the populations centers, the strategic centers of your opponent, as quickly as possible," he says .
 You can actually find the actual missile sites, and where they were installed, and when they became operational . And if you look up on the Web, you can find the missile sites .
 These are the ones that were in Italy, kind of right here, near the heel of Italy . These were in the middle of Italy, where they were found .
 The U.S. was looking a little bit weak after the Bay of Pigs invasion . The United States was looking "weak" after the invasion of Cuba, says CNN's John Sutter .
 It looks like they wanted to oust Castro, but they weren't able to do it . "It's not surprising that they were not able to oust him," says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Soviet Union did not appreciate the U.S. placing these missiles so close to its population centers, CNN's John Sutter says . The missiles were launched in the 1980s and 1990s .
 On the 14th of October we sent these U2 spy planes over Cuba . The U.S. is sending spy planes to Cuba .
 It looks like the Soviet Union is using Cuba to do the same thing that we used Turkey and Italy for, to set up ballistic missiles, really, right off of our coast . Ballistic missiles that could now now reach any of the strategic population centers, especially on the east coast .
 So by the 16th--So this is literally two days after the pictures were taken. So by . 16th day- so far-by-16th day .
 The next day, they're analyzing them, they tell the State Department about them . the 16th, they told Kennedy about them, and Kennedy holds a meeting of the Executive Committee . The next morning, they were analyzing them .
 A subset of the National Security Council and other advisors that essentially become the brain trust to figure out what to do about this forming crisis . But it was really a subset of special advisors -a subset of . the NSC . Council .
 "All of a sudden you have a state that we don't like off of our borders - a Communist state - a state aligned with the Soviet Union," he says . "Because of all of a suddenly you have ... a state ... aligned with [the Soviet Union]," he adds .
 It looks like these are offensive weapons. All of the sudden, it has nuclear missiles, it looks like it's a threat .
 If they're being launched from Cuba, maybe they can attack -maybe they can obliterate the United States before the U.S. even has a chance to respond properly . Once again, if they're . maybe they . can . attack - maybe they could obliterate . the United
 "They didn't really think that that would have any significant effect on the Soviets. But they thought it would have no significant effect," he says . "They thought that would be the only thing to do"
 President Obama is expected to make a speech at the White House on Thursday night . The White House has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 Khrushchev was leading the Soviets at this time, and just to understand who was leading them, it was him . He was a leader of the Soviet Union .
 He said he thought Kennedy was young and may be naive, and maybe too intellectual to really play a good game of chicken here . And he had even made remarks to the effect that he thought that Kennedy was naive .
 CNN's John Sutter says starving a country is considered an act of war . Sutter: "You are, to a large degree, starve a country. But then that's actually considered an attack on the U.S.
 The other option would be to do air attacks on these missile silos . Another option for the United States, (because it was completely viewed as unacceptable that these missiles should be here, and that they should be deployable from Cuba), the other option is air attacks .
 The U.S. wants to avoid having a communist regime so close to its own borders . And that goes in line with the US' general interest of not having a . communist regime .
 "Most of the team was actually advising Kennedy that they should do a full-scale invasion of Cuba," he says .
 They thought that this was the only thing that the Soviets would take seriously, it would show that the U.S. is serious about this . The Soviets thought that would show the United States is serious, he says . The United States was serious about the situation, he adds .
 The Soviet Union didn't think that the Soviet Union would really try to put up a fight in Cuba, so far away from their own borders . And they didn't really think that they would try to fight, they said . The U.S. did not think that it would try
 Kennedy, probably thinking about it pretty reasonably, realized "Well, hey, hey. But Kennedy realized that it was a good thing for him."
 They might not do anything in Cuba, and they might allow us to oust Castro and install a new regime there, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com . The U.S. might not have to do anything, but they might be able to oust the Castro regime,
 Berlin may retaliate in Europe, but specifically, in Berlin, probably in Germany as a whole . But they might retaliate, he says, "probably would retaliate"
 "Just for the sake of getting these things out of Cuba, we could sacrifice a lot in Europe," he says . "Just a few things in Europe. So, just for the . sake of the sake . of getting . these things . out of the . Cuba, he says
 "It prepares for any of these situations, because they really don't know what's going to happen," says CNN.com.com's iReport .
 "With hours notice, any of those options can, kind of, go into effect," the mayor says . "So, on ... kind of with hours notice," he says .
 By the 22nd, you have the Executive Committee -(And that just becomes formalized as an actual, official group that is advising the President in this capacity.) -and on the 22th, Kennedy finally puts out his first salvo on what is the US' position on what
 Defensive weapons would include surface-to-air missiles, things that would stop planes from bombings . And, to most people, defensive weapons would mean things like surface to air missiles . The U.S. military says it has no plans to use such weapons in the future .
 Not surface-to-surface missiles, not something that could attack a country . The U.S. has not launched a missile attack on a country, it says .
 Khrushchev may have thought missiles were defensive missiles . But we'll see, in future letters, that maybe they actually did perceive this .
 Kennedy and the U.S. frustrated with the Russians, because it felt like the Americans were saying, ""Look, we clearly know you have missiles there"", but Gromyko is saying ""No, these are just defensive weapons nothing to worry about"
 Kennedy gives a speech to state the United States' opinion . But more importantly, Kennedy gives an important speech to the U.S. President .
 All ships bound for Cuba from any nation or port will be turned back . If found to contain offensive weapons, they will turn them back . The U.S. government says it will turn ships back if they contain weapons .
 The Kennedy administration's position became slightly more nuanced . So, the Kennedy administration became slightly less nuanced .
 Both parties are kind of saying, ""We don't care what you're gonna do. So both parties are saying, "We're not gonna do" Both parties say they're not interested in what they want to do .
 Both sides are getting tense, the whole world is kind of taking sides, they're making public statements about what's right or wrong . We're gonna do what whatever we have to do," he says .
 "We really are getting very close to the brink of a very major confrontation between the Soviet Union and the United States," says CNN's John Sutter . The U.S. is "getting very close" to a "very major confrontation," he says .
 You can read the book ""13 Days Robert Kennedy"", there's also the movie "13 Days,"" which actually is not based on the book .
 "Both of them really kind of give the account of what happened over this period," she says . "But both of them kind of ... give the accounts of what they really give," she adds .
 Kennedy essentially replies, ""Look, these are offensive weapons and these require the responses I have announced," he says . Kennedy essentially says, "Look, look, these were offensive weapons"
 The Soviets, even though they're speaking the game of chicken, they are turning back . So the Soviets, in fact, they're turning back. The U.S. is turning back, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The best guess is that those 14 ships probably did contain some type of armament . And the best estimate is that they did . The 14 ships were probably equipped with armaments .
 "Behind the scenes, there is a little bit of a softening of the stance. So even though, publicly, everyone is playing a very strong game, behind the scenes," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Khrushchev essentially sends his first proposal on the 26th, and then you fast forward to the . 26th . The proposal was essentially Khrushchevitch's first proposal, and the proposal was accepted by the Soviet Union .
 In Khrushchev's mind, in his mind, the Soviet leader wanted to use the power of the Soviet Union . The letter is a fascinating letter to read .
 It's a fairly long letter, so I'm not gonna go into the whole thing and you can get it at this URL right over here . You can get the letter from the author of this article .
 "He kind of goes into the nuance of what he views as a defensive or an offensive weapon," he says . "It's not easy to say if you're going to use it as a weapon or not," he adds .
 He implicitly admits that the missiles are there -That they're not these benign weapons. He implicitly . He implicitly admitted that . They are not benign weapons .
 He says he'd use them as defensive weapons . But, in his letter, he kind of makes the nuance that he would use them for defense purposes .
 Khrushchev is kind of setting up-Kruschev is saying, ""We don't have the intention of using these to attack you for no reason"
 "That's the reason that they placed those weapons there in the first place. That's why they placed them there," she says . "They placed them in the place of weapons," she adds .
 The U.S. already had missiles pointed at the Soviet Union in Turkey and Italy . Another rationale for why they did it -and it's just, and probably, probably the more strategic rationale -is that we already did have these missiles that were pointed at Russia .
 The Soviet Union wanted to put missiles near the United States some ally's country, from the Soviet Union's point of view . The U.S. wanted to use missiles near some of the allies' countries, the U.K. says .
 The U.S. wanted missiles to protect Cuba - so that the United States would not try to oust the Communists from there . President Obama's stance right here really does make it look like their main interest in having those missiles was, kind of, to . protect Cuba .
 Khrushchev had a public broadcast where he kind of changed his tone a little bit . But then on the next day, he had a little change of tone, he said . The next day he said, "Krushchev has a little different tone"
 President Obama says he would undo the situation in Cuba only if the U.S. removed missiles from Italy and Turkey . Now he says they would only remove missiles from Turkey and Italy if the United States removed them .
 "This is when both armies are really at, kind of, they're at hair-trigger notice, it's a really scary situation," says CNN's John Sutter .
 It was a local decision by a Soviet commander. And this was actually done by-It was actually a local commander. It was not a decision by the Soviet commander .
 The U.S. did not use this, alone, as a reason to engage in war . And lucky for, I guess, the world, the United States did not . The United States didn't use this alone, it's lucky .
 It was lucky that this did not trigger an immediate war with the Soviets . So it was lucky not to have a war with them, it was not .
 The Soviets also didn't know that the Americans were planning on -that these missiles, to a large degree, were already obsolete . And what the Soviets also knew at that time is that the U.S. was planning on .
 We already have Polaris missiles that can be deployable by submarines . Because we already . already Polaris missiles, we already have them .
 Submarine submarines can deploy things much closer to the action, and they're much harder to track . And clearly, submarines are much more likely to deploy things . Submarine warfare is a form of warfare .
 Neither side wanted to look like they were giving in . And the whole point here is that neither side wanted it to look as though they had given in .
 The first Khrushchev proposal was agreed to by the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The first proposal was the proposal to build up a Soviet Union-sanctioned nuclear weapons .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove -to not send any more weapons, and also dismantle the weapons that were there . The Americans agreed that they would not invade Cuba, and the Americans agreed to not invade .
 Fidel Castro is paranoid that the U.S. is planning another attack on him . The big winner here is probably Fidel Castro, because he's paranoid about the United States .
 CNN's John Sutter says the U.S. government is now saying that they cannot invade him . Sutter: "They're saying that, at least publicly now, they can't invade him"
 The United States agreed to remove missiles from Turkey and Italy . The U.S. agreed to do so privately, the U.N. says .
 "They didn't wanna do this publicly, because then it would like they were being weak," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com . They didn't want to be seen as weak, he says .
 "They were able to extract something out of the United States," says President Obama . "By doing it, they are able to ... extract something from the U.S. And by doing it," says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 By doing this action, they were able to get these missiles removed from Turkey and Italy . The action was able to remove the missiles from Turkey, Italy and Turkey .
 President Obama needed to look like a strong leader, especially after the Bay of Pigs, he said .
 "He kind of swallowed his pride and allowed it to publicly look like he lost the negotiation," he said . "It's not surprising that he didn't win the negotiation. He kind of swallow his pride," he added .
 He publicly made it look like he got nothing in return for backing down, but in reality he did, he did . "He made it seem like he didn't have to back down. He did," he said .
 This was the closest that the Soviet Union and the U.S. ever got to really the brink during the Cold War . This was a close encounter between the two countries .