 American businessmen had property and industry in Cuba and USA was a major market for Cuban goods . USA was also a major trade market for Cuba goods .
 Americans were concerned of Cuba as Castro was believed to be a communist and USA feared spreading of communism . Americans feared the spread of communism in Cuba and feared it would spread .
 USSR now had ally close to America . Plan for USA to invade Cuba and team up with enemies of Castro .
 CIA advised that Castro could be overthrown if USA supported Cuban rebels . CIA advised U.S. could overthrow Castro if it supported Cuba's rebels .
 With U.S. support, a force of 1400 rebels landed at Bay of Pigs in Cuba . With American support, the rebels landed in Cuba in 1961 .
 They were trapped on the beach by Castro forces and could not link with rebels on land . Castro's forces trapped them on a beach and they were unable to link up with rebels . Castro forces were able to link them up with rebel forces on land in Cuba .
 Many in the USA blamed Kennedy for refusing air cover to the invasion as he did not want to be seen openly supporting rebels . Disaster for Kennedy as many in the U.S. blamed him for refusing to air cover .
 Castro feared Americans would attack again so he turned to the USSR for help . Castro turned to Russia for help in the wake of the U.S. invasion .
 Khrushchev supplied weapons and surface-to-air missiles that could shoot down American planes . He announced he was a communist and Khrushvic supplied weapons to shoot down U.S. planes .
 USA suspected missiles being put up but Khrushchev denied it when challenged and claimed USSR had no intention . USA suspected missile installations in the U.S. were put up .
 No missiles at the moment but when in place, could carry hydrogen bombs that could reach and destroy American cities within 20 minutes . The U.S. has no missiles but could be capable of carrying hydrogen bombs .
 Millions of American lives would be lost so Kennedy had to take action . If Kennedy ignored missiles and just made diplomatic protest, he would have appeared to backed down and was weak . Millions of U.S. lives would have been lost if he ignored missiles .
 If nuclear attack it could provoke nuclear war with the USSR resulting in destruction of world . If nuclear strike could provoke war with USSR resulting of destruction of the world. If attack could provoke world .
 Soviet ships with missiles heading towards Cuba so kennedy decided to put naval blockade around Cuba . Kennedy decided to do so because of the threat of missiles from Soviet ships .
 October he announced sea within 800km of Cuba will be placed in quarantine and no ships carrying weapons will be allowed through . No ships with weapons are allowed through, he said .
 Kennedy called Khrushchev to withdraw weapons from Cuba . 4 of 11 Crisis Point Soviet ships carrying rockets approach Cuba . Kennedy called for withdrawal of weapons from the country .
 Kennedy demanded Soviets remove all sites and missiles . Khrushchev agreed to consider dismantling if Kennedy removed blockade . Kennedy demanded Soviet missile sites and missile sites be removed .
 Kennedy received letter from Khrushchev demanding he remove all missiles in Turkey in exchange for removal of missiles in Cuba . Next day he received letter demanding he removed all missiles from Turkey . Kennedy was forced to remove missiles from Cuba and remove them from Turkey in return .
 He threatened to invade Cuba if Khrushchev did not respond by 29th October . The threat was made by the Soviet Union in response to the threat of a coup .
 U2 plane shot down over Cuba and pilot killed . One Soviet ship boarded and crate containing nuclear bombs opened . U2 planes were shot down in Cuba .
 Khrushchev agreed to dismantle missile sites in return for Kennedy lifting blockades . Kennedy lifted blockades and not attacking Cuba . Secretary General of UN urged leaders to avoid war .
 Khrushchev guaranteed safety of Cuba and worked with UN with UN to prevent war . Worked with UN and helped prevent war between Russia and Cuba .
 Kennedy's reputation increased, seen as strong as stood up to Khrushchev and forced him to back down . Kennedy's image was seen as a strong leader who stood up against the Soviet leader .
 Khrushchev protected Cuba and claimed as peacemaker who had listened to UN, avoided war and seek peace . Khrushche claimed as peacemaker who avoided war, sought peace .
 Telephone link between Washington and Moscow set up so can talk directly to each other . Telephone link was set up between Washington, Moscow to talk directly .
 Disarmament Conference held in 1962 resulting in Nuclear Test Ban Treaty . Treaty was based on 1962 nuclear disarmament conference held in Geneva .
 Kennedy initially refused to withdraw American missiles in Turkey . He later agreed secretly to dismantle them . Czechoslovakia was last satellite state to become communist in 1948 .
 Censorship of press and radio removed and powers of secret police reduced . Secret police were removed from power of press, radio and radio .
 Government control of industry and agriculture reduced and trade unions given more power . Trade unions also given more control of the government .
 Dubcek remembered Hungary 1956 and constantly stressed to Soviets that Czechoslovakia is still communist and will not withdraw from Warsaw Pact . Dubcec also stressed that Czechsoslovakia still communist . Czechs were still communist in 1956 .
 Brezhnev feared reforms in Czechoslovakia will lead to demands in USSR and other satellite states . Reforms were known as Prague Spring but concerned USSR. Reforms known as 'Prague Spring' and 'Moscow Spring'
 Warsaw Pact leaders also felt threatened by Czechoslovakia, as they felt their own positions were being weakened .
 Brezhnev scared Czechoslovakia will look to West rather than USSR causing gap in Iron Curtain, leading to its collapse . USSR feared gap in gap would lead to collapse of Soviet Union, which led to collapse .
 Dubcek maintained Czechoslovakia was communist and wanted to remain in Warsaw Pact . Dubcec maintained Czechs wanted to stay in the Warsaw Pact and remain in the Soviet Union . Dubckek maintained the country was communist .
 Soviet tanks invaded Czechoslovakia on August 20, 1968 . Great surprise when 20th August 1968 Soviet invasion occurred . Soviet invasion was the first of its kind in the country .
 Reforms withdrawn, opposition continued and student set himself on fire in protest . Student set himself alight in protest against reforms . Reforms were withdrawn and opposition continued .
 Brezhnev Doctrine Statement to explain Soviet intervention in Czechoslovakia . After a year or so, all opposition died down, Soviets restored control by force . Soviet intervention came after a year of opposition died .
 Made clear that if any country attempted to break away from Soviet control will be regarded as threat to other Warsaw Pact countries . Made it clear that any country . attempting to break . away from . Soviet control . will be seen as a threat to the other Warsaw . Pact countries.
 Dubcek's reforms and Brezhnev Doctrine sent clear signal to satellite states that USSR will resist any attempt to break away from Soviet control . Doctrine remained in force until reversed by President Gorbachev in 1989 .
 Czechs even more resentful of Soviet rule but realised there was little they could do . Czechs were even more resentsful of the Soviet Union but realised little could be done .
 Cuba and USA realised helping Czechoslovakia will end it . Relations were better since Cuba and U.S. realised helping them end it will end .
 USSR allowed its own sphere of influence without interference without interference . Example of how USSR allowed itself to have its own spheres of influence .
 Use this set whenNearlyVisible { googletag.push { .defineSlot.addService); }); }); . Use this to help students with reading comprehension comprehension comprehension and vocabulary .
 THE USA 1945-1970 1. / 5 based on 1 rating GCSE Edexcel History Cold War Timeline 0.0.0 . The Cold War Cold War timeline is a Cold War history of the Cold War .