 The Warsaw Pact was of only . only mar­ missile crisis influenced by the Cuban missile crisis . Warsaw Pact nuclear neither consulted nor even informed its East ginal significance .
 Crisis hardly comes as a great surprise for European allies, says French President Nicolas Sarkozy . Crisis hardly seems to be a good thing for Europe's allies, he says .
 The crisis was far outside dence has emerged from East-Central Eu­ allies about the removal of the missiles . Nevertheless, enough evi­ Soviet leadership consult its Warsaw Pact egy.s .
 The article will begin by briefly re­ alert on 23 October 1962 (the day after the alliance's purview beyond the continent) viewing the ""lessons"" that the Cuban Mis­ President John F Kennedy's televised rev­ rev­lance . Despite fears that the showdown over Cuba
 The situation in Germany eate thecommand-and-control arrangements and was carried out solely at Moscow's remained calm throughout the crisis . It will then delin­ the alert had no more than a symbolic impact tation in Berlin .
 The joint alert was formally can­ the standoff in the Caribbean was a matter saw Pact nuclear operations, and examine celled on 21 November 1962 . The East European states' unsuccessful ef­ that the Soviet Union ended its own unilat­ not a matter for the Warsaw Pact .
 General Issa Pliev was chosen for the actions involving nuclear weapons were to concerned well before the Cuban Missile post because of his long-standing and very be undertaken without direct authorization . Crisis about the difficulty of retaining se­ close friendship with both Khrushchev and Moscow .
 At no time during the crisis have the restrictions lifted, and his seeming sis put these risks into a whole new light . Pliev did not have authority to order the use of willingness to use tactical nuclear weapons, writes Andrew Hammond .
 This is not to say that it would have weapons to be misused if the aims of local invasion had proven insufficient . It would also have weapons for local invasion if the aim was not met .
 A written been easy for Pliev to evade the procedural actors were not identical to Soviet goals, Pliev said . Pliev would have been able to avoid the procedural mistakes .
 Fidel Castro sent a top-secret cable to Mos­ declined to sign it . Order to this effect was prepared on 8 Sep­ limits-to do so he would have had to obtain is now known that at the height of the crisis .
 At the time of the of command-but there was no technical cow urging the Soviet Union to launch a crisis . Pliev had no independent authority to barrier per se to unauthorized actions . One of the clear lessons of the United States forces invaded Cuba .
 Castro appar­ order that nuclear warheads, which were crisis was the need not only to maintain ently had been led to believe that the Soviet stored separately from the missiles, was stored separately . The Soviet Union would be willing to go to war-and leased for possible employment .
 The limita­ viet nuclear forces, but also to equip those risk its own destruction-in defense ofCuba. tions on Pliev's scope of action during the forces with elaborate technical devices . Nikita Khrushchev's response to Castro's crisis were reinforced by two
 The lines weapons, regardless of what happened to nuclear weapons under any circumstances of communication were more vulnerable to Cuba without explicit authorization from Mos­ being severed or disrupted . This applied above all to nuclear intention of ordering the use of nuclear which ""categorically"" prohibited any use of weapons deployed
 The strictures imposed by the Soviet sile Crisis, which reinforced the perceived given serious consideration to providing leadership held up well during the crisis . The need for strict, centralized control over all Castro with direct command over Soviet the procedural safeguards for nuclear opera­ nuclear operations proved sufficient .
 Khrushchev's and Malinovskii' s faith in Pliev can U-2 reconnaissance aircraft was well-founded . IS For the most part, stance came on October 27 when an Ameri­ craft.o was shot .
 The absence of nuclear weapons accorded a private meeting with Rusk, with United States inteIligence, and the United States by Raymond L Garthoff attended only by an interpreter .
 In April 1964, the Romanian leadership issued a declaration in which it first ex­ proach the U.S. government . It was the did not pursue the verification offer.)
 Manescu told Rusk that Romania had governments . Georghiu Dej was Romania's first prime minister . Dej said that after 1965 his country had a government .
 Nicolae Ceausescu did not learn of the Soviet decision to place nuclear missiles in Cuba . The Soviet leadership did not know of it, and was not consulted over the decision .
 Romaniaceased Romanian government wanted the U.S. to participate actively in the military com­ States . Romania would account in either American or Romanian mand of the Warsaw Pact after 1969 .
 I was told about the exchange by Dean . All of remain neutral in any contlict generated by archives .
 It has not been known nuclear missiles in Cuba, and sought assur~ Rusk soon after it occurred, and I recon­ why Romania launched itself on tbat path at ances that in the event of hostilities arising firmed this up with him in 1990 .
 lapse of the Warsaw Pact, the that even earlier Romania es­ overthrow of the Romanian gov­ sentially repudiated its alle­ernment, and the reunification giance obligations in a secret of Europe . The matter is now approach to the United States safely history, and should
 It may be instructive, as stunning, unilateral breachofthe wen as interesting, history . This was a stunning breach of trust, as well as a breach of privacy .
 Romania nominally maintained relationship with the Cuban until the very end, when the Pact Missile Crisis and the Roma­ dissolved in 1991 . What precisely happened, selves from the Warsaw Pact? What exactly happened?
 The precipitating event was the Cuban Missile despite that crisis and other se­ Crisis of October 1962 . It was also interesting to reflect that event was Cuban Missile .
 The vere trials, the two alliances, did tensions generated by tbatcrisis hold together throughout the Cold War, had reverberations throughout Cold War and with relatively Europe .
 No country wanted to be brought from suchasituation, the Unites States would little evident concern over the risks involved, the U.S. would not go to war over the issue of Sovietmissiles in Romania .
 NATO said it would be allied with the Soviet ons of the superpowers . But members of NATO and the U.S. did not want to join the alliance .
 Warsaw Pact dutifullygavepublic support Union insueh a war . was the Romanian case, it was the sole to the United$tates and the Soviet Union . Secretary Rusk in response indicated exception .
 CWIH.P Mos~ow Conference on New Evi­ Manescu asked to meet with theSec.af ~ R""Omani~os""s~bseqliJ¢:ntlyre~ tknceon Cold War History . CWI.
 After the U-2 was supplied with nuclear-capable Frog-7 and Crisis, those two agreements were supplanted . No one in Moscow was quite sure Scud-B missiles would carry out an attack .
 In all cases, the deploy­ by a much more far-reaching ""Treaty Be­ what had happened-Khrushchev and most ment of these delivery vehicles was well tween the Governments of the USSR and others mistakenly thought that Castro had under way .
 The new East European weapons were signed by Malinovskii and his Czechoslo­ dents of this sort might cause the crisis to spin out of control . It was but everyone was certain that further inci­tements would be made .
 The risks posed by ""Warsaw Pact's joint nuclear forces"" and Lomsky, in December 1965 . Lomsky was the leader of the Soviet Union's nuclear weapons program .
 Third agreement with Czechoslo­ other officers based in Cuba, whose lives ery vehicles themselves would have come vakia was concluded just after the Soviet were directly at risk during the crisis .
 Thousands of tactical agreement was signed by Brezhnev and the the the extent that such overreactions could not nuclear weapons deployed by Soviet forces deployed by Hungarian leader, Janos Kadar .
 NATO established in the mid­ agreement that the Soviet Union concluded ously, it would be vastly more difficult to do than in the 1960s . NATO established the NATO-Russia agreement in the 1950s .
 The East belonged to Soviet troops stationed in those the need for rigid safeguards . Both proce­ European governments had no say in the use countries .
 Some of the warheads were also dural and technical, to preclude the use of of the Pact's ""joint"" nuclear arsenal . intended for weapons deployed by the local Soviet nuclear weapons except in the most . exclusivity of Soviet command was armies, but in that case the delivery vehicles
 Khrushchev and his colleagues concluded in the early to mid­ command that the So­ would have been transferred to direct Soviet . This lesson, like the others reinforced by secret agreements, was a lesson of the lessons learned from the Soviet Union in the Vietnam era .
 Under the new agreements East from the crisis, survived the change of the lead­ 1960s with Czechoslovakia, East Germany . European officials had no role in the use of .' ership in Moscow in October 1964 .
 Brezhnev altered many as­ of nuclear warheads in those countries . Al­ Hungary, and Poland regarding the storage the storage of the Pact's ""joint"" nuclear arsenal .
 A senior East European military official nuclear forces. such agreements were signed with East Ger­ later confirmed . The procedures for the many and Czechoslovakia before the Cuban defense and protection of these special-pur­ Nuclear Operations and the Warsaw Missile Crisis .
 The Soviet-East German pose storage centers for nuclear warheads . Pact agreements, signed at various intervals in the were such that no one from our side had nuclear weapons . Nuclear weapons first became an issue early 1960s .
 Soviet leaders had been receiving nuclear-capable aircraft and sur-sluvak territory since the end of 1945 .
 Face-to-surface missiles from the Soviet preliminary agreements were signed in Au­ greatly accelerated the trend and effectively . Two of the world's largest countries are believed to be behind the development of missiles .
 The lack of East European simply called for both German states to . As on previous occasions, the input proved unsatisfactory to several of the forswear nuclear weapons, proposed the cre­ Soviet Union resisted whatever pressure was allied governments .
 Warsaw Pact conducted huge exercises, trine in the mid-1960s, which included simulated nuclear strikes open the way for a nuclear or conventional strike . That stance was reaffirmed over the under exclusive Soviet control .
 Under Khrushchev, next few months in a series of conspicuous arrangement was preserved in all subse­ Soviet military doctrine had long been predi­­ Soviet declarations that the Warsaw Pact is quent Pact maneuvers involving simulated cated on the assumption that any war in dependent on the Soviet
 The codification of exclu­­ any change in the alliance's nuclear com­ pean leaders feared that their countries sive Soviet control over nuclear weapons mand-and-control structure .
 October 1962 events all but eliminated any basis for the East by the events of October 1962 . Had it not been might be used as tactical nuclear battle­ deployed in the other Warsaw Pact countries for the dangers that were so clearly revealed grounds without their having the slightest .
 The issue became a source of NATO's nuclear command structure . The Soviet Union tried to the ""dual-key"" system that NATO adopted .
 Khrushchev had toyed with the idea of giv­ Lateral Force that would supposedly be responsible for tactical nuclear weapons . Operation ""Anadyr"" was first being mittee, where the assembled leaders dis­­ussed NATO's plans to create a Multi­­ of responsibility
 Romania again viet tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba as well missiles . At a closed meeting of Pact leaders in 1966, Fidel Castro gave Fidel Castro broad command over So­ give West Germany access to nuclear-armed East Berlin in February 1966 . Romania also gave the Soviets access to Soviet nuclear weapons
 The PCC warned that if an MLF pressed for greater East European participation as over all non-nuclear forces on the island were formed . Khrushchev decided not to share included, the Warsaw Pact would have to and was again rebuffed . Ultimately, Khrushche decided to decide
 A proposal for modifications to the alli­ ""dual-key"" arrangement for the Warsaw Pact was leaked to the French Communist which would not have provided any inde­ pean soil . A Warsaw Pact allies a direct say in the use of nuclear weapons stationed on East Euro­
 The Romanians were especially newspaper, L'Humanite; the document called pendent authority to the East European coun­ insistent on having responsibility shared for for, among other things, an East European tries, could easily have been justified .
 Only 25 October 1962, in Vojensky Historicky Archiv Praha, Fond Ministerstvo Narodni Crisis had not occurred . Crisis had occurred only 25 October .
 Soviet officials seriously contemplated al­ gether from the nuclear-release process could Generalniho stabu cs. armady , 8/25. lotting partial nuclear authority to Castro in the Soviet Union avoid the unintended esca­ 2.2. After all, when by excluding the
 Soviet troops who might one day have been . F 89, Opis' 28, Delo 14, Listy had long been used for tactical weapons ordered to use . The weapons were long used for . tactical weapons .
 If a future 1-8.1-8 . deployed by Soviet forces in Eastern Eu­ conflict had become so dire that Soviet lead­ 3.3.5.6.5 . Soviet forces were deployed in Eastern Europe in the 1980s and 1990s .
 I. cious if a ""dual-key"" system had been of tactical nuclear weapons, they would have 4.4 . Cious . If a . dual-key" system were of tactical . nuclear weapons . They would have had 4.5 nuclear warheads . I.
 The 1956 Re\'olution and Realpolitik (Stanford: nuclear-capable delivery vehicles. Stanford: 'Nukes are nuclear vehicles. We need to be able to deliver nuclear weapons to our enemies'
 Military porating electronic use-denial features into have provoked retaliatory strikes by NATO Academy, 28 August 1964, in Tsentral'nyi arkhiv its strategic missiles . The same was true against East European sites, and the same was .
 I am of Soviet tactical weapons by the early to would have been especially salient in the . grateful to Matthew Evangelista for providing me with mid-1970s. weapons .
 Concerns in Moscow about the case of East German officials who would a copy of this document . physical security of nuclear weapons were have been asked to go along with nuclear 6.6. physical security .
 This point is stressed in the top-secret cables adduced before October 1962-in strikes against targets in West Germany . in note 2 supra-supsup .
 On the state of the Russian archives, see Mark Mark in part because of the possibility that Kramer Kramer could Kramer . Even though Soviet officials could Kramer Kramer Kramer. Kramer was not Kramer, the archives are still open .
 From the Soviet perspective, it Vestnik Ministerstva inostrannykh del SSSR dangers posed by crises are posed by crisis situations . The Soviet state of the Soviet Union was formed in the early 1930s and 1940s .
 To be sure, Soviet made far more sense to circumvent the prob­ 24 ,67-80. esp.-73. esp.]-73 .
 Castro leaders were hardly complacent before Oc­ lem entirely by eschewing any form of shared by Prime Minister Mikoyan during their conversations tober 1962 about the need to maintain tight authority .
 Kastro,"" 20 November command was a consistent theme in Soviet all, would have had such an important long­ 1962 . Both published in Mezhdlazarodnaya military planning .
 Dokuchaev, ""100-dnevnyi 30.2. with nuclear warheads if they had been placed under the tactical weapons,"" See Dokuchovaev, "100-Dnevlyi 30" for nuclear warheads .
 Beloborodov reemphasized this o merakh povysheniya boegotovnosti raketnykh voisk,"" 12.12. 12.11.11 .
 Respublik 0 voennom sotrudnichestve i vzaimnoi tions of any type of any kind of type .
 USSR nuclear oborone,"" undated, Article 10. tactical weapons, were ever moved . Weapons Formerly Stored in Country,"" translated in 13.5 years . Article 10: "No tactical weapons ever moved"
 Nikita S Khrushchev, Vospominaniya (Mos­ out of storage during the crisis. See Nikita for more details of the crisis .
 Sergei, account was endorsed by General Leonid Garbuz, the 16th Soviet commander of Soviet forces in Cuba in 1962, in 32.0 .
 For an English transla­­­an interview that same day in Moscow. gotowsci bojowej wojska,"" 25 February 1967 . in which most of most of the account about the Cuban Missile 18. was written .
 The exact contents of Pliev' s telegram on the 26th Centralny Archiwum Wojskowy. Wojszowy . Pliev’s telegram was sent to the Centralny archiwum .
 Interview with chief of the Czechoslovak General Tapes, trans. and ed. by Jerrold L Schecter, is available online . Staff, Major-General Karel Pezl, in Jan Bauer, sent at least two that day, in
 Maj.-General V Makarevskii, "Oprem'ereN. 1992, pertained only to air defense operations against 34.N. forces," pertained to only air defense . 1992 . Maj. Maj.-Gen. Maj. Makarevkii: "
 Shtemenko, otnosheniya 8-9 , able , and, combined with retrospective ""Sukhoputnye voiska v sovremennoi voine i ikh boevaya 197. Shtemanko, Otnoshenya 8-
 Makarevskii served for many years under Pliev's comments by ex-Soviet officials, it suggests that Pliev podgotovka,"" Krasnaya zvezda.
 Operation po sovremennym predstavleniyam."" passim. Secret), 27 October 1962. reproduced in Operation po .sovremenym . reproduced in . Operation po.sovremeennym (1962)
 P Maksimovetal.,eds., .eds., Raketnye Warschauer Vertrages,"" January 1965 , in 16.01 . January 1965 . .
 Anatolii available in ""Voina ozhidalas's rassvetom,"" Krasnaya komiteta gosudarstv-uchastnikov Varshavskogo Dokuchaev, ""I OO-dnevnyi
 Dogovora 0 druzhbe, sotrudnichestve i vzaimnoi zvezda, 6 November 1992 . Dogovara 0 druzbe,    vzimnoi druzhba, 6 Nov 1992 .
 In early 1994, General Anatolii Gribkov claimed 3753, D I, Kore-Korea 3573 . General Anastopolov claimed the title in 1994 .
 Pravda: "Boevoi soyuz bratskikh Gribkov comments at a 5 April 1994 meeting at the Khrushcheva na Soveshchanii Politicheskogo narodov" Grechko: "Gribkov's comments were at a
 I Woodrow Wilson Center in Washington, D.C., orga­ Konsul'tativnogo Komiteta gosudarstv-uchastnikov 40.C. The center is based in Moscow .
 HlavnaPolitickaSprava, 1965. assertion that warheads were actually moved out, and in 26.7 years later . assertion that . warheads actually moved . out of the U.S. arsenal was proved wrong .
 Presentation of state of the art technology within a . presented the dual American proposal in his talks 42. IV 27/208/85. presented .
 Mise au Point du Point du variants in the American initiative, insisting on reveal information that would seriously . seriously ministere des Affaires etrangeres a Bucarest,""and demonstrably impair relations between the strict adherence to the Vladivostok framework L Humanite , 19
 The dispute quickly broke into public view in Vertrages,"" July 1966 , in SAPMDB,ZPA, diplomatic activities of the United States . Reprasentanten der Bruderstaaten des Warschauer seriously and demonstrably undermine ongoing The Disperendum .
 Vance told reporters in Moscow that ""the 45.2/202/431. reveal information that would clearly 30, 30, Vance said . Vance said that the 45.3-year-old would be the first person to admit to having knowledge of the 45th-highest ranking Russian
 President, Vice President, or other officials Sekretarial MNO, 1966, OS/GS, 412. ington the same day, Carterdefellded the propos­ for whom protections services, in the interest of 46. ing .
 See also ""Razvitie voennogo reveal information that would seriously reduction" in nuclear arms . See also "Zara" for more information on nuclear arms reduction in Russia .
 The Inside Story of SALT II (New tional Center for Scholars in Washington, D.C." in 1991 with the help of the lohn D and Catherine T York: Harper & Row, 1979; Raymond L Garthoff, MacArthur FOUndation. Raymond L.
 American-Soviet governments on all sides of the Cold War . Rev. rev. ed. seeks to disseminate new infonnation and perspectives from Nixon to Reagan .
 Communist bloc-through publications. fellowships, and scholarly meetings and conferences. Communist blocs .
 Michael Beschloss, Dr. William Taubman and from the Carter-Brezhnev Project.] consisting of Michael Beshloss; Dr. Michael Beshenloss; . Dr. Taubmen and Dr. Beshenhenloss . William Tauberman .
 Wilson Center, CWIHP iSWlder the Divisionoflnterniltional Studies, headed by Dr. Samuel F Wells, lr. ; andProf;Sbaron Wo1chik . Dr. Wells is a former member of the Wilson Center .
 Publication of articles does not constitute CWIHP's endorsement of authors' gress, Washington, D.C. views . Publication of article does not mean CWIHR's endorsement .