 All color codes * must be added after the colon and before the semi * colon . * must also be added before the colon or after the semi .
 As the anniversary of the Crisis is approaching, we thought it would be an appropriate time to publish an article describing the event . This can be all the way from pandemics, diseases, wars, natural disasters, and important moments in political history .
 The 45-year period directly after World War II known as the Cold War was one of the most tense periods in American and World history . The Cold War period was known as a tense period in American history .
 The crisis was a military standoff between the United States and the Soviet Union which lasted 13 days . The U.S. and Soviet Union were at odds during the standoff .
 This event showed just how fragile International relations were during this difficult period of the 20th Century . The event was a sign of the fragility of international relations .
 One split-second decision could have led to total nuclear war between the two superpowers . The U.S. and Russia have been at odds for more than a century .
 Nikita Khrushchev secretly collaborated with Cuba's leader Fidel Castro . During the months leading up to the crisis, Soviet Premier Nikita worked with Castro . The crisis was the height of the Cold War in the Soviet Union .
 Castro had allied himself with the USSR in 1959 to gain more military and economic power . Castro allied himself to Russia in 1959 in order to gain military, economic and political power .
 The plan was to transport and install Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba, just 90 miles from the shores of Florida . The Cuban government was planning to install the missiles .
 The two communist leaders acted in this way to combat the threat of a possible second invasion from the U.S., following the infamous ""Bay of Pigs"" in 1961 . The two leaders acted to combat a possible invasion from . the United States .
 Kruschev also felt threatened by the U.S. missiles that had recently been deployed in the neighboring countries of Italy and Turkey . Krusche felt threatened .
 The confrontation between the U.S. and the Soviet Union began on October 14, 1962, when photographs of a partially assembled Soviet SS-4 ballistic missile were taken by U2 spy plane pilot Major Richard Heyser .
 President John F Kennedy was briefed about this two days later on October 16 . He immediately took action by calling in a team of diplomatic and militaristic executives to plan the next course of action .
 Kennedy and his administration knew that if the missiles became operational, it would completely alter the course of the Cold War . Kennedy knew if they were operational, the missiles would change the course . Kennedy's administration knew it would be a huge blow to the world .
 ExComm created a multitude of potential solutions to the unfolding crisis, including an elaborate takeover of the island, and a possible bombing attack . Throughout the week, ExComm presented a variety of possible solutions, including a possible takeover .
 Kennedy suggested that the U.S. navy construct a ""quarantine"" or blockade of Cuba in order to halt the supply of Soviet nuclear materials . Kennedy however, suggested that a blockade would be built to halt Soviet nuclear material .
 Kennedy saw it important that he word this as a ""quarantine"" in hopes that Kruschev would avoid declaring it as an act of war or hostility . Kennedy wanted to avoid declaring the quarantine as a act of hostility or war .
 On October 27, several U.S. navy ships enforcing the ""quarantine"" had encountered a Soviet B-59 submarine . The submarine was one of several ordered by the USSR to travel to Cuba .
 At the time, the crew of the submarine had not been informed of the blockade, as their communication with Moscow had been cut off many days prior . The crew of a Russian submarine was not informed of their blockade .
 Several depth charges were dropped on the submarine by the Navy ships in an unsuccessful attempt to signal the B-59 submarine to surface . The Navy ships dropped depth charges on the sub in an attempt to get the sub to surface.
 A unanimous vote between the three senior officers was agreed upon . Thinking that war had already broken out above the waters, the vote was agreed on .
 If passed, the submarine would fire its T-5 nuclear-tipped torpedo, which was around the strength of the atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima . The torpedo would be fired at the height of the bomb dropped at Hiroshima .
 The crisis was averted through a series of letters and compromises between the White House and the Kremlin . The crisis ended in a compromise between the U.S. and Russia .
 On October 26, Kruschev sent Kennedy a formal message explaining that he would remove the Cuban missiles in exchange for Kennedy's promise that Castro's communist regime in Cuba would remain unopposed by the United States .
 Kruschev added that the U.S. missiles in Italy and Turkey would have to be dismantled as well . However, the very next day he said that the missiles would also be dismantled . The very same day he also said the missiles in Turkey and Italy would also need to be
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy secretly corresponded with USSR ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin . The president then sent his brother to secretly correspond with the ambassador . Robert Kennedy's brother, Robert, was the attorney general .
 The two opposing sides discussed the formalities of the agreement to remove both the missiles from Cuba and Europe, and on October 28, the crisis was effectively concluded . The agreement was reached by the end of October 28 .
 WiNK serves as the student voice of our community . WiNK provides readers with a weekly overview of what's happening in our students' lives .
 The majority of the content is developed in Upper School Journalism classes . We also accept contributions from other students and faculty members .
 WiNK prepares young people for fulfillment, happiness, and success in life through rigorous and healthy development of intellect, conscience, body, and spirit . WiNK Contact Brooke Thaler Publications Teacher .