 Examining specialties brings academic specialties together and broadens one’s understanding of how political forces function between political actors . Examining their conjunction brings academics and political experts together and brings them together .
 Historians of foreign relations can clarify how particulars of armed forces interrelate with the achievement of diplomatic efforts, and generate a more comprehensive understanding of past events . Such an approach can challenge military historians, for instance, to address larger policy questions, to clarify policy questions .
 Brands, and anonymous readers at Diplomatic History for comments on earlier drafts of this article . Brands and the anonymous readers of Diplomatic history for comments .
 National security strategy is more effectively served when military strategy and diplomacy are integrated, says President Obama . The U.S. should focus on diplomacy and national security strategy, he says .
 The role for the military during a crisis may range from active use, to an instrument that makes a negotiated settlement attractive, or it may remain in the background because its misuse could trigger an avoidable war .
 At the very least, wielders of the diplomatic and military instruments of power need to take each other into account . But a tendency of treating the two as profoundly different remains .
 War, military actions short of war, and diplomacy mutually support each other when thought of as instruments of power that inhabit the same continuum . Diplomacy, war, military action and military actions are often seen as tools of power in the world .
 Rhetoric on the resolution of international security crises tends to treat military force and negotiations as two completely distinct realms .
 Politicians, military leaders, and the public often segregate military actions from diplomatic efforts . The interrelationship between military actions and diplomatic efforts has been demonstrated .
 Too often people regard of force and diplomacy as apples and oranges, but with significant similarities . Force and diplomacy are not apples and apples, but they are very different but with similarities .
 Scholars, however, have repeatedly noted the relationship between force and diplomacy . Scholars have noted that diplomacy is essential to the nation's survival .
 Hans Morgenthau asserted that “the diplomatic representative of a great power, in order to be able to serve both the interests of his country and the interests . of peace, must at the same time use persuasion, hold out the advantages of a compromise, and impress the other side
 “The Limits of Coercive Diplomacy’s Theory and Practice in History,” in The Limits of the Coercives Diplomacy, 2nd ed., ed. ed. “. Theory and practice in History in History”
 Neither is the use of diplomacy with military force an innovation new to political leaders . The use of diplomatic and military force is not a new thing for political leaders to do .
 The power and threat of the Royal Navy aided Great Britain while it pursued favorable outcomes over conflicts with the United States such as the boundary between Maine and British Canada, and the Oregon dispute .
 Polk Administration blended negotiations with military actions in order to achieve a lasting resolution . Polk administration blended negotiations and military actions to achieve lasting resolution of Mexican War .
 The Chinese decided in July 1951 that they needed their armies to push the American forces further to the south of their present position in order to persuade the United States to negotiate a truce . In July 1951, the Chinese decided to push their armies further south of the U.S. border .
 Both sides were “convinced that military pressure was essential to force the other side to compromise” during the negotiations, the report says . Both sides believed military pressure needed to force a compromise .
 Eisenhower threatened to escalate the war if the North Koreans and Chinese rejected the armistice proposal of May 25, 1953 . Eisenhower relied mostly on the threat of force to try to dissuade China from using military action to take the islands of Quemoy and Matsu .
 He melded nuclear forces with negotiation efforts in order to persuade the Chinese to refrain from military action against them . Three years later, he combined firm diplomatic signals with military actions to avoid escalation to armed conflict .
 The Limits of Coercive Diplomacy, 114. Peaceful Resolution through Coercives Diplomacy . Peaceful resolution through coercive diplomacy can only be achieved in a peaceful resolution .
 The United States and Mexico, 1845-1848 , 76, 82, 105, 109, 117, 161, 184. The U.S. and Mexico were at odds with each other .
 Stueck’s is not an argument that force and diplomacy were the sole factors in this war, he says . He says, "force and diplomacy weren't the only factors in the war"
 Ideological differences, distrust, disputes over the fate of prisoners of war, and culture, were all important issues . Ideological disputes, distrust and disputes over fate of POWs were important issues in the war .
 Eisenhower recognized that force or force and diplomacy would not always serve his objectives . Eisenhower's decision to use diplomacy to achieve his objectives was made by diplomacy and diplomacy .
 Diplomats helped persuade the Soviet Union to negotiate an end to the Berlin Crisis of 1961–1962 . Despite the evidence of case studies such as these, the mutually supporting relationship between diplomacy and military force is common knowledge only .
 Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev decided to ship mediumand intermediate-range ballistic missiles to Cuba in 1962 . The missiles were launched by the Soviet Union in response to American threats .
 Khrushchev resented the stationing of American ballistic missiles targeted against the USSR on North Atlantic Treaty Organization bases . He wished to place the United States under a similar threat, and he wished to put the U.S. under similar threat .
 Stationing Soviet missiles in Cuba would help compensate for the imbalance between Soviet and American ICBMs, gain leverage for Soviet policy goals in Europe, and deter the U.S. from invading Cuba . The United States would not invade Cuba, but the Soviet missiles would provide leverage in Europe
 The weapons, surface-to-air missiles and medium-range ballistic missile support equipment left the Soviet Union for Cuba in July . Eisenhower’s desire to avoid escalation into ‘allout war,” persuaded him to rely on information warfare and diplomacy during the Soviet invasion of
 The Rise and Fall of Russia’s Strategic Nuclear Forces, 1945-2000 was published in 2002 and 2002 .
 Medium-range “R-12’s ballistic missiles had a 1,292-mile range; intermediate-range "R-14” ballistic missiles were a 2,796-mile . Medium range missiles had an intermediate range of more than 2,800 miles .
 The U-2 overflights were part of a broad continuing effort to monitor and contain Cuba . Soviet efforts at maintaining secrecy were unlikely to remain successful . U.S. efforts to maintain secrecy were likely to remain unsuccessful .
 U.S. policymakers commenced marshaling diplomatic capital in Latin American during the preceding months while they prepared and positioned military forces for use against the island .
 State Department diplomats consulted with the foreign ministers of numerous Latin American countries on how to prevent Cuba’s Communist revolution from spreading to other nations in the region . The U.S. State Department sought to prevent the spread of Cuba's Communist revolution .
 The Kennedy administration’s goal of multilateral diplomatic coercion through the OAS shared some common ground with the policies of states throughout Latin America . Kennedy administration's goal was to coerce states through OAS .
 At the beginning of 1962, Argentina communicated that a “united front of the American nations” was “vital,” as far as imposing economic sanctions on Cuba was concerned . Argentina said that a united front of American nations was ‘vital”
 The ministers as well as the Organization of American States were largely in agreement with Rusk regarding the Soviet buildup . The ministers of the OAS were in agreement .
 Both stated that the Soviet presence in Cuba constituted a threat to hemispheric unity and democracy . Both claimed that the presence of Soviet troops in Cuba was a violation of democracy .
 The ministers called for increased surveillance of Cuba, with a particular lookout for offensive weapons . This is understated way of saying nuclear missiles .
 Kennedy’s goal was American security, and when push came to shove, he valued anticommunism over the expansion of liberalism and democracy . Kennedy's goal was U.S. security, not liberty, but security, he said .
 Leaders within the Defense Department sought to blend force with diplomacy before the crisis broke . The U.S. military began to plan for possible offensive operations and to take defensive measures .
 The Air Force began to modestly build up Florida’s air defenses in January 1962 . Four F-102A interceptors were stationed at Homestead Air Force Base in south Florida prior to the crisis .
 National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy ordered an analysis of U.S. military options for destroying offensive nuclear installations in Cuba . The analysis was ordered by Bundy in August .
 The staff for Command-in-Chief Atlantic produced four operational plans for the president’s use . The staff also produced four plans for President Obama's use .
 Oplan 312, consisting of air strikes by tactical fighters using conventional weapons, took center stage during the crisis . The air strikes were part of the plan to use conventional weapons in Syria .
 Atlantic Command conducted a series of multiservice exercises in 1962 as practice for a possible invasion of Cuba . Phibriglex62 was scheduled for that October .
 U.S. must synchronize efforts with the OAS and UN if it attacks Cuba, says Joint Staff . Joint Staff member: "It's important to synchronize" efforts if the United States chooses to attack Cuba if it does .
 Wielders of diplomacy and military power need to know about the capabilities, motivations, and intentions of the adversary in order to apply instruments of power in the most productive manner .
 U-2 reconnaissance flights on Cuba could lead to U.S. targeting the island . U.N. officials say signals intelligence from Cuba in July prompted the U.2 to start focusing on Cuba .
 Naval surveillance monitored the great increase in Soviet shipping into Cuba from July through October . Naval surveillance monitors increased the amount of Soviet shipping .
 The Director for Central Intelligence , John A McCone, recognized that 28.5% of Americans were likely to be in the U.S. military .
 Richard F McMullen, The Fighter Interceptor Force, 1962-1964, U.S. Air Force Official History, 2–7. Richard F. McMullan, Jr. was a member of the F.I. Force .
 The Atlantic Command Headquarters of the Commander in Chief Norfolk, Virginia, is located in the city .
 The defense community began thinking about options, dangers, and complications that would be the results of such an action by the Soviets before the crisis was upon them . As a consequence, the defense community .
 Intelligence gathering and analysis helped provide analytical tools and plans for the execution of mutually supporting force and diplomacy . In this way, intelligence gathered and analysis provided analytical tools for planning and analysis .
 The U.S. achieved an intelligence success in discovering the missiles in time to take action short of war to persuade the Soviets to remove them . Because of these actions, the United States achieved .
 The discovery of the missiles in October was not a complete surprise . The missiles were discovered in October .
 Magazines and newspapers had been printing stories about Soviet activity in Cuba for weeks . Magazines, newspapers were printing stories of Soviet activity .
 A Persistent Approach to the Intelligence-Policy Relationship,” International Journal of Intelligence and Counterintelligence 2, no. : 555 .
 U.S. would not have detected the missiles in time without McCone’s intuition and leadership . McCone: It is conceivable that the United States wouldn't have detected missiles without his intuition . He says McCone's intelligence and leadership was crucial to detecting the missiles .
 It should be noted that there were “hundreds” of reports that ballistic missiles were being placed in Cuba . All of the reports were proven at the time to be false .
 Administration knew that there were large numbers of Soviet technicians and workers in Cuba two months before the crisis . Administration knew there was large number of Soviet workers and technicians in Cuba .
 Kennedy was involved in the decision to send a U-2 to photograph suspected ballistic missile sites . Kennedy himself was involved with the October 9 decision .
 U-2 overflights on October 14 and 15 found signs of medium-range missile sites at Los Palacios, Cuba, and IRBM sites at Guanajay, Cuba .
 On October 16, Kennedy convened the decision-making body called the Executive Committee of the National Security Council—Ex Comm—to analyze the problems the missiles presented and options for removing them . Ex Comm: Ex Comm analyzes the problems and options to remove them .
 State and Defense Departments have been working together to solve the crisis . Diplomatic and military force will be key to solving the crisis, officials say .
 The president utilized this subset of the NSC because that body “made him uncomfortable.” The president’s use of the body was “uncomfortable” with the body, he said .
 President Kennedy stocked Ex Comm with individuals sure to debate each other . Kennedy excused himself from some of the meetings so as to encourage free discussion . Ex-Commons meetings were filled with individuals who were sure to be open to discussion .
 Members of the Ex Comm included President John F Kennedy, Vice President Lyndon Johnson, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Defense Robert McNamara and Secretary of the Treasury Douglas Dillon . President Kennedy was the first president to hold the post .
 Diplomatic efforts paved the way for military action should that prove necessary by justifying such actions to the world . Diplomacy efforts held the possibility of success in their own right, they also paved the . way to military action .
 At the same time, preparations for an invasion, a blockade, and air strikes were more than prudent . They encouraged the Soviets to choose to resolve the crisis via negotiations, since military action was a near-term threat .
 Ex Comm also concluded that if they chose to destroy the missiles, it would be necessary to strike before they became operational, so as a consequence the administration had to resolve the crisis quickly . Ex Comm . concluded that . if they . chose to . destroy the . missiles, they would be
 Oleg Penkovsky helped the administration realize that it had days, not hours, to make decisions in relation to the missiles becoming ready to fire . In this instance human intelligence, specifically that of OlegPenkovsky, helped . The administration realized that the missiles were not ready to
 Penkovsky had provided his British and American handlers a technical manual on the R-12 missile . He had provided them with technical manuals on the missile .
 Photo interpreters conclusively identified the first missiles discovered as R-12s of 1,292 statute mile range . The missiles were found in a range of more than 1,000 miles .
 Installing warheads required only a couple of hours, and launch preparations as little as two to three more . Launch preparations could be a matter of a few hours .
 All this encouraged the Executive Committee to turn first to the air strike option . The Executive Committee turned first to air strike .
 Time until completion of missile sites was a critical factor in determining U.S. strategy, says U.N. expert . Time until completed missile sites is critical to U.K. strategy .
 Once they were operational, options became more limited . "Better to destroy them before they're ready to fire," says the author .
 Because of technological limitations, there was no defense against ballistic missiles short of destroying them before they were launched . The U.S. has not been able to defend ballistic missiles before they launch .
 Ex-Commons members believed that Moscow could use the missiles as a distraction . Even if the Soviets did not intend to fire them against U.S. targets, several Ex Comms members believed it could be a distraction while the missiles were fired .
 Others believed Khrushchev also wanted to establish leverage against U.S. missiles in Turkey in addition to bringing the Berlin issue to a head . The Soviets were amenable to a political solution .
 In ideal world, Kennedy would have known why Soviets sent missiles to Cuba . Intelligence briefs had not provided a definitive explanation . Kennedy had not known why the Soviets had sent missiles .
 President could not apply force and diplomacy against a firm target . He could only use them only against what he believed the Soviet motivation was . That meant that the president could not use force or diplomacy against the target .
 Ex Comm recognized several technical and diplomatic shortcomings of military action by itself . Ex Comm. recognized several . shortcomings of the military action itself .
 Bad weather might prevent complete photographic coverage of Cuba for weeks . For one, they did not know if they had found every site, and certainty was out of reach .
 The need to not signal that an attack was imminent actually worked against its success . It worked against the need to signal an imminent threat to the West .
 The JCS recommended that the Air Force should preserve surprise by . foregoing low-level reconnaissance flights . The Air Force would broadcast the threat of tactical air strikes, the JCS said .
 The absence of highresolution photographs such flights would provide decreased the pilots’ chances of seeing and striking all the targets during their attacks .
 A loss of surprise is a consequence of prestrike reconnaissance, a result of a well-prepared defense . A lost surprise was an effective passive defense in that day .
 By choosing to destroy the missiles, tactical fighters would have to “ensure by conventional means the most rapid and complete removal of” ballistic missiles, SAMs, jet fighters and bombers, and nuclear storage sites, but their complete destruction was unlikely .
 The fundamental problem with the air strike option was that the U.S. Air Force would have to destroy every single missile in Cuba in order to ensure the safety of the United States . The U.K. would need to destroy all the missiles in Cuba to ensure its safety .
 The Air Force and CIA knew the location of only thirty-six of the suspected forty launchers . The CIA and Air Force knew only the locations of only 36 launchers .
 If just one operational MRBM escaped detection, it could still destroy a U.S. city or military base .
 With two missiles per launcher, that left eight unaccounted for in their minds . With two missile launchers, that leaves eight unaccount for . Eight people are believed to be missing .
 The commander of Tactical Air Command, General Walter C Sweeney, Jr., Jr. would have 52 fighters . General Sweeney's fighters would have been 52 .
 The Americans concluded that R-12 launchers were operational on October 15 . The U.S. concluded that the launchers had been operational .
 Source: Up to eight missiles could be launched on October 20 . This source states that twenty-four launchers were ready, but a source says up to eight missile launches could take place .
 The United States had put 16 “Jupiter’s MRBMs in Turkey as part of the nuclear deterrent . The U.S. had put the 16 ‘Jupiter' missiles in the country's arsenal .
 Robert McNamara, “Notes on October 21 Meeting with the President, 11:30m.-12:30 p.m.” NSAD 738. McNamara . McNamara’s meeting with the president will take place in Washington, D.C.
 Air Force Historical Research Agency photo, AFHRA IRIS number 1026391. carry out the air strikes . Even under the best conditions he did not believe his planes could destroy all of the missiles during the first wave of attacks .
 The generals were not writing-in excuses just in case the strikes met with less than complete success, they said . The generals said they would not write in excuses just before the strikes were launched .
 For instance, the Air Force believed its reconnaissance aircraft photographed IRBMs on October 16; they later found three IRBM sites with four launch pads each on October 23 . The Air Force also found IRBM launch pads on October 24 .
 Pilots aimed unguided bombs, rockets, napalm, and gunfire through simple gunsights . The U.S. Air Force was involved in the Vietnam War, Vietnam and the Philippines .
 Digitally computed aim points and laser-guided precision weapons were years in the future . Laser-guided weapons are years away from precision weapons, experts say .
 The challenge they could not overcome was finding each of every missile . The challenge was to find each of the missile's missiles .
 If the missiles were the vanguard of a Soviet first strike, Kennedy would have regretted having tried anything else but preventive action . Nevertheless, striking without warning remained attractive .
 The JCS believed that the missiles ought to be attacked at once and as new ones appeared, instead of waiting until U-2s had discovered all of them . JCS: "The missiles should be attacked as soon as they appear"
 To wait until they were all ready might be too late, for the Soviets might launch the missiles as soon as they were ready, before an air strike could arrive .
 Although a war initiated from Cuba was probably not in the cards, the generals concerned themselves with what the Soviets could do, not necessarily with what they were likely to do . The generals were concerned about what they could do not necessarily know what they would do .
 The greatest merit of a preemptive air strike was that tactical aircraft would destroy most, if not all, of the missiles in the first wave of attacks . The best merit of such a strike was to destroy most of the missile missiles in first wave, he says .
 A broader conventional attack would ensure the quickest and most complete elimination of offensive weaponry in Cuba, the authors say . The Cuban government says a conventional strike would eliminate the possibility of a nuclear strike from Cuba .
 The JCS, when faced with uncertainty, preferred to escalate, while Kennedy and many within the State Department were inclined to pull back and attempt diplomatic suasion . The State Department was reluctant to try to get involved in negotiations .
 The JCS perceived the missiles solely as weapons, while the State Department interpreted them as instruments which generated political effects . As will become more evident, the JCS believed the missiles were weapons .
 The way in which each bureaucracy perceived the missiles greatly influenced their response . The response to the missiles was a key part of the U.S. response .
 An attack against even a single missile would complicate and escalate the problem politically . Soviet technicians servicing the weapons would certainly become casualties . For example, an attack on even one missile could complicate the situation politically .
 Killing Soviet citizens was just one of many problems with using military force without any diplomatic preparation ahead of time . The U.S. killed Soviet citizens in the Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 A first-generation air-to-surface guided missile, the AGM-12B “Bullpup,” was also available, but it was not a true precision weapon . The AGM12B was also known as a first-genius air to-surface
 JCS Decisions Concerning the Cuban Crisis, SM-1451-62, 9, 15, 46, 46. Chronology of JCS Decision Concerning Cuban Crisis . JCS decision was made on behalf of the Cuban government in 1962 .
 He reminded the Ex Comm that America had forty-two allies and that it faced flash points around the world . The Ex Comm. reminded the President that America has forty-second allies .
 U.S. would probably bear the brunt of any retaliation if the USSR decided to respond militarily to an American conventional air strike against Cuba . allied countries, not the United States, would probably be the worst .
 The United States simply had to consult with its closest allies on any military actions it might take . The U.S. has to consult closely with its allies on its military actions .
 Merely informing them of United States decisions after the fact is inadequate, says Obama administration . Obama administration has been criticized for failing to inform them of U.S. decisions .
 The Soviets might retaliate against one or more of the NATO allies . The U.S. had taken action without their consultation, but which put them at risk . NATO allies might be at risk from the Soviets .
 Charles E Bohlen, the ambassador to the Soviet Union from 1953 to 1957, also warned against striking first without trying diplomacy . Bohlen was ambassador to Russia from 1953-1957 .
 If the U.S. had to attack at a later date, the administration would have already explained why . The administration could remind other countries that it had tried to negotiate the missiles out of Cuba .
 Bohlen concluded that diplomacy was not dangerous to U.S. objectives . Bohlen: Diplomacy was not a problem for the United States in the world .
 Undersecretary of State George Ball warned that an air strike could leave NATO allies in “disarray” and force Britain and France to adopt a Berlin policy different from America’s . Ball: NATO allies could be left in ‘disarray,’ and force
 The use of military force, he warned, would leave a trail of political collateral damage if unleashed unwisely . He warned of the risks of the use of force in Syria .
 The president agreed that consultation with allies prior to military action was vital . President Obama agreed that consultations with allies before military action is vital .
 The administration had to explain the reasons why a preemptive attack was justified . Even then, the nation’s friends might consider that an overreaction .
 Bohlen proposed sending letters to Khrushchev and Castro, consulting with OAS and other allies prior to military action . Bohlen's proposal was rejected on the second day of the crisis .
 An air strike without any warning or attempt at diplomacy had few diplomatic merits . The strike only demonstrated intolerance of Soviet malfeasance in sneaking missiles into Cuba . The U.S. did not have clear military advantages .
 Khrushchev may actually wish to force a confrontation over Berlin, one that could lead to rifts within the alliance . The Soviet Union may actually want a confrontation with the West .
 Stevenson urged Kennedy to make it clear to the Soviets in no uncertain terms that if they did not remove the missiles, the United States would . Stevenson: "The United States will not tolerate the threat of nuclear weapons"
 Alexis Johnson warned that enacting a blockade without coordinating with the OAS would be the “worst” use of force . Johnson: The effort to justify the action and gain support through diplomacy would have been missing .
 George Ball perceived disturbing parallels between an air strike and the Pearl Harbor attack . Ball perceived parallels between the attack and the attack on Japan in 1941 . Ball said the attack was the equivalent of a bombing attack on Pearl Harbor .
 Kennedy’s men began to modify their approach to resolving the crisis into one that blended military action and political efforts . Confronted with the shortcomings of a military strategy executed in isolation from diplomatic effects, Kennedy's men modified their approach .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk suggested a judicious use of force and diplomacy to isolate and threaten the Soviets . Rusk: Use of force, diplomacy was necessary to isolate the Soviet Union .
 That could convince them that bending to U.S. demands was in their best interest . That could persuade them to bend to the United States demands .
 McNamara lacked confidence in the air strike option, believing it would only destroy two out of every three missiles . McNamara wanted to use the option of air strike to destroy missiles . He believed it would destroy only two of every 3 missiles .
 General Taylor likewise was moving toward a more nuanced use of coercion . General Taylor also moved toward a softer approach to coercion .
 National Security Council minutes for October 20 reveal that he conceded the political importance of giving a warning prior to launching an air strike . Minutes show he conceded that the political significance of giving the warning was political .
 Dean Rusk continued to push for consultation with allies before taking action . Rusk continues to push to consult with allies and consult with them .
 Military and political imperatives pulled President Kennedy in opposite directions . President Kennedy was president of the White House in 1961 . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 What worked best for the political solution wrecked the optimum military solution, a surprise air strike . The most effective military solution created political wreckage he may not be able to repair .
 Kennedy needed to balance and utilize the strengths of both approaches . Kennedy needs to balance his strengths and balance his approach to winning the presidency .
 Adlai Stevenson, “Memo to Self for Conference for Conference,” October 17, 1962, NSAD 650 . Stevenson: “I am a man who is not afraid to be afraid of the future.” Stevenson: "I am afraid to live in
 An effective use of force and diplomacy required that Kennedy order preparations for a major conventional attack against Cuba, convince the Soviets that nuclear strikes would take place if they launched their Cuban-based missiles, negotiate sincerely with the Soviets, convince world leaders of his demands .
 President Kennedy chose a moderate path, one which saw force and diplomacy not just acting in parallel, but constantly intersecting while working in the same direction . Kennedy chose to be a moderate president, one of the world's most powerful leaders .
 Several of his advisors believed the missiles presented such a danger that proactive military strikes were the proper course of action . An added strain on Kennedy’s efforts to use force and diplomacy in concert .
 These included military officers such as generals Thomas Power and Curtis LeMay . Adlai Stevenson's brother Bobby, Douglas Dillon, DCI John McCone, and even Adr. McCone .
 The Soviet Union might respond in an unpredictable way that could escalate to nuclear war . The United States could use nuclear weapons against the Soviet Union in nuclear war.
 The survival of the United States was at stake, so the risk of an air strike was worth it . To Secretary of the Treasury Douglas Dillon, for instance, a strike would be worth it, Dillon says .
 The U.S. ought to accept the negative political fallout from a surprise attack rather than allow the missiles to stay in Cuba . The United States should accept the political fallout of the attack, the author says .
 The generals did not assess the political effects preemptive air strikes could produce . They did not consider the political consequences of preemptive strikes .
 The JCS had made no predictions as to the Soviet response to a conventional air strike, nor did they recommend the implementation of a specific American plan for general war .
 They viewed the crisis through a lens of military targets and operational challenges, meaning that they perceived security in physical terms . The concept of “military” factors did not include diplomatic and political aftershocks military posturing and attacks could generate .
 C Douglas Dillon, “Scenario for Airstrike against Offensive Missile Bases and Bombers in Cuba,” October 25, 1962, . The U.S. bombed Cuba in 1962 .
 Dillon had gained considerable experience with nuclear diplomacy as ambassador to France and undersecretary of state during Eisenhower administration . Dillon was secretary of the treasury .
 Air Defense Command in the Cuban Crisis in Cuba is a study of the U.S. Air Force in Cuba . Air Force Command in Cuba was a major component of the Cuban Missile Crisis .
 Kennedy decided that he could best achieve his goals through a naval blockade in combination with diplomacy and a threatening military mobilization . Kennedy decided to use naval blockade as a way to achieve his objectives .
 Joint Staff had presented a blockade as a possible contingency even before the crisis broke . Ex Comm discussed the possibility of a naval blockade from the first day of the crisis .
 Kennedy favored a coercive strategy that applied diplomatic pressure and gave negotiation a chance to succeed . He favored a naval blockade as the keystone of his strategy . The naval blockade allowed Kennedy to be assertive and diplomatic at the same time .
 His decision assumed that successful measures that did not resort to open conflict were better than air strikes that had not been preceded by a diplomatic offensive . The decision was based on the fact that successful air strikes were preceded by diplomacy .
 If the Soviets did not intend to commence a nuclear war as soon as the missiles were operational, the strategy of diplomacy backed by military force was not too risky . The strategy was not risky .
 The strategy signaled to allies and nonaligned states that the U.S. protected its interests with measured responses . This strategy also signaled that the United States .
 The strategy gave NATO allies, especially the Germans, time to adjust to the crisis . The strategy gives NATO allies a chance to adjust, especially Germans .
 The Strategic Air Command history, for example, restricts itself to a tactical-level narrative . The history of the Air Force has a long-running but narrow history . The Air Force Command history has a wide-ranging history .
 Rusk suggested using the Rio Treaty as the legal basis for the quarantine . The administration sought OAS support for this action . The Rio Treaty was used as a legal basis to quarantine .
 Kennedy decided that the U.S. would proceed with a quarantine if necessary without the backing of the OAS . Kennedy nevertheless decided that that would result in doubtful legality . Kennedy said that the United States would proceed .
 Multilateralism also made possible the loss of final authority over U.S. actions, the author says . Multilateralists also made it possible to lose final authority in the world, he says .
 Self-defense justified a unilateral strike against the missile sites, the U.S. could not afford any sort of veto by its Latin American neighbors, the president says . Self-defence justified the unilateral strike, he says, and the United States cannot afford veto .
 Diplomatic efforts carry more legitimacy than unilateral action, but they also risk abrogating a state’s sovereign right to act on its own . Diplomatic diplomacy carries more legitimacy, but it also risks abrogation of a state's right to take action alone .
 The president was ready to implement a quarantine in the absence of full OAS support . The quarantine was set to be implemented by the president .
 A strategy centered around a naval blockade came at a cost . But of course, it was not without a cost. The blockade was designed to stop the flow of food and medicine from entering China .
 General Maxwell Taylor warned the president on October 19 that imposing a blockade equaled a decision to not execute an air strike because such an attack after 89 days would have been possible .
 Organization of American States, Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, September 2, 1947 . Treaty was signed by the U.S. in 1947 . The treaty was ratified by the United States of Latin America .
 General Taylor’s opinion: The best scenario for destroying the missiles was an attack without warning . Diplomatic might encourage the Soviets to camouflage the missiles, greatly reducing the chances of an effective attack .
 A blockade warned the Soviets that further military action could follow, and cost the Air Force the chance to hit the missiles with complete surprise before they were all operational . Similarly, a blockade . cost the U.S. the chance of hitting the missiles .
 Taylor believed that risks skyrocketed once the missiles became operational . The launch crews might fire their ballistic missiles if American aircraft were launched against them, he said .
 Substituting a blockade for an air strike strategy could still subject European allies to Soviet pressure . Substituted a blockade could still force European allies under pressure from the Soviet Union .
 Soviet troops might blockade Berlin in retaliation, or embarrass the Turks by calling for them to dismantle their Jupiter missiles . The Turks might also embarrass the Soviets by asking them to remove Jupiter missiles from Berlin .
 It could make the U.S. appear less firm than it claimed to be if the Soviets balked . It could also make the United States appear less .
 Critics could ask why the U.S. had to destroy the missiles when it had put up with them for a couple of months . If the administration waited until November or December to bomb the missiles, critics could ask if the United States had to .
 The JCS discussed a blockade as well, although as a component of wider military action . A blockade was also discussed, but not as a part of wider action .
 Imposing a blockade offered the advantages of flexibility and control, says President Obama . It contained diplomatic and military benefits without relying solely on either, he says .
 It lessened the chances of a sudden escalation to a nuclear confrontation with the Soviet Union with the U.S. It was lessened than a sudden nuclear confrontation .
 It provided the United States time to present its case in the UN and rally international support and sanctions . The U.S. is seeking international support for sanctions against Russia .
 A blockade offered both superpowers a chance to stop and consider their next action, instead of leaping from one fire into another, no small matter when nuclear war threatened . The blockade offered the chance to consider the next action .
 Dean Rusk and the president decided to not press the Turks to dismantle the Turks until a suitable replacement was on station . A Polaris submarine is on station at the time of the decision .
 An early decommissioning of the missiles would have “embarrassed” the Turkish executive, Turkish executive says . The missiles will be decommissioned by the Turkish government, the official says .
 It would force him to ask Parliament to return them to the Americans just after allocating funds for their deployment . It would be the first time he has asked for them to be returned .
 His State Department advisors believed that the Soviets wanted to avoid a direct confrontation with the administration over Cuba . The U.S. State Dept. believed that they were trying to avoid direct confrontation .
 State Department analyst Roger Hilsman deduced that Soviet leaders believed the U.S. actually knew of the ballistic missiles . State Dept. analyst: Soviet leaders wanted to remain noncommittal to any particular action .
 The administration could expect the less aggressive blockade to have a real chance of influencing Soviet behavior . The blockade is expected to be less aggressive than the previous blockade .
 A naval blockade was more likely to gain OAS endorsement than a preemptive air strike . A preemptive strike would be more likely than a pre-emptive strike, the author says .
 A blockade carried the added value of being an equivalent “passive” counter to the missiles, since no one had been killed . A blockade was equivalent to being a "passive" counter to missiles, as no one died .
 It was less apt to provoke retaliation against allies, and it allowed diplomatic solutions time to work . The U.S. was less likely to provoke retaliatory attacks against allies .
 A blockade was the wisest strategy, but, he added, the U.S. 104. A blockade is not the best strategy, he said, but the United States 104.
 George Ball’s opinion in May and Zelikow, The Kennedy Tapes, 143, was published in May . Ball: Kennedy should have been assassinated in 1968 .
 McNamara believed that a blockade would not be overly provocative, because the CIA had concluded that the Soviets would not attempt to break through it .
 The secretary agreed that a surprise air strike was “contrary to our tradition,” and that a blockade lessened the chances of escalation with the Soviets and a rift with U.S. allies .
 The next day, the president conferred with British ambassador David Ormby-Gore, put forth the two options of an airstrike followed by a blockade, or a blockade alone . The president asked him which he preferred .
 The ambassador replied that he thought a blockade was the better of the two . The United States had to make it clear that if the Soviets failed to remove the missiles, the U.S. armed forces would destroy them .
 Only under such a threat was there any reason for the Soviets to give in . Only under . such a . threat, the Soviets gave in . only under such . reason for giving in .
 Kennedy’s decision to utilize a blockade appears to have been an out of hand dismissal of the air strike plans, but that was not the case . Kennedy's decision to use a blockade was not an out-of-hand dismissal .
 The threat of a conventional air strike—under the umbrella of a massive nuclear alert—lent credibility to the blockade . A nuclear strike would have been a major deterrent to the North Korean regime .
 The administration always retained the conventional air strike as a trump card . It was used in case diplomacy was unable to persuade the Soviets to remove their missiles from Florida .
 Just as diplomacy and military force had done, conventional and nuclear forces mutually supported each other . "Just as diplomacy, military force has done, diplomacy has done," says President Barack Obama .
 Kennedy heightened the alert status of American nuclear forces in order to keep their Soviet counterparts at bay in case U.S. conventional forces struck Cuba . The alert status was heightened in response to the threat posed by the Soviet Union .
 With U.S. nuclear forces ready to attack, the Soviets, it was thought, would be more inclined to absorb a conventional attack on Soviet assets far from their own shores .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff ordered Defcon 3.118 SAC bomber and ICBM crews prepared themselves for an immediate counterstrike against the Soviet Union if it launched an attack on the U.S.
 One out of every eight B-52s was airborne in order to be invulnerable to an ICBM attack . Soon thereafter, one out of eight was airborne . Soon after, one of every 8 B-QCs was airborne to be able to withstand ICBM .
 Remaining B-52s flew to dispersal bases and periodically relieved the airborne alert force . Remaining U.S. aircraft flew to disperse bases and relieved the alert force.
 Macmillan supported Kennedy’s choice, although some in the British cabinet doubted that international law would support the quarantine . Some in the cabinet doubted international law .
 Tanker aircraft positioned themselves to increase the flying distance of both kinds of bombers . Tanker planes positioned themselves in order to increase their distance of flying distance .
 The Air Force’s Atlas and Titan I ICBMs took on fuel and readied for launch . Air Force's Atlas and Atlas I ICBM were readied to launch .
 Ordnance men armed some with antiaircraft missiles tipped with nuclear warheads . Some of the missiles were tipped with nukes, including those tipped with warheads .
 In this way, United States armed forces, particularly manned bombers, put pressure on the Soviet Union . The U.S. armed forces were putting pressure on Soviet Union through their existence .
 Khrushchev ordered Soviet ships carrying weapons to not cross the quarantine line . Soviet military forces went to a higher alert status, including fueling ICBMs for launch . The incident occurred during the Cold War .
 The Soviets also ordered the ships carrying the R-14 IRBMs to turn around . The Soviet Union also ordered ships with the IRBM to turn back .
 The Executive Committee dealt with the crisis without knowing this vital information when it reconvened on the morning of the 24th.2 American naval forces also generated some subtle side effects .
 The preponderance of naval forces around Cuba meant that there were enough ships and aircraft to enforce the quarantine . The quarantine meant that Soviet ships carrying any additional missiles, warheads, and support equipment were not going to make it to Cuba .
 The dominance of the U.S. Navy in this instance generated certainty within this aspect of the confrontation . Kennedy and Khrushchev had a couple of fewer variables to worry about .
 Navy task force was strong but not over the top . Two attack aircraft carriers, an antisubmarine aircraft carrier, three cruisers, and thirty-two destroyers were deployed . The task force is composed of two aircraft carriers .
 USAF Historical Division Liaison Office, Headquarters USAF, “The Air Force Response to the Cuban Crisis,” 6.6.1. USAF Historical Liaison office, Headquarters .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff and National Policy: Volume VIII, 1961-1964 . Volume VIII of 1961-64, 177 .
 Air Force RB-47 and RB-50 aircraft joined naval patrol aircraft in searching 4. million square miles of the Atlantic Ocean . The search was launched in the early hours of October 1 .
 Khrushchev ordered Soviet submarines to sink American warships that tried to board Soviet merchant vessels on the high seas . The U.S. was informed of this on the 24th through the businessman William Knox .
 The DoD devised procedures for Navy warships to coerce submerged Soviet submarines to surface . DoD also took a step that could have worked against the peaceful resolution in its rules for the quarantine .
 The U.S. published these procedures worldwide through a “Notice to Mariners,” they were still aggressive and risky . It depended on the Soviet Navy forwarding the procedures to its submarine captains; that did not happen .
 Navy warship 124.6 had to surface and proceed on easterly course . If the submarine did not surface, the warship would have been classified as nonthreatening .
 Soviet submariners were familiar with the acoustics of American practice depth charges . The Soviet submariner was familiar with American depth charges.
 They were unresponsive to these efforts and did not surface until they needed to recharge their batteries . The animals did not respond to efforts to get them to shore up .
 Beale followed it for a few minutes and flooded it with a searchlight beam . The Beale was flooded with a beam of light .
 Maritime supremacy meant when sixteen Soviet ships had either turned for home or stood pat, the Navy knew about it . It also meant when Soviet ships were standing pat or standing pat, it was known .
 Each side might then become reluctant to deescalate, which would reduce the possibilities for a peaceful resolution . Each side may become reluctant, which could reduce the possibility of a peaceful solution .
 On October 25, the JCS raised the alert status to Defcon 2 after receiving authorization from the White House . The JCS has been in lockdown since October 25 .
 When the Soviets intercepted the transmission of the DEFCON change, they raised their own military alert, particularly for the ICBMs . The Soviets were on high alert when the change occurred .
 This counter-alert may have appeared to be attack preparations, but the Americans did not detect this change . This may have encouraged a U.S. preemptive strike .
 The Soviet interception of the increase in DEFCON was an accurate piece of intelligence . Soviet intelligence passed along an incorrect conclusion on October 25, that the United States was about to invade Cuba .
 This information suggested that America was about to transition to open warfare, but the U.S. was only preparing to be able to do so . This information was incorrect, and the United States was preparing to prepare for war .
 The order for war had not been given, and more importantly, the administration did not want to resort to force . President Obama did not order war, but said he did want to use force .
 Kremlin leaders feel even more threatened, which increased the likelihood that decisions detrimental to a peaceful solution would be made . So this incomplete information encouraged Kremlin leaders to feel more threatened .
 SAC commander, General Thomas S Power, accused of acting as a loose cannon by sending the change in DEFCON .
 President Richard Nixon directed otherwise in 1972 . Transmitting DEFCON changes without encrypting them was the normal procedure until 1972 .
 Kennedy urged Khrushchev to realize that he had lied to the U.S. about never placing missiles in Cuba . Diplomats can continue negotiations for years, but a military mobilization at such a peak of readiness could not be maintained indefinitely .
 After two weeks of waiting, aircraft were going to start malfunctioning . After a month of not flying, the Air Force expected “extensive” system failures .
 Air, as opposed to ground alert, wore down the maintenance-intensive aircraft then in service . Air was air-only, rather than ground-based, aircraft were airlifted .
 Had ADC and SAC kept fighters and bombers flying more patrols, fewer would have been ready to fly during an air strike .
 ADC initially had ten fighters on airborne patrols over south Florida . ADC reduced the number to four on the 23rd .
 Marine Air Group 14 had to sit ready for action at Key West, but could not fly training sorties to maintain their flying skills at a sharp edge .
 If Kennedy chose to wait a month or more, the Soviets would complete their missile deployment in Cuba as more and more U.S. aircraft broke down from intensive flying or a complete lack of maintenance . The administration’s threat of force began to weaken .
 Such limitations in extended military readiness constrained the president’s options, he says . The president's options were limited by the president's limited military readiness .
 Force and diplomacy can only be used in this manner only for a limited amount of time . Force can be used only for limited time only for the sake of diplomacy and force .
 The Contributions of CORONA,” in Eye in the Sky: The Story of the Corona Spy Satellites, ed. ed. “Corona’s contributions are contributions to the Space Force .
 U.S. Marine Corps Emergency Action Center, 7m., October 23, to 7:01m. ET, October 24, 1962, was activated by the Navy .
 The State Department recommended that measures for the use of military force parallel diplomatic preparations . State Department: Measures for use of force parallel diplomacy . The U.S. State Department says measures for military force should parallel diplomatic plans .
 American actions would show that the United States sought a reasonable solution, but would impose its will by force in the face of Soviet intransigence . U.S. actions would be shown to show that U.K. sought reasonable solution but not reasonable .
 The administration had to justify military action to the U.S. by exhausting diplomatic means . The Obama administration has had to use diplomatic means to justify its actions .
 The State Department had been mobilizing Latin American diplomatic power for months . It more easily pursued Stevenson’s recommendation to meld their efforts with those of the U.S.
 Administration strategy assumed that if the OAS condemned Soviet forces in Cuba, Moscow would have one less weapon in the public relations war . Moscow would be unable to call the American reaction unilateral if most Latin American governments supported U.S. policy .
 A multilateral diplomatic effort carried more weight than one waged by the United States alone . The U.S. was involved in a multilateral effort to reach a resolution of the situation .
 State Department officials prepared diplomatic moves to preempt Soviet diplomacy . State Department was preparing diplomatic moves against the Soviet Union in the wake of the Cold War .
 A Soviet complaint to the United Nations about U.S. actions would upset American posturing in case a military strike was imminent . The U.N. would upset America's posturing .
 The United States had to ready its own complaints so as to direct attention toward the Soviets’ surreptitious emplacement of missiles in Cuba . The U.S. had to . ready its . own complaints . The United .S. complained about the Soviets' surre
 Ambassador Stevenson could, for example, time an emergency convening of the Security Council to take place shortly before the air strikes commenced, if Ex Comm followed that path .
 The secretary of state forwarded a letter from the president to Prime Minister Harold Macmillan on the morning of October 22 telling him of the ballistic missiles in Cuba . Allies had to be informed, and leaks prevented .
 Lord Alexander Douglas-Home of the British Foreign Office made a similar recommendation during the Berlin Crisis in 1961 .
 The Kennedy administration had to assure the Turkish government that it rejected a Soviet comparison of the Jupiter missiles in Turkey with those secretly installed in Cuba .
 Secretary Rusk gained near-unanimous support for the quarantine . The ambassadors were usually reluctant to make quick decisions .
 Kennedy signed the “blockade proclamation” on October 23 and it became active the next day . Kennedy implemented the diplomatic side of the American strategy through the Organization of American States . He used the UN to show the limited nature of United States objectives .
 The administration also contemplated exerting pressure through the Brazilian ambassador to Cuba, an avenue that had been open since Eisenhower administration due to Brazilian initiatives .
 Diplomatic pressure from a country less powerful than the U.S. was more likely to succeed because it promised to embarrass Castro less, and also demonstrated that more was involved than the interests of the United States . Ironically, diplomatic pressure from less powerful countries is more likely .
 Stevenson’s public questioning of Ambassador Valerian Zorin on October 25 was the most forceful use of the UN . Stevenson's questioning of the ambassador was the first time he questioned him .
 Stevenson called for the Soviets and Cubans to permit UN inspectors to verify or refute U.S. accusations . The Soviets balked at the request, at which the Soviets refused to verify the accusations .
 The United States obtained military support, however small and symbolic, from several Latin American countries . This use of photo intelligence paid positive dividends as well when the United States released photographs of the sites to European press .
 Costa Rica, Panama, Nicaragua, and Guatemala offer basing support for U.S. forces in the blockade . Costa Rica and Panama offer bases in support for United States forces in blockade .
 Zorin assured his foreign ministry that the Venezuelan and Chilean ambassadors were reading American “crib-notes” during their UN speeches . The Venezuelan and Chile ambassadors are reading American "crib notes”
 The U.S. undermined the arguments of those who accused it of unilateralism . Through these efforts, the United States undermined those who said it was unilateralism.
 Diplomatic pressure to remove the missiles worked only if the Soviets cooperated . But like the blockade, diplomatic pressure was needed to remove missiles from the Soviet Union .
 Leaders in the Soviet Presidium debated their next move after the U.S. imposed the quarantine . Soviet leaders debated the next move when the quarantine was imposed .
 The administration received conflicting signals as to the success of the blockade and the concurrent diplomatic pressure it was using in pursuing the removal of the Soviet missiles . Over the next five days, the administration was receiving conflicting signals .
 Averell Harriman, ambassador to the Soviet Union during the Truman administration, believed Kennedy’s efforts were working . Several Soviet vessels, including ones carrying ballistic missiles, turned back on September 23, he says .
 Khrushchev was, in his opinion, sending signals of concessions that the administration had to interpret and respond to in a way that would deescalate the crisis, he says . The administration responded to the signals, he writes .
 The premier rejected the legitimacy of the OAS, saying that it had no business meddling in Soviet-Cuban affairs . The OAS had no authority, and that whatever business the Soviet Union and Cuba conducted had no effect on anyone else .
 President approved low-level reconnaissance flights over missile sites to keep pressure on the Soviets . For instance, the president approved .
 The flights signaled the American goal of ridding Cuba of the missiles that were already there, and if the Soviets rejected UN requests to inspect the sites, the U.S. would have fresh information on the missiles and could bomb them .
 Tactical strike aircraft in Florida maintained high levels of alert, anywhere from pilots in their cockpits ready to launch to as long as a thirty-minute alert .
 Commander of NATO, General Lauris Norstad, offered to carry out low-key preparations that would improve the readiness of his forces, but would not be so open and provocative that they distracted from diplomatic efforts . Norstad: "Low-key" preparations would improve readiness, but not
 Kennedy also persuaded Senegal and Guinea to “deny the landing rights required for” aircraft that might possibly try to transport nuclear warheads to Cuba . Kennedy continued with the dual track strategy of force and diplomacy, he reversed their roles .
 If negotiating failed, he could therefore justify a conventional air strike . If negotiations failed, the air strike would be justified, says President Obama .
 By the 26th, the Executive Committee began codifying the strategy it had been employing throughout most of the crisis . The Executive Committee has codified the strategy .
 Soviet withdrawal of offensive weapons from Cuba could be a cover for the Soviets .
 Preserving the interests of allies and of the cohesion of the NATO alliance remained key elements of this strategy . Preserving allies' interests and of NATO's cohesion was also a key element of the strategy, NATO said .
 The U.S. owned only the warheads . The missiles belonged to the Turks; the United States owned only warheads .
 A trade deal would undermine if not wreck the NATO alliance by making it appear as if the U.S. was willing to sacrifice an ally’s security in favor of its own .
 The Turks were disinclined to even admit that these missiles were on Turkish soil . The Turks placed great stock in them and reacted harshly to proposals in the American press to give them up in exchange for the removal of Soviet missiles .
 Cleveland was the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs . Thompson was Ambassador at Large at the Department of State . Cleveland was Ambassador to Large at State Department . Thompson served as Ambassador to the U.S. in Washington .
 There was open discussion of just such a trade in the press during the crisis . There was, however, vehement denials by both governments during that time .
 U.S. missiles in Turkey for removal of Soviet missiles in Cuba could look less damaging to NATO allies when one considers the specter of a countermove against West Berlin . Two days after Khrushchev's first warnings, the outcome looked promising .
 Khrushchev offered to dismantle missiles if U.S. would promise not to attack Cuba . Kennedy offered in so many words to dismantle the ballistic missiles if the United States would not attack Cuba. Kennedy was the president of the Soviet Union .
 This condition could argue for a preemptive strike, or for much greater caution . This condition may argue for the U.S. to take action .
 On that same day, Khrushchev sent a second letter, noticeably harsher in tone, and more strident in its demands . On that day, the letter was sent to the White House . The letter was the first to arrive in Washington, D.C.
 The premier demanded that the United States remove its Jupiter missiles in Turkey if it wanted to see a nuclear-free Cuba . The U.S. must remove the Jupiter missiles from Turkey, he said .
 Then a Soviet air defense commander in Cuba ordered the shooting down of a U-2 . The U.2 was shot down by the Soviet air force in Cuba in the 1980s .
 President Kennedy discussed the possibility with the prime minister of Great Britain . President Kennedy also discussed the idea with the British prime minister .
 The Soviets called Turkey the Soviet Union’s Cuba . Meanwhile, the Soviets directly threatened the Turks, calling Turkey the . Soviet Union's Cuba .
 Message from Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy, October 27, 1962 . Message from chairman to president Kennedy: "Khrrushchev, Kennedy, will not be surprised"
 The president and his advisors again considered ordering an air strike to resolve the immediate crisis of more and more missiles becoming ready for launch . President Barack Obama considered ordering a strike but did not respond .
 A majority of the Security Council and the entire OAS had condemned the Soviet nuclear presence in Cuba . An attack now appeared more justified than before, an attack now appears more justified .
 A single series of strikes might be less escalatory over the long run than protracted confrontations . Besides, the assumption was correct that the Soviets would not go to war in retaliation. Besides, a single strike may be less escalateatory over long run .
 Military action would also demonstrate that the president meant what he said, that he was willing to fight for vital American interests . Military action is needed to show that the U.S. is willing to defend its interests .
 U.S. credibility and resolve lost power each day the missiles remained, which lent new urgency toward the air strike option . United States credibility and . resolve lost each day each day that day missiles remained . The United States has been criticized for the lack of credibility in Syria .
 Latin American support might wane and time could erode the acceptability of an air strike . Time could also erode acceptance of the air strike in Latin America .
 Military planners and political leaders often lack a complete picture of the perils they face, and this was true in regard to Cuba . Military planners often lack the complete view of what they face in Cuba .
 The Americans did not realize this, even though on October 15, U-2s photographed a cruise missile site at Santa Cruz del Norte . The U.S. didn't know this, but U.2s did .
 During the course of the crisis, they photographed three cruise missile sites and one other “possible” cruise missile site . The photos were taken during the crisis .
 CINCLANT speculated that since these weapons could carry nuclear warheads, U.S. tactical nuclear weapons ought to be 194.7 .
 McNamara, Bundy, Ball feared the likelihood of extreme knee-jerk behavior . McNamara and Bundy feared the possibility of extreme reaction to the decision .
 A U-2 had strayed over Siberia, and not a few Ex Comm members feared that a mistake like this would trigger a nuclear war . Not a few members of the Ex Comm. feared that such a mistake would trigger nuclear war.
 A list of weapons the State Department wanted removed did not mention tactical nuclear weapons . The State Department did not want to remove the weapons .
 The note did include a catch-all coverall-the-bases phrase “or any other type of nuclear weapon” but did not mention the presence of short-range nuclear missiles .
 Major Consequences of Certain U.S. Courses of Action on Cuba, October 20, 1962 . Cuba was a major source of Cuban influence in Cuba .
 John McCone showed a photograph to JFK on October 26 that he said might have uncovered battlefield nuclear weapons . McCone said the photo might have been a photo of a nuclear weapon . JFK says the photo could have been used to find out more about the weapons .
 The Soviets chose not to reveal the presence of the weapons after October 22 . Especially puzzling is why the Soviets chose to not reveal the weapons to reporters .
 The discovery of the ballistic missiles was an intelligence success, but missing these short-range nuclear weapons was just the opposite .
 The inability to detect the presence of tactical nuclear weapons on Cuba meant that threatening an invasion was actually a much more dangerous proposition . The FKRs and FROGs could have inflicted the obliteration of the American invasion force the U.S. invasion force . Their use would have been
 The Soviets considered giving the on-site commander, General Issa Pliyev, local authority to launch them against an invasion force in case communications with Moscow were cut, but never did .
 Khrushchev prohibited his generals in Cuba from using these weapons to defend the island . Pliyev double-checked the status of his authority to use nuclear weapons during the crisis .
 Pliyev acknowledged that he did not have the authority to fire nuclear weapons . But he nevertheless retained the capability, despite not having the authority .
 In a crisis such as this one, the executive leadership never had full control over the execution of their strategy, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "In this crisis such a crisis, the executives never have full control of the strategy"
 JFK favored diplomacy, because a nuclear attack could have sparked Soviet use of nuclear weapons . It was thus fortunate that JFK favors diplomacy, as a result of a diplomatic move .
 At this point in the crisis, American force and diplomacy efforts had begun to bear more of a resemblance to trying to control a gasoline fire than they did to statecraft .
 The momentum of the crisis was now pressing them back toward the air strike option . Kennedy and most of the Ex Comm badly wished to find a way out, for the sake of the situation .
 USSR Minister of Defense R Malinovsky, “To the Commander of the Group of Soviet Forces in Cuba,” September 8, 1962, . USSR minister of defense Malinovski wrote to the Cuban commander .
 Archive of the President of the Russian Federation, Special Declassification, April 2002 . Archive . of the . President of Russia, President Vladimir Putin .
 Secretary Dillon anticipated diplomatic challenges and postulated responses, with his eye on utilizing diplomacy to justify an air strike . The secretary of state said the air strike would be used to justify the use of diplomacy .
 The United States could try to cast itself in a conciliatory light by proposing in a Security Council resolution that the Soviets remove the missiles, and by presenting additional evidence of the Soviet buildup .
 If the White House decided to attack, it could first issue repeated warnings that the Soviets needed to dismantle the missiles . The White House could also warn the Soviets that they must dismantle their missiles .
 If Kennedy ordered the attack, he would notify the chairman of the OAS shortly beforehand, the Latin American heads of state, and the NATO allies at its initiation . Kennedy would notify OAS chairman of OAS before the attack .
 His brother warned that it was not worth risking nuclear war when he could avert that risk by removing missiles in Turkey in exchange for the removal of those in Cuba .
 This negotiated proposal --lessening the possibility of war -- could gain the appreciation of NATO allies, or it could make them feel that their interests were being sold down the river in favor of America's.
 RFK pressed that the military be ready to launch air strikes by Monday the 29th . RFK said the military should be ready for air strikes on Monday the day of the attack . In contrast, RFK called for the military to be ready by Monday, 29th Monday .
 The president was prepared to order attacks on all of the SAM sites if they shot at another reconnaissance flight . Likewise, the president was also prepared to attack all SAM sites in the U.S.
 The administration believed it was reaching a point where it had to take bolder steps . The administration believes it was at risk of the status quo, making an attack more difficult to justify .
 The preparations for the use of force encouraged Kennedy to continue to try to find a diplomatic solution . He had one last option through the UN, the “Cordier Maneuver,” if he needed it .
 If he received orders from the president, Cordier would hand it over to the secretary general . Cordier says he would hand the issue over to secretary general if he was ordered .
 Secretary General Thant could then present the motion to the Security Council as his own idea, not as Kennedy’s . Secretary general Thant then presented the idea to Security Council .
 Kennedy’s idea was shrewd, because if the proposal had reached the Security Council, the U.S., the USSR, and Turkey would all have a face-saving opportunity to diffuse the crisis by giving in to the UN, not to each other . The United States,
 In order for his diplomatic efforts to remain credible, he had to escalate his military pressure on the Soviets . In order to keep diplomatic efforts credible, the U.S. would have to escalate its military pressure .
 On the night of the 27th, he agreed to the mobilizing of approximately three hundred cargo aircraft to fly troops into Cuba . He agreed to mobilizing approximately three hundred . cargo aircraft .
 The administration also had to convince its NATO allies that some kind of negotiated missile trade was in their interests . The military meanwhile prepared orders for an air strike to commence on October 30, while the administration tried to figure out a way to pull of a missile trade with the concurrence of NATO
 The president continued to seek a solution that did not involve combat . He was not confident that multilateral action through the NATO Council would result in the removal of missiles .
 The only remaining military options short of war were a tighter blockade and an expanded military mobilization . The U.S. has been unable to find a solution to the crisis in Syria .
 Bobby Kennedy urged resolve, warning that if the Soviets believed the U.S. was giving in on the Jupiters in Turkey, they would soon press for the removal of the missiles stationed in Italy . Kennedy: If the Soviets believe the U .S. is giving in,
 President Obama said the administration should wait and see what the next day would bring . He said he would wait until the next morning to see what would happen .
 JFK had already said that he would remove the Jupiters if the Soviets proposed that course of action first . JFK, however, had said he would do so if he was to remove them first .
 Cabinet Room Meeting, October 27, 1962, 4.m., Stern, Averting, 324, 328. Stern, 328, 328 . Stern, averting, was a member of the Cabinet .
 The idea was already part of the public discourse in the newspapers . Absolute secrecy was going to be a challenge, for the idea .
 Several months had to elapse before dismantling of Turkish missiles began . There could be no appearance of a quid pro quo, so the dismantling of the missiles began.
 This quid pro quo was behind the backs of NATO allies and behind Castro’s back . Both sides had to keep the deal secret by both sides . Castro's deal had to be kept secret .
 The administration had already been sorting out a way to arrange an acceptable trade deal . The administration was already sorting out an acceptable deal .
 On the 24th, George Ball informed the ambassador to Turkey, Raymond Hare, that negotiating the removal of the Jupiter missiles was a possibility . Hare cabled detailed trade recommendations on the 27th. Ball informed Hare that the missiles were a possibility of being removed .
 Attorney General Bobby Kennedy negotiated a deal with the Soviet ambassador Dobrynin to remove the missiles . The president used his brother to provide the Soviets with the opportunity to make the bargain a reality .
 He reminded Dobrynin that the Soviets had promised to not install missiles in Cuba and then did so, covertly . The Soviets promised not to install missiles but did so covertly, he said .
 The Soviets had to commit to the removal of the missiles by the next day, or America would take care of the problem itself . The USSR might retaliate violently, even though the USSR might react violently . The U.S. would remove the missiles itself .
 Kennedy offered a pledge to not invade Cuba in exchange for the removal of Soviet missiles . Kennedy did offer a pledge not to invade Cuba after the Soviet missiles were removed from Cuba .
 Both men realized they had maneuvered each other into the same corner . There was still a way out, and both men realized there was still an opportunity .
 Dobrynin asked Kennedy if there was a way of executing a missile trade like Premier Khrushchev had proposed . Kennedy was in the midst of a crisis in the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 Kennedy replied that the U.S. needed time to remove the Turkish missiles through normal channels and procedures . Kennedy replied in the affirmative, noting that the United States needed time . The United States was trying to maintain the fiction that there was no connection between this action and the termination of the
 In terms of the effects on America’s nuclear arsenal, the fact that the missiles 218 missiles are 218. missiles will have no impact on the U.S. nuclear arsenal . The missiles were launched by North Korea .
 If this solution went forward, both sides would have to make concessions . Both sides would need to be willing to compromise .
 The Soviets had to remove their missiles from Cuba because of American threats . The Americans had to later remove ballistic missiles from Turkey, which risked severe damage to NATO .
 Khrushchev received a cable of Dobrynin’s discussion with the attorney general . The cable was sent six hours after the meeting with Robert Kennedy . The two men met on October 28 in Moscow .
 It required little discussion for the Presidium to agree to Kennedy’s terms . Kennedy's terms were agreed to by the Preidium .
 Khrushchev had already decided to remove the missiles from Cuba prior to RFK’s discussion with Dobrynin . RFK offered to remove Jupiters from Turkey was icing on the cake .
 President Kennedy accepted the terms of Khrushchev’s letter of October 26 . President Kennedy agreed to withdraw the missiles in exchange for a noninvasion of Cuba pledge .
 U.S. military and diplomatic initiatives had created conditions in which the Soviets had few choices besides acceding to the American offer . The Soviets were forced to accept the offer, which led to the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 Soviet intelligence sources had even informed the premier that a U.S. attack on Cuba was imminent, but no such strike was going to take place unless JFK gave the final order .
 Khrushchev believed that the USSR had achieved some of its goals since missile deployment had led to an American promise to not invade Cuba and the removal of the missiles in Turkey . The administration had arranged and offered the Soviets the way out of the crisis after backing them into a corner .
 The Soviets shipped their missiles home quickly, while the U.S. got to wait until the following spring when it could act as if it was casually 224 . The United States waited until the next spring to act casually .
 In any event, the missile trade did not lead to difficulties in US-Turkish relations . The missile trade didn't lead to any difficulties in U.S.-Turkish relations.
 In January, it announced the replacement of the Turkish and Italian Jupiters by Polaris SSBNs . The weapons are not vulnerable to a first strike, unlike the Jupitsers .
 The Soviets made up for their losses in a matter of months . By 1964 they had about two hundred ICBMs with many more under construction .
 “Quarantine Operations were held in abeyance on 30 and 31 October” when U. Thant went to Cuba to meet with Fidel Castro .
 The last of the R-12 missiles left Cuba on November 11 . U.S. forces maintained high alerts until photographs verified their removal . By November 20, the Soviets decided to bring these aircraft home although they did not mention their redeployment to the Americans .
 The Air Force cancelled the augmented B-52 airborne alert the following day, and it returned to Defcon 5 on November 29 . Surveillance capabilities helped assure the administration that it had accomplished its goals .
 On November 1, photographs from Navy reconnaissance aircraft revealed that the Soviets were tearing down the missile sites . Nine days later reconnaissance flights “confirmed that all six MRBM and three IRBM sites had been 230.”
 John Scali and Alexaner Feklisov exchanged messages during the crisis . Kennedy administration did not make use of the messages to negotiate an end to the crisis, he says .
 Presidium had already decided on October 25 that Khrushchev would offer to remove missiles if Kennedy promised to not invade Cuba . Presidium decided to remove the missiles after Kennedy promised not to invade Cuba in return for promise to remove them from Cuba .
 U.S. Navy surface combatants followed the Soviet ships carrying the missiles from Cuba all the way back to the Black Sea . NATO allies expressed their relief after the agreement was publicized .
 The preponderance of naval power in the Atlantic had assured the success of the quarantine . And again, again, the preponderances of the . Atlantic had . assured the . operational success .
 Military power provided him with flexibility; weakness would have limited Kennedy’s options . Military power would have provided him flexibility .
 A surprise air strike could have been most effective from a purely military point of view, but it would have been costly in terms of relations with other states . A surprise strike would have cost the U.S. more than a surprise strike, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The world stage required justification, and the blockade provided the Kennedy administration the opportunity to present its case . The blockade provided a chance to present itself to the world stage .
 A subsequent air attack on the missile sites would have then been more palatable . A subsequent strike on the sites would then be more likely to be less palatable, say experts .
 President Obama would have attempted diplomacy first, and made a case to foreign leaders . He would have tried diplomacy first and made his case to the world .
 The Air Force's ability to carry out an effective conventional air strike empowered the State Department’s efforts to negotiate a 237-plus-air strike . The State Department is negotiating a 237 air strike .
 Arthur C Warfel, History of the 4080th Strategic Wing, Special Operations, November 1 to December 31, 1962, was published by the Air Force in 1962 . The wing was based in New York City, New York .
 Intelligence Memo REU-74, To the Secretary of State, October 31, 1962 . Hilsman, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, “Western European Reactions to the Soviet Decision to Dismantle the Missile Bases in Cuba .
 There were three wings of F-100D fighterbombers at Homestead Air Force Base south of Miami, another at McCoy AFB along with an F-105 wing . Another F-104C fighters and Marine Air Group 14 at Key West Naval Air Station . There were two wings
 The commander-in-chief of Atlantic Command commented that “nuclear weapons were not needed” for these air strikes . The commander in-chief said “nukes were not necessary’ for these strikes .
 There were 150,000 U.S. Army troops standing by for an invasion, nearly 6,000 United States Marines at Guantanamo Bay, and naval forces composed of three aircraft carriers and 28 additional warships .
 Policymakers in this case needed to use force and diplomacy together because the strength of one compensated for the weakness of the other . Had a transition to war become necessary, forces were in place for a quick transition to wartime operations .
 Diplomacy had to have the threat of military action behind it to increase the attractiveness of a peaceful settlement . Diplomacy must have the . threat of . military action to increase . attractiveness of the peace settlement .
 The shortcomings in target acquisition and bombing precision of the day’s aircraft made a negotiated settlement more attractive, and perhaps necessary, for the U.S. The United States negotiated a settlement .
 Force generates unexpected undesirable side effects that may worsen the situation . Force generates unwanted side effects, such as unexpected side effects . Force can also be harmful to the environment, say experts .
 Force could have encouraged military escalation on the part of the Soviets, or it could have alienated America’s allies . Force could also have alienated the U.S. allies, or alienated the Soviet Union .
 Extended diplomacy may work against the accomplishment of policy goals . Likewise extended diplomacy may help the United States achieve its goals .
 An adversary may interpret diplomacy alone as weakness or disinterestedness . Diplomatic diplomacy alone may be interpreted as weakness, disinterestedity .
 Planning was narrow, for it omitted foreign relations considerations . Air Force planning was narrow for it .
 Carl von Clausewitz did not see war as a continuation of politics to a degree that would have passed muster with Clausewitz . That made sense within their paradigm, which focused on ‘purely military” issues, he says . That makes sense within the paradigm, he adds .
 The Air Force at that time seemed to instead see the president as the general-in-chief . The president was the Air Force's first president .
 One official history argued after the crisis that, ‘it is no longer possible in the nuclear age to expect a war to be conducted without the day-to-day exercise by the President of intimate control’
 Diplomats deliberately employed both force and diplomacy in pursuing national objectives, diplomats say . Its leaders frequently expressed a noncompromising attitude, diplomats said . Diplomats said it was a non-compromising approach .
 For his part, the president had already laid the military and diplomatic groundwork in the form of consultation with allies and adequate force capabilities .
 Both leaders had less than full trust in the level-headedness of their senior generals, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Both leaders had little or no full trust" in their generals .
 Khrushchev lost confidence in the judgment of his generals when they regarded his wishes to avoid nuclear war with scorn . The Soviet leader's wish to avoid a nuclear war was rejected by his generals .
 American military leaders developed an all or nothing approach to the use of force during the Korean War . Not a few military leaders had developed an an all-or-all approach to using force .
 They had a track record of recommending the use of nuclear weapons to solve security problems that were not critical to national survival, such as when they wanted to use them to defend the tiny islands of Quemoy and Matzu .
 Robert Kennedy used the fact that many of the generals, as well as some civilian leaders, were “itching for a fight” to convey to Anatoli Dobrynin on October 27 how urgent it was to resolve the crisis . Robert Kennedy: Many of the . generals as well
 During the crisis, General Power had the commander of the first set of Minuteman ICBMs bypassed the safeguards that required four officers to 248 . The new missile was a new missile at an under-construction site .
 The inability of Admiral George Anderson to understand the need to modify the Navy’s doctrine for blockades to fit the sensitive character of the standoff with the Soviet Union resulted in McNamara's loss of confidence in his judgment .
 The reactions of Admiral Anderson and General LeMay to the resolution of the crisis confirmed Kennedy’s distrust . Kennedy was distrustful of Anderson and LeMay .
 He instituted changes that made it easier to inform the president of the possible consequences of actions taken . The changes were made in response to the president's actions .
 He was willing to give incomplete advice in a timely manner instead of waiting until most all of the intelligence had been vetted and vetted . He was also willing to advise the president on how to deal with the world .
 As a consequence, the executors of policy rested on a firmer foundation . As a result, the execution of policy rests on a stronger foundation, the government says .
 Before the crisis erupted, the United States coordinated and consulted with Latin American states, if not as equals, at least as with independent sovereigns . The U.S. has been involved in the crisis in Latin America since it began .
 The administration is going to carry out its strategy regardless of the wishes of Latin American states . Once photo interpreters discovered the missiles, however, the administration formulated its strategy and decided to carry it out .
 Its efforts through the OAS were ultimately a window dressing of multilateralism draping a unilateral operation . Its efforts were ultimately window dressing, the U.S. says .
 It is ironic that effective diplomacy requires strong military support . The U.S. needs strong support for effective diplomacy, says Obama .
 Effective military action requires laying diplomatic groundwork, much like a preparatory artillery barrage . Likewise, effective military action must also be laid groundwork for diplomacy .
 The rhetoric of “diplomacy first, followed by military action second” is a fallacy, says David Frum . “Diplomacy before military action is a mistake,” he says .
 One’s understanding of state policy is broadened by perceiving aggressive military force and staid diplomacy not as distinct entities, but as essentially alike occupying widely spaced positions on the same continuum .
 One should not deduce the necessity of the integration of force and diplomacy from one example, but this case study verifies the arguments of many . Force and diplomacy support each other, the author says .
 Donald Alan Carter has argued that Kennedy never trusted the service chiefs in the first place . Donald Alan . Alan Carter argues that Kennedy did not trust service chiefs at all .