 Cuba sides themselves with the Soviet Union and their policies with Soviet Union being communists . Dec 19, 1960 Cuba and Soviet Union were at odds with each other's policies . Cuba sides itself with the Soviets .
 John F Kennedy makes a speech about how the U.S. is under threat because of Cuba . Kennedy made the speech in 1961 .
 Over 1000 people with weapons aimed to reach Havana but were soon stopped by Fidel Castro's army . Fidel Castro stopped them by stopping them from reaching Havana .
 This failed invasion increased the tension between Castro and the U.S. The failed invasion of Cuba increased the tensions between the two countries .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy talk in Vienna about the missile crisis . Castro is furious the Kennedy sets up a blockade around Cuba . Castro was furious Kennedy set up the blockade .
 Castro sends armed men to the shores of Cuba to try and defend Cuba . As a result of this Castro sent armed men into the shores, he sent armed forces to defend Cuba's borders .
 U.S. spy planes flew over Cuba only to find a minimum of 6 medium range missiles . Cuban missiles discovered in 1962 . The missiles were believed to have been a medium range missile .
 Nikita Khrushchev asked the United States to publicly say they would not invade Cuba and remove their missiles from Turkey . Kennedy then claimed any missile fired would be an attack on the U.S. from the Soviet Union .
 If they successfully did so, the Russians would removle their missiles from Cuba . The Russians would remove them from Cuba if they successfully .
 President Kennedy agrees to Khrushchev's offer on the 27th of October, 1962 . President Kennedy agreed to the offer on October 27 .
 The United States and the Soviet Union set up a radio and telegraph line between them to inform them of any nuclear danger that occurs or any misunderstandings . U.S. missiles were removed from Turkey and Italy and Russian missiles are removed from Cuba .
 1963 Nuclear Treaty stated neither the United States or Sovient Union could test nuclear bombs anywhere except for underground under strict circumstances . Treaty was signed by U.S. and Soviet Union in 1963 .
 The Cuban Missile crisis set off the need of power for the Soviet Union . Jan 1, 1972 Soviet Union Power was created .
 They were striving for the same nuclear ability as the United States and this ability was reached in 1972 . This ability was achieved in 1972 and 1972 .
 The Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty was a treaty that restricted the number of ABM deployment areas from two to one . This means the Soviet Union would be able to defend themselves if the United States try to attack them .
 The Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty was put into force on this day in 1972 . The treaty was signed by the Soviet Union .
 This is various negotiations bet ween the United States and Soviet Union . This is a series of negotiations between the U.S. and the USSR .
 SALT II was introduced to reduce the limit of strategic nuclear weapons . SALT I was introduced in 1950s to reduce limit of nuclear weapons by limiting nuclear arms .
 START I treaty in 1991 was never put into force and was outdated by the START I Treaty in 1991 . This treaty was not put in force and never put to force . START I was outdated and was put to the ground in 1991, but was outdated .
 START I Thi treaty banned the U.S. and the Soviet Union from using nuclear weapons such as nuclear warheads, ICBM's and submarine-launched ballistic missiles and bombers . The treaty was signed in 1991 .
 By the end of this treaty , 80% of all strategic nuclear weapons had been removed . 80% were removed .
 START II between the U.S. and Soviet Union, was banning the use of MIRV's on ICBM's . START II was banning use of the MIRv's on use of ICBM .
 MIRV's provide greater target damage, hit a broader area and reduce the effect of ABM's . MIRVs can also be used to target a larger area of target damage .
 This failed invasion increased the tension between Castro and the United States . The failed invasion of Cuba increased tensions between the U.S. and Cuba .
 Kennedy explains how he wants to set up a blockade around Cuba . Castro is furious the Kennedy sets up the blockade . Kennedy explains why he wanted to blockade Cuba .
 Khrushchev asked the United States to publicly say they would not invade Cuba and remove their missiles from Turkey . As a result of this Castro sends armed men to the shores to try and defend Cuba .
 President Kennedy agrees to Khrushchev's offer on the 27th of October, 1962 . If they successfully did so, the Russians would remove their missiles from Cuba .
 U.S. spy planes flew over Cuba only to find a minimum of 6 medium range missiles . United States missiles removed from Turkey and Italy and Russian missiles are removed .
 Kennedy then claimed any missile fired would be an attack on the U.S. from the Soviet Union . The treaty stated neither the United States or Sovient Union could test nuclear bombs anywhere except for underground .
 The Cuban Missile crisis set off the need for power for the Soviet Union . This treaty helped reduce the tension between the two countries .
 The United States and the Soviet Union set up a radio and telegraph line between them to inform them of any nuclear danger that occurs or any misunderstandings . This means the Soviets would be able to defend themselves if the U.S. tried to attack .
 START I treaty in 1991 banned the United States and the Soviet Union from using nuclear weapons such as nuclear warheads, ICBM missiles and bombers . This was never put into force and was outdated by the treaty .
 By the end of this treaty , 80% of all strategic nuclear weapons had been removed . The treaty was between the United States and Soviet Union .