 Nearly twenty years have lapsed since the end of the Cold War . Program in Independent Studies is Rivier College's Independent Studies .
 Today it is relatively easy to forget the bipolar structure that dominated international relations and the intense conflict that the Cold War era generated . The Cold War was the most intense conflict in the world's history, with the rise of the Soviet Union and Russia .
 It was a time when nuclear war was not some theoretical military strategy, but a real possibility . The U.S. government says nuclear war is not a military strategy but a possibility .
 During the crisis, President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev’s decision-making processes were those of rational actors, not crazed heads of state playing a game of nuclear brinkmanship, writes Peter Bergen .
 President Kennedy desperately sought to maintain the strategic balance of power, while Khrushchev wanted to alter the balance . President Kennedy sought to keep the balance in favor of the Soviet Union . Kennedy was assassinated in September 1963 .
 President Kennedy had no choice but to respond to the Soviet nuclear missile deployment in Cuba, for if he failed to respond, Khrushchev would continue to probe in all other spheres of American influence . President Kennedy was forced to respond .
 Some scholars suggest President Kennedy’s management of the crisis was dangerous and unnecessarily provocative . The U.S. and the Soviet Union were on the brink of thermonuclear war .
 The crisis did thrust the two superpowers toward the precipice of nuclear war . The argument that revisionist historians put forth that the Soviet missiles in Cuba posed no additional danger nor did it alter the nuclear threat to the mainland of the United States is almost entirely without merit .
 Revisionist historians argue that Soviet based nuclear missiles launched from Cuba would have same disastrous results as if they had been launched from within the Soviet Union .
 The Soviet deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba did not pose any additional danger to the United States. That fact in itself is insufficient to support the conclusion, the author says . The U.S. would not be surprised if the missiles were deployed in Cuba .
 The Soviet deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba did alter the strategic balance of power . Most importantly, the Soviet deployment in Cuba changed the balance of the power balance .
 Khrushchev’s decision to deploy nuclear missiles was a significant motivational factor in his decision to do so . The strategic balance of power was a motivating factor in the decision to launch nuclear missiles .
 Khrushchev’s decision to deploy the missiles was multifaceted . As with most political decisions, the decision was complex, says historian John Avlon .
 He sought to thwart the U.S. policy of containment, especially in Berlin and Latin America, he says . Not only did he want to alter the strategic balance of power, he wanted to thwart America's policy in Berlin .
 The deployment of Soviet missiles in Cuba allowed Khrushchev to threaten the American mainland in the same manner in which American missiles in Europe threatened the Soviet Union . Furthermore, the deployment of Cuban missiles allowed the U.S. to threaten Cuba .
 Fidel Castro was willing to accept the Soviet missiles, albeit not entirely on his terms . Fidel Castro accepted the missiles, but not on the terms of the Soviet Union .
 Like Khrushchev, Castro did agree to accept the missiles for the sake of communist expansionism . However, the primary reason he agreed to the deployment was for the salvation of Cuba . Castro agreed to accept missiles in order to save Cuba .
 Joseph T Thompson misperception that an invasion of Cuba by the U.S. was imminent was not without merit . Kennedy administration did not pursue policies to halt the possibility of such misperceptions .
 His failure was to stem the misperception of an imminent invasion by U.S. backed forces . Instead, his failure was his inability to stem his misperceptions of an invasion .
 To examine the crisis otherwise, is to disregard the long-standing adherence to the Monroe Doctrine and ignore the U.S. foreign policy of containment . The crisis is to be examined as a result of the crisis in Syria .
 During this era, American foreign policy can be best summed up with one word, containment . The U.S. has been in the midst of a turbulent period of American isolation .
 Without a Cold War context, the task of scrutinizing the crisis and the decision-making processes of Kennedy and Khrushchev is perilous .
 Although the decision-making processes of both superpower leaders were occasionally faulty with some foreseen and some unforeseen harrowing consequences, they were able to bring the crisis to a successful diplomatic resolution . The decision to end the crisis was made by both world leaders .
 The years before the Cuban Missile crisis are particularly relevant to the crisis itself, for several events directly influenced key decision-making processes during the crisis . The years preceding the crisis are .
 The missile crisis needs to be analyzed in the Cold War context of the missile crisis . Those years reveal an extremely pervasive and robust Cold War atmosphere, writes CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 After the launch of Sputnik on October 4, 1957, the U.S. public was in a state of near hysteria over the perceived might of Soviet technocracy . After the successful launch of the Soviet Union's first satellite satellite, the American public was outraged .
 No event influenced American perception of Soviet superiority more than the successful launch of the first artificial satellite .
 A Gallup poll in January 1958 revealed that 67% of Americans believed the Soviet Union was ahead of the United States in the Cold War . 67% believed that the U.S. was behind the Soviet Russia in Cold War.
 The successful flight of Yuri Gagarin in 1961, the first human to orbit the earth, only added to the American public misperception of Soviet technological and military superiority . The success of the successful flight in 1961 added to American public .
 In 1960, historians, political scientists, and sociologists heralded an ‘age of consensus’ in America . Social protest in America was rendered obsolete by agreements on numerous issues, one of which was the fear of communism .
 Gallup Polls conducted in the period leading up to 1960 confirm the nearly universal aversion to communism by the American public . Americans had an unfavorable opinion of Communism/Soviet Union of 88.5%, 91.1% and 86.4% respectively .
 A History of the U.S. since 1945; (Boston MA: Houghton Mifflin, 2007), 115. The U.N. history of the United States since 1945 .
 The Cold War and the strategy of containment were more than political policies or ideals . It was an American way of life that provided a common identity for Americans in the post-war era .
 When President Kennedy took office, he inherited, from his predecessor, President Eisenhower, a covert military operation . The operation was designed to overthrow the newly installed communist regime of Fidel Castro . President Kennedy inherited the covert operation from President Eisenhower .
 The covert military plan, later to be known as the Bay of Pigs, was an absolute failure of policy and decision-making . It was a fiasco, and subsequently as a fiasco .
 Professor Irving L Janis cites the Bay of Pigs invasion plan of Cuba as a perfect illustration of groupthink mentality and faulty decision-making .
 The Kennedy administration made dreadful and faulty decisions, says Janis Janis . Janis says the group suffered from the illusion of invulnerability and the . illusion of unanimity, the . suppression of personal doubts, the docility fostered by . suave leadership and a taboo against antagon
 President Kennedy’s failure, for which he claimed sole responsibility, afforded the opportunity to learn from the failures of the group decision-making process in the Bay of Pigs invasion plan .
 The pitfalls of not questioning intelligence services, military advisors, and a desire to seek consensus within the group without alternative viewpoints would be avoided during the next crisis, which turned out to be far more complex and precarious than the Bay of Pigs .
 The failure to halt the Central Intelligence Agency backed plan precipitated a military rapprochement between the Soviet Union and Cuba,7 which aided Premier Khrushchev’s decision to transport Soviet nuclear missiles to the island nation of Cuba .
 The other geopolitical area of instability and conflict that highlighted Cold War tensions during the same epoch was Berlin, Germany . Berlin was one of the most unstable areas of instability during the Cold War .
 Khrushchev’s opinion of Kennedy was that he was weak and ill prepared to ward off realpolitik diplomacy . He tried to bully Kennedy into capitulation over the Berlin issue . The Eisenhower administration had successfully dealt with the issue .
 Khrushchev handed Kennedy an aide-memoire that issued a new ultimatum on Berlin . During the summit, Kennedy was handed the document by the Soviet leader .
 Khrushchev traveled to East Germany and formally announced a December 31, deadline for a Berlin settlement . The deadline was December 31 . The following day he traveled to the East German capital .
 Because of Khrushchev’s forcefulness on the “Berlin Problem,” Kennedy invariable linked Berlin with Cuba . Because of his forcefulness, Kennedy linked Berlin to Cuba .
 To Kennedy, holding the line on Cuba inevitably meant holding the . line on Berlin . Kennedy: "Holding the line was holding on Berlin. To hold on Cuba."
 To lose Berlin to the Soviets was equivalent to nullifying containment . Berlin's loss to the Soviet Union would have been equivalent to losing containment .
 After the Bay of Pigs failure, Khrushchev supplied Castro with more advanced weaponry to act as a deterrent for any possible future invasion by the United States . Castro was strategically located just ninety miles from the U.S. mainland .
 President Kennedy was aware of the Soviet military build up on Cuban soil . He issued a statement in 1962 that there was “no evidence… of significant offensive capability in Cuban hands or under Soviet direction and guidance”
 Kennedy felt it necessary to continue issuing threats of deterrence, as a result he held a news conference on September 13, 1962 . Were it to be otherwise, the gravest issues would arise .
 Kennedy indicated resolve on part of the U.S. that the installation of nuclear missiles in Cuba was intolerable . Kennedy's series of increasingly heightened political affirmations indicated resolve .
 The answer is multifaceted, ambiguous, and complex, but complex . The question requires analysis in the context of Cold War politics in which misperceptions and miscalculations of ones adversary were commonplace .
 Khrushchev miscalculated President Kennedy’s response to the installation of missiles in Cuba . President Kennedy's response to missile installation in Cuba was a mistake, he says . President Nixon's response was to the threat of a missile strike .
 Kennedy wrongfully perceived Kennedy would have no choice but to accept the Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba . Kennedy intended to reveal the clandestine installation after the November mid-term elections .
 Scholars offer many different interpretations of why Khrushchev went ahead with the deployment of missiles in Cuba . The missiles were deployed in Cuba in the 1960s .
 Cold War historian John Lewis Gaddis cites Khrushchev’s desire to spread communism in Latin American as the chief reason for the deployment . Cold War historians cite Khruschev's desire for the spread of communism .
 It is highly improbable that this was Premier Khrushchev’s rationale for the deployment of nuclear missiles . However, the hypothesis has substantial merit as a contributing factor in the decision-making process .
 Former Defense Secretary Robert McNamara conceded at the Moscow Conference that the U.S. intended to mount an invasion of Cuba .
 The Kennedy administration failed to refrain from covert operations to overthrow Castro’s communist state . The Kremlin believed an invasion was imminent, according to the Kremlin .
 It is highly probable that Khrushchev sought to justify his actions in a more favorable light in his memoirs . It is substantially more credible than that he did indeed install nuclear missiles as part of an offensive strategic Cold War maneuver .
 Khrushchev was vehemently annoyed by the proximity of American Jupiter missiles located so close to the border of Russia, in Turkey, in the 1960s .
 In the case that the Soviet Union ever had to withdraw the missiles, Khrushchev could always point to the American missiles in Turkey as a bargaining chip . Other NATO countries, which housed similar missiles, could be used as bargaining chips .
 It is highly unlikely Khrushchev would embark on such a risky venture, because it did not alter the balance of power one iota . Further, it is unlikely he would embark upon such an ambitious venture, as such as a risky move .
 Khrushchev had a larger prize in mind, namely a resolution to the Berlin problem . Perhaps he was trying to solve the problem, perhaps to solve it .
 West Berlin was a prize that eluded Joseph Stalin and was the ultimate trophy of the Cold War conflict . West Berlin eluded Stalin and became a symbol of the Soviet Union's success .
 Confidential correspondence between Khrushchev and Kennedy illustrates that the subject of West Berlin was the foremost issue on the agenda . The correspondence shows that the issue was the primary issue of the two leaders .
 If the U.S. were to lose Berlin the entire strategy of containment could be nullified . The Cold War victory by America with the enormously successful Berlin Airlift would have been destroyed . The United States would have lost Berlin .
 The fate of Berlin weighed heavily on President Kennedy during the Cuban missile crisis . President Kennedy visited Berlin during the crisis .
 Kennedy linked the fate of Berlin with the Cuban crisis, theorizing if the U.S. were to attack Cuba then the Soviet response would be to move on West Berlin . Kennedy theorized if the United States attacked Cuba, the Soviet would move on Berlin .
 President Kennedy telephoned 16 Bruce J Allyn, James G Blight, David A Welch . President Kennedy made the call in a remarkable act of diplomacy and non-partisanship .
 Friday, October 19, 1962 at 9:45 meeting with the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
 By Monday, October 22, President Kennedy had formally decided against the military airstrike option . Kennedy now viewed West Berlin as the strategic objective the Soviets were after and would bargain for, in exchange for the missiles in Cuba .
 Kennedy continued to perceive a linkage between Cuba and Berlin . Even during the last day of the crisis, Kennedy continued his view of a link between the two .
 De Gaulle reminded Kennedy, “that the Soviet leader had a habit of issuing ultimatums and then forgetting about them.” Kennedy said .
 At no point during the crisis did Khrushchev even intimate the possibility of an attack against Berlin . Interestingly, at no point . during the . crisis did no mention of the . possibility of a possible attack on Berlin .
 Alteration of the balance of power, if successful, would enable the Soviet Union significant increased leverage in global international relations . If successful, it could potentially negate the long-term American foreign policy of containment .
 A shift in the balance of power is the objective Khrushchev desperately sought . A shift of power was the objective that Khrushche desperately sought. A shift was needed to shift the balance in power .
 In 1962, the U.S. was the much stronger superpower and was constantly thwarting Khrushchev’s initiatives . The United States was the stronger superpower in 1962, but was constantly thwarted .
 If President Kennedy failed to respond to the Soviet missiles in Cuba, Khrushchev would have a much freer hand to act against Berlin or challenge America in other arenas of global contest . President Kennedy would have been able to act on Berlin or against Berlin .
 Kennedy’s acceptance of the Soviet missiles in Cuba would have altered the balance of power within the western hemisphere . Moreover, Kennedy's acceptance of Soviet missiles would have changed the balance .
 Nuclear parity did not exist, the supposed “missile gap” did not favor the Soviets; it drastically favored the U.S. The United States did not have nuclear parity parity .
 Telephone conversation with Eisenhower Sunday, October 28, 1962 at 12:08.08. Eisenhower .
 Khrushchev in effect, could more readily and more cost effectively alter the balance of power by the Cuban deployment, than by any other means, as long as Kennedy acquiesced to the presence of the missiles in Cuba . Kennedy in effect .
 Khrushchev was taking an enormous gamble, but it also had the potential to reap significant rewards . Khrushchevitch was taking a huge gamble but it could reap rewards, he says .
 Cuban officials also viewed the missile deployment as a shift in the balance of power . Cuban officials said the deployment was part of the shift in power in the country . The missile deployment is seen as a significant shift in Cuba's power .
 Years later, the United States discovered that the Soviets intended to develop Cuba into a full-scale strategic Soviet base . The U.S. discovered that Cuba was intended to be a full scale strategic Soviet bases .
 The security implications of a major Soviet military base located just ninety miles from the U.S. coastline of the United States were enormous and unacceptable, the author says .
 The development of a fullscale Soviet military base was unbeknownst to Kennedy at the time . At no time during the Cold War could any President resign the doctrine of containment to the scrap heap .
 Gaddis explains that the doctrine of containment was sometimes applied very differently in different presidential administrations . He says the doctrine was applied very different in different administrations .
 Soviet intervention in Cuba was a direct challenge to American prestige, power, and the policy of containment . Nevertheless, all Presidential administrations have viewed “American security as tied up with the maintenance of the global balance of power and all have seen the Soviet Union as the major threat to that balance
 The adherence to the strict policy of containment by the Kennedy administration, much like his predecessors foiled Khrushchev’s risky gamble, as a result, American prestige increased and Soviet prestige declined .
 Khrushchev calculated differently, namely by going public, his risky gamble might have succeeded . However, he did not go public, and his gamble might not have succeeded, says the historian .
 President Kennedy made repeated explicit public warnings that Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba would not be tolerated by the U.S. President Kennedy warned that Soviet missiles would be not tolerated in Cuba .
 Khrushchev, instead of going public with the missile deployment as Castro had urged him, decided to keep the deployment secret . Kennedy issued any warning statements regarding U.S. policy .
 Gaddis concludes that containement has worked very successfully in the past and will continue as an instrument of U.S. foreign policy in the future .
 The Soviet Ambassador to the United Nations, Valerian Zorin denied the existence of the missiles in Cuba before the U.N. Security Council . The Soviet ambassador to the UN said the missiles were in Cuba .
 Ambassador Adlai Stevenson publicly confronted Zorin with intelligently worded diplomatic rhetoric . The U.S. declaration of the existence of the nuclear missiles was accurate, Ambassador Stevenson said .
 Stevenson’s performance and the veracity of his statements along with incontrovertible evidence badly damaged Soviet credibility, enhanced the justification for the naval blockade . Stevenson's performance badly damaged the credibility of the Soviet credibility and enhanced the blockade .
 President Kennedy announced in a televised address that a strict naval quarantine of all offensive military equipment bound for Cuba .
 Kennedy specifically used the term quarantine in his speech, because the use of a naval blockade was contrary to international law . Nevertheless, Kennedy acted transparently, opening himself and his administration to criticism .
 The Organization of American States authorized the use of force in maintaining a naval blockade, either individually or collectively . Kennedy sought and won a unanimous resolution of the OAS .
 Through proper decisionmaking and acting transparently, Kennedy was able to garnish public support and transform skeptics of U.S. policy during the crisis .
 The successful application of transparency stood in stark contrast to Soviet policy, enabling the U.S. to maintain moral authority . The choice of the naval blockade was ultimately more palatable to the Soviets .
 The establishment of a naval blockade of Cuba was not President Kennedy’s initial choice upon discovery of the Soviet missiles . President Kennedy's initial choice was not to establish a blockade .
 Initially he opted to act unilaterally and for a military air strike to remove the missiles,43 subsequently heeded the recommendations of the National Security Council Executive Committee . Heeded the recommendation of the NSC Executive Committee, which recommended a greater multilateral approach to the resolution of the crisis .
 The blockade had two major drawbacks, one, it would not remove the missiles already located on the island . The blockade would also not remove missiles from the island, one of the country's most powerful weapons .
 Two, Soviet ships bound for Cuba would inevitably encounter American warships . An escalation of the crisis could easily propel the two superpowers to thermonuclear war . If those ships chose to ignore the blockade, an escalation could easily lead to war .
 Some scholars such as Irving Horowitz suggest that President Kennedy initiated an “unnecessary dangerous game of chicken”44 with 38 Allison & Zelikow .
 The government of the Soviet Union authorized the media agency TASS to release a statement that Soviet nuclear weapons were so powerful that there was no need to export nuclear weapons beyond the boundaries of the USSR . The statement gave more credence to the theory the . Soviet Union wished to alter the balance
 Ambassador Zorin at the time genuinely believed Soviet missiles had not been installed in Cuba, because he was never informed about the Soviet installation . Ambassador: "I was never told about the installation. I'm not sure what happened."
 Zorin’s denials, challenged by Ambassador Stevenson, revealed the extent of Soviet deceit and secrecy . Ambassador Stevenson's overwhelming evidence before a global television audience revealed the truth .
 To make such conclusions is to ignore the context of the Cold War epoch and Khrushchev’s intentions. To ignore such conclusions would be a mistake, says Peter Bergen .
 Khrushchev believed Kennedy to be weak willed and ill fitted for the task of halting Soviet aggression . Kennedy believed to be ill fitted to be a leader for the job of stopping Soviet aggression in the world .
 Diplomacy without deterrence would not have any impact on Khrushchev, it would have only strengthened his resolve to probe much further . Diplomacy with deterrence not having any impact would have had no impact, says historian .
 The day after announcing the establishment of the naval blockade President Kennedy expressed his grave concerns about the conflict with his brother Robert F. Kennedy .
 The President expresses his concern that if he fails to contain the current threat of Soviet aggression, the consequences of his inaction will encourage further Soviet incursions into American spheres of influence .
 Congress would interpret President Kennedy’s failure to respond to the communist threat, as such an egregious capitulation that it warranted impeachment . Second, Congress would read that failure to act in response to the threat of communist threat to the U.S. Congress would consider impeachment .
 A failure to respond to Soviet aggression, especially in the western hemisphere during this era, was simply politically untenable . Failure to respond was simply political untenable, he says .
 Some scholars interpret President Kennedy’s decision-making during the crisis as purely political, dangerous and excessively concerned with public opinion . Some scholars say the president's decision to take action was based on a fear factor .
 In his article, he downplays the role of ExComm in the decision-making process . ExComm is a key part of the decision process .
 Professor Irving L Janis offers a much better analysis of the Kennedy administration’s decision-making process during the crisis .
 Professor Janis found in his analysis of Cuban missile crisis an absence of the symptoms of the groupthink decision-making process that previously plagued the Kennedy administration .
 Kennedy had learned not to overly rely upon the military and intelligence community enabling him to avoid the pitfalls and poor reasoning exemplified by the Bay of Pigs decision-making processes .
 President Kennedy relied heavily on the advice of the military and went ahead with his initial inclination to utilize air strikes against Cuba . The consequences of that decision would have meant nuclear war .
 In an interview-styled documentary, McNamara relates a meeting he had with Fidel Castro in 1992 . McNamara talks about the meeting in a documentary .
 Joseph T Thompson House tapes reveal intense thoughtful discussions to allow for the proper decision to be made and for the implications of those decisions to be fully analyzed . Castro recommends to Khrushchev using nuclear warheads against the United States .
 Janis Janis points to several aspects of the decisionmaking process that highlight the avoidance of groupthink . Janis says the decision-making process is important to avoid groupthink.
 Kennedy purposely acted as an antagonist to challenge different points of view . Kennedy's actions were meant to be a challenge to different views of the world .
 The administration acknowledged grave dangers even after arriving at a decision . There was also an explicit discussion of moral issues, reversals of judgments, non-stereotypical views of the enemy, and an avoidance of humiliation to allow Khrushchev a face-saving way out .
 After serious deliberations and the weighing of all options, the crisis ended with a compromise . After serious deliberation, the Senate voted to pass a compromise on the issue . The Senate will hold a hearing on the matter on Tuesday .
 The United States pledged not to invade Cuba and outdated U.S. Jupiter missiles in Turkey would be secretly dismantled at an undetermined later date .
 The missiles in Turkey were removed later to avoid the appearance of a negotiated quid pro quo settlement . While the Soviets were required to immediately remove the Soviet missiles from Cuba, the missiles were removed from Turkey later .
 It appeared as if the Soviets unilaterally withdrew the deployed nuclear missiles in Cuba in the face of U.S. military pressure . Thus, it appeared as though the Soviets had withdrawn the deployed .
 The Soviets kept the removal of the missiles from Turkey secret for years . The Soviets upheld the negotiated arrangement to keep the removal secret . The removal of missiles was kept secret for decades .
 Robert Kennedy’s book, Thirteen Days, clearly states that the diplomatic deal struck between the Soviets and the U.S. was not a quid pro quo deal . Robert Kennedy: The deal struck by the Soviet Union and the United States was a diplomatic deal, not a
 Immediately after the crisis there was a temporary cooling of Cold War tensions . Immediately following the crisis, tensions were cooled .
 A limited Test-Ban Treaty of nuclear weapons was signed on August 5, 196357 . A hotline (direct teletype machine) was installed in Washington and Moscow to hasten communication in case of another crisis .
 The cooling off period was short lived as the Soviets sought and achieved nuclear parity with the U.S. The Cold War was a short-lived period as the Soviet Union sought nuclear parity .
 European allies of the U.S. felt hopelessly trapped by the bipolarity of Soviet and American dominance . European allies felt trapped by bipolarity .
 Khrushchev was willing to accept the risky gamble that President Kennedy would not militarily object to the missile deployment . He was nevertheless a rational actor who realized consequences of his and President Kennedy’s actions and pursued a diplomatic solution to avert nuclear holocaust .
 If President Kennedy accepted the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba, the Soviet Union stood to gain international prestige . The Soviet Union and communism would have every reason to continue to challenge American spheres of influence .
 Khrushchev simply miscalculated Kennedy’s response . The risk of placing the missiles in Cuba was extreme, but the benefits were enormous . The risks were extreme but the risks were enormous, writes Peter Bergen .
 Kennedy had to act assertively, an emboldened Khrushchev who perceived Kennedy as weak would not merely acquiesce without some form of deterrence from Washington . Kennedy had acted assertively in response to Khrushchets' perceived as weak .
 Khrushchev miscalculated the overwhelming anti-communist ideology of the U.S. and their elected officials . The Soviet Union was defeated by the Soviet Union in 1956 .
 It was politically impossible for Kennedy not to confront the Soviet Union over Cuba due to the significant security implications along with the threat of further communist expansionism . Kennedy was forced to confront Russia over Cuba .
 During the Cold War, Cold War tensions dominated not only the domestic security politics of the U.S. but also international relations . During the Cuban Missile Crisis, tensions dominated international relations.
 To analyze the missile crisis without this context is tantamount to analyzing the American Civil War and disregarding the context slavery played . To analyze this crisis without context, slavery played a key role in the U.S.
 Leaders in Washington won elections for their hard-line stance on communism and were held accountable to contain it . Leaders won elections because of their hard line stance against communism .
 Rivier College student was an Individual Studies major with a concentration in History . He was a major in Individual Studies at Rivier college .
 He completed his education at Rivier College in December 2009 . He will formally graduate in spring 2010 .
 Upon graduation, he plans to attend graduate school to complete a Masters Degree . He also plans to eventually complete a Ph.D. in History .