 The contestant’s attire was said to be ""inspired by the supersonic bomarc missile"" because it mimicked the coloring and markings of the United States Air Force's nuclear antiaircraft weapon during its development .
 Four of 56 U.S. Air Force BOMARC IM-99A nuclear antiaircraft missiles emplaced at a site about twenty miles southeast of Trenton, New Jersey near McGuire Air Force Base .
 Missiles remained horizontal in the shelters shown except when preparing to launch or the erection equipment was being tested . Missiles were not visible in shelters shown when they were being used .
 Each missile carried a W-40 nuclear warhead which yielded about 6.5 kilotons . Each missile was carried by each missile carrying a nuclear weapon . Each weapon was equipped with a nuclear device capable of carrying about 6,000 kilograms of energy .
 McGuire became the first BOMARC site to be declared operational in October 1960 . Thirteen months before this photograph was taken, McGuire was the first site to become operational .
 It also was the location of a June 1960 accident in which fire destroyed a warhead . The site was also the site of an accident that destroyed a nuclear warhead in 1960 .
 The United States Air Force’s Falcon guided nuclear antiaircraft missile with an interceptor in the background . The U.S. Air Force's Falcon guided missile is a guided missile guided by an anti-aircraft missile .
 The nuclear Falcon entered the inventory in 1961 as a result of the Air Force’s decision to have a nuclear antiaircraft weapon capable of being carried by the F-102 Delta Dagger interceptor . The Falcon was the result of a decision to carry a nuclear anti-aircraft
 Designed in 1959, it was fifteen inches long, nearly eleven inches in diameter, and only weighed fifty pounds . Designed to be 15 inches long and nearly 11 inches diameter, it only weighed 50 pounds . designed in 1959 .
 The relative small size of this nuclear device compared to those developed just three years earlier demonstrates the rapid pace of the U.S. nuclear weapon design effort in the period . The relative size of the nuclear device is the size of a nuclear device .
 A United States Air Force F-101B Voodoo interceptor presumably carrying two non-nuclear training versions of the Genie MB-1 nuclear air-to-air rocket . The interceptor is thought to have been carrying two training versions .
 Sidney Bruce stood 18,000 feet below an aerial detonation of an MB-1 in Nevada . He touted the F-101 and its armament to a St. Louis, Missouri, St. Paul Air Force officer .
 F-89 Scorpion interceptor preparing to conduct Shot John in Operation Plumbbob at the Nevada Test Site on July 19, 1957 . Ground crews prepare to attach a U.S. Air Force Genie MB-1 nuclear air-to-air rocket to the wing of a specially
 Five Force officers volunteered to stand beneath a Genie detonated in the air eighteen thousand feet above them . For Shot John, five Force officers stood beneath the Genie detonation . The Genie was detonated by a Genie detonating a bomb 18 thousand feet from the air .
 Operation Plumbbob’s Shot John detonates a nuclear antiaircraft rocket above the officers . The MB-1 Genie was detonated by a U.S. Air Force missile launcher .
 Members of Battery A, 2nd Missile Battalion of the United States Army’s 57th Artillery scramble during an alert drill at the Montrose-Belmont Nike-Hercules nuclear antiaircraft missile site .
 Nike-Hercules carried the W-31 nuclear warhead which could yield either two or twenty-two kilotons . The Nike Hercules could be used to carry a nuclear weapon of up to two kilotrons .
 Nuclear Antiaircraft Arms and the Cold War by Christopher J Bright . The Cold War is a Cold War book by Christopher Bright .
 Air defense weapons comprised as much as one-fifth of the U.S. nuclear arsenal in 1961, Bright writes . The United States government publicly acknowledged the facts of the deployments in the 1950s, he says .
 The exact number of U.S. soldiers killed in Afghanistan remains a secret . The last of them were retired in 1986, but their exact number remains a mystery .
 Bright's work raises the possibility that air defense weapons may have been among the most dangerous nuclear arms . The predelegated use arrangements that could have led to inadvertent nuclear use during a crisis .
 Nuclear weapons were integral to Cold War U.S. military strategy . Continental Defense in the Eisenhower Era is a reminder of the extent of the role nuclear weapons played .
 U.S. policy makers are giving renewed attention to nuclear arms, occasioned in part by President Obama's support for their ultimate abolition . Others have suggested replacing or refurbishing existing nuclear warheads should be replaced .
 Bright's book recounts many other formerly secret details about the thousands of Army and nuclear air defense weapons built during the Cold War . Bright: The plans and procedures for their use, and their eventual withdrawal, were revealed .
 proponents of nuclear air defense believed that relatively small defensive nuclear warheads compensated for inaccuracy by producing comparatively large lethal blast zones .
 They argued that nuclear warheads would assuredly destroy attacking planes and bombs they carried, while posing minimal risk to those on the ground . They also argued that nukes would also destroy planes and the bombs carried .
 Policy makers, including President Dwight Eisenhower, military service leaders, and members of Congress, agreed . Policy makers including President Eisenhower and military leaders agreed .
 Defense officials announced the deployments to the public . Arms manufacturers and the news media also publicized them .
 Even members of the nascent anti-nuclear movement at the time devoted almost no attention to these arms . The arms of nuclear weapons were largely ignored by anti-nuke activists .
 This suggests that they did not see nuclear air defense weapons as especially worrisome . While this does not indicate their assent to the weapons, it suggests they didn't think they were especially worried .
 Eisenhower authorized in advance the use of these arms in the event that an aerial attack upon the U.S. was known to be underway but the president could not be contacted . Eisenhower authorized the use in advance of using these arms .
 In February 1958, an Air Force publicist revealed the cost of the Genie's W-25 nuclear charge . It is one of only two occasions in which the expense of a U.S. nuclear warhead has been revealed .
 The Genie rocket was test-fired from an Air Force plane over Nevada in July 1957 . It was the first time the rocket was fired from a plane over the state .
 Five officer volunteers stood below in an attempt to demonstrate that the weapon could be used without endangering those on the ground .
 In July 1958, extensive preparations had been made to test-fire additional Genies as well as Nike-Hercules missiles over the Gulf of Mexico . The tests took place in July 1958 .
 Eisenhower canceled the test, in an Oval Office meeting with Secretary of State John Foster Dulles and others . Days before the operation was scheduled to be conducted, Eisenhower canceled .
 The Soviet Union was interested in the details of American nuclear antiaircraft arms . The Soviets wanted to know details of U.S. weapons .
 In 1958, the USSR's military intelligence agency apparently recruited an Army lieutenant colonel to provide classified information about the Nike-Hercules . The USSR recruited the lieutenant colonel for information .
 Soviet colonel Oleg Penkovskiy, an American agent, reported that the Army missile information was in the USSR's possession . This alleged activity was not uncovered until several years later when a U.S. agent reported it .
 Continental Defense in the Eisenhower Era marks the first book-length scholarly examination on the topic . Despite the ubiquity and visibility of air defense nuclear weapons to Americans a generation ago, the book is the first to examine the topic in a book .
 Coinciding with the publication, the National Security Archive is posting thirteen documents which highlight many of these and other important topics covered in the book . Coincides with the release of the book, the archive will also post thirteen documents .
 Further details about Continental Defense in the Eisenhower Era are available at www.ChristopherJohnBright.com .
 President Eisenhower appointed Massachusetts Institute of Technology President James R Killian, Jr. to lead a group of scientists and engineers to examine technological applications that could improve the nation's offensive forces, intelligence collection, and continental defense efforts .
 Killian, Doolittle, Land, Land and Baxter lead the steering committee . Killian is the son of MIT aeronautical engineering doctorate . The group's steering committee includes retired World War II hero General James H Doolitt .
 The danger posed by a thermonuclear-equipped adversary and the consequent requirement for effective air defenses was a significant theme of the Killian study . The threat posed by an adversary was the subject of the study .
 Report recommended that nuclear warheads become ""the major armament"" for American air defense arms . Report: Nuclear warheads should be 'major armament' for air defense forces .
 Committee recommended one ""high altitude"" nuclear shot in a forthcoming test series be promoted by officials in a way which might reduce public angst about the dangers of deploying or using nuclear antiaircraft weapons .
 Killian panel believed that the relatively low yield of nuclear antiaircraft arms, and the altitude at which they would be detonated, would pose little harm to those on the ground .
 In 1956, the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy asked the AEC to consider testing versions of the MB-1 Genie and Nike-Hercules .
 Various iterations of the warheads had been detonated and the design of the missile and rocket components had been validated . Various iterations had already been detonated .
 Neither Genie nor Nike-Hercules had been operated as a complete weapon in a single exercise from launch to nuclear blast .
 The AEC believed its function was the design, manufacture, and testing of nuclear components . It had little interest in funding, supporting, or organizing what it considered to be practice firings of completed arms .
 On July 19, 1957 in Shot John of Operation Plumbbob, an interceptor detonated an MB-1 at 18,000 feet above five U.S. Air Force officers standing on the ground .
 MB-1 Genie rockets were declared operational on January 1, 1957 . The U.S. Air Force used the rockets to launch the first generation of its own rockets .
 The month before, Herbert Loper, an aide to Defense Secretary Charles Wilson, wrote Lewis Strauss, the Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission, about the need for ""a public announcement"" of the nation's ""new capability"" in nuclear air defense weaponry .
 Loper outlined the Pentagon's approach to announcing the deployment of the Genie and the Army's Nike-Hercules . Loper said the Genie was also scheduled to be introduced in next year .
 The next year, he noted the Genie's cost in a press release issued in conjunction with a Las Vegas air fair . "The cost of the Genie" was the same year he noted it in a release .
 The Air Force investigated after the announcement garnered a front-page article in the Washington Post and Times-Herald . Air Force is investigating the incident .
 The cost of nuclear weapons was an important secret . Defense officials believed that an adversary could estimate the size of the U.S. arsenal based on the total AEC budget .
 Oldfield's statement about the cost of the Genie cost was the first time an official acknowledged the figures for a specific American nuclear weapon .
 During the Cold War and ensuing years, the cost of only one or two other warhead types may have been officially confirmed . During the entire Cold War, there were only two or two confirmed nuclear warheads . The cost of a nuclear warhead was not confirmed .
 The Pentagon scheduled a Nike-Hercules operational exercise and a second full-fledged Genie test to take place over the Gulf of Mexico in 1958 . The tests were part of an operational exercise .
 Eisenhower halted the operation a week before it occurred following two Oval Office meetings with senior military and civilian officials . The operation was halted a week later .
 AEC Chairman Lewis Strauss questioned the possible adverse public reaction if the operation went ahead . AEC chairman Lewis Strauss said the operation could be 'adverse public reaction'
 Nike-Hercules battery at Eglin Air Force Base's Santa Rosa Island launched two missiles over the Gulf . Each missile had a different version of the W-31 nuclear charge . Air Force F-80s were converted into drones .
 In the same exercise, the Air Force intended to have interceptors fire Genies at other unmanned aircraft . In the exercise, interceptors intended to use Genies to shoot at other aircraft .
 The United States Public Health Service also made arrangements to collect rain, rainwater, milk, crop, crop and seafood samples . Health departments in Georgia, Florida, Alabama, and Mississippi will collect samples in cooperation .
 On June 27, 1958, Lewis Strauss, Secretary of State John Foster Dulles and others discussed the Eglin operation with President Eisenhower . Eisenhower was the president when he visited Eglin .
 Strauss believed unnecessary tests of production nuclear arms might imperil future test activities he thought which were central to the AEC's mission . Strauss emphasized his belief that what he considered unnecessary tests may imperil the future of nuclear arms tests .
 Dulles expressed concern that neighboring nations might react poorly to the operation . Dulles and his deputy, Christian Herter, expressed concern about neighboring nations .
 A month later, as test preparations proceeded, another White House meeting was convened . The meeting was held in Washington, D.C., in September .
 Dulles reported to Eisenhower that ""consultations"" with Cuba and Mexico led him ""to recommend strongly" that the nuclear operation be moved to the Pacific . Dulles recommended that the operation be relocated to the ocean .
 There is no evidence that the 1958 test arrangements became known at the time . No evidence that they became known .
 Donald A Quarles memorandum for the president , October 13, 1958 . Revelation of Predelegation . Donald A. Quarle memorandum .
 Any expenditure of atomic arms required explicit presidential permission . Before the advent of nuclear antiaircraft weapons, any expenditure of nuclear arms required permission .
 Killian committee asserted in February 1955 that the brief and hectic period following the detection of a bomber attack made it difficult if not impossible to secure the necessary authority while still allowing ample time to react . However, the Killian Committee asserted in . February 1955 .
 On April 18, 1956, the president executed an ""Authorization for the Expenditure of Atomic Weapons in Air Defense" which allowed military officials to use nuclear air defense arms in certain emergency situations without further approval .
 CONAD had used the article as a basis for other briefings to journalists . News article and other prior occasions had been used in other briefings, CONAD said .
 CONAD received a broadly worded message a month before ""countermanding"" the prior permission to discuss the topic . Quarles countered that CONAD had received the permission to talk about the topic a month earlier .
 Quarles reported to the president that the Pentagon was distributing more precise regulations to clarify the prohibition on public comment . In addition, he said the Pentagon would also be distributing more specific regulations .
 Development of Small, Light-weight Nuclear Weapons . Paul Ager memorandum to Alfred D Starbird, November 24, 1958 .
 Falcon air-to-air missile, developed by Hughes Aircraft, was designed to carry a conventional warhead . It was originally intended to be a conventional weapon . The Falcon missile was developed in the 1960s and is now being used by the Air Force .
 It was six and one-and-a-half feet long, had a small diameter, and tipped the scale at less than one hundred and fifty pounds . It was 6 and one and 1/1 feet long and weighed less than 100 pounds .
 When the F-102 was slated to remain in service longer than intended, Air Force Vice Chief of Staff Curtis LeMay sought to field a nuclear version of the Falcon . Air Force vice chief of staff sought to develop a nuclear .
 The size and weight of the Falcon airframe posed significant challenges for designers of the nuclear warhead destined for it . Air Force wanted a warhead mated to the Falcon which required only modest missile modifications or performance inhibitions .
 Joint Committee on Atomic Energy visited AEC's Los Alamos laboratory and Sandia Corporation in November 1958 . They heard apparently futile complaints that the precise dimensional limits imposed on the nuclear components threatened to greatly increase the warhead's development costs .
 The W-54 warhead which was ultimately developed in 1959 for the Falcon was fifteen inches long, nearly eleven inches in diameter, and weighed only fifty pounds . The warhead was 15 inches long and 11 inches wide .
 Three years later a nuclear device could be produced that was a fraction of the W-25's size and weight . The fact that three years later the device was produced demonstrates the trajectory and speed of the American nuclear weapon design effort in the period .
 On June 3, 1960, the BOMARC missile installation near McGuire Air Force Base in New Jersey passed an inspection that evaluated the unit's nuclear warhead handling, safety and security .
 A highly pressurized helium used in the BOMARC fueling process burst with explosive force in one of the missile launch shelters . Nevertheless, four days later, the helium used to fuel the missiles burst in a missile launch .
 Airmen trained hoses on the conflagration, which kept the flames from spreading beyond the affected building, but the intense heat and flame enveloped one missile .
 Spot checks across sixty-six square miles outside the facility's boundaries found no trace of radiation . Spot checks have been carried out over the past six months .
 According to an Air Defense Command history, it was ""perhaps the worst" event involving any of the ADC's nuclear weapons . Nonetheless, the ADC history says it was perhaps the worst event involving any adviser's nuclear weapons .
 NORAD commander John Gerhart ordered a mobile Nike-Hercules battalion to move by train from Fort Bliss, Texas, to the Miami area in 1962 . NORAD had no antiaircraft missiles deployed in Florida or the adjacent areas .
 Gerhart worried about the adequacy of the Commander-in-Chief Atlantic's ""operational plan"" that would go into effect if war broke out . Gerhart: The plan would go in place if war breaks out in the U.S.
 Gerhart: Most Nike-Hercules missile batteries were exclusively nuclear-capable . Gerhart says most of the missile batteries had nuclear warheads . He says the missile battery was designed to carry nuclear warheads and missiles .
 The JCS reiterated air defense forces in the Florida area were to be ""nonnuclear"" only . In response to the threat, the JCS said it was to be a nonnuclear only .
 The next day, Lieutenant General Theodore W Parker, the Army's deputy chief of staff, asked subordinates to determine if it was ""a fact"" that the Nike-Hercules sites across the nation had few nonnuclear warheads .
 Nike-Hercules unit being shipped to Florida also had only high-explosive warheads on all seventy-two missiles it carried . Parker also confirmed that the unit was shipped to the U.S. also had high explosives warheads on its missiles .
 Parker's inquiries and the JCS's stipulations make clear that the latter had prohibited the use of nuclear antiaircraft weapons around Florida during the Missile Crisis . Despite longstanding policies intended to facilitate such arms, such arms were not banned .
 In the 1990's the cost of the Advanced Cruise Missile's W-80 warhead was inadvertently disclosed . In addition to the cost, in the 1990s, the cost was also inadvertently disclosed.
 This memorandum was fully declassified in 2001 at the request of the National Security Archive . The balance of the meeting it addresses covers predelegation instructions for other types of nuclear weapons .
 The reference to nuclear tests over the Gulf of Mexico generated some press coverage when the document was released . The reference was published in the document .
 At least two scholars have misunderstood its significance since then, probably because other information was not available to place it in the proper context of antiaircraft weapons .
 McCool memorandum for the Atomic Energy Commission, July 23, 1958, . McCool memo for the atomic Energy Commission . Department of Energy/Nevada Nuclear Testing Archive accession .
 Department of Energy/Nevada Nuclear Testing Archive accession no. 1 . John R McBride memorandum to Assistant Chief, and Acting Chief, Division of Radiological Health, July 25, 1958, .
 Melvin W Carter memorandum to James G Terrill, Jr., August 6, 1958, Department of Energy/Nevada Nuclear Testing Archive accession no. NV0023334; Melvin W. Carter memo to James . G. Terrill Jr. memo .