 A Re-examination of the UN Charter System is a re-examining of the Charter System . Joel H Westra Calvin College is the author of a book on the UN .
 Scholars have been able to point to relatively few instances in which the Charter has functioned to legitimate or restrain the actions of powerful states . However, because of the veto, scholars have pointed out few instances .
 This article provides an alternative conceptualization, treating the Charter as the basis of a broader system of international order . legitimacy is conferred cumulatively, by both states within the Security Council and those outside of it, it says .
 States’ expressions of acceptance confer legitimacy, while their resistance withhold legitimacy, evokes prudential restraint from major powers . States are trying to signal their continuing commitment to the existing, postwar international order, writes Julian Zelizer .
 The article applies this conceptualization to a case study of the 1962 Cuban missile crisis . The article is based on the 1962 case study .
 Under conditions of anarchy, states’ interest in self-preservation and in the mutual benefits derived from cooperation incline them to establish systems of order . States’ interests in self preservation and mutual benefits from cooperation in order, states say .
 The UN Charter makes explicit provision for carrying out these tasks, providing a basis for the broader system of postwar international order that exists today . UN Charter provides provision for providing these tasks .
 Earlier versions of this article were presented at the ISA Comparative Interdisciplinary Studies Conference in The Hague on July 3, 2006 and at the APSA Annual Meeting in Philadelphia on September 1, 2006 .
 Security Council action is authorized by collective decision of the Security Council . These include actions explicitly authorized by the council's collective decision .
 Historically, attempts at collective decision making within the Security Council often have been stymied by veto or threat of veto . The major powers possess as the five permanent members of the Council .
 These scholars have ignored the Charter’s role in clarifying and legitimating state actions . These scholars largely have ignored Charter's role in legitimating and clarifying state actions, they say .
 Scholars can point to relatively few instances in which the Charter served as an effective instrument of international order . During the Cold War, the Charter was used as a tool for international order, especially during that period . The Charter was passed by the U.S. in 1945, but was largely
 This article provides an alternative conceptualization, treating the Charter as the basis of a broader system of postwar international order . The Charter is maintained via processes of cumulative legitimation and prudential restraint, it says .
 According to this conceptualization, legitimacy is not a matter of collective decision by the Security Council or other international bodies, but rather the extent of an action’s congruence with Charter rules intended to serve states’ shared interests . legitimacy not a decision by Security Council, but
 It does not require deep internalization of Charter rules and is conferred cumulatively, by both states within the Security Council and those outside of it .
 States’ expressions of acceptance confer legitimacy, while their expressions of resistance withhold legitimacy,’s author says . States‘expression of acceptance conceiving legitimity concedes legality, while resistance withholds legitimacy, he says .
 The anticipated likelihood of resistance elicits prudential restraint from major powers, which alter the manner and timing of their military actions in accordance with the arguments they have offered (or intend to offer) to justify such actions as consistent with the Charter .
 This alternative conceptualization allows us to observe the functioning of the Charter system in maintaining international order both during the Cold War and afterwards . This is in instances in which the Security Council acted and instances in . cases in which it did not. It did not .
 It expands our current understanding of the Charter as an instrument of international order, as well as our understanding of process of legitimation within the international system and other social systems .
 The second section considers legitimacy within the Charter system as being conferred collectively . It lays out three distinct formulations and considering the shortcomings of each one .
 The fourth section applies this conceptualization to a case study of the 1962 Cuban missile crisis . The Charter’s role in evoking prudential restraint as policymakers sought to cumulate legitimacy for US actions, the authors say .
 To understand the functioning of the Charter system in maintaining international order, we must begin by examining the Charter itself . The UN Charter System of International Order .
 Legal scholars generally have characterized the Charter as an instrument of international peace . In consideration of these and other Charter provisions, legal scholars have characterized it as a peace-making instrument .
 The Charter is an instrument of international order that alters the costs and risks associated with using armed force . More than a peace instrument, it alters the risks and costs associated with armed force, the Charter is more than peace, it says .
 The phrases signify a ‘comprehensive and cooperative’ approach to achieving states’ shared interests by restraining actions that threaten international order . As Wolfrum has suggested, the consistent coupling of these two concepts is purposeful, he says .
 As Ikenberry has suggested, to bind less powerful states to this emerging postwar order, it was necessary that the major powers offer them a more favorable bargain than they otherwise would have been able to negotiate, based on their relative power positions at the time .
 The Charter says the Security Council has ‘primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security’ But it does not have sole responsibility for doing so, nor is the sole arbiter of the legitimacy of states’ actions .
 Such actions can best be understood as occurring within a broader system of international order built upon the basic UN Charter framework . Such actions are best seen as occurring in a broader international order, such as the UN Charter .
 Understanding state actions within the context of this broader system of order helps us better understand the process by which legitimacy is conferred internationally . legitimacy is a concept that can be defined only in an existing social order, whether that order be domestic or international .
 The literature tends to treat international legitimacy as a matter of states’ subjective beliefs that lead to voluntary compliance with shared rules, such as those codified in the Charter text . This is the case of states' subjective beliefs .
 States do not necessarily agree, however, on how such rules should be interpreted or applied . States may disagree on how to interpret or apply to the rules .
 Much of the existing literature accords the Security Council with collective authority to confer legitimacy on actions involving the use of armed force . The Security Council has ‘primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security’ and consists of a broad sampling of states .
 Most understand the Charter as a means of coordination, as part of a system of communal obligation, or as an expression of domestic social purpose . There are several variants of the Charter .
 Many assume that post-World War II international order has given way to a new, post-Cold War international order . The Charter was designed to sustain the post-WWII international order, which was designed for World War II .
 Scholars understand the Charter as a means of coordination . Charter serves as an instrument of international order by reducing complexity . Charter provides a basis for coordinating state action .
 The Charter provides a focal solution to the coordination dilemma faced by states attempting to enforce limits on the actions of the major powers . Voeten provides the most complete articulation of this position, describing the Charter as an 'elite pact'
 Such beliefs arise among states that have thinly internalized Charter rules by accepting them, making them part of their established practices . Such beliefs occur among states .
 The mere existence of rules that serve states’ shared interests, however, does not necessarily mean that those rules will be internalized by them . Rules that serve state’s shared interests don’t necessarily mean they will internalize by them, experts say .
 There remains the question of when enough states have internalized such rules to render them self-forcing . Even then, however, there remains a question .
 In general, the argument seems to be that internalization of Charter rules did not occur until after the end of the Cold War . The argument is that internalizing of the Charter rules was not until after end of Cold War, the author says .
 The 1990–1991 Persian Gulf War was a ‘galvanizing event’’ in that the Security Council acted collectively in response to Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait . Voeten is more explicit, arguing that the 1990–91 Persian Gulf war was a 'gal
 In other words, this operational rule became established practice and hence the basis of a new, post-Cold War international order . This operational rule was the basis for a new international order, the author says .
 The Security Council confers legitimacy on state actions, but no international community has emerged as the setting in which such legitimacy is conferred . The United States has not emerged as an international community as a setting for such legitimacy .
 It would seem that some other threshold might have sufficed . States have not deeply internalized Charter rules so as to have formed a collective identity among themselves as members of the international community .
 It would seem that such a process would have begun already in 1945, when states ratified the Charter as part of their attempt to instantiate and sustain the emerging, post-World War II international order .
 The rules are a product of consensus among states, defining membership within that community . Such rules define membership of that community and provide an agreed standard for assessing the legitimacy of state actions .
 It arises through social learning and argumentation, which combine to produce a gradual trend toward impartial acceptance of Charter provisions regarding the use of force . It arises from social learning, argumentation .
 As suggested above, this process of collective identity formation involves deep internalization of Charter rules .
 President Obama's administration has been in the midst of a turbulent world of politics . He says it's important to keep the nation's interests in the balance of interest . Obama says the world is now in the process of becoming a democracy .
 States responding to this pressure become increasingly unlikely to use armed force without seeking prior authorization from the Security Council . They seek to gain the approval of other members of the community through arguments propounding common understandings .
 The Security Council confers legitimacy on these shared understandings . Collectively, the Security Council . Confirms legitimacy on this shared understanding .
 Most scholars who understand the Charter suggest that the ‘minimal sense of community’’ necessary for its effectiveness did not emerge until after the Cold War, when the Security Council responded collectively to Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait in 1990 . Most scholars say that the 'min
 Hurd (2007:129–130; see also Caron 1993:553) argues that it was not until then that the Security Council could be understood to have developed a ‘corporate identity’’ such that it could act in a manner distinct from the particular interests
 Charter rules were not deeply internalized by most states until sometime after the Cold War had ended, post-Cold War had emerged . Charter rules not widely internalized until after the end of Cold War and new international order had emerged, author says .
 If the process of internalization produces a gradual trend toward shared understandings of 5 Mitzen applies similar logic to the working of the Concert of Europe, it will be similar to similar logic .
 Major powers continue to use armed force absent explicit Security Council authorization . Their arguments continue to reflect fundamental areas of disagreement .
 According to this understanding, states value a particular international order insofar as it corresponds to the configuration of their domestic social identities . This understanding is based on the understanding that states value an international order in relation to their social identities, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The resulting Charter system of order reflects the internal ordering of these constituent states . The resulting charter system is based on the internal order of these states .
 Koh characterizes this as a process in which rules become ‘entrenched’’ in states’ domestic processes, such that their domestic decision making becomes ‘enmeshed’ with them .
 Liberal theorists argue that the process of internalization is more effective in liberal states than it is in non-liberal states . Liberal states have a domestic political culture premised on the rule of law and hence more easily ‘enmeshed’’ with international legal rules .
 These include disagreements over whether or not humanitarian concerns or other ends have priority over the Charter’s general prohibition of force . Whether or not indirect aggression is tantamount to ‘armed attack’’ under Article 51, for example .
 Gray suggests that consensus on many such issues has emerged among less powerful states, though perhaps not among the major powers . Gray: "Consensus on such issues is emerging among less-powerful states"
 The emergence of this new international order involves the deep internalization of liberal norms by most states in the system . The U.N. and other multilateral institutions are repositories of international legitimacy .
 Post-World War II international order has given way to a liberal, post-Cold War international order . These arguments become virtually indistinguishable from those posed by scholars who understand the Charter as part of a larger system of communal obligation .
 The only distinction is that liberal states that existed during the Cold War had internalized Charter rules already . The only difference is that, according to scholars who understand the Charter as an expression of domestic social purpose, liberal states .
 The Security Council seldom was able to reach collective decision and confer legitimacy on state actions . However, because of the two diverse systems of international order that existed during the Cold War, the Security Council rarely reached collective decision . The U.N. Security Council was unable to reach a collective decision
 Scholars tend to focus on cases in which the Security Council delegitimized state actions, or cases where legitimacy was conferred by regional organizations acting in combination with the General Assembly .
 Analysis of such cases tends to be rather cursory, insofar as the cases often are intended for purposes of illustration only . Analysis of these cases tend to be very cursory . Analysis is often meant to be more of a point of illustration .
 Chayes’ argument is that Charter rules expressed shared norms that had been internalized by liberal states, he says . He argues that the Charter rules express shared norms in liberal states . The Charter rules are meant to be used in the U.S.
 Policymakers within these states experienced a ‘felt need for justification’’ when making decisions regarding the use of armed force . Policymakers in these states felt a need to justify their use of force, the report says .
 US policymakers heeded advice of State Department legal advisors by attempting to legitimate United States military actions through collective decision by the Organization of American States . U.S. policymakers were restrained by their desire to attain such legitimacy .
 We will soon take a closer look at this case, but for now we should take note of an important shortcoming in Chayes’ analysis .
 Chayes is correct to suggest that the Cuban missile crisis provides a ‘harsh test of international law,’’ insofar as it is a case in which ‘vital interests of the state threatened’ The standard of evidence is too low to demonstrate that the
 Examples of the former include Anglo-French intervention in Egypt during the 1956 Suez crisis, and Belgian intervention in the Congo during the 1960 Katanga secession, according to Chayes .
 U.S. intervention in Guatemala in 1954 and the blockade of Cuba in 1962 . Examples of the latter include United States intervention in Guatemalan and Cuban intervention in 1954 .
 To demonstrate the functioning of the Charter system as a restraint on state action, it would be necessary not only to show that actions accorded with the arguments offered to justify them, but also that policymakers planned those actions in such a manner that the actions would be in accord with the argument they
 The outcome might not have been a result of states having deeply internalized Charter rules . But even then, the outcome might be a consequence of state-internalized rules . The outcome may not be the result of the outcome of the vote .
 To demonstrate such internalization, it would be necessary also to show that there were meaningful deliberations among liberal states (as well as legal advisors within those states) regarding the precise meaning and application of Charter rules . Policymakers planned military actions with explicit regard for the legality of such actions as a
 Legitimation within the UN Charter System is conferred cumulatively by states that have thinly internalized Charter rules intended to sustain the postwar international order .
 States have remained in agreement regarding the post-World War II order, it can be said to have attained legitimacy (Watson 1992:315; Morgenthau 1993:102) So long as they remain in agreement, it will retain its legitimacy .
 States have thinly internalized Charter rules by accepting them as reasonable approximations of underlying shared interests, incorporating them into their established practices . States thus have thinly internalized charter rules . States have thinned internalized rules to accept and incorporate them into existing practices .
 They remain willing to accept the postwar order and the rules necessary to sustain it . They act in general accordance with those rules, even if the rules diverge somewhat from their interests .
 As codified in the Charter, these rules take the form of an incomplete contract . The rules are codified by the Charter of the United States .
 The more persuasive the account an argument provides, the more credible the signal it sends . The more compelling an argument is dependent on the restrictiveness of the claims it contains .
 The more restrictive the claim made by a major power, the more limited the set of military actions it defines as legal . The more restricted the claim, the greater the likelihood that the major power will remain committed to the existing order .
 Providing a persuasive account for the use of armed force thus is not costless, because maintaining its persuasiveness restricts the actions of the major power that provides it . Providing such a compelling account for armed force in the U.S. is not a costless .
 The magnitude and extent of the costs borne by a major power as a result of restrictions serve to make its signal credible . These costs may not be readily observable by other states because restraint is less readily observable than the absence of restraint .
 States consider the costs that are indirectly associated with the arguments offered as a means of assessing the credibility of the signal sent . In other words, states consider the cost of the arguments as a way to assess the credibility .
 States may disagree with the action itself, because it is not in accord with their particular understandings of the Charter . But they accept the action as reasonably justified, nonetheless, insofar as it is consistent with the shared interests that underlie Charter rules . States are willing to accept it as reasonably
 Their acceptance of the action is not simply a judgment of the legality based on a narrow reading of Charter rules, but rather an assessment of the potential to threaten the existing order, based on the broader purposes underlying those rules . Acceptance of the order is based on broader purposes of the rules
 By accepting an action, states confer legitimacy on it, with each state’s acceptance conferring additional legitimacy . Each state's acceptance of an action conferring more legitimacy, states can also confer legitimacy .
 States may express their acceptance of the action by public statements and diplomatic exchanges supporting the major power that engaged in it, by casting votes favorable to that major power within multilateral institutions, or by participating in the action through providing assistance .
 More direct means of resistance include imposing tariffs, trade restrictions and embargoes, suspending or terminating treaties enabling the actions that the major power has taken .
 States’ resistance to a major power indicates that they have not been persuaded that the action it has taken is reasonably justified under the Charter, says the U.S. State Department . States' resistance to the action indicates they are not persuaded that it is justified, the department says .
 They have concluded either that the arguments accompanying the arguments were likely to have been offered in bad faith or that the claims are not sufficiently restrictive to provide evidence of future restraint .
 It is this perceived threat that provides incentive for states to respond with resistance rather than ‘free riding’’ on other states . It is the perceived threat of a state that is perceived to be under attack .
 Such resistance withholds legitimacy from the major power’s actions and cumulatively can erode the legitimacy that has been conferred on those actions by other states (Beetham 1991:18–19), making those states more likely to conclude that such actions are not justifiable under
 The more legitimacy that has been conferred on a major power’s actions, however, the less likely states are to perceive those actions as threatening and to respond with resistance . The less legitimacy that is conferred on the more likely states will respond to those actions, says the author .
 Legitimacy thus is instrumentally valuable, insofar as it can help to alter states’ beliefs regarding a major power’s actions and intentions . Legiticities thus are instrumentally useful, instrumentally valuable to alter states' beliefs regarding major powers�
 In considering possible courses of action, a major power must weigh the benefits of legitimacy against the potential costs of restraint . In the short term, the U.S. should weigh the risks of restraint in the long term, as well as in the short-term .
 States might also take actions to undermine that order in ways that are unfavorable to the major power . States might downgrade their prior beliefs regarding a major power’s commitment to the existing order .
 The Security Council often does play an important role in legitimating foreign policy . Though not essential to the process of legitimation, the council often plays an important part .
 As suggested above, the Security Council represents the pooled judgments of a broad sampling of states within the international system . The Security Council is the body of the United Nations .
 By casting a vote in the Security Council that is unfavorable to a major power, a state not only indicates that it remains unpersuaded that the major power’s actions were reasonably justified, it also increases the likelihood that states outside of the Council will reach similar conclusions and respond
 The Charter provides a written record of a major power’s obligations, subjecting its actions to the scrutiny of other states and the possibility of resistance from them . Nevertheless, even if a power acts outside of a multilateral organization, the Charter still provides a record of that major power
 A major power is likely to offer an argument to account for its actions, hoping thereby to cumulate legitimacy for those actions while exercising restraint as part of its attempt to do so .
 U.S. policymakers do not appear to have been constrained by deeply internalized Charter rules, but rather by the anticipated likelihood of resistance from other states if they failed to cumulate legitimacy for proposed U. States actions .
 They do not seem to have been concerned with the legality of those actions per se, nor with communal norms of consultation and deliberation, they say . They seem to be concerned not with legality of the actions, nor the norms of deliberation .
 The U.S. is showing restraint in Syria, the authors say . They say it's a credible signal of its commitment to the postwar international order .
 The U.S. did not seem to have viewed authorization by the Security Council as a means of collective legitimation . Instead, it was a way of persuading other states that United States actions were in accord with Charter rules intended to sustain existing international order .
 The cumulation of such legitimacy would make it more likely that other states also would respond to U.S. actions with acceptance . Other states would retain their own prior commitment to the existing order as well as their prior beliefs .
 Kennedy received a report from the Central Intelligence Agency detailing the placement of Soviet nuclear missiles and medium-range bombers in Cuba . Kennedy received the report in 1962 .
 Kennedy called together a group of selected advisors, subsequently referred to as the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, to discuss the United States response .
 Kennedy, however, ruled out such an invasion, at least initially, because of the anticipated response by the Soviet Union against Berlin . Kennedy ruled out any invasion because of anticipated response from Soviet Union .
 Failing to resolve this disagreement, ExComm met again on October 19 . ExComm members met again this month to resolve the issue .
 The United States and other states were unable to reach agreement . They expressed concerns regarding the need to legitimate U.S. actions and the possibility of resistance .
 Meeker suggested instead that a naval ‘quarantine’ be initiated through the OAS . The OAS would act under Article 54 of the Charter . Meeker suggests a naval 'quarantine' be initiated by the UN .
 The ExComm split into two groups, each of which prepared policy recommendations . Still unable to reach agreement, the ExComm broke up and decided to split .
 Both groups expressed concern that Latin American states might respond with resistance to U.S. military action against Cuba . Both groups prepared arguments to be offered in the Security Council .
 Kennedy ordered that further military actions be delayed until policymakers determined that quarantine had failed . Air strikes and a follow-on invasion remained as possibilities, Kennedy said .
 Kennedy instructed that his speech announcing the quarantine be written carefully so as not to suggest that United States action would precede OAS authorization . Kennedy instructed his speech to not suggest that the U.S. would take action prior to OAS approval .
 An attack against any member state was considered to be an attack against all . Under the agreement, an attack on any member member state would be considered an attack .
 Language in the speech regarding the implementation of the quarantine intentionally was left vague while OAS action was pending . According to Presidential Advisor Theodore Sorenson .
 The planned air strikes and invasion never occurred . The U.S. and the Soviet Union reached an agreement for removing missiles from Cuba .
 Throughout the crisis, policymakers attempted to cumulate legitimacy for US actions, but they do not appear to have been constrained by deeply internalized Charter rules . U.S. policymakers are not constrained by internalized charter rules .
 The U.S. chose a naval quarantine rather than air strikes and delaying implementation of the quarantine pending OAS authorization . Instead of air strikes, the U.N. changed the way and timing of its response to U.K. actions .
 Policymakers’ main concern was that perceived violations of Charter rules would make the U.S. appear to be an aggressor, evoke resistance from states that perceived such actions as threatening to the existing, postwar order and to their own positions .
 In general, policymakers seemed to believe that the existing, postwar international order was instrumentally valuable to the U.S. The order was important to the United States, only insofar as it approximated underlying United States interests, they say .
 The U.S. acted in broad accordance with Charter rules intended to sustain this order . They made efforts to legitimate United States actions, signaling the United States' continuing commitment to postwar order .
 Ambassador Thompson noted that the Soviet Union would appear to be the aggressor if it ran ‘a blockade against military weapons’’ —irrespective of potential OAS authorization of such a blockade, he said . Ambassador Thompson also noted that if the Soviet U.S. ran
 Policymakers’ efforts to cumulate legitimacy for U.S. actions also included emphasizing the limited nature of those actions . Policymakers also emphasized the limitations of the United States' actions .
 They eventually agreed that actions taken against Cuba in self-defense, under Article 51 of the Charter, would not sufficiently demonstrate restraint . Regional action, taken under Article 54 of the charter and accepted by most states, would. would. not .
 Even as late as October 25, Treasury Secretary Douglas Dillon expressed his concern regarding the ‘dverse effect on United States image’’ of attacking Cuba . He recommended that the proposed air strikes be delayed still further .
 Policy makers' concern with gaining approval from most states, irrespective of Security Council authorization . Notice here policy makers’ concern with getting approval from Security Council approval .
 They do not seem to have been concerned with communal norms of consultation and deliberation . They seem not to be concerned with community norms of deliberation and consultation .
 Even if they did not obtain OAS authorization, they hoped to demonstrate that United States actions were in accordance with Charter rules regarding the use of armed force . The U.S. has already delayed such actions as a means of demonstrating the United States’ continuing commitment to the postwar order
 The risk of nuclear war does not appear to have been a deciding factor in these decisions . Though always a looming threat, the risk of a nuclear war was always a factor in the decision .
 Legal advice shaped policy-making discussions in the U.S. military, authors say . It did so not by evoking explicit concerns of legality, but by assessing the magnitude and severity of resistance, they say . They say .
 Legitimation within the international system does not seem to require deep internalization of Charter rules . States have concluded that Charter rules approximate their interests to such an extent that they remain willing to accept them, even when those rules diverge somewhat .
 States appear to have thinly internalized Charter rules early on, as a result of the tradeoffs contained within the Charter . Having done so, they sought to legitimate their military actions by demonstrating that those actions were taken in accordance with the Charter and therefore not threatening to the existing, postwar international
 Throughout the crisis, the Charter served as an instrument of international order by selectively legitimating and restraining U.S. military actions that might have threatened the existing order .
 Policymakers’ concerns regarding the possibility of resistance from other states prompted them to seek legitimation from those states . In doing so, they delayed proposed air strikes and a possible followon invasion of Cuba .
 Such concerns allowed additional time for a negotiated settlement, but had the quarantine not been effective, such concerns might have prompted policymakers to undertake subsequent military actions under suboptimal conditions .
 The Charter would have prevented a U.S. invasion of Cuba or made it sufficiently costly that similar future actions might have been deterred . But in both instances, it would have served as an effective instrument of international order .
 As the balance of power shifts and new threats emerge, the Charter’s institutional framework must be changed accordingly, or else risk losing its legitimacy . The Charter must change accordingly, says the U.N. Secretary of State .
 Legitimation and restraint are complementary means of maintaining international order, as we have seen . Legitimate and restrained are complementary ways to maintain international order in the Middle East .
 If consensus is unnecessary for legitimation, placing too much emphasis on it and on accompanying multilateral restraints might undermine the process of cumulative legitimation outlined herein . This process might weaken the prudential restraint that this process evokes, the author says .
 It would seem then that reform efforts should focus on updating and clarifying Charter rules regarding the use of armed force by states, rather than augmenting the role played by the Security Council .
 Abbott, Kenneth W. Abbott and Robert O. Keohane, Andrew Moravcsik, Anne-Marie Slaughter, and Duncan Snidal .
 David Caron, David D. Caron: Legitimacy of the Collective Authority of the Security Council is not a myth . Caron argues that the authority of the security council is legitimate in the United States .
 The Interplay of Westphalia and Charter Conceptions of International Legal Order . Falk, Richard A. Falk and Richard A . Falk .
 Institutions, Strategic Restraint, and the Rebuilding of Order after Major Wars. Institutions . Institutions. and the rebuilding of order after major Wars. The United States.
 The United States, International Organizations, and the Quest for Legitimacy. Luck, Edward C. C. Luck .
 The Struggle for Power and Peace, 6th edition, edited by Kenneth W Thompson . 6th book of the Struggle for Peace and Peace .
 The Quasi-Judicial Role of the Security Council and the General Assembly is described as a "quasi-judicial role" in the U.N. Security Council . The Security Council is a non-judgmental role in the United States .
 Liberal Norms, Rhetorical Action, and the Eastern Enlargement of the European Union, are discussed in a new book . The book, "Liberal Norms," is published by Simon Tisdall, a professor at the University of Cambridge .
 Great Britain, the United States, and the International Economic Order. Great Britain and the U.S. are the world's most powerful economies .
 The Political Origins of the UN Security Council’s Ability to Legitimize the Use of Force . The political origins of the Security Council's ability to . Legitimimize the use of force are the origins of this type of force .
 An Outline of Interpretive Sociology Vol. Vol., edited by Guenther Roth and Claus Wittich, is published in the book, "Sociology" and "Interimical Sociology"
 In The United States and Europe in a Changing World, Roger Kanet writes about the U.S. and Europe . He says the world is changing and needs to change .