 Batista fled Cuba fearing Fidel Castro, a Cuban revolutionary who mounted a rebel force called the 26th of July Movement against Batista . Batista had just fled the country fearing Castro .
 Castro assumes power on the 16th of February and establishes a dictatorship . Castro assumed power on February 16, 1959 . Castro was the first president to assume power in Cuba .
 So far, the Soviet leader, Khrushchev is in question of what political track Castro is deciding to take . Castro is the Cuban president of Cuba .
 Russia have only one connection with Fidel which is his brother Raul who is no doubt a full communist . Raul's brother is Fidel's brother, who is a communist .
 Raul never showed his true feelings for communism to his brother, Fidel . Unfortunately, Raul did not agree to Fidel's view of communism .
 This causes quite a predicament for the Soviet Union . This causes them to make them seen and heard by Cuba . The Soviet Union is in a predicament .
 Russia sends Anastas Ivanovich Mikoyan, who held business contacts in the US, to the states as a guest of the Russian ambassador . Smartly, Russia sends him to the U.S. as guest of Russian ambassador.
 Castro still has not identified himself as a Communist yet . Mikoyan is traveling throughout the island, looking things over, looking over .
 Cuba has turned to Russia because the United States had cut off their oil supplies and imposed an economic embargo on the island . The U.S. cut off the island's oil supplies because of the naturalization of United States owned companies and citizens by the Cuban government .
 This calls for a massive oil shipment from the Soviets but unfortunately, Russia was unable to handle such a demand because of their limited overseas shipping capabilities . The Soviets were unable to deal with such a massive amount of oil .
 Russia puts an order for extra oil tankers from Italy, a capitalist country . Subsequently, Russia orders extra tankers for Italy . Russia also orders extra tanks from Italy .
 The United States is infuriated that another capitalist country was willing to help a communist country . When Italy agrees to the business proposition, the U.S. was infuriated . The U.N. was outraged by the idea .
 Italy saw it as nothing more than an opportunity to make extra money, regardless of opposing economic systems . The country's economic system is divided by opposing opposing political systems .
 Russia sent in tanks, artillery and attack planes as well as instructors on how to use the new technologies . Castro felt he needed protection against the United States .
 Khrushchev soon realized that he worsened relations with Cuba instead of bettering them . The former Russian ambassador in Cuba was then replaced after he was replaced . The Russian ambassador to Cuba was replaced by the Soviet-Russian ambassador in 1959 .
 A journalist replaced him by the name of Alekseyev who was friendly with Fidel and his brother, Raul . The journalist was a friend of Fidel and Raul.
 Alekseyev was seen to be much better suited for his position and worked well with the Cuban government because he was already known and trusted by them . He was already trusted by the government .
 As time, went on, Cuba became increasingly dependent on military and economic aid provided by the Soviet Union . Cuba became dependent on Soviet aid .
 Russia made up much of the Cuban trade interactions including the purchase of sugar and nickel . Russia also made purchases of sugar, nickel and sugar .
 The United States was more threatened than ever by this socialist island nation on the rise . The U.S. was more likely to be at risk than ever, says President Obama .
 U.S. spy planes are making a pass over Cuba, particularly, an area where much activity is spotted . The planes are flying over the Cuban border .
 A Soviet-managed construction site is visible and photographs are taken of the site . The Soviet-run site was visible in the Soviet era .
 It is soon confirmed that the first of many medium/intermediate range ballistic missiles have been spotted . It is also confirmed that many of the missiles are believed to have been launched .
 Frantically, President Kennedy secretly meets with his advisory staff to question the approach . Kennedy secretly met with his advisers to decide on the approach to the White House .
 On October 22, Kennedy announces a naval blockade aimed at preventing offensive missile weaponry into Cuba on Russian ships . Kennedy announced the blockade on October 22 .
 The Russian strategy was to install missiles in Cuba without the Americans knowing it . The U.S. knew it was going to do so, and the Russians knew it .
 They would then discover them only to find that it was too late to act upon it . The pair would then find it too late for them to act on it .
 The Soviet Union saw installing missiles in Cuba as a very wise course of action . U.S. missiles were stationed in Italy, Turkey and West Germany which were pointed towards mother Russia .
 Even if the U.S. would try to neutralize the missile installations in Cuba, they would not be capable of neutralizing all of them . Also, even if the United States . try to . neutralize all of Cuba's missile installations, they wouldn't be able to neutral
 Something that both the U.S. and the Soviet Union shared was their fright of world war and even nuclear war . The United States and Soviet Union were both terrified of the possibility of a nuclear war.
 This is arguably the only time in history where the threat of nuclear war is possible . The threat of a nuclear war has never been seen in the world .
 President Kennedy became aware that the U.S. government is pressuring the United States government to use force against Cuba . President Kennedy was aware of the American army .
 This situation escalates so much that the president feels he feels he is in danger of being overthrown by his own military . This is so much so that he feels that he may be overthrown, the president says .
 The exchange of messages between Khrushchev and Kennedy begin to become more frequent as tension rose . The messages would be exchanged between the two men .
 A final demand was made against the Soviet Union to dismantle the missiles immediately . The Soviet Union was ordered to remove the missiles from the site .
 Word came from the Soviets that they were willing to take down the missiles in Cuba if the U.S. promised that they would not invade Cuba . The Soviets offered to take the missiles down if the United States promised not to invade .
 Kennedy agreed to the terms but wanted an inspection team to verify the dismantling of the missiles . Kennedy said he wanted the team to inspect the missiles, but wanted a verification team .
 During the evacuation of Soviet missiles, a U-2 spy plane was shot down by the orders of Castro which caused much commotion in the states . Castro shot down the plane in order to evacuate the Soviet missiles .
 This caused a total outpour of negative propaganda towards the Cubans and the Soviets . This caused the Cuban government to launch a propaganda campaign against the Soviet Union in Cuba .
 Diplomatic relations with the Soviets and the U.S. began to settle, but relations with Cuba and Russia began to worsen . Cuba's relations with Russia and Cuba's relationship with the Soviet Union began to deteriorate .
 Mikoyan was once again called upon and sent back to Cuba to discuss matters with Castro . The Soviet-Cuban relationship was one of the key moments in history .
 Khrushchev decided to write Castro Castro a letter pertaining to his feelings on the recent crisis . The letter was sent to Castro after Mikoyan's return to Russia . The two countries had been at odds for years .
 He mentions the main objective of keeping Cuba a socialist country was successful in which no threat of invasion is posed towards the island nation . The main objective was to keep the country socialist .
 His main objective was to dominate the international sugar market with modern machinery and technology . His primary objective was dominating the world's sugar market .
 World sugar prices suffered much inflation but returned to normal after other countries raised their sugar production to meet the demand . Because of the blockade on Cuba, the world sugar prices rose much .
 Cuban missile crisis served as another example of how nuclear war is possible, says author . Crisis allowed interaction between opposing systems of government that were both seeking to expand their influence on third world countries .
 For Russia, they have succeeded in guaranteeing that Cuba would not be invaded but they have compromised their balance of power with the United States . The U.S. had missiles positioned in various places in Europe and the Middle East all pointed towards the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev has also lost face with China where they see him as a coward in retreating . The former Soviet Union leader has also been seen as a traitor in China .
 The people of the U.S. saw this as their own victory with the removal of the nuclear threat, says CNN.com's John Sutter .