 The new film “Chappaquiddick” is, to date, the most brutal and honest account of what happened that night . The film is to date the most honest and brutal account of the events that happened .
 His brother Robert had been assassinated while campaigning for president the year before . His brother had been killed in the same year .
 Ted himself barely survived a plane crash in 1964, dragged to safety by Senator Birch Bayh and hospitalized for five months . Ted was hospitalized after being dragged from the plane by Senator Bayh .
 It was assumed, within the family and without, that Ted would run for president in 1972 . Ted would have been a presidential candidate in 1972, his family says .
 He had three small children and, the July weekend he went partying in Chappaquiddick, had a pregnant wife at home confined to bed rest . His wife was in bed at home when he went out partying with his wife .
 Jason Clarke is portrayed as a venal, self-pitying coward, thoughtless and remorseless, ambition his only care . As portrayed by Clarke, the young senator is portrayed by Jason Clarke . Clarke: "I'm not a senator. I'm a coward. I
 Chappaquiddick must be counted one of the great untold stories in American political history . The average citizen may be vaguely aware of what happened but probably has little notion of just how contemptible was the behavior of Senator Ted Kennedy .
 Mainstream book publishers and Hollywood have mostly steered clear of the subject for 48 years . Mainstream publishers have mostly avoided the subject of the book .
 Chappaquiddick the movie fills in an important gap, and if it had been released in 1970, it would have ended Kennedy’s political career . The movie would have helped end Kennedy's political career.
 Film is suffused with lament that a man in Kennedy’s position could have been so much more than he was . The film is directed by John Curran .
 Ted, the last and least of four brothers, was shoved into a role for which he simply lacked the character . Ted was the last of the four brothers and the least of them .
 The Senate's Jabba the Hutt is perhaps the most dizzying chapter of the century-long Kennedy epic . That the other three were dynamic leaders who died violently while he alone lived on to become the Senate’s Jabba .
 Vaccine experts decry the appointment of a vocal vaccine skeptic to explore the safety of vaccines and their purported link with autism . The association was raised by a paper published in The Lancet in 1998 that claimed to find a connection between the measles, mumps and rubella vaccine and autism
 Since then, numerous studies have affirmed the safety of the vaccine, most recently including a study of 100,000 children considered at high risk of developing autism .
 Kennedy has “raised issues that have been settled securely and completely by good science,” Schaffner says . 80,000 pediatricians, many family doctors and the World Health Organization all reinforce the current recommended childhood immunization schedule .
 ‘Real Time’ Host Sides with Cuckoo Crackers anti-Vaxxer Robert Kennedy Jr. Anti-vaxxers Robert Kennedy, Jr. Jr. In Bizarre Interview, 'Real Time' host Sides in Bizarre interview, ‘
 HBO's Real Time with Bill Maher aired a very Beasty episode on Saturday night . The episode was part of an episode of the HBO series Real Time .
 Daily Beast contributors Ana Marie Cox and Liz Mair joined Maher and some bald guy from The Weekly Standard to discuss the latest current events topics .
 Robert F Kennedy Jr. came on the show to promote his book Let the Science Speak . Kennedy recently ran a full-page ad in USA Today claiming that thimerosal, a preservative used in vaccine medications, causes autism .
 Kennedy made an infamous appearance on The Daily Show with Jon Stewart for an “autism” special in 2005 .
 Kennedy claimed vaccines cause autism, and that there’s a conspiracy to cover it up . Kennedy also claimed that the government, academia, and Big Pharma are involved in the cover-up . He said the government is covering up the fact that vaccines are linked to autism .
 Maher opened the interview asking him about the USA Today ad, and his anti-vaxx stance . Maher also asked him about his stance on the issue .
 I’m comfortable reading science and dissecting it, and discerning the difference between junk science and real science, I say . I'm comfortable with reading science, dissecting science and analyzing it .
 "We were giving huge amounts of mercury to our children," says mother-of-one . "When I started looking at it, what I saw was very alarming, which is very alarming"
 The former governor of Florida, Jeb Bush, is a Catholic from a wealthy and politically active family with bases in both New England and Florida . Jeb Bush is another Republican with eyes on the White House, as Kennedy was .
 Jeb Bush even wrote a book, Profiles in Character, with a title that is a conscious imitation of JFK’s Profiles In Courage . JFK's Profiles of Courage was published in 1964 .
 Bush and Kennedy also both wrote books extolling immigration . Bush’s was Immigration Wars, Kennedy's was A Nation of Immigrants . Kennedy's book was a nation of immigrants, Bush's Immigration Wars .
 On the 50th anniversary of Kennedy’s assassination, Cruz published a remarkable piece in National Review Online crediting Kennedy with laying the foundation for Ronald Reagan’�s tax cuts and Cold War victory .
 We've seen an economic boom, we’ve seen people climb out of poverty into prosperity,’s President Obama says . We've also seen an increase in the number of people who live in poverty in the U.S.
 Ben Carson says he would have responded to 9/11 with a "Kennedy-esque moment" to launch a national project to become petroleum independent . Carson is a retired neurosurgeon who opposes the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 Photographs taken by Robert Knudsen, Office of the Naval Aide to the President, in the John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, Boston . Photographs were taken from the John Kennedy Presidential Museum in Boston .
 My smoking habit began in my youth, helped me write my own adult history, and now, cigars are in my dreams . My smoking habits began in the youth and helped me to write a memoir .
 Even though the world is rising against smoking, I still feel they are part of my daily world . I have no incentive to stop smoking them. Even though I'm against them, I feel they're part of the daily world and I'm not going to stop .
 I entered the U.S. Navy in the early days of World War II . I became commanding officer of a submarine chaser in the Pacific Ocean at the age of 19 .
 Even if the quality of those big cigars was mediocre, they accomplished their purpose–they made a 19-year-old boy really look like the commander of the ship . The quality of the cigars is mediocre, but it's important to remember .
 When I returned to San Francisco after the war, I went back to a job at a daily newspaper where I had briefly worked before entering the Navy . When I was in the Navy, I worked for a newspaper in San Francisco, California .
 There was a wonderful woman journalist working for the newspaper who hated the smell. She was a journalist who hated it, she said .
 She handed me $19.32 and told me it was her contribution for a better quality of cigars . She handed him the money for better quality cigars .
 Despite the self-interested largess of my colleagues, I still did not advance to the cream of available cigars in those days, the imports from Cuba . The Cuban cigars were still available in the US .
 John Kennedy was a rising young American politician named John Kennedy, who liked to smoke Petit Upmann Cuban cigars . He would have to wait until he was almost 35 years old before he started to work for him .
 Working around him, I felt I had no choice but to upgrade my smoke of choice to a Cuban . I felt it was no longer safe to smoke around him .
 Shortly after I entered the White House in 1961, a series of dramatic events occurred. Shortly after entering, I became the president of the United States . President Richard Nixon was assassinated in 1961 . President Nixon's assassination was the result of a CIA operation in Washington .
 In April, 1961, the United States went through the disastrous error of the Bay of Pigs, where Cuban exiles with the help of the U.S. government tried to overthrow the government of Fidel Castro .
 Several months later, the President called me into his office in the early evening. Several months after, I was invited back to meet with him again, he said . He said he was surprised to find out what happened .
 "I worked on the problem into the evening. But since I was now a solid Cuban cigar smoker, I knew a lot of stores, and I worked on it . I was able to buy a Cuban cigar at the end of the night .
 The next morning, I walked into my White House office at about 8m.m. and the direct line from the President’s office was already ringing . The next day, I was greeted by a flurry of calls from the White House, including from President Obama .
 The only time I could get a few Cuban cigars was when I traveled abroad with the President to countries like France, Austria and Great Britain . The only cigars I could buy was when we traveled abroad to France and Austria .
 I met for two days with Nikita Khrushchev, talking face-to-face with the Soviet leader . I met two days in Moscow, Russia, during the 1960s .
 Kennedy also warned the Soviets that any nuclear attack from Cuba would be construed as an act of war, and that the United States would retaliate in kind .
 Kennedy argued that war-like behavior, “if allowed to grow unchecked and unchallenged, ultimately leads to war.” Harking back to efforts to contain German, Italian, and Japanese aggression in the 1930s .
 The program originated in Chicago and was carried by all of the major radio and TV networks . The program was carried out in Chicago .
 Howard K Smith served as the moderator and questions came from Sander Vanocur, NBC News; Charles Warren, Mutual News; Stuart Novins, CBS News; and Bob Fleming, ABC News . Howard Smith was the moderator for the panel .
 My mother crossed it on her doctor’s visits in the months leading to my birth, she says .
 While I spent my youth in freewheeling California, I knew I’d return to the changing seasons that give the region much of its character . And while he spent his youth in California, he knew he would return to California .
 In 1963, the then-sleepy burg set off on a growth surge that’s ballooned in population to more than a million people today . New homes and shopping malls are spread out across what was farmland not long ago .
 “Going to McLean” meant driving out to the country for a picnic . In fact, when I was a youngster, “going to Mclean’s” was a picnic for a family .
 If you don't live in the national capital area, you might wonder what this has to do with you . CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery .
 As the federal government expands its footprint beyond the District of Columbia’s borders, it has brought a bonanza to those surrounding areas . The federal government has expanded its footprint into those areas .
 He murdered Kennedy because the latter promised to send advanced fighter planes to Israel . Kennedy was assassinated because of his promise to arm Israel with advanced military planes .
 Johnny Raincloud: Americans think John F Kennedy was one of our greatest presidents . He says Americans think he is one of the greatest presidents of the time .
 John F Kennedy was many things, but a great president was not among them . Kennedy was not a good president, but he was a good man .
 I meant to wrap up our multi-volume series on Kennedy yesterday, but a this one caught my eye . This is the latest in a series of photos of Kennedy .
 It fits in with the contrarian view–a reality check on Kennedy myth–to counter the Kennedy inflation that characterized much of the coverage of the 50th anniversary of the JFK assassination .
 If you’re a Kennedy admirer, the Washington Posts’s WonkBlog‘s Dylan Matthews is here to rain on your parade . Matthews: Kennedy is a good guy, but he's a bad guy .
 Lee Harvey Oswald assassinated President John F Kennedy 50 years ago Friday . Oswald assassinated JFK in June 1963 . Oswald was the assassin of President Kennedy .
 The assassination was a tragedy — and it turned the target into something of a secular political saint . The assassination of George W. Kennedy turned the assassination into a tragedy .
 Gallup poll last week found that Americans rate him more highly than any of the other 11 presidents since Eisenhower . Gallup poll: Americans rate President Obama more highly .
 A 2011 Gallup poll found that he came in fourth when Americans were asked to name him the greatest president of all time . He came in behind Ronald Reagan, Abraham Lincoln, and Bill Clinton .
 Kennedy was a brilliant rhetorician who inspired a generation of young Americans . His death left a lingering scar on the American psyche . Kennedy was an inspiration to a generation .
 It's important that Obama's presidency be evaluated on its actual merits, but it's important to be judged on its merits .
 Historians disagree on what exactly led to the October 1962 crisis that almost ended in a nuclear exchange . Historians say the crisis almost ended with a nuclear strike .
 The Eastern Seaboard was wiped out that month . Kennedy's fecklessness would have been the result of his feckless actions, says historian .
 The brief Kennedy years represent for many in the media their own golden moment . Kennedy years were a golden moment for the media . The Kennedy years represented for many media outlets .
 JFK was their royalty, their idol, their ideal, their handsome and rich young war hero . JFK was the young, rich, handsome, handsome and wealthy war hero. JFK was JFK's idol, his ideal, and their handsome, rich young soldier .
 "And then it was all cut short, like a Shakespearean tragedy or fairy tale," she said . "Then it was cut short like a fairy tale. And then it would be a tragedy," she added .
 "I grew up around Dallas and heard about the assassination any time I visited anywhere else as a child," he says . "I visited the Sixth Floor Museum. Later on I visited the sixth floor Museum. It was the first time I've seen the Sixth floor Museum," he adds .
 For many, JFK provides a meaningful anchor point, or a point that they have infused with meaning . For many in that generation, that generation was mostly born after World War II and ended up losing Vietnam .
 Don't bring up his womanizing or how the Kennedy patriarch behaved toward the Nazis . Don’t bring up the Kennedy family's womanizing .
 Dallas had its share of mainstream Kennedy-haters, but none of them fired a shot . The fact is, while Dallas had plenty of mainstream JFK haters, none fired a gun .
 Dallas citizens turned out on November 22, 1963, to greet the Kennedys warmly . Dallas citizens actually turned out to greet them warmly in 1963 .
 Even the horrible Zapruder film shows happy crowds lining the streets in Dealey Plaza just to get a glimpse of the First Couple . Even the worst of the worst, the terrible film shows a happy, cheering crowd .
 One lone nut can change all that, and did, which is unsettling to the point of horror . "One lone nut" can change the course of events in the U.S.
 Dallas was not and is not to blame, but Ford’s Theater is to blame for Lincoln's killing . Ford's Theater is not responsible for Abraham Lincoln's death, but Dallas is not . Dallas was never to blame .
 Many on the left would rather blame their preferred villains than look at the truth . The left is trying to blame its preferred villains rather than look for the truth, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm not going to blame my preferred villains. But many on the
 The truth is, the assassination of John F Kennedy is the killing of one of life’s genetic lottery winners by a small-time loser . The assassination of JFK Kennedy is a killing of life's genetic lottery winner .
 The JFK assassination could have been a conspiracy, but it probably wasn't . JFK assassination was probably not a conspiracy .
 The evidence points directly at one man whose ideology, coupled with his combination of grandiosity and mediocrity, led him to kill the president in order to elevate himself, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Perhaps Althouse is right and it’s become a cliche–and will probably violate a few more by the time November is over . While true, perhaps Althouse was right, perhaps . perhaps . Althouse said, perhaps, perhaps perhaps Albright is right .
 Althouse’s list of 10 rules is a welcome addition to her list of Friday Nov. 10 .
 It’s coming up next Friday, and I’d like to help with that op-ed or blog post you might have in the works . I'm looking forward to hearing your thoughts in the comments .
 Don't repeat the cliché that everyone who was around at the time remembers where he was and what he was doing when he heard the news . Don’t repeat that . Everyone remembers where they were and what they were doing when they heard it .
 Don't tell us what you've been doing and how you’ve always remembered that . Don’t tell us as if it were not a big cliché — what youhappened to have been doing, how you've always remembered it .
 Don't even attempt to say that the assassination had a profound effect on people. Don’t try to . say that . The assassination had an impact on people, he says. Don't try to say .
 Don't make up alternate histories of what would have happened if Kennedy had not been killed . Don’t make up an alternate history of Kennedy’s death .
 Everything would have been different; we would all have had been different. Everything would've been different, we would have had a different outcome, he says .
 If you’re American and under 50, you can assume that you would never have been born . If you're under 50 you would be born in America .
 If you’re into that sort of thing, enjoy it some day in your spare time, but don’t lard your 50th anniversary writings with that . If you're into that kind of thing .
 Caroline Kennedy Schlossberg’s son Jack appears to have reached adulthood in nonugly form and has grown a large head of hair and is therefore presumptive presidential material . Don’t drag in the recent news .
 We celebrate his birthday, like Washington’s, because he was such a great President. We celebrate him like Washington, because of his greatness, he says .
 We don't celebrate JFK’s birthday — I don’t even know what it is — because he was not great enough, he says . We celebrate JFK's birthday because he wasn't great enough. We celebrate his birthday because of his greatness.
 We celebrate Martin Luther King’s birthday, not the day he was assassinated . We celebrate his birthday not his assassination, not his birthdays .
 "Because of his greatness, and because we don’t want to direct our attention toward his murder," he says . "We want to focus our attention on his murder. Because of his great greatness, we don't want to . focus attention to his murder."
 It must be because he was not great enough, and because of points #1, #2, and #3, above . It must also be because of the fact that he wasn't great enough .
 A man died and we morbidly relive it annually, it seems to make little sense to those under 50 . A man's death is not a tragedy, it's a tragedy that must make no sense to the under 50s .
 Inspire us to move on to modest acknowledgements of the date at 10 or 25 year intervals up until 2063, when we — those who survive — can go big for the centennial . Inspiration should be inspired by the 100th anniversary of this year .
 Nearly all of us remember precisely where we were when we got the news of the earthquake . CNN.com will feature iReporters from all over the world .
 Those born after 1963 are generally considered the last birth year of the baby boomer generation . But more and more Americans have little interest in the Kennedy legacy . Those born in 1963 are less interested in the legacy of JFK .
 Most of this exhaustive media coverage failed to note Kennedy was a mediocre president . Most of the coverage of Kennedy's presidency was focused on the fact he was mediocre .
 His record of less than three years provides little support for his place in many polls as one of the best presidents in history . His time in the White House was short of three years .
 A recent survey ranked Kennedy as the most popular president in the past 50 years . Kennedy was ranked as the president of the United States in 1964 .
 Another man, one of the few innocents who lost their jobs due to the Kennedy assassination, wrote feature stories for me when I was managing editor of the New Orleans weekly Gambit . Another man lost his job as a reporter for another newspaper .
 The reverberations from the assassination a half century ago altered the course of a nation . The reverberation from that assassination altered many private lives, in ways poignant and deep . It was a 50th anniversary of the assassination .
 For the two men I knew, Ed Butler and Jesse Core, August 16, 1963, was a fateful day . The two men were both men who died that day . Ed Butler, Jesse Core and Ed Butler died in the same place in 1963 .
 Lee Harvey Oswald passed out leaflets for the Fair Play for Cuba Committee . Oswald was passing out leaflets outside the International Trade Mart in New Orleans . Oswald had been working for a pro-Cuban group .
 Oswald started causing a commotion and Core tried to shoo him away to avoid bad publicity . Core was the Trade Mart’s publicist; he was trying to avoid any bad publicity for the trade Mart .
 Butler was the head of an anti-Communist outfit called the Information Council of the Americas . He joined a Cuban exile and two local reporters on WDSU radio to debate Oswald . Five days later, Butler appeared on the radio to discuss Oswald .
 It was Butler who helped goad Oswald into proclaiming that he was a Marxist . Hale Boggs, who served on the Warren Commission, thought that admission was highly important .
 President John F Kennedy knew his way around the ladies . From strippers to interns and Swedish aristocrats, he knew how to handle the ladies in the White House .
 The murder of a handsome and vigorous president shocked the nation to its core . The murder shook the faith of many Americans in their institutions and way of life .
 These scenes were repeated endlessly on television at the time and then reproduced in popular magazines and, still later, in documentary films . These scenes of the war in the Second World War were repeated on television and popular magazines .
 Conspiracy theories are conquering the country, leading us into a dark age of cynicism . Conspiracy theories have been conquering the U.S. and leading to a dark era of cynicism.
 Americans are bombarded by a growing barrage of outlandish tales, aided and abetted by a polarizing media, and amplified by the echo chamber of the internet . Americans are now bombarded with a growing onslaught of outlandish stories .
 Republicans and conservatives are prone to conspiracy theories, particularly prone to them . Republicans and Conservatives are particularly prone .
 Such inflamed rhetoric divides nations and destroys deliberation democracy, says President Obama . Such rhetoric is dangerous and dangerous, says Obama .
 We have a much better sense of where conspiracy theories come from and why so many people believe them . Fortunately, we have a lot of the answers to conspiracy theories and why they are true .
 Secretary of State John Kerry is a member of the Senate majority in the House of Representatives . Kerry has been in the Senate for more than a decade . He says the majority of his colleagues are Democrats .
 Kerry says JFK’s death was part of a bigger plot . Kerry: “I just have a point of view.”
 "It’s just inappropriate, and I’m not going to do more than say that it's a point of view that I have," he said . "I’ve never said anything about it," he added .
 Kerry: "But it’s not right, or worthy, or appropriate for me to comment further" Kerry: “I’m not sure what I’ve done, but I have a lot of respect for the president,” Kerry said .
 Kerry said in a recent interview with NBC, as the 50th anniversary of the assassination approaches, he doubts the official story . Kerry: "I'm not sure what happened. I'm sure we're not going to believe the truth"
 Bill Clinton shaking hands with President John F Kennedy . It's a black-and-white picture we’ve all seen before: an earnest, 16-year-old Clinton .
 The photo was taken in July 1963 in the Rose Garden . It was soon after Kennedy addressed a group of Boys Nation delegates . The photo shows Kennedy speaking to the group .
 Clinton has recalled the moment in 1992 during his 1992 presidential campaign . He has since recalled it in a series of interviews .
 Memories of Kennedy’s presidency, from his inaugural address to the horror of Dallas, live on in the U.S. imagination . Memories of JFK's presidency, including his inauguration address, still live on .
 JFK's tragic legacy lingers particularly with Democrats, particularly with them . For the past 50 years, generations of them have venerated JFK as their party’s tragic hero .
 Democrats may have long ago abandoned the Kennedy program, but JFK’s flame flickers elusively in their hearts . JFK's flame still burns in the hearts of Democrats .
 In the wake of the resurgence of left-wing propaganda about Dallas, its a topic that deserves honesty, legitimate pushback, and clarification .
 I welcome The Weekly Standard’s Mark Hemingway commentary, and include it here . Stay tuned to updates on the latest developments in the White House .
 The fiftieth anniversary of the assassination of President Kennedy is nearly upon us . America’s public intellectuals are gearing up to present a series of sober and illuminating reflections about the tragedy's legacy .
 Any misty-eyed resonance that can be wrung out of JFK’s death is already being exploited by our elite media gatekeepers to advance a political agenda, says CNN.com .
 Racism is, of course, described as a ‘right-wing passion” though it is conveniently forgotten that at the time of JFK’s assassination this odious legacy was exploited and enforced primarily by the Democratic party . Racism was described as ‘a right-
 Dallas may have been suffused with “Bircher anti-Communism” but that seems very much at odds with the identity of JFK’s assassin who had spent time in the Soviet Union under mysterious circumstances . And yes, Dallas .
 "A lot of my conservative friends were contemptuous of the whole Kennedy family. A lot of the Kennedy family was contemptuous," she says .
 A left-of-center friend admired Kennedy, but for all the wrong reasons, he says . Kennedy was a good guy, but not a good person, he adds . He says he admired Kennedy for a lot of the wrong things .
 Kennedy grappled with economic growth, tax cuts, the dollar, free trade, peace through strength, immigration, welfare reform . The same issues are still with us today. Kennedy grapples with today's economic growth .
 I think he had some ideas that can inform our current debates over politics and policy . I think some ideas can be used to help shape the debate over politics, policy .
 When he built up the military we were in a global conflict with the Soviet Union. And when he built it up, we were at risk of being in conflict with Soviet Union, he says .
 You may be surprised by how similar some of the arguments then were to the arguments today . The arguments today are still similar to those today's .
 Al Gore Sr., the father of Bill Clinton’s vice president, was denouncing tax cuts as a bonanza for fat cats . Gore Sr. was a Democratic senator from Tennessee who was a Democrat .
 John Kenneth Galbraith, the Keynesian Harvard economist, opposed tax cuts . He preferred, instead, more government spending . Galbrith was an advocate for government spending, not tax cuts, he said .
 Kennedy wanted the top long-term capital gains tax rate in the Kennedy administration to be lowered to 19 percent . Kennedy wanted it lowered to 20 percent, but the rate was then 25 percent .
 In 2013, if you include the Obamacare tax, the top long-term federal capital gains tax rate is 23. percent . The Obamacare tax is the highest rate in the country for capital gains .
 There’s a lot in the book that will probably resonate with libertarians . There's a lot of the book's themes that are likely to resonate with libertarianists .
 Kennedy was influenced by a libertarian writer called Albert Jay Nock . Kennedy was likely influenced by Nock, a libertarian who influenced him .
 Early in his political career, JFK gave some amazing speeches about the individual versus the state . JFK gave speeches about individual versus state .
 Inaugural Address line “Ask not what your country can do for you’s” was a call for self-reliance and an attack on the welfare state . And the Inauguration line ‘Ask not your country is what you need’ was a
 Kennedy’s foreign policy and his stance on some social issues, libertarians might find less attractive . Other parts of Kennedy's foreign policy might be less attractive to libertarians .
 Gallup poll shows President Obama has fallen back to square one in a recent Gallup poll . Obama has delivered a number of “economic growth’s” speeches this summer .
 Gallup reported that Obama’s approval rating on the economy has sunk to 35 percent in August from 42 percent in early June . Gallup said the president's approval rating is 35 percent . Obama's approval ratings are 35 percent on August .
 This so-called recovery remains the worst in modern history dating back to 1947 . The recovery is the worst since 1947, according to CNN.com .
 End the spending-cut sequester, lower tax deductions, and raise taxes on the rich . Free up money for infrastructure, green energy, “manufacturing innovation initiatives,” and the teachers’ unions .
 Of course, this would all come on top of Obamacare, which if it doesn't fall of its own weight, will add so many new taxes and regulations that it will sink the economy even more .
 Gallup poll reflects voter fatigue over Obama’s stale class-warfare act . Gallup poll also reflected voter fatigue with Obama's stale class warfare act .
 U.S. is on the verge of allowing Communist China to enslave the free city of Hong Kong . Yet America is set to allow it to be enslaved by the Communist China . Hong Kong is a free city and a free democracy .
 If this happens, it will be one of the greatest abdications of U.S. moral leadership in history, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "If this happens ... it would be an abdication of moral leadership"
 Chinese President Xi Jinping inspects Chinese troops of People’s Liberation Army Hong Kong Garrison at the Shek Kong Barracks in Hong Kong .
 Xi landed in Hong Kong Thursday to mark the 20th anniversary of Beijing taking control of the former British colony . Authorities showed little patience for pro-democracy protests .
 Communist China massing paramilitary forces on its border with Hong Kong . Right now, Communist China is massing forces on the border with the city .
 The pro-freedom movement has brought parts of the city to a standstill in recent weeks . Intimidate the pro-liberation movement that has been brought to a halt in recent .
 The echoes of the Tiananmen Square massacre 30 years ago are unmistakable . The echoes are still unmistakable of the massacre that killed thousands of people in 1989 .
 These developments are eerily familiar to the Soviet Union’s attempts to dominate West Berlin . The developments are similar to those of the former Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 "The United States always made it clear that we would defend the city," says mayor . "We would defend it," he says of the city, "but it's not clear what happened"
 Presidents John F Kennedy and Ronald Reagan traveled there personally, proving by their presence that America stood with its residents .
 The blockade of Berlin in 1948 was widely seen as the opening salvo of the decades-long struggle between freedom and communism . The blockade was seen as a symbol of the struggle between communism and freedom .
 Beijing’s crackdown on Hong Kong already well underway, maybe now we’ll admit that another struggle has arrived . With Beijing's crackdown on the Hong Kong economy already underway, perhaps now we'll admit that perhaps another struggle is arrived .
 Unlike the first Cold War, this time it's unclear whether America has the will to win . This time it’s unclear whether U.S. can win the Cold War .
 Launch pad 39A is the same facility used by the Apollo 11 lunar landing crew and numerous space shuttle missions . The launch pad was the same place used by Apollo 11 and the space shuttle .
 The film, directed by John Curran, stars Jason Clarke as Senator Kennedy, Kate Mara as Kopechne, and Bruce Dern as Ted’s father Joe Kennedy .
 Despite all evidence to the contrary, they are still widely believed, and not only by members of a credulous public . Despite evidence, they still believed, they say they still .
 The claim that JFK was a victim of hatred and bigotry or a martyr in the crusade for civil rights is now a basic element in the liberal interpretation of the post-war era . JFK was not a martyr or a victim in the civil rights crusade .
 Lee Harvey Oswald, a Marxist, defector to the Soviet Union, shot President Kennedy in Dallas 50 years ago . Oswald was an admirer of Fidel Castro, a self-described Marxist, and ardent admirer . Oswald shot Kennedy in the head in Dallas, Texas .
 Oswald was stopped on foot in another section of the city to question him about the shooting . Forty-five minutes later, a policeman stopped Oswald on foot . Oswald was questioned by a police officer in the area .
 Oswald was himself assassinated while in police custody by a nightclub owner distraught over Kennedy’s death . Two days later Oswald was killed in custody by an angry nightclub owner . Oswald was shot by police officers in a nightclub in Dallas, Texas .
 Few Americans today believe that Lee Harvey Oswald shot President Kennedy or that, if he did, he acted alone . Despite the evidence, few Americans still believe that he shot Kennedy .
 A recent poll found that 75% of American adults believe that JFK was the victim of a conspiracy of some kind . 75% believe JFK was a victim of some sort, usually of a right-wing variety .
 Most of the popular books published on the assassination since the mid-1960s have elaborated one or another conspiracy theory . This is not surprising because most of the books have elaborated on conspiracy theories since the 1960s . Most of these conspiracy theories are not surprising, says author .
 Right-wing businessmen, disgruntled generals, CIA operatives, and Mafia bosses are the typical villains in these scenarios . The U.S. House of Representatives will host a series of congressional hearings in New York City .
 Before long the Kennedy assassination came to be encrusted in layers of myth, illusion, and disinformation strong enough to deflect every attempt to understand it from a rational point of view . Before long, the assassination became an issue of myth and deception .
 This enduring national illusion and confusion has had unfortunate consequences . And this enduring national . illusion, confusion, has had unintended consequences .
 In the days and weeks following the assassination, the idea took hold that a climate of hate in Dallas and across the nation established the conditions for President Kennedy’s murder . The myth is that the atmosphere of hate was created in Dallas .
 Racial bigots, the Ku Klux Klan, followers of the John Birch Society, fundamentalist ministers, anti-Communist zealots, and conservatives of all kinds sowed hatred and division in national life .
 These battalions of the American Right had been responsible for manifold acts of violence across the South against Negroes and civil rights workers in the years leading up to the assassination . They must have been behind the attack on President Kennedy .
 It followed that President Kennedy was a martyr, like Abraham Lincoln, to the great causes of civil rights and racial justice . Kennedy was the martyr like Lincoln, who was assassinated in 1968 . Kennedy's death was the result of his assassination .
 President Barack Obama was assassinated in 2012 . Obama was the first African-American president to be assassinated in the U.S. State Department .
 This explanation for the assassination did not drop out of thin air, but was circulated immediately after the event by influential leaders, journalists, and journalistic outlets, including Mrs. Obama .
 Reston pointed the finger at hatred and a spirit of lawlessness in the land as the ultimate causes of the assassination . Reston returned to this theme in subsequent columns, pointing out hatred and lawlessness as ultimate causes .
 Many took this a step further to declare that all Americans were complicit in Kennedy’s death because they had tolerated hatred and bigotry in their midst . Many took to Twitter to express their disgust at Kennedy's death .
 President Johnson saw that his job as national leader in that time of crisis was to supply some meaning to his predecessor’s sudden death . For his part, he saw that . President Johnson's job was to provide some meaning for his predecessor .
 The civil rights bill, which Kennedy proposed in mid-1963, was approved in 1964 with bipartisan majorities in the Congress . Kennedy belatedly proposed the bill in 1963, but it was approved by 1964 .
 Johnson feared a dangerous escalation of tensions with the Soviet Union and another McCarthy-style “witch-hunt’s” against radicals if the U.S. public concluded that a Communist was responsible for the assassination .
 President Nixon said it was better to deflect blame for the assassination from Communism to some other unpopular target . "From his point of view, it was best to circumvent that danger by deflecting blame to another unpopular target," he said .
 FlipIt is Flipboard Magazine's weekly feature program . Use this week's Flipboard to help you understand today's featured news stories .
 The pen is mightier than the sword ...unless someone is trying to stab you with a sword . AreoFree Expression • Humanism • Culture • Politics • Human Rights • Science .
 According to HoytBorn FreeBriar Patch, the sword is definitely the sword . Then it's the sword ...definitely the sword. Then, it's a sword .
 Mildly irreverent thoughts on sex, higher education, media, and my life .
 America On Coffee: Take a timeout into the rhythmic ambiance of our breakfast, brunch and/or coffee selections . I meant irrelevant.