 Both sides had enough nuclear weapons to kill every living thing on earth many times over . The issue was so important that neither side could back down . Both sides could kill all of the living things over .
 The Americans could NOT accept ICBM bases only minutes away from Washington, and the Soviets had promised to defend Cuba, and their reputation was on the line . The U.S. had to be careful of the situation .
 When the U2 plane spotted those missile bases on 14th October, we were literally only one decision away from the end of the world . The U2 planes spotted the missile bases in October .
 I think the critical days were after 16th October, when Kennedy set up the Committee of the National Security Council .
 Some of the options they considered were terrifying – bombing raids, invasion, nuclear strike – ANY of those could have sparked off a nuclear war . Any of those options were terrifying - bombing raids or invasion could have triggered a nuclear strike .
 'The decision to mount the blockade on 22nd October was the turning point. So actually, I think the decision was a turning point,' he said . The blockade was the 'turning point' of the blockade, he added .
 There was still tension, of course, but it gave the two sides something to argue about . The two sides were able to get back on the track .
 Neither side wanted a nuclear war – so as long as they were talking, there was no danger of fighting . Teacher 3 – except for Kennedy’s inexperience .
 I know there’s this myth about how WONDERFUL Kennedy was, but he was a mess-up really . He was a 'mess-up' really. I know this myth. He was really a mess up .
 Castro made a fool of himself over the Bay of Pigs in April 1961 . Castro asked Khrushchev to defend Cuba – and he’d come home from the Vienna summit in June 1961 feeling that Khrushche had made him look silly . Castro came home from Vienna summit feeling that
 The 27th October, when the Cubans shot down the U2 spyplane, was the heart-stopper . For me, it was the 27th Oct. when the Cuban government shot the plane down . The U2 plane was shot down by the U.S.
 There was a real danger that Kennedy would go to war just to prove he wouldn’t take any nonsense from the Commies, says historian John Avlon . Kennedy would have gone to war in order to show he would not tolerate any nonsense .
 You only have to listen to the tapes from the White House to realise that Kennedy was NEVER going to press the button – rather he was scared witless of doing something to make the Russians press it . Kennedy was scared to do anything to make Russians press the buttons .
 Khrushchev, too, was talking big – threatening ‘a fitting reply to the aggressor’ – but he backed down in the end, and on 25th October ordered the Russian ships to turn back . Khrushchchev was as scared as Kennedy!
 I’ve always wondered, you know, whether Khrushchev didn’t intend that from the very start . I‘I’m always wondering, you . wondered whether Khushchev . didn‘t intend’ to use the term ‘K
 Khrushchev asked Kennedy to remove missile bases in Turkey at the Vienna Summit in 1961 – but Kennedy refused . Kennedy refused to remove the bases in 1961 . The Americans had missile bases .
 Khrushchev never intended to finish the Cuban missile bases, but was just using them as a bargaining chip to get Kennedy to decommission the Turkish bases . I’ve always wondered whether Khrushche was just trying to get the bases to be decommissioned . The bases were
 I think it’s obvious that both sides gave themselves one HELL of a scare . Both sides gave each other a scare, and it's obvious that they gave themselves a scare. I think both sides deserve credit for the scare .
 Look what happened afterwards – they set up a telephone hotline, and they negotiated a nuclear test ban treaty . Look at what happened after – they . set up . hotline, negotiated a . nuclear test . treaty, and negotiated a treaty banning nuclear test test .
 Cuba was the beginning of the end of the Cold War, because both sides realised how close they had come to the precipice . Both sides realised that they had been close to the brink of war .
 In the intervening 27 years, BOTH sides went for stockpiling nuclear weapons big time . Both sides went big on nuclear weapons .
 The whole point about a nuclear deterrent is that it ceases to be a deterrent when you pull the trigger . But the whole point is that a nuclear weapon is a deterrent, he says .
 There were U.S. generals who believed that they could WIN a nuclear war . There were a number of occasions during the Cuba crisis when they might just have decided to risk it .