 National Senior CERTIFICATE GRADE 12 HISTORY P1 FEBRUARY/MARCH 2018 ADDENDUM . This addendum consists of 14 pages .
 The extract below focuses on the relationship that Cuba had with the Soviet Union . Cuba's relationship with the USSR is described as one of the most important relationships in the world .
 Cuba's ties to the USSR were strengthened by two of Castro's closest advisers – his brother, Raul Castro, and the legendary revolutionary, Che Guevara .
 Castro came to believe that the Americans would invade Cuba no matter what . Both men shared the communist ideology of the Soviets . Castro and Castro believed that the American invasion would be inevitable .
 USSR and allies were providing military aid and weapons to Cuba . Soon the USSR and its allies provided military aid . Cuba became a major ally of Cuba .
 Khrushchev and the Soviets couldn't have asked for a better-located ally against the U.S. The Soviets were able to get a better ally from the United States .
 The U.S. had nuclear missiles in Turkey, which were pointed at the Soviet Union . The United States had a huge number of military forces in Europe near Soviet borders . It was well-known that the United States .
 While the United States had forces surrounding the USSR, the Soviet had no military presence in the Western Hemisphere . While the U.S. had forces around the Soviet Union, the USSR did not have any military presence at all .
 They did not even have aircraft carriers to put their planes within striking distance of the United States mainland . The U.S. mainland does not have an aircraft carrier .
 After the Soviets moved missiles to Cuba, the global balance of power would shift . After the Soviet Union's move, the world's balance would shift, experts say .
 Kennedy and his advisers were debating what to do about the missiles in Cuba . Kennedy was debating what he would like to see the missiles .
 On Tuesday 16 October, the same morning he learned about the photographs, the President immediately called for a meeting . President Obama learned of the photographs and immediately called a meeting with the White House .
 Kennedy and his advisers gathered before noon in the White House cabinet room . Kennedy was in the cabinet room at the time of the day .
 Intelligence officers presented photographs and details showing missiles . Joining the President in the large room were several intelligence officers .
 They were found in the area around San Cristobal, located in western Cuba . They are found in an area that is located in the western Cuba region .
 The President and his advisers pored over the evidence, asking intelligence officers questions about the photographs and missiles . The President asked the intelligence officers .
 Spies wondered if there may have been more missiles in Cuba not seen in these spy photos . They wondered whether there may be more missiles there in Cuba .
 The President assembled a team of experts to help him determine what to do . The team includes key members of his Cabinet and key experts .
 President Kennedy sought advice from experts on Soviet relations . Most of these advisers were part of the President's administration . Kennedy also sought advice of people outside his government who were experts on relations .
 This group became known as the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, or 'ExComm' for short . ExComm is the group of members of the national security council . This group is now known as 'The Executive Committee'
 It depicts an eagle attempting to catch a mouse that is carrying a missile . It depicts a mouse with a missile carrying an eagle carrying the missile .
 The Eagle Missile Mouse was created by Cubans in the 1960s . It is the first of its kind in Cuba .
 It explains the Soviet Union's position on the deployment of missiles in Cuba . The Soviet Union was behind the decision to deploy missiles in the country .
 The Soviet government stands for peaceful coexistence of states with different social systems, against the interference of one state into the internal affairs of others, and against the intervention of large states .
 It is well known to you, Mr President , the attitude of the Soviet government and personally, of Nikita Khrushchev toward the dangerous developments connected with the USA administration position on Cuba .
 An unrestrained anti-Cuban campaign has been going on in the USA for a long time . There is a definite USA administration policy behind it, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Right now the USA is making an attempt to blockade Cuban trade with other states . The U.S. is trying to block Cuba's trade with others .
 If we speak about dimensions and resources of the two countries, the USA and Cuba, then it is clear that they are a giant and a baby . Cuba and the U.S. are a giants and babies, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 This extract focuses on the process of decolonisation in Angola that began in 1975 . It is the first extract of this article to focus on the decolonialisation of Angola .
 The transition to independence in Angola was spoiled by violence, division and foreign intervention . Angola's independence was paved in 1953 after a decade of political turmoil .
 The hastily concluded Alvor Agreement of 15 January 1975, signed between the Portuguese government and the three nationalist movements, promised independence on 11 November of the same year . Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola and National Union for the Total Independence .
 The Portuguese troops were to remain in Angola until 19 February 1976 … Another proviso under Article 40 of the Alvor Agreement was that the transitional government must organise general elections to a constituent assembly within nine months of 31 January 1975 .
 By July 1975, the transitional government had collapsed due to mutual distrust among the three groups, which had led to outbreaks of fighting . The transitional government was overthrown by July 1975 .
 The News Diary of Lisbon was published on 15 January 1975 . It was published in the Portuguese newspaper News Diary .
 Victoria Brittain spent ten years working in Angola as a journalist . She spent time in Angola during her time there .
 The MPLA, they claimed, never intended to share power with the other two parties and was planning with the Soviets and Cubans to crush the FNLA and UNITA militarily, giving the Soviet Union a strategic foothold .
 The FNLA leader, Holden Roberto, had been on the CIA payroll since 1961 . The Americans also stepped up military support for UNITA . Throughout the year ambushes and assassinations of the MPLA by its two rivals destabilised the country .
 In January 1975, the Portuguese transferred power in Angola to a 'Government of National Unity' This interim government was supposed to rule until a general election had been held, with independence taking place on 11 November, but it did not happen that way .
 Portugal could not or would not exert any real influence during the transition period . Portugal's own internal problems prevented Portugal from exerting real influence in the transition .
 The interim government disintegrated and, with the help of Cuban troops the MPLA, soon became the sole rulers in the capital Luanda . The MPLA became the only government in Luanda after the war .
 It will be remembered that during the 1960s and 1970s and thereafter, the pattern was for the big powers to take sides and become involved in regional and local conflicts . Soon Angola was a battleground .
 The United States of America was the leader of the West and the Soviet Union of the East . The participation of the Americans with their allies and the Soviets with theirs is common knowledge . This is the international 'Cold War' background against which the conflicts of that time must be seen .
 South Africa, with the war on its doorstep, became part of the anti-Marxist alliance . South Africa is now part of an anti-war alliance .
 The extract below explains the reasons for the establishment of the Black Power Movement in the United States of America during the 1960s . The extract is an extract from the book Black Power in America .
 The Black Power Movement grew out of the Civil Rights Movement that had steadily gained momentum through the 1950s and 1960s . The movement was formed from the civil rights movement .
 The Black Power Movement marked a turning point in black-white relations in the United States . Although not a formal movement, the movement marked a change point in relations between blacks and whites .
 The movement was hailed by some as a positive and proactive force aimed at helping blacks achieve full equality with whites . Others reviled by others as a militant, sometimes violent faction whose primary goal was to drive a wedge between whites and blacks .
 In truth, the Black Power Movement was a complex event that took place at a time when society and culture were being transformed throughout the U.S. The movement's legacy reflects that complexity, says CNN.com's Roland Martin .
 Blacks still faced lower wages than whites, higher crime rates, and unspoken but palpable racial discrimination . Blacks still face lower wages, crime rates and racial discrimination.
 Young blacks in particular saw the Civil Rights Movement as too mainstream to generate real social change . Young blacks saw the movement as 'too mainstream' for real change .
 What they wanted was something that would accelerate the process and give blacks the same opportunities as whites, not just socially but also economically and politically . The goal was to give blacks a chance to equal opportunity as whites as they did in the 1960s and beyond .
 They felt that the Civil Rights Movement was based more on white perceptions of civil rights than black perceptions . Perhaps more important, they felt that white perceptions were more important than black ones .
 By the mid-1960s, dissatisfaction with the pace of change was growing among blacks . By that time, dissatisfaction among blacks was growing .
 Stokely Carmichael, head of the Student Non-violent Co-ordinating Committee, popularised the term in 1966 . The term 'black power' had been around since the 1950s .
 When we form coalitions we must say on what grounds we are going to form them, not white people telling us how to form it . We must say the grounds we're going to use, not how we will form them . We need to be able to form a coalition, not
 We must think politically and get power because we are the only people in this country that are powerless. We are powerless, she says . We are only people who are powerless," she said .
 We are the only people who have to protect ourselves from our protectors. We are only people . We are protecting ourselves from their protectors, says the author of the book . "We are the people who must protect ourselves," she says .
 We are the only people who want a man called Willis removed who is a racist, that have to lie down in the street and beg a racist named Daley to remove the racist named Willis . We are only those who want to remove a racist who is called Willis .
 "We have to build a movement so we can see Daley and say, 'Tell Willis to get hat,' and by the time we turn around he is gone. We have to be a movement," says Daley .
 Everybody in this country is for 'Freedom Now' but not everybody is for Black Power . "We have got to get rid of some of the people who have white power," he says . "Everybody is for "Freedom Now"
 "We have to be able to smash any political machine in the country that's oppressing us and bring it to its knees," he says . We need to smash political machine that's "oppressing us," he adds. "We need to bring it down"
 We have to be aware that if we keep growing and multiplying the way we do in ten years all the major cities are going to be ours . We have been warned that in 10 years, all major cities will be ours. We need to be prepared for that .
 In Newark, New Jersey, where we are sixty per cent of the population, we went along with their stories about integrating and we got absorbed . We have to know that in Newark, N.J. "We got absorbed. We have a history of integration. We got absorbed,"
 "All we have to show for it is three councilmen who are speaking for them, not for us. All we have is is three councils speaking for us," says councilman . Councilmen "speaking for them not us," he says .
 Around the border of the poster the words 'POWER TO the PEOPLE' are written . Around the borders are written 'Power to the People'
 When traditional modes of repression failed to counter the growing insurgency, the Bureau took the law into its own hands . The Bureau secretly used fraud and force to sabotage constitutionally protected political activity .
 The FBI secretly instructed its field offices to propose schemes to misdirect, discredit, disrupt and otherwise neutralise specific individuals and groups . The FBI's field offices were instructed to plan schemes to target specific individuals .
 Close coordination with the local police and prosecutors was encouraged . Close coordination was also encouraged .
 The black community's lack of material resources for fighting back, and the tendency of the media and whites in general to ignore or tolerate attacks on black groups, worsened their situation .
 Government and corporate fear of the Black Power Movement reflected government fear of its militancy, it also reflected corporate fear, it said .
 The Black Panthers came under attack at a time when they provided free food, free health care and free community-based education . The Panthers provided food, health care, and education for the community .