 Both countries, at the time, were vying for global dominance in virtually every facet of human life . Both countries were vying to be the world's dominant superpower .
 One crucial aspect of the Cold War involved the issue of nuclear weapons and missiles . The Cold War was centered on nuclear weapons, missiles .
 The U.S. and the Soviets had a showdown over missile positioning in Cuba . Many countries all over the world braced themselves for the possibility of a third world war .
 "Without a shred of doubt, they would certainly have taken the entire world down with them," says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 On the fateful day of 27th October 1962, the Cold War nearly ignited into a full-scale and all-out war . One Soviet Officer’s Decision Saved the World .
 A nuclear-armed Soviet submarine on its way to Cuba encountered aggression from a United States Destroyer . The U.S. Destroyer was a Soviet submarine carrying a nuclear-army submarine .
 The crew of the Russian sub couldn’t tell whether the war had started or not . At that dangerous location, the crew couldn't tell whether it had started . The Russian sub was sent to a dangerous location .
 One crew member of the Soviet submarine failed to authorize the attack . Fortunately, one of the crew members did not authorize it .
 To this day, Vasili’s decision not to fire is hailed by many as what saved the world from a nuclear conflict, perhaps nuclear annihilation . Vasili's decision to not fire in the face of a nuclear war is hailed as saving the world .
 The United States Planned to Invade Cuba . Fidel Castro and Che Guevara disliked U.S. policies . The Cuban leaders disliked the United States .
 US-Cuba diplomatic relations were cut off when America realized that Castro allied Cuba to the Soviet Union . Diplomatic relations between the U.S. and Cuba were severed when Cuba allied itself with the USSR .
 America worked tirelessly to support Cuban exiles to topple Fidel Castro’s government . America supported exiles from Cuba to topple the Castro regime . Fidel Castro's government was overthrown in 1953 .
 Fidel Castro realized that the U.S. was hell-bent on removing him from office . He sought military hardware and assistance from the Soviet Union . Fidel Castro sought help from the Soviets to oust him from power .
 U.S. flew spy planes to watch and capture activities in Cuba . As part of the agreements, the Soviets built and operated Soviet missile sites in Cuba.
 In October 1962, while conducting its intelligence-gathering flight, an American U-2 plane captured photographic evidence of Soviet missile facilities in Cuba .
 The site of installation was a stone throw from United States land; America was innocently sleeping in hell . The site was a Stone throw from U.S. land; the site was .
 Even though the Cold War was real, America least expected the Soviets to go that far . The Soviets never went that far, but America didn't expect it .
 Kennedy knew that immediate counter actions were supposed to be taken . In any case, Kennedy knew there was a need to take immediate action .
 In order not to risk precious lives, he sought a peaceful approach to the resolution of the missile crisis, he said . The Russian president sought to avoid further escalation of the crisis .
 The president set up an advisory committee known as “ExComm” to help him in the decision-making process . The committee is known as ExComm .
 The quarantine line served to block the Soviets from further transporting missile equipment to Cuba . Kennedy announced the quarantine line in October .
 Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev met with the United States President John F Kennedy in 1960s and '60s . The Soviet Union and U.S. presidents of both countries were involved in negotiations .
 The heat of the crisis lasted about 13 days, during which a lot of negotiations kept the two factions at close contact with each other . A lot of the talks were held between the factions .
 A little mistake in the decision was bound to trigger a devastating nuclear conflict . Judging from the destructive capabilities of the armies of both countries, a little mistake was bound for a nuclear war .
 There was a direct exchange of messages between the United States and the Soviet authorities . The messages were exchanged between the U.S. and the Soviets .
 In the end, the two sides took a compromise because it was a clear case of mutual-assured annihilation . The two sides agreed to a compromise in the end of the war .
 Nikita Khrushchev of the Soviet Union made an important announcement on 28th October . The Soviet Concessions during the Crisis were made by the Soviet leader .
 The Soviets also promised to remove their installed missiles from Cuba . The Soviets agreed to remove the missiles from the country .
 A United States nuclear-armed Jupiter intermediate-range ballistic missile was just one of the numerous in the U.S. arsenal . The Jupiter missile was one of many of the many in the United States arsenal .
 JFK pledged not to invade Cuba, provided the Cubans didn’t directly provoke America . On his part, JFK pledged to not invade Cuba . JFK's Cuba policy was based on his pledge .
 America also had nuclear missile installations in Turkey and Italy . But America had nuclear missiles in Turkey, Italy and Turkey .
 As part of the deal, President Kennedy secretly assured the Soviets that America would withdraw all United States missiles in Turkey . Kennedy also promised to withdraw all U.S. missiles from Turkey .
 The world sat on a ticking time bomb of nuclear warfare, there came a huge sigh of relief as the two countries started fulfilling their promises .
 Reportedly, he was not much impressed with the manner in which the Soviets backed down .
 Castro had no authority or say in how things should have panned out between the U.S. and the Soviets . In any case, Castro had little say in what should have happened between the two countries .
 Cuba would have been annihilated if the war didn't ignite, lest Cuba would be annihilated . But at least, he was probably grateful that war didn’t ignite, he said .
 There were an estimated 40k Soviet military men in Cuba, something that the U.S. was completely oblivious to . The United States was oblivious to the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba . There were also 40k military men .
 Soviet soldiers disguised themselves as Cuban civilians . It was virtually impossible for the U.S. to have known because of the deception .
 The Soviet used “Maskirovka” to beat United States intelligence, by way of denying and deceiving Americans about their operations in Cuba .
 The crisis has been singled out as the closest war event that nearly exploded the Cold War into a hot war . Back in the U.S., President Kennedy was admired as a hero, for his rightful handling of the crisis .
 The Russians were disappointed in their leader, partly because of how he handled the crisis . The Russians are disappointed in his handling of the crisis, however, according to Russian diplomats .
 To prevent future misunderstandings, a direct telephone line was made active for the Kremlin and Washington authorities . As a result, Nikita Khrushchev lost power in 1964 .
 After narrowly escaping a nuclear war, the two nations began to appreciate the valuable lives of their citizens . The two nations narrowly escaped nuclear war .