 U.S. Secretary of State Cordell Hull and Mrs Hull arrive in Havana by ship . Cordell is the wife of U.K. Cuba's first lady .
 Submarine telephone cable laid between Havana and Key West off the Cuban shore . Havana Cuba Date: 1928 Duration: 1 min 55 sec .
 Cuban troops march in front of the Monument to the Battleship Maine . Cuban troops marched in the area .
 Fidel Castro entered Havana, Cuba in 1959 . Fidel Castro was the Cuban president of Cuba's first government . Castro was assassinated by the Cuban government in 1953 .
 Deputy Premier of the Soviet Union Anastas Mikoyan deplanes and meets Fidel Castro in Havana . The former Soviet Union leader was greeted by Fidel Castro .
 A map depicts proximity of Cuba to the United States . United States surveillance aircraft heading for Cuba . U.S. surveillance aircraft headed for Cuba.
 Men examine reconnaissance photographs of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba . Men examine photos of Soviet missile tests .
 U.S. Air Force B-52 bomber aircraft takes off from an airfield . Air Force bomber aircraft is a U.N. Navy bomber aircraft .
 Story of Cuban missile crisis in the month of October . United States USA date: 1962, October 16 . Clip was shot in the U.S. during the Cuban Missile Crisis .
 Fidel Castro addresses his followers and prepares to lead the revolution in Cuba . Fidel Castro was captured in 1962 in the U.S. United States USA .
 Cuban political leader Fidel Castro addresses his followers at various gatherings after the 1959 revolution in Cuba that brought him to power . Fidel Castro was one of the most prominent leaders in Cuba's history .
 Cuban coast, monuments in Cuba, luxurious hotels and important landmarks . Aerial view of the Cuban coast . Cuba is one of the world's most beautiful countries .
 Leeward Point Field airport is located at the United States Naval Base in Guantanamo Bay . The airport is a military base on the U.S. Naval Base .
 Eisfeld-Valier rocket propulsion system tests using simple chassis with steel wheels running on narrow gauge railroad . Cuba date: 1959 .
 Trial run of an Eisfeld-Valier propulsion system on a simple rail car running on the Harz Narrow Gauge Railway in central Germany .
 Official speed run of the Eisfeld-Valier-Rak 1rail car at Stiege, Germany . The car is a prototype of the German supercars EISIS 1rail .