 President Kennedy signs proclamation for naval quarantine of Cuba, 23 October 1962 . President Kennedy signed proclamation to quarantine Cuba .
 President Kennedy and Attorney General Robert F Kennedy confer, 03 October 1962 . ST-459-10-62 . President Kennedy was assassinated in November 1963 .
 Kennedy met in secret with his advisors for several days to discuss the problem . Because he did not want Cuba and the Soviet Union to know that he knew about the missiles, Kennedy met with advisors .
 Kennedy decided to place a naval blockade around Cuba to prevent the Soviets from bringing in more military supplies . He demanded the removal of the missiles and the destruction of the sites .
 No one was sure how the Soviet leader would respond to the naval blockade and U.S. demands . No one knew how he would respond .
 Khrushchev turned his ships back. Recognizing the devastating possibility of a nuclear war, Khrushchev turned the ships back .
 The Soviets agreed to dismantle the weapon sites and, in exchange, the United States agreed not to invade Cuba . The U.S. also agreed to not invade Cuba in exchange for the sites being dismantled . The United States never invaded Cuba .
 In 1963, the United States agreed to remove its nuclear missiles from Turkey . In a separate, unpublicized deal, the U.S. also removed its nuclear missile range in Turkey . The deal was part of a lessening of tensions between the two countries .
 Estimada Conchita, 27, spent 27 years in Luyanó . Her family lived in the Calzada de Luyano, entre Clzda de Concha and el puente sobre el arroyo Pastrana .
 "Me imagino que coincidimos durante algunos años bastante cerca, sin conocernos" "I imagine que coincidentimos por alguno añños"
 Me gustan mucho sus ""posts,"" pues muestran un alto nivel intelectual. Porvenir. Me gusta mucho mucho . Me gusto mucha sus "posts," pues .
 Excerpts from my book “Cuba’s Primer”: “I went to the Agence France Presse office, the French news agency. I went to . The Agence . Presse . office . The Cuban government has been in touch with
 He asked about our trip, and I told him about observed scarcities of food, as well as, related anecdotes . He said, "I'm not surprised, but I'm glad to see how much food is available."
 Ives jumped to his feet and took me in front of a Cuban map hanging on a wall at his office . Ives: "I'm a Cuban. Ives. I'm a great guy," he said .
 The first convoy was near Sagua la Grande, a port in Las Villas, the central province of Cuba . Pointing to the map, I explained to him that we watched the first convoy off the northern coast .
 It was at night, but we watched large trucks with huge loads covered by canvases . It was night-marred, but it was still possible to watch large trucks carrying canvases covered in canvas .
 The second convoy was heading south from the northern coast, at night, close to Gibara, a port in Oriente, in the eastern Cuban province . We saw the last convoy on our way back, as we drove from the “Carretera Cental” towards the
 It was an overcast afternoon, and we were traveling a narrow road, winding through the Escambray mountain ridges . It was traveling on a narrow, winding road winding through a narrow mountain ridge .
 Soviet personnel were in a huge convoy manned by Soviet personnel wearing their characteristic short-sleeved plaid shirts . Suddenly, we were in full view of the huge convoy .
 "Uniform" became a kind of trademark of their presence in Cuba . Overtime, this ‘uniform’ became a sort of trademark .
 There were some light armored vehicles manned by Cuban soldiers, around one hundred yards at the front and at the rear of the convoy .
 The Cuban and Soviet soldiers were stone-faced, and the Soviet men looked professional and disciplined at whatever they were doing there . The Cuban, Soviet and Cuban soldiers looked professional, disciplined .
 These were the heavy industrial equipment Cuba was to receive from the Soviet Union . We joked that these were probably the heavy-industrial pieces of equipment that Cuba had received from the USSR .
 Government slogans purported that Cuba was moving into a fast industrialization program with the assistance of the Soviet Union and its Eastern Europe satellite countries . Cuba's slogan: "Cuba is moving into industrialization"
 Ives took notes as I recounted my story, but shortly thereafter, returned to his casual demeanor .
 "It had taken on the tone of a matter-of-fact conversation, so we did not elaborate much further," she said .
 Ives retired and there are no records of his personal address or telephone number . They told me that Ives had retired . There were no records for Ives' personal address, telephone number or address .
 I always wondered what Ives did with this missile build-up information . Ives has a long line of questions to answer .
 I have the feeling that it was conveyed to the French intelligence service. I have a feeling that . I have felt that it is conveyed to French intelligence services .