 Christopher Columbus discovered Cuba in 1492 . Christopher Columbus found the island in 1592 .
 Cuba is 90 miles south of Florida and also about 90 miles north of Jamaica in the Caribbean Sea . Cuba is a little island 90 miles from Florida and a little north of Jamaican .
 It is nearly the size of Pennsylvania, which is about 42,803 square feet . It's nearly the same size of the state .
 Cuba is always hot and humid due to its tropical climate, and is the biggest Caribbean Island . Cuba is the largest island in the Caribbean .
 On February 15, 1898, the American battleship Maine mysteriously exploded . The ship was the first ship from the U.S. to explode .
 The United States subsequently blamed the Spanish, and declared war against Spain . The U.S. went on to blame Spain for the collapse of Spain .
 The land battles at El Caney and San Juan Hill were all fought in July . The naval battle at Santiago de Cuba was the main event of the war .
 A treaty was signed on December 10, 1898, called the Treaty of Paris . It confirmed that Spain gave up all claims to Cuba . The treaty confirmed Spain had given up all its claims to the island .
 Middle Castros rebellion became known as the 26th of July Movement winning its name from the date of this first attack . The 26th July Movement was formed from this date .
 Castros revel forces staged another unsuccessful revolt in the province of Oriente in 1956 . Castros forces staged a revolt in 1956 in Oriente province .
 The rebels engaged in guerrilla warfare from the mountain headquarters, for the next two years . The rebels fought from the base for two years, with the help of the rebels .
 In January, 1959, Batista fled to the Dominican Republic, and Castros forces gained control of the government . Batista's government was overthrown in January 1959, 1959 .
 Raul Castro, Fidels brother, and Ernesto Guevara also became leaders in the new government . Fidel Castro's brother, Raul, became the leader of the government .
 Both men were were known to have communist backgrounds and were leaders in the 26th of July Movement . Both men have been known to be known for their communist backgrounds .
 Castro seized almost all American-owned property in 1960 . Relations with the U.S. became strained in 1960 when Castro seized most of the country's property . Castro seized the property in 1961 .
 Property owned by other foreigners and by wealthy Cubans was also nationalized . Property owned in Cuba was nationalized by the government .
 Sugar factories and estates, telephone and transportation companies, power plants, banks, mines, and hotels were all taken over by the government . Sugar factories, estates, . telephone and transport companies, . power plants and banks, . banks, and mines, . mines, apartment houses, and
 Shiploads of Russian military equipment and Russian technicians started arriving in Cuba . Russian technicians also started arriving to Cuba .
 On October 22, 1962, President Kennedy announced that Russia had built missile bases in Cuba that could launch atomic attacks against the U.S. and other parts of the Western Hemisphere . President Kennedy said the bases could attack the United States and others .
 President Kennedy ordered a naval quarantine of Cuba to halt the flow of weapons to the island . The quarantine was ordered to halt flow of arms to Cuba . President Kennedy also quarantined Cuba in 1961 .
 President Obama has demanded that Russia remove all missiles and missile bases from Cuba . He also demanded that all missile bases be removed from the island .
 In October, Premier Khrushchev invited the UN to inspect and verify the dismantling of the bases in Cuba . In October of that year, the UN was invited to inspect, verify and dismantle the bases .
 He also demanded that the U.S. give up Guantanamo Bay as an act of privacy .
 In April 1963, the United States announced it would not allow the exiles to launch raids from United States territory . The U.S. decided not to allow raids from U.N. territory .
 They made some sea and air attacks on sugar refineries, ports, and railroads in Cuba . They attacked Cuba's sugar factories and ports . They also attacked the island nation .
 Cuba is a beautiful country, yet has always been place of turmoil and relative violence . In conclusion Cuba is beautiful, yet a place of chaos and violence .
 Even today you are still not allowed to visit Cuba without special permission . Cuba is still a very difficult place to visit without permission .
 Student written piece of work is one of many that can be found in our AS and A Level International History, 1945-1991 section . The above preview is unformatted text .
 The cold war made the crisis more likely because the superpowers were now natural enemies . The Cold War made the situation more likely as the world's superpowers became enemies .
 Both countries were hugely disliked each other and believed that their countries were run in the right way . They both believed that they had the right to run their countries in a democracy .
 The 1984 Land Acquisition Act meant that the government was only legally bound to supply cash compensation, which was often below the market value of the land . The government was often forced to provide cash compensation for land .
 Federalists had capped their opposition to the war with demands for major changes in the Constitution . The party dwindled down to a base in New England and in the 1820s dissolved . Few of the uprooted were adequately resettled .
 Americans in trade, finance, and foreign affairs soon realized the AOC was c**p b/c Congress couldn't levy taxes, establish a uniform commercial policy, or enforce treaties . One element was that Americans in finance, finance and foreign policy soon realized it was c***p b
 After invading Inchon, MacArthur's troops recaptured Seoul, and moved up rapidly through North Korea within 100km of the Chinese border . After invading inchon and recapturing Seoul, MacArthur’s troops moved up to within 100 km of China .