 Castro died in Havana on Friday night at 10:29pm local time, Cuban television said . Castro was Cuban President of Cuba . Castro died on Friday evening in Havana .
 Fidel Castro's death was announced by his brother Raul, who took the reins after Fidel stepped down . Fidel died at the age of 84 .
 Castro led the country from 1959 to 2006, when an intestinal condition nearly led to his death . Castro's illness nearly led him to death, but he survived .
 He ceded power to his brother first provisionally, then formally formally, in 2008 . The former prime minister ceded his position to his younger brother in 2007 .
 In his last years, he mostly stayed out of the public eye, only occasionally providing commentary on events in Cuba . His last years were in Cuba, where he spent most of his life in exile .
 Castro was the last remaining leader from the group of old school communist leaders . Mao Zedong, Korean Kim Il-sung and Soviets Nikita Khrushchev and Leonid Brezhnev were old school leaders .
 Castro rose from being a student activist protesting against oppressive regimes to becoming the president of Cuba . Dictator or national hero, Castro was called many things along the way, as he rose from student activist to national hero .
 Cuban Revolution brought Castro to power as the prime minister in February 1959 . Castro was prime minister of Cuba from 1959 to 1961 . Castro is the current leader of Cuba .
 He was backed by the so-called 26th of July Movement, and Latin American revolutionary Che Guevara . He was the leader of the 26th July Movement and the founder of the movement .
 Cuba isolated from its neighbor as the U.S. cut all trade links with the Caribbean state . After failing to maintain ties with Washington, Cuba became isolated from the neighbor .
 The island nation fended off a CIA-backed invasion known as the Bay of Pigs in 1961 . In 1961, the U.S. fought off an invasion by the Cuban government known as "The Bay"
 The Soviet Union supplied Cuba with arms, cars, and industrial equipment to keep it running . Castro quickly found a new ally with the Soviet Union . Castro was Castro's first president of Cuba .
 In October 1962, Castro agreed to house Soviet nuclear missiles on Cuban territory . The move was a move that followed the deployment of United States missiles in Turkey .
 Washington was furious over the development, and pledged to use force if necessary to prevent it .
 The countries’ leaders, Kennedy and Khrushchev, eventually agreed to a compromise . The countries' leaders agreed to the compromise .
 The United States government has always been open about its feelings toward communist Cuba . The U.S. government has been openly critical of the Cuban government .
 It remains unknown how many times the CIA tried to assassinate Castro . Some Cuban officials set the number as high as 600, according to some .
 This figure includes the notorious incident when Castro’s cigarettes were found to be stuffed with explosives . Castro's cigarettes were discovered to be filled with explosives in the past .
 Fidel was still considered the main moral authority in Cuba . After passing power to his brother Raul, Fidel passed power to Fidel's brother, Raul . Fidel was considered a key figure in Cuba's government .
 Pope Francis met with Pope Francis in 2015 and Russian Orthodox Patriarch Kirill in February .
 Under Raul’s leadership, Cuba has experienced a slow transformation as he has introduced some market-style economic reforms in the largely socialist country . Raul's leadership has seen some slow transformation in Cuba under his leadership .
 He also agreed to restore diplomatic ties with the United States in December, taking a step from decades of rivalry .
 Please consider making a donation or subscribing to our Newsletter. Then please consider making the donation .
 In case your comment isn't showing up right away, there is no need to repost it . Reply Conversation: Share your thoughts with us .