 A decade of social upheaval… …and change… … of war… …of war… ...rebellion… …rebellions… … and fear . The world is about to end in a decade of upheaval .
 Through it all, two leaders with liberal sensibilities drove America forward . With confidence and vision, they drove the country forward .
 The Presidencies of John F Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson created a lasting impact... on America in the 20th Century . JFK and LBJ were both Presidents of the United States .
 John F Kennedy hailed from a wealthy Boston family with long-standing political ties . He was the son of a wealthy family who had long-running political ties in Boston .
 When he announced he was running for Congress in 1946, many thought he was a longshot . Many thought he would be running for the presidency .
 He would be the youngest candidate ever elected to the office and the first Catholic . He would become the first elected Catholic candidate for president .
 Kennedy pitched his experience and said he was the better man for the job . Kennedy said he would be better suited to the job at the White House .
 The initial program drew over 70 million viewers and became a historic milestone in politics . The initial broadcast of the show was broadcast on PBS at 7.30 p.m. ET .
 For the first time, the candidates’ image became a major factor for voters . The candidates' image has become a factor in voters' decision to vote for president .
 The appearance built momentum in the campaign for Kennedy and his running mate Lyndon Johnson . Kennedy and Johnson were both running for the White House .
 He used connections to raise money, rally support and--some allege--buy votes for his son . Some allege he used his connections to buy votes for him .
 The next morning, America woke up to learn that John F Kennedy had beaten Nixon by a narrow margin to become the 35th president of the United States . The next day, America awoke to learn of the victory .
 Kennedy's speech marked the beginning of a presidential age that sparkled with potential . Kennedy’s speech was the first presidential speech of the 1960s . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 President Kennedy surrounded himself with brilliant thinkers . His closest advisors became known as “the best and the brightest” including Robert McNamara .
 Bobby Kennedy took the heat for the president on issues such as Civil Rights and fighting organized crime . Bobby was brash and impulsive--he became the fall guy .
 Kennedy encouraged citizens to work together as Americans faced this new frontier . Kennedy: "We are here to help each other in this new era of American history" Kennedy: Americans must work together to overcome challenges .
 Most of Kennedy’s idealistic domestic policies would not find support in congress . Still he pushed ahead with characteristic determination .
 He aggressively took on the country’s recession, urging tax cuts and boosting federal spending to spur the economy and promote job growth .
 It rested on his belief in America’s youth to deliver aid and promote international friendship, he said . He said: ‘America's youth can deliver aid to deliver international friendship'
 College graduates volunteered for two years to be teachers, health aides, engineers, or agricultural advisers in developing nations . Many idealistic college graduates volunteered to work in developing countries .
 Another international priority was maintaining stability in Latin America . Another priority was keeping stability in the region .
 The common cause was improving the standard of living in South America and using economic development to prevent communism from taking root . Economic development was a key part of the common cause for South America .
 Sputnik was an awesome achievement that underscored the Soviets’ leadership in space technology . It underscored their leadership in the world's leading space technology, says author .
 Kennedy unveiled the goal for landing a man on the Moon while speaking to a Joint Session of Congress . Kennedy was speaking at the time of the first moonwalk .
 Congress approved $20 billion dollars for the space program . One year later, John Glenn became the first American to orbit the Earth .
 On July 20, 1969, John F Kennedy’s dream came true . The success propelled the space program forward . The space shuttle mission was the first to carry out the mission .
 Millions of Americans watched as astronaut Neil Armstrong became the first person to walk on the moon . Armstrong was the first man to walk the moon in Apollo 11 years ago .
 Weeks after entering the Oval Office, Kennedy gave the go-ahead to a CIA plan to invade the island of Cuba and overthrow the Communist government of Fidel Castro . Just weeks after becoming the president, Kennedy decided to invade Cuba .
 The mission--which came to be known as the Bay of Pigs--was a disaster . The mission was a disaster and tarnished the new administration . It came to become known as "Bay of Pigs" The mission came to an end in disgrace .
 Some advisors called for a pre-emptive air strike or invasion of the island . Some advisors have called for an invasion or an air strike . Some called for air strikes or invasion .
 He said ships bound for Cuba with military equipment would be quarantined . The Cuban government has vowed to quarantine all ships bound to Cuba .
 In this charged atmosphere the smallest mistake at any level could lead to an all-out nuclear war . The smallest mistake in the world's most powerful state of war could be a nuclear war, experts say .
 For eleven days Americans worried, waited, waited and wondered if they would see tomorrow . Americans worried for eleven days before they saw tomorrow .
 Finally on October 28th, after much diplomacy and back-channel negotiations, the situation was diffused . The situation was finally diffused after a series of diplomacy .
 President Kennedy publicly agreed that he would not invade the island . In return, President Kennedy agreed to give President Kennedy a tour of Cuba .
 The Turkish president also conceded to the removal of US, medium range missiles from Turkey . Privately, he also conceded that the US would remove the missiles .
 Khrushchev said the Soviets would cut-off access between the communist East and the democratic West . The East and West would be cut off from each other, he said . The West was the only democracy in the world .
 East Berlin was losing as many as 1,500 people per day - many of whom were well educated and skilled workers . East Berlin lost up to 1,000 people a day in the early 1950s .
 The Soviets built the Berlin Wall —96 miles of concrete isolating East from West . If the U.S. intervened, he threatened nuclear war . He also threatened the United States if it intervened .
 Since the Soviets took no military action against West Berlin, the president could only protest . The president was only able to protest against the Soviet action .
 In the newly divided city, the president denounced communist oppression . The president denounced the communist oppression.
 President Kennedy reluctantly accepted a government that included Communists . In Laos, President Kennedy accepted a coaltion government . The government included Communists in Laos .
 In neighboring Vietnam, Kennedy and his advisors set the country on a course that would consume twenty-years . More than 50,000 American lives were lost in the Vietnam War .
 The treaty was signed in Moscow by the United States, the Soviet Union and Great Britain . It prohibited atmospheric testing of nuclear weapons .
 It was a small step but started a collaborative process that would be used throughout the cold war . It was the first time the U.S. was able to work together in a collaborative way .
 In the early ‘60s, social unrest grew. He would soon be forced to take a stand. He was soon forced to .
 “Freedom Riders” took bus trips throughout the South, testing segregation laws for interstate travel facilities . They drew a sometimes violent response from the Ku Klux Klan .
 1963 marked a pivotal year for civil rights . Martin Luther King, Jr. began a series of peaceful demonstrations in Birmingham, Alabama… where police met peaceful marchers with fire hoses and dogs . Then Kennedy sent federal troops to Mississippi after riots broke out, leaving two dead and hundreds injured
 At brother Bobby’s urging, Kennedy committed himself to racial equality . But at brother Bobby's urging, he committed himself . Kennedy committed his life to black Americans .
 Civil rights leaders pressed Kennedy for legislation to protect civil rights . Kennedy pushed for legislation as clashes grew more violent . Kennedy died at the age of 92 in March 1968 .
 Congress dragged its feet… and no action was taken. I have a dream today. Still, Congress has not taken action,’s ‘dream today’
 With a 60% approval rating, the president looked ahead to a second term in which he would renew his commitment to end racial injustice and fight poverty . The president has a 60-percent approval rating .
 He would also re-consider the future course of America’s involvement in Vietnam . The Vietnam War would be the first time the U.S. has been involved in the Vietnam War .
 Official government investigation concluded that Oswald acted alone . Two years later, an official government investigation into Oswald's actions concluded that he acted alone.
 The nation mourns their youthful leader…his optimism and seeming invincibility . His optimism was his optimism . The nation mourned their youth leader .
 An estimated 1 million people lined the streets from the Capitol to Arlington Cemetery . Crowds lined up to pay tribute to the martyred president .
 Much of the fallen president’s vision for America was shared by the new man in the White House, Lyndon Baines Johnson . Johnson's vision for the country was shared with the new president .
 President Johnson would enjoy success building on Kennedy’s domestic accomplishments . But he would fail to escape the destructive power of Vietnam .
 Lyndon Baines Johnson came to Washington as a congressional aide . He was a fervent supporter of Franklin Roosevelt and the New Deal . Johnson was a staunch supporter of FDR's New Deal.
 Johnson’s personality served him well in politics -Complex and contradictory, he swung from the heights of idealism and generosity to unsavory depths of duplicity and petty cruelty . The experience fueled the ambitions of the Texas democrat and by 1955, he was one of the most
 His homespun, profanity laced remarks often cloaked his sharp intelligence . He was known for his homespun remarks, but his intelligence remained sharp .
 In 1960, Johnson joined the Democratic ticket as John F Kennedy’s vice-presidential running mate . The colorful Texan joined the Kennedy ticket in 1960 .
 The legislative giant grew dispirited living in the the the president’s shadow . But the legislative giant became dispiriting living in his shadow .
 He resented the administration’s East Coast intellectuals and tangled constantly with Bobby Kennedy . He also tangled with the President's brother and Attorney General, Bobby Kennedy, over the years .
 President Kennedy was cut down by an assassins bullet and President Kennedy’s assassination gave Johnson inherited the office he desperately wanted to win . President Kennedy died in 1963 .
 He was confident that, as president, he could deliver what Kennedy had only promised . He said he was confident of delivering what Kennedy promised .
 His sweeping vision for America was influenced by the experiences of his childhood . He was inspired by his childhood experiences in New Jersey .
 Growing-up poor in rural Texas, the President identified with those in need . President Obama has a history of growing up poor in Texas .
 African Americans were demanding equality and the movement could no longer be contained . The movement could not be contained, the author says . African Americans are demanding equality .
 He thoroughly enjoyed the game of politics and was a tough competitor - using whatever it took to win . He was a 'tough competitor' and 'always used to win'
 He encouraged Congressmen, cajoled the press and pushed his former colleagues to get behind the bill . The bill is expected to be signed by President Barack Obama .
 Within a year, Johnson achieved his goal… the most sweeping civil rights legislation since reconstruction . Johnson achieved the goal within a year of his goal .
 Millions are being deprived of those blessings, not because of their own failures, but because of the color of their skin . Yet millions of people are denied those blessings .
 The law outlawed barred discrimination on the basis of race, religion, national origin, or gender . It also banned the practice of segregation in schools, public places and employment .
 The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission was created to oversee the fairness in employment . The commission was created in 1973 to oversee fairness in job creation .
 In many areas, literacy tests and other forms of discrimination still prevented African Americans from voting . Literacy tests still prevented blacks from voting in many areas .
 Johnson further championed civil rights in 1967, with the appointment of Thurgood Marshall, the first African American Supreme Court justice . The president also championed the civil rights movement in 1967 .
 Robert Weaver was the first African-American to hold a presidential cabinet position . The war on poverty in 1964 made poverty a national issue .
 With one in five American’s living below the poverty line, Johnson was determined to bring about real change . One in five Americans is living below poverty line .
 President Obama declares unconditional war on poverty in America . "This Administration today, here, now, declares unconditional War on poverty," he said .
 Head Start helps preschool children learn skills necessary to be successful in school . Job Corps trains unemployed young people from poor backgrounds for new jobs . VISTA, short for Volunteers in Service to America, provides a “domestic peace corps”
 His social programs were working and Americans faced the future with optimism . President Obama's social programs are working, he says, and Americans are optimistic .
 The campaign was a chance to silence those who saw him merely as an “accidental president.” The campaign is a chance for those who thought he was merely an ‘accidental” president.
 The campaign spot insinuated that Johnson’s opponent, Republican Senator Barry Goldwater would start a nuclear war in Vietnam or other cold war conflicts . The spot “Peace Little Girl” insinuated .
 The controversial ad was severely criticized and pulled after one airing . It was pulled after only one airing and the ad was pulled .
 The president and his running mate Hubert Humphrey gained 61 percent of the popular vote . It was the widest margin in American history . The election was held in 1964 .
 Congressional Democrats rode Johnson’s coattails and increased their majority in Congress . Democrats rode the coattail of his election to win a majority .
 Within months of his inauguration, the president and the democratic congress pushed forward a flurry of reform bills . President Obama has pushed for a raft of reform measures .
 Medicare and Medicaid provide health care for those 65 and older . Medicaid provides health care to the poor and disabled . Medicaid does not provide medical care for the poor or disabled .
 He set standards for consumer goods...and automobile and highway safety...along with creating the Department of Transportation . Set standards for labeling of consumer goods and automobile safety .
 Not since the New Deal had so much important domestic legislation passed so quickly . New Deal passed quickly. Not since New Deal .
 When it came to the war in Vietnam, Johnson anguished over the stark choices . Johnson: "When it comes to the Vietnam war, Johnson had to make some tough decisions"
 At first, the President was able to balance military and domestic spending . Now, he is trying to balance the budget with a balanced budget . The White House has been criticized for overspending .
 As the cost of both ""guns and butter"" escalated, it was not sustainable . But as a result, it is not sustainable, it will not be able to continue .
 The American military machine had pounded away at the enemy for more than three years. and there was still no end in sight. The U.S. military machine was still pounding the enemy .
 In the early morning hours of January 30, 1968, the enemy launched a massive attack that proved they were stronger than ever . The attack was the first time the U.S. has seen a major attack in the history of the Vietnam War .
 Tet Offensive, as it came to be known, was not a victory for the enemy in military terms . The battle turned the tide of public opinion in the United States and called into question much of what Americans had been told about the war . After Tet, it was clear that there would
 Even some of Johnson's closest advisors began to lobby for a withdrawal . Johnson's advisors were among those who lobbied for the withdrawal .
 In April 1968, the Reverend Martin Luther King Jr. was assassinated in Memphis, sparking riots in major US cities . The Rev. King Jr.'s assassination in Memphis sparked riots in April 1968 .
 The President hoped to unite the country with social progress but his administration left the country more divided than at any time since the Civil War .
 Divisiveness and war became his Presidential legacy . Despite all that he had accomplished divisiveness became his legacy .
 Hubert Humphrey: “He was an all-American President. He was an American."
 He was really the history of this country, with all the turmoil, the bombast, the sentiments, passions, the passions, he said .
 In the decades following Presidents Kennedy and Johnson, the trend in the White House turned conservative . In the years following JFK and LBJ, the GOP became a conservative party .
 In the course of 40 years, only 12 presidents have been governed by democratic presidents . Only 12 of them have been in office of democratic presidents.