 The threat of a third World War allowed the U.S. government officials to deceive the press under the guise of protecting national security . The threat was a pretext to protect national security, the government said .
 This paper will explore the relationship that President Kennedy cultivated with the press to promote his political agenda . It will also explore the impact that this relationship had on the reporting of future foreign policy crises .
 The lesson that appeared to be learned from Kennedy’s “staring contest” with Khrushchev was that the key to resolving foreign policy crises is to take a tough stance . Kennedy refused to compromise under all circumstances .
 Investigators were ready to share the story with the American people, but Kennedy stopped them . Kennedy stopped the story .
 Kennedy hinted that he would be embarrassed if the “real” activity was in Berlin instead of Cuba . Kennedy hinted to Philip Graham, publisher of the Washington Post, that he was embarrassed if it were in Berlin .
 On October 28, 1962, Khrushchev backed down, and the press hailed Kennedy as a national hero . Kennedy was a hero in the wake of the fall of the Cold War .
 The public believed that Kennedy had scared Khrushchev into submission . Kennedy believed that he had scared the Soviet Union into submission.
 Kennedy orchestrated a secret deal with Anatoly Dobrynin, the Soviet ambassador in Washington, to make a missile trade . Kennedy orchestrated the deal with an ambassador to the Soviet Union .
 RFK “made clear that if the Soviets withdrew their nuclear missiles from Cuba,” the U.S. would respond by withdrawing their Jupiter missiles from Turkey, he says . RFK: The United States would withdraw their Jupiter missile from Turkey if it was withdrawn from Cuba .
 Administration officials kept their promise to Kennedy . Administration officials never explicitly revealed their participation in the Turkey deal . The deal was never publicly revealed .
 The press perceived no connection between the Turkish bases and the resolution of the crisis . The press also perceived no connections between the bases with the resolution .
 The U.S. withdrew its Turkish missiles six months after the close of the crisis, the press failed to detect the significance of the event .
 Kennedy was the only person to emerge from the crisis unscathed . The crisis strengthened his international reputation of toughness . Kennedy emerged unscathed from his own crisis .
 Secrecy was also integral at the end of the crisis because it allowed Kennedy to orchestrate the missile swap without jeopardizing U.S. relationships with foreign allies . Secrecy helped Kennedy orchestrate a missile swap .
 Both during the Bay of Pigs and the Vienna summit, Khrushchev had emerged the victor . Both during and after the summit, the Soviet Union had emerged victorious .
 Kennedy had the sense that he would have been impeached if he had not immediately removed the Soviet missiles from the Western Hemisphere . Republicans were vying for Kennedy to take an immediate and forceful response to the threat of Soviet missiles on the American border .
 The Kennedy administration had used secrecy to protect the American people . They also used their insulation to regain American mastery over history . Thus, although initially the Kennedy administration used secrecy, they also used secrecy .
 Early accounts produced by top officials in the administration lionized President Kennedy for standing up to Khrushchev . Early accounts of Kennedy's stand-up to the Soviet leader were published in the 1960s .
 Soviet and U.S. officials conducted a series of meetings to revisit the details of the crisis in the 1980s .
 Revisionists describe the president’s fallibilities, and his desperate attempts to bring the crisis to a peaceful resolution . Revisionists say the president's fallibilities include his fallibilities .
 Kennedy authorized covert activities to overthrow the Cuban government, which led Khrushchev to construct a defensive nuclear base on the island . Bernstein argued that Kennedy invaded Cuba for purely political reasons .
 Michael Beschloss suggested that Kennedy lacked subtlety in solving foreign policy crises . Kennedy and Khrushchev 1960-1963: Kennedy lacks subtlety to solve foreign policy . Kennedy: "I don't think it's easy to say 'I'm sorry'
 Kennedy's anti-Soviet rhetoric and crusade against the Cubans tied Khrushchev’s hands to retaliate against the Americans with equally incendiary force . Kennedy‘s anti-Khrrushchev rhetoric’ and crusade for the Cubanans tied the hands of the Soviet Union .
 Both scholars have neglected to take into account the press’s participation in promulgating the Kennedy legacy . The Kennedy legacy has been promulgated by the press .
 In the late 1990s, scholars compiled more balanced and authoritative accounts of the crisis . They used material from Soviet and American archives to create more balanced accounts .
 This book challenged previous conceptions of the administrative deliberations during the crisis . This book challenges previous perceptions of the administration deliberations .
 In all public accounts, officials and the press emphasized JFK’s 14 McCarthy, “Rallying Around the Flag,” 42. McCarthy . McCarthy, who died at age 42, died in a plane crash in 1968 .
 Kennedy was tough, but he was also much more flexible than the public record indicated . Kennedy was a tough guy, but was also flexible, the president's spokesman says .
 Fursenko and Naftali assigned equal culpability to all the actors involved . Instead of designating heroes and villains to the Cuban Missile drama as other historians had done, they assigned equal blame .
 In 1999, Laurence Chang and Peter Kornblush compiled documents from the National Security Archives into a documents reader . The National Security Archive's documents have been compiled into a document reader .
 Like other works of this decade, their research challenged the official account of crisis management . The work challenged the government's account of crises management .
 "My goal is to fill in the gap of how administrative officials were able to peddle their version of the crisis to the press for so many years," she says .
 Alice L George has focused on how Americans reacted during the 13 days of the crisis . She has been given a look at how Americans react to the crisis in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks .
 During the 13 days of terror, Americans feared they would wake up to nothing left on earth . Americans feared for 13 days before they woke up with nothing left to earth . During that time, Americans thought they would never be able to come to rest of earth .
 The first chapter of this thesis examines Kennedy’s relationship with the press .
 Kennedy developed a network of relationships with journalists to frame the publicized version of the crisis, the book says . The book argues that Kennedy developed relationships with reporters to frame his story .
 Second chapter examines how Kennedy used his friendship with journalists to persuade publishers to withhold information about the developing crisis .
 The third chapter explores how Kennedy administration insiders were able to hide a secret deal with the Soviets from the press and the American people .
 This thesis concludes by arguing that press coverage of foreign policy crises has not changed dramatically since the early 1960s . It argues that coverage of crises in the U.S. has remained largely unchanged since the 1970s .
 Examples from recent foreign policy crises show that in times of war or national emergency, the press supports the policy of the current administration . The press has been critical of the Obama administration in recent years .
 A counter-example is that after the Tet Offensive, journalists became more critical of Johnson’s Vietnam policies . The Tet Offensive was a major event in the Vietnam War .
 Kennedy feared overexposure, so he looked to the printed press to shape the news . Kennedy feared over-exposed exposure, so looked to print media to shape his news .
 These publications demonstrate the extent of public knowledge throughout the crisis . The publications demonstrate that public knowledge of the crisis has been widespread .
 A major limitation to these papers is that they have been heavily edited to align with government policy . The papers have a major limitation: they have to be heavily edited .
 Since Kennedy monitored the news during the crisis, information or opinions that deviated from the New Frontier agenda are sparse .
 Memoirs from syndicated journalists, reporting at the height of the crisis, supplement the information contained in these periodicals . They supplement the material published in this periodique .
 Biographies and accounts from Kennedy administration officials provide a glimpse inside the White House during the most contentious moment of the Kennedy presidency . Finally, biographies from Kennedy administrative officials provide an inside look at the administration .
 These accounts must be read with extreme caution because many were published for the purpose of preserving the Kennedy legacy . Many were published to preserve the legacy of Kennedy .
 Administrative officials have admitted to fabricating details and facts contained in their books . Since the close of the crisis, administrative officials have also admitted fabricating facts .
 Ted Sorensen, Kennedy’s speechwriter, confessed at a 1989 meeting in Moscow between Soviet and U.S. officials that he edited the secret missile swap out of Robert Kennedy's posthumous memoir .
 Welch controlled the flow of information during the crisis, “not only to prevent 31 nuclear war, but also to create a lasting legacy,” Welch says .
 The press coverage of presidents can make or break a presidency . The President and the Press can influence the outcome of a presidential election . The president and the press can influence their decisions .
 News media has tremendous power to influence the public attitudes about a particular president . News media possess tremendous power, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 President Johnson and President Nixon cite the press as a primary reason for their unpopularity . The press is a primary factor in President Nixon's unpopularity.
 Secretary of State George Shultz complained about the biased media coverage of the U.S. invasion of Grenada in 1983 . Shultz said the media was biased against the invasion .
 The adversarial relationship between president and press stems from the president’s desire to release favorable information and withhold unfavorable information . The president wants to withhold favorable information from the press .
 Arthur Krock coined the term ‘news management’ during the Kennedy presidency because of JFK’s skill at manipulating the press to effectively censor public information during most of his presidency . All presidents have managed the news in some form .
 The positive reports printed about Kennedy during and after the crisis raises the question of how Kennedy was able to manipulate the news . The positive press coverage of the crisis raised the question .
 Kennedy cultivated friendships with journalists, editors, and publishers before he became president . Once in office, he could appeal to his friends’ patriotic sensibilities . The simple answer is that Kennedy cultivated friendship with journalists .
 He blamed reporters for notifying Khrushchev and the Cubans about his operational plans . He blamed journalists for not alerting Khruschev and Cubans .
 This chapter begins by examining John F Kennedy’s symbiotic relationship with the press . First, this chapter begins with examining JFK's relationship with journalists .
 The relationship between the president and the press was generally cooperative . There were a few terse moments when journalists became annoyed with Kennedy’s management .
 The chapter argues that the press trusted the president’s judgement during the pre-Vietnam era . The book also argues that it was the first time the president trusted the press during the era .
 Next, the chapter examines how the Bay of Pigs contributed to Kennedy’s political agenda . Next, we will examine the role of Kennedy in Cuba .
 The chapter closes by examining how the press changed their media strategy in response to the heightening of a potential showdown with the Soviets . Finally, the chapter concludes that the media changed its media strategy to deal with the Soviet Union .
 Before becoming president, Kennedy had ardently read Richard Neustadt’s Presidential Power to develop a media relations strategy . Kennedy had read Neustads' Presidential Power before becoming president .
 Kennedy influenced public perception by framing his agenda in the papers . Most Americans read about the news in daily papers, so Kennedy influenced his agenda .
 Before becoming president, Kennedy worked as a special correspondent for the Hearst newspaper . Kennedy learned how journalists collected information to write a story .
 Kennedy cultivated a network of journalists, editors, and publishers to shape his presidential legacy . He fed select information to shape the legacy of his presidency .
 Kennedy ran the White House like a newspaper and every journalist wanted a favorable relationship with the president to gain access to insider information . Kennedy's White House was run by a newspaper like a paper .
 Historians have described Kennedy’s press management strategy as the carrot and stick approach . Historians say Kennedy's press management was a carrot-and-stick approach .
 Kennedy would dangle the possibility of exclusive inside stories to reporters . Journalists who published stories that cast the Kennedy administration in an unfavorable light would struggle to get even a crumb .
 Kennedy mastered the art of media relations during his presidency . By influencing members of the press, Kennedy used the media to highlight his strengths and gloss over his weaknesses .
 Arthur Sylvester defended the government’s “inherent right to lie” when faced with the possibility of nuclear war . The White House was accused of not being forthcoming during the missile crisis .
 If President Kennedy had been entirely forthcoming with journalists, he may have precipitated a nuclear conflict . President Kennedy's secret knowledge of nuclear weapons could have prevented nuclear war .
 By framing the crisis in the press, he was able to secure the endorsement of Allies and to protect the American people . The crisis was a victory for the U.S.
 The press agreed that the White House had the right to withhold “sensitive” information . That right expires as soon as the situation has been resolved, but that right expires soon after .
 Cuba was a major point of contention leading up to the 1960 election . In fact, Cuba had been a major issue of contention before the election .
 Kennedy inherited the Cuban problem from his predecessor, Dwight D Eisenhower, and faced it straight-away . The Cuban problem was a major problem for the Kennedy administration .
 Eisenhower had authorized a CIA-Cuban exile project to overthrow the Castro regime . Kennedy endorsed the plan less than a few weeks into his presidency .
 He did not want the world to interpret the paramilitary operation as a direct U.S. attack on Cuba . So he revised the plan to make the American hand more invisible .
 This plan entailed new risks because if the counterrevolutionaries did not secure the beachhead before the Cuban forces arrived, then the guerilla fighters would be left defenseless . The Cuban forces would be forced to withdraw from the beach, leaving the rebels vulnerable .
 In addition, the “unspectacular landing at night” might not stir up the mass uprising necessary to make the 48th president . Thompson, ed., Ten Presidents and the Press, 75.
 The “Ultrasensitive” Report and Testimony of the Board of Inquiry on the Bay of Pigs , 67. 15 operation successful . 67.15 operation successful. Report and testimony from the board of inquiry .
 If Kennedy did not take any action toward Cuba, then Kennedy would demonstrate to the world that he tolerated Castro’s communist regime . Kennedy would show that he was willing to take action against Castro's communist regime.
 He called and consulted with bureau chiefs and pleaded with them to change their story . CNN's John Sutter said he was disappointed with the outcome of the investigation .
 Nobody wanted to be blamed for alerting Castro’s forces of the invasion, so publishers edited out obvious references to the CIA or buried the story in the back of the paper . The story was buried in the newspaper's back page .
 The Cuban defense forces were taken by surprise, yet Kennedy still found cause to blame the media for his defeat . Kennedy still finds cause for blaming media for defeat .
 Kennedy had doomed the operation when he made multiple changes to the CIA’s original plan . Kennedy's original plan was to use the CIA to launch the operation, but Kennedy had already made changes .
 Kennedy faced major embarrassment when Adlai Stevenson lied about United States involvement in a recent air attack . Kennedy faced a major embarrassment after Adlae Stevenson lied .
 Kennedy canceled a second airstrike on Castro’s air forces . Kennedy did not want to suffer more negative publicity, so he canceled it .
 This decision left a large portion of Castro’s air force still intact, which enabled Castro to have the upper hand in the invasion . Castro's air force was still intact .
 Kennedy’s decisions left the Cuban émigré air force and the U.S. backed armada open to attack . Kennedy's decision to attack Cuba in Cuba left Cuban air force open to the attack .
 Kennedy authorized six "unmarked" jets to defend the remaining Cuban exiles from air attack . Kennedy finally authorized six ‘unmarked’ jets to protect the remaining Cuba exiles .
 Only 14 of the 1,400 exiles were rescued, and the Bay of Pigs became a sore spot in Kennedy’s political career . Ultimately, only 14 were rescued and only 14 survived .
 Kennedy accepted responsibility for the Bay of Pigs fiasco, but privately he blamed just about everybody else . Publicly accepted responsibility but privately blamed everyone else for the fiasco .
 Kennedy chastised newspaper publishers for publishing uncensored stories . Kennedy was speaking to newspaper publishers in a meeting before them .
 Kennedy could not prevent the press from publishing negative comments about his presidency . Despite his attempts to play damage control, the press continued to publish negative comments . Kennedy was forced to resign from the White House .
 In Time’s September 1961 issue of Fortune, Charles V Murphy blamed the president for the Bay of Pigs failure . Murphy: 'The president is responsible for the failure'
 Kennedy covertly dispatched General Maxwell Taylor to meet with Henry Luce, the publisher . General Taylor met with Luce at the request of President Kennedy . Kennedy secretly dispatched Taylor to the publisher's headquarters in Washington .
 Luce agreed that unity was paramount to deter Khrushchev and the communists . Luce was not happy to be scolded for his publication, but he agreed to publish .
 Castro publicly declared himself a communist and Kennedy lost the faith of the American people . Kennedy lost his faith in the U.S. to Castro, Castro declared himself communist . Kennedy was assassinated in 1961 .
 Kennedy accepted personal responsibility for the Bay of Pigs disaster . Kennedy accepted responsibility for his role in the tragedy .
 The Bay of Pigs was a foreign policy nightmare, but Kennedy had learned from his defeat how to proceed with his Cuba policy . Kennedy learned from the defeat of the Bay of Pics .
 Kennedy decided to conceal details about an upcoming Cuban invasion . Instead of advertising his foreign policy plans and accomplishments in the press, Kennedy concealed details .
 He devised a secret U.S. program, codenamed Operation Mongoose, to topple the Castro regime . While publicly announcing an embargo on Cuba, he publicly announced an embargo . He devised the secret program to topple Castro regime, while publicly announcing the embargo .
 The Bay of Pigs, Missile Crisis, and Covert War Against Castro,” in Kennedy’s Quest for Victory, “18 Kennedy would proceed with caution, and he would wait until the time was right to disclose information about the operation .”
 This time Kennedy would control the narrative, so that the next time the press published a story about Kennedy’s Cuba policy, he would be the American hero, he said . This time, he controlled the narrative . Kennedy's Cuba policy would be a success story for the press,
 Cuba had transformed into the top issue of the 1962 election . The Cuban Question had become a top issue in the race for president .
 Republicans were clamoring that offensive Soviet missiles were already in Cuba, but the president was too “soft-on-communism” to do anything about it . Republicans clamored that offensive . Soviet missiles had already been deployed in Cuba .
 Kennedy promised to take action if Cuba became an offensive military base . President Kennedy promised action if it became a military base in Cuba . Kennedy died in August 1961 .
 White House spokesmen were careful to keep Operation Mongoose out of the press . Despite this promise, the White House promised to keep it out of press .
 This section argues that Cuba was an important issue of the 1962 election . Americans were divided over how the president should proceed on Cuba .
 He cultivated an inner circle of journalists, editors, and publishers to preserve his legacy in the written record . He cultivated inner circle to preserve legacy in writing .
 Right-wing conservatives lashed out at him after the failed Bay of Pigs invasion . Despite his attempts to control the story, he could not prevent conservatives from attacking him .
 Kennedy attempted to restore his reputation by publicly taking responsibility for the operation, but privately planning how to defeat Castro and win back America’s trust . Kennedy was trying to win back his reputation .
 Popular opinion of Kennedy dropped to an all-time low in August 1962, and Sept. 1962 . Public opinion of JFK dropped to a record low in September 1962 .
 Historians have focused on the military and diplomatic significance of Kennedy’s presidency . But more important is what the pre-crisis rhetoric illustrates about U.S. sentiment in the early 1960s .
 Historical studies emphasized the diplomatic consequences of the Bay of Pigs instead of the political consequences on Kennedy’s presidency . Historical studies emphasize the diplomatic .
 After the Bay of Pigs, Cuba was no longer a military problem, but a domestic political problem . Cuba is now a domestic problem, not military, but domestic political .
 Newspaper coverage in the buildup to the crisis offer a rare opportunity to peer into the American psyche .
 The White House had not yet confirmed the existence of offensive nuclear missiles in Cuba, the president had no reason to censor or suppress the press . Because the White House hadn't confirmed the presence of the missiles, there was no reason for censoring the press.
 The pre-crisis period provides insight into the true American sentiment before Kennedy began to ‘manage” the news . Thus, the pre-Crisis period gives insight into American sentiment .
 The following chapters will examine how Kennedy’s media strategy changed upon the discovery of missiles in Cuba . The next chapter will examine the change in Kennedy's media strategy after the discovery .
 The press has a duty to report the news, but they are willing to hold back tidbits of information when the threat of nuclear annihilation is at stake . The press is willing to withhold information when it comes to nuclear threats .
 The discovery of offensive nuclear missile sites in Cuba confirmed Republican suspicions that the Soviets were indeed building a nuclear base only ninety miles away from the coast of Florida .
 Kennedy commissioned ExComm to determine how to respond to the Soviet threat . ExComm was tasked with finding out how to deal with the threat of the Soviet Union .
 The committee was limited to only twelve government officials to prevent U-2 photographic evidence from leaking to the press . The committee is limited to just 12 government officials .
 Journalists also uncovered evidence of Cuban missile sites before President Kennedy disclosed this information to the public .
 In the interim period between the discovery of the missile sites and Kennedy’s address to the nation confirming the existence of Soviet missile sites, the president and the press worked together to suppress the flow of information .
 Some columnists felt that the president was stripping journalists of their right to report the news . While most reporters respected this arrangement given the magnitude of the situation, most respected it .
 The nation was shocked when Kennedy confirmed that the Soviets were in the process of building offensive nuclear missile sites in Cuba . Despite minor grievances, the press complied with the president's demands .
 Government secrecy in the early days of the crisis was justified because it allowed ExComm the privacy to devise a plan . Government secrecy was justified in early days, it was said .
 If journalists reported the news before President Kennedy devised a course of action, then the press could have endangered the lives of American citizens . If journalists had reported the story before the president decided on the action, the press may have endangered lives of Americans .
 Fear was not lost on politicians and journalists, who Alice L George claims “rallied around 76” Schwarz, Democracy in the Dark, 49 .
 The president personally monitored publications, and by personally calling reporters, Kennedy stopped the publishing of information that might threaten national security . Kennedy personally called reporters to stop the publishing .
 The White House’s control of the timing and flow of information allowed ExComm a sufficient amount of time to weigh United States options and reach a peaceful resolution, the White House says . ExComm: ExComm was able to weigh U.S. options .
 It was not until historians began examining the Soviet perspective that they realized there were many inconsistencies in Kennedy’s account . Kennedy's account was examined by Soviet historians .
 Historians have begun to rethink the news coverage of the crisis and President Kennedy’s motives for managing the news . In light of new information, historians have re-examined the events surrounding the Kennedy assassination .
 Most scholars agree that the president’s tight reins on the press allowed ExComm to deliberate without domestic or foreign interference .
 Some scholars argue that Kennedy’s executive oversight of the press protected American freedom by giving the ExComm the privacy to deliberate . Some scholars say Kennedy's oversight of press protected U.S. freedom .
 Others argue that Kennedy manipulated the press for personal political advancement . Others say Kennedy manipulated press for political gain .
 This chapter examines President Kennedy’s motives for managing the news at the onset of the crisis . The next chapter examines the motives of President Kennedy to manage the news .
 Foreign policy concerns prohibited the press from printing until the president could deliver a streamlined message to America’s foes and allies . Legitimate foreign policy concerns .
 premature leakage of inaccurate information could have prompted a nuclear war . These concerns were legitimate because premature leaks of information may have prompted nuclear war, the author says .
 President Kennedy’s speech was delivered, but the press continued to promulgate it . The president's speech was the first to be published by the White House .
 McGeorge Bundy argues that the press trusted the president during the crisis because Kennedy dealt with it “directly and honorably;” Kennedy personally called publishers and reporters to appraise them of the situation, and because Kennedy took the time to inform journalists of the crisis, the press
 This chapter will examine journalists’ discovery of missiles in Cuba, and President Kennedy’s strategies for convincing them to withhold the news . First, this chapter looks at the discovery of the missiles .
 Next, the chapter will explore how Kennedy framed his political agenda in the papers . Next, we'll look at how he framed his views on Soviet intentions and American actions .
 In October 1962, journalists observed a frenzy of activity at the State Department’s Latin American Bureau . They suspected that a crisis was developing in Cuba .
 Assistant Secretary of State Harlan Cleveland accidentally confirmed journalists’ suspicions when asked by Murrey Marder, a reporter at The Washington Post, how bad the situation looked .
 On October 21, 1962, The Washington Post published a story about the sudden amassing of American forces in the Southeast . Cuba was the likely destination for a Caribbean confrontation, the story said .
 If Kennedy canceled these public meetings, he would set off alarm bells of danger to the Soviets that the U.S. knew about the secret missiles . Kennedy canceled the meetings, which would set alarm bells .
 Kennedy’s control of the flow of information in the first few days of the U.S. discovery of missiles in Cuba, allowed ExComm the insulation from outside pressure to reach a well-informed consensus . ExComm was the first time the United States’ discovery of missile
 Philip Graham was one of Kennedy’s friends; they had just recently eaten dinner together . Kennedy and Graham were friends . Graham was Kennedy's friend .
 Kennedy persuaded Graham to withhold publishing about the Cuban missiles by appealing to the journalist’s patriotic duty to protect the American people . Graham promised an exclusive once Kennedy informed the world of the situation . Graham was the first journalist to withhold an exclusive from Kennedy .
 Philip Graham weighed his constitutional right to report the news against his right as a citizen to protect innocent American lives . Graham: "I'm a citizen of the United States. I'm a good citizen. I want to protect my innocent American life"
 Graham decided suppression of the news would save more American lives . Ultimately, Graham decided to suppress the news to save more lives .
 Presidents may control flow of information to the press to protect national security concerns . Especially during foreign policy crises, presidents may control the flow of info to the media .
 President Eisenhower denied that the U.S. was flying spy planes over Soviet territory . But when the Soviets shot down an American U-2 plane piloted by Gary Powers, Eisenhower admitted the truth .
 By the time Kennedy came to office, tensions between the U.S. and the Soviet Union had augmented to such an extent that the appearance of strength was more important than actual strength . Kennedy came into office in 1961 .
 Kennedy’s job as president was to protect Americans from an impending nuclear conflict . For this reason, Kennedy's job was to reassure Americans of the strength of U.S. democracy .
 Kennedy knew that journalists had learned about the developing situation in crisis . After reading the Washington Post’s Sunday paper, Kennedy knew what had been learned .
 Kennedy instructed James Reston, The Times bureau chief in Washington, to notify the White House Press Secretary before The Times released a story . Not wanting the public to learn about the crisis prematurely, Kennedy instructed Reston to notify Reston of the crisis .
 I’m going to order a blockade of all Soviet shipping to Cuba, says President Nixon . I'm going to blockade a blockade, he says .
 Journalists were Americans first, and in the early 1960s, they were committed to helping the president preserve democracy from the clutches of communism . Journalists were dedicated to helping Americans preserve democracy .
 Many journalists, including Max Frankel, realized mistakes they had made in the preamble to the Bay of Pigs invasion which may have alerted the Soviets to an American attack .
 Reston called the National Security Adviser instead of the White House Press Secretary . Reston had no memory of the agreement between him and the president before publishing a story .
 Kennedy’s friendship with influential publishers, and journalists’ desire to prevent a nuclear war allowed the president to contain information about the Cuban crisis until EXCOMM determined an appropriate course of action .
 Khrushchev declared war with the U.S. when he placed a series of ‘offensive’ missiles aimed at America’s heart . Khrrushchev had declared war .
 The morning after Kennedy's speech, the American press corps published various statements of support for the president’s highly questionable propositions . The president's remarks were published in the morning after the speech .
 The press did not challenge any of Kennedy’s bold assumptions, nor did they consider alternative viewpoints of the situation . Instead, members of the press offered unqualified praise for the president and his policies .
 29 missiles in Cuba because the president’s speech “confirmed” Soviet intentions, Kennedy Library says . Kennedy Library. 29 missiles were launched in Cuba .
 Khrushchev insisted the missiles were intended to deter an American attack . Other journalists ridiculed the possibility that the missiles could be defensive . The missiles were meant to deter a U.S. attack .
 Administration officials codenamed the top-secret program Operation Mongoose . The objective of the program was the complete capitulation of the Castro regime .
 The mediator had asked Mikoyan why Khrushchev installed the missiles in Cuba . The talks were held in the Soviet Union-controlled Cuba .
 Tensions were high, and the threat of a nuclear war was a novel situation . The public was looking for a strong leader to protect the tenets of American democracy . Even if the press addressed the Soviet perspective in their articles and editorials, the public would have accused the press of being
 James McCartney argues that this is another instance where the press failed to exercise independent judgement from the Kennedy administration . But I do not think that the press can entirely be blamed for not asking this question . I think that it is not the press that failed to ask this question.
 McCartney assumes journalists have access to classified government documents to check the veracity of the president’s statements . McCartney is assuming that journalists will be able to check out classified documents .
 Journalists were working in a period before the Vietnam-Watergate era shook the public’s confidence in U.S. democracy . Journalists worked in the period before Vietnam and Watergate .
 The Hidden History of Negotiations between Washington and Havana, 2014, is published in Havana, Cuba .
 ExComm advisers prepared a statement of defense in case the public ever questioned why Soviet bases in Cuba were automatically offensive and American bases in Turkey in Turkey were automatically defensive .
 Journalists defended the administrative position against possible objections . Journalists went further to defend the position .
 The press exaggerated the danger, so that Kennedy would have no choice, but to respond to the placement of missiles in Cuba . Instead the press exaggerated the danger to Kennedy, he said .
 Even the president conceded that Khrushchev’s strategy was more of a political play than a military challenge . Even the U.S. President Richard Nixon conceded that even the president had a problem .
 Some members of the press presented the placement of nuclear missiles in Cuba as a challenge to American nuclear superiority . Nevertheless, some . members of . the press portrayed the placement . of the . placement of . nuclear missiles as a threat to American . superiority .
 Kennedy believed a show of strength was necessary to reaffirm American superiority . The press was on the administration’s side when they learned of Soviet missiles .
 Instead of challenging the highly questionable propositions of the Kennedy administration, the press defended them without a reasonable justification . The press defended these propositions without a rational justification .
 Members of the press did not examine alternative viewpoints of the crisis, nor did they check the veracity of the president’s statements . They simply reiterated word by word, lie by lie, all the 'facts' that the administration took to be true .
 Without questions or challenges from the media, Kennedy sold his version of the crisis to the public . Kennedy won back the hearts and minds of the American people while also reestablishing his international image of American toughness .
 Kennedy’s speech on October 28, 1962, was explicitly shroud in incendiary language for the purpose of appeasing his political opponents and regaining international favor . American Action Kennedy: Kennedy's speech was intended to appease opponents and gain international favor.
 Kennedy had campaigned on the promise to be tougher on Cuba than the Republicans . Kennedy had vowed to eradicate communism from the Western Hemisphere .
 Americans disappointed that the president had failed to live up to his 1960 promise . Americans, especially Republicans, were disappointed with the president's performance .
 A 1961 Gallup poll showed Kennedy’s popularity dipping below the 70 percent mark after the failed Bay of Pigs invasion . Although still quite high, Kennedy's popularity dipped below that mark in 1961 . Kennedy was the president of the United States in 1961 when he was in office .
 When U-2 surveillance photos showed missiles in Cuba, Kennedy had one more chance to stand up to Castro and Khrushchev . He had one last chance to imprint his lasting legacy in history .
 ExComm members were discussing possible responses to the Cuban crisis . Diplomacy simply wasn’t an option for domestic political reasons, they say .
 Kennedy leaned more towards moderate action, but for the sake of America’s international credibility, it was paramount that the administration make a show of strength . Kennedy scrambled to control the Cuban missile narrative .
 Kennedy exercised tight management over the press and the stories they were reporting . Kennedy exercised close control of the press during his presidency .
 Kennedy’s oversight bordered close on censorship, but the press tolerated it . The press believed they were helping the White House win the war on communism . Kennedy's oversight of the papers was close to censorship .
 EXCOMM members gave Kennedy private interviews with journalists and publishers . Kennedy personally gave interviews to journalists, including Stewart Alsop, James Reston, Walter Lippmann, and Philip Graham .
 Kennedy considered close friends, such as Charles Bartlett, had the privilege of receiving exclusive information from the commander-in-chief .
 Krock argued that the Kennedy administration had known about the missile sites weeks in advance of the public . Krock: The Kennedy administration knew about the sites .
 The announcement of Soviet missiles in Cuba was conveniently timed to influence the election . The announcement was timed to coincide with the announcement of the missiles .
 By the middle of October 1962, Kennedy learned that the Soviets had deployed missiles into Cuba . Kennedy learned of the Soviet move in October 1962 .
 The rhetoric of the Cold War required that Kennedy put on a show of strength, he says . Kennedy's actions were a response to the threat of the Soviet Union, he adds .
 Kennedy used the press to present the strength of “American will and resolve,” while privately he used private channels to secure a diplomatic solution with Khrushchev . Therefore, publicly, Kennedy used .
 This strategy allowed the president to insulate foreign policy from domestic politics, while he secured support from America’s allies . This strategy was in place of domestic politics while securing support from allies .
 In times of a national crisis, information control is necessary, if not required, to safeguard the lives of the American people . Information control is needed in times of crisis, says President Obama .
 As the crisis continued and a peaceful outcome seemed uncertain, the public trembled on the brink of nuclear war . Secret Deal was a secret deal .
 Only a few members of the Kennedy administration were aware of all the precautions the president took to prevent nuclear war .
 While the press presented a tough image of Kennedy to reassure the American public and NATO, privately Kennedy worked through back channels to strike a deal with Khrushchev .
 The missile crisis reached its climax during the weekend when Khrushchev sent two private letters to the president . The crisis was the height of the missile crisis in the early 1960s .
 Kennedy responded to the letter with more favorable terms . Departing from diplomatic tradition, Kennedy publicly responded to it with a more favorable term . Kennedy responded with a favorable response .
 This left Khrushchev in the uncomfortable position of accepting the president’s offer or preparing for military confrontation . This left him in an uncomfortable position, leaving him with a choice between accepting the offer or facing military confrontation.
 Khrushchev accepted Kennedy’s offer, and the public celebrated on what appeared to be an American victory . On Sunday, October 28, 1962, Kennedy accepted the offer .
 Statesmen and journalists celebrated the U.S. reaffirming mastery on the global stage . Statesmen celebrated the United States reaffirming its mastery on global stage.
 Henry Luce rearticulated the responsibility of America as the dominant global power “to exert upon the world the full impact of our influence” to bring about a more peaceful world order . In a Life editorial, Luce wrote that America should exert its influence on the world
 Kennedy continued to preserve his legacy as a Cold War warrior by restricting information access after the crisis was over . Kennedy also continued to restrict information access to the public after the war .
 The president granted an exclusive interview to Charles Bartlett and Stewart Alsop . Their “Profile in Courage” became the official account of the crisis . Kennedy edited their story before it was published .
 The missile crisis became a tale of heroic military leadership . The lessons that appeared to be learned from the confrontation was that crises could be mastered . The crisis became an example of how crises can be mastered, author says .
 Some foreign policy analysts argue that this pervasive belief continues to harm U.S. foreign relations today . The belief persists in the United States today .
 This chapter examines how journalists worked with the president to help him attain a diplomatic solution . This chapter begins with a look at how journalists helped him reach an agreement with the government .
 Kennedy nurtured close friendships with many reporters to help him defeat communism . Kennedy's friendship with reporters helped him defeat the Soviet Union .
 Robert F Kennedy made secret missile deal with the Soviet ambassador, Anatoly Dobrynin . Then, it examines the secret deal that he made with the . Soviet ambassador . The deal was a secret deal between the two sides .
 In the heat of the crisis, back-channel diplomacy was effective way for Kennedy to convey to Khrushchev that he was willing to trade missile bases in Turkey for Cuban missile bases .
 Kennedy’s ability to keep up a tough public image while privately negotiating a diplomatic solution allowed the U.S. to secure the endorsement of allies and to strengthen the United States position with the Soviets . Robert Kennedy later observed that “the luckiest thing in the world”
 Recent evidence suggests that KGB agents did not consider journalists as a reliable conduit to the president . Kennedy believed his efforts at back-channel diplomacy to be successful .
 The Kennedy brothers thought that back-channel meetings between American journalists and KGB agents would successfully resolve the crisis . These meetings allowed Kennedy to convey his flexibility to Khrushchev without appearing weak to the public .
 Charles Bartlett and Frank Holeman met with Georgi Bolshakov of the KGB to inform him that the president wanted to trade missiles in Cuba for missiles in Turkey . On October 23, 1962, the two men met with the KGB in Moscow .
 On October 24, 1962, after the blockade went into effect, Robert Kennedy dispatched Bartlett once again to meet with Bolshakov . Robert Kennedy sent Bartlett back to the Soviet Union in October .
 Historians debate the role that journalists played in resolving the crisis . Historians continue to debate whether journalists played a key role in solving the crisis in Ukraine .
 Historians question whether John Scali of ABC news helped resolve the crisis . Historians have questioned whether Scali helped solve the crisis.
 Historians thought Scali brought information about a missile swap to the Kremlin's attention . Historians initially thought that Scali had told the Kremlin about a possible swap .
 Khrushchev did not view Scali or other journalists as a channel to Kennedy, documents reveal . Scali contacted Fomin, and Khrushche did not see journalists as channels to Kennedy . Fomin contacted Scali and other journalists .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy already agreed to trade missiles in Cuba for missiles in Turkey . Scali and Fomin's pledges appear redundant because by the time Fomin’s cable reached the Kremlin it had already been made public .
 The Scali-Feklisov 40 may have been the primary factor to resolve the crisis . The meetings may have prepared the Kremlin to accept a diplomatic solution . The meeting may have helped the Kremlin accept the solution .
 Lippman learned in a private briefing with the president that Kennedy was contemplating a missile swap . Kennedy was planning to trade Jupiter missiles for the newly constructed Soviet missiles .
 James Graham argues that this article was significant because Kennedy did not demand Lippman to retract his story . Graham says that although it deviated from Kennedy’s public image as tough and uncompromising, Kennedy didn’t demand his story be retracted .
 Historians believe Khrushchev learned of Kennedy's willingness to trade missiles through Lippman’s column . Historians also believe that the Soviets learned of the deal through the column by Lippmann .
 Khrushchev was aware of Kennedy’s friendship with journalists, so the fact that Kennedy did not refute the article may have indicated that Kennedy was willing to consider a diplomatic solution . Lippman's article was published in 1964 .
 Journalists helped resolve the missile crisis, but not in the way that historians originally believed . Instead, publications, not meetings, brought the possibility of a missile swap to the attention of the Kremlin .
 Khrushchev agreed to withdraw Soviet missiles from Cuba if the president promised not to attack Cuba . Kennedy’s efforts at back-channel diplomacy worked .
 The president rejoiced, he had achieved the public outcome he had desired . The president's victory was the result he had hoped for .
 For foreign policy reasons, Kennedy could not dismantle the Jupiter missiles because if he did, the United States role of protectorate would be called into question by America’s allies . If he did dismantle the missiles, the U.S. role of protecting the country would be questioned by
 On Friday, October 26th, the president received startling news that the Cuban missile sites were operational . U-2 photos showed that the Soviets would be able to launch an attack against America within days .
 The “hawks” in Kennedy’s committee pressed for an invasion or an air strike, but the president was hesitant to take military action that might endanger the lives of the people . The ‘hawks’ pressed for the president to launch an invasion .
 If the president heeded his advisers advice not only would America receive bad public opinion for “conducting a Pearl Harbor in reverse,” but also dropping a bomb would give Khrushchev reason to escalate . The president would be under pressure to drop a bomb .
 Kennedy knew that taking such reckless military risks would only hasten a nuclear war, so he tried to convince the members of ExComm that a diplomatic solution was the best strategy .
 Adlai Stevenson, the U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations discussed possible diplomatic solutions with ExComm. Stevenson . Stevenson: Diplomatic solutions are possible, but not possible .
 Stevenson advised for the U.S. to lift its quarantine on Cuba, pledge not to invade Cuba, agree to make the Western Hemisphere a nuclear-free zone, and suggest the possibility of a missile swap .
 Many of the ‘hawks’ in the committee adamantly disagreed with Stevenson’s suggestions . Stevenson: “I'm not sure what I'm doing here. I'm sure it's a good idea. It's time to get back on the track,” Stevenson
 CIA director: It was too dangerous for the U.S. to remove all of its defensive capabilities when the Soviets were prepared to launch a missile strike against the United States at any minute . John McCone, director of the CIA, articulated the typical argument of dissenters that it was
 The idea of a missile swap dissipated from everybody’s minds-except for the Kennedy brothers . The Kennedy brothers still believe the idea of swapping missiles is still alive .
 The Attorney General met with Anatoly Dobrynin, the Soviet ambassador in Washington, on Saturday evening, October 27, 1962 . Without the public, the press, or ExComm knowing, the attorney general met with the Soviet Ambassador in Washington .
 The deal was contingent on the Soviets not disclosing that a compromise took place . However, the Soviets did not disclose that the deal took place, the deal was made .
 Robert Kennedy warned Dobrynin that if Khrushchev did not accept this deal, the U.S. would be forced to escalate its response . The public did not have any knowledge of this secret arrangement at the time .
 Kennedy responded with a public letter to Khrushchev in which he pledged not to invade Cuba in exchange for the Soviets to remove their missiles from the Western Hemisphere . Kennedy responded to the letter with a letter of his own .
 Only nine people knew about the missile swap, and they did not disclose this secret until 1982 . Surviving participants to the deal jointly wrote to Time magazine .
 Schwarz argues that there were legitimate foreign policy concerns for keeping the deal secret immediately after the missile crisis . Schwarz says adherents to the deal harmed the public by keeping it a secret for several decades .
 The Jupiters were “a pile of junk” but removing them too quickly after the missile crisis would weaken NATO and make United States allies doubt US resolve . The U.S. should not remove them too soon after the crisis, says President Obama .
 Historians and foreign policy analysts agree that Kennedy had substantial reasons for initially keeping the missile deal a secret .
 The prolonged secrecy of the missile swap appears to be largely motivated by political interests . However, the prolonged secrecy seems to be motivated by the political interests of the deal .
 During the crisis, only a small group in the White House knew about the existence of Soviet missiles in Cuba before the president’s announcement .
 Even White House Press Secretary Pierre Salinger was unaware of the missiles in Cuba . The missiles were launched in Cuba in 1961 .
 Kennedy purposely kept Salinger in the dark, so if pressed by reporters, Salinger would not accidently leak any information to the press . Kennedy intentionally kept the information from Salinger .
 Papers published during the crisis helped restore Kennedy’s reputation as tough on Communism and Khrushchev . Most papers published in the 1950s helped to restore Kennedy's reputation on Communism .
 If the public found out that Kennedy had not actually defeated Khrushchev, but compromised with him instead, Kennedy’s political reputation would be ruined . The public would be outraged if the public learned that he had compromised .
 In the Cold War era, there were no middle-of-the-road diplomatic strategies . "Middle-ground diplomatic strategies" are no longer common in the world .
 Kennedy was forced to choose between a "hard" military strategy and a "soft" negotiation strategy . This dichotomy permeated into the negotiating room, where Kennedy chose between a hard and soft approach .
 Lippman urged the president to use his platform to educate the average American citizen about the subtleties of foreign policy negotiations . The president is expected to speak to the public about his role in foreign policy .
 With the creation of nuclear weapons that have the capability to destroy the world, negotiations became the only viable strategy to resolve foreign policy crises . Negotiations are now only viable strategies to resolve crises, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Khrushchev publicly announced that he would withdraw his missiles from Cuba in exchange for a non-invasion pledge by the U.S. The deal was made in October 1962 . Khruschev was a hero for the United States .
 Kennedy was willing to make the missile trade public if Khrushchev did not agree to his initial proposal . Kennedy was also willing to go public with his initial offer of a missile deal .
 Khrushchev secretly contacted U Thant at the United Nations and told him to propose a missile trade . He had secretly contacted him at the U.N. to propose the missile trade if Khruschev was unwilling to back down .
 Their retelling of the crisis soon became the official narrative of the 13 days . The retelling became an official narrative for the crisis .
 Details that didn't fit with the narrative of political toughness were edited out of the account . Kennedy restricted this exclusive only to the few journalists he could trust . Details that did not fit the narrative were edited from the account, Kennedy said .
 Kennedy planned to use his renewed popularity in the next election cycle, but unfortunately, his political aspirations were cut short by his assassination in 1963 .
 Kennedy took the secret of the missile swap with him to his grave, and loyal advisers who had been privy to the secret denied in every forum that such a deal had taken place .
 President Kennedy's media management techniques went beyond merely mediating the truth to outright creating his own version of history . President Kennedy, like most presidents, desired a favorable press, but his media management .
 Kennedy may not have been as “tough” as reporters described him, but his media management techniques of restricting access to favorable reporters and influencing the story that they reported were so successful that Kennedy created his own personal legacy in the press .
 Kennedy’s lie had detrimental foreign and domestic policy consequences . Although Kennedy died before the truth could be revealed, the truth was never revealed .
 The press portrayed the nuclear standoff as a staring contest with winners and losers . Schlesinger’s illusion that a tough resolve and cool control won foreign policy crises gave Americans an inaccurate understanding of the true nature of crises, he says .
 The press praised President Kennedy for refusing to compromise to Khrushchev, so if President Johnson made any compromises during the Vietnam War, the public would have perceived him as weak .
 I think that the strong media image of Kennedy may have been one of the factors that pushed Johnson to appear equally as tough in his foreign policy strategies . I also think that a myriad of other factors contributed to Johnson’s Vietnam policies .
 Schwarz argues that “this was an extraordinary misuse of secrecy” because Johnson was deprived of the knowledge of how foreign policy negotiations were conducted .
 If he had been equipped with this knowledge, he may not have escalated the war so quickly, he could have avoided the risk .
 If Kennedy had lived, the tough reputation he built during his short-term presidency would have certainly been tested . Kennedy's tough reputation would have been tested, says CNN's John Sutter .
 TV news became the dominant communications medium after Kennedy’s assassination . Technology was improving to such an extent that television news was the dominant medium .
 This new technology offered reporters a way to test the president’s bold statements . The technology allows reporters to test President Obama's statements .
 While during the early 1960s, the press generally trusted the president, this sentiment changed during the Vietnam War . Journalists became more cynical of the president's motives .
 Kennedy used the lack of intrusive technology to his advantage . Kennedy controlled the flow of information through the American printing press . Johnson and Nixon would have to deal with television technology that contradicted their claims .
 Kennedy’s media management techniques saved the world from nuclear war, but also the deliberate disinformation put forth by the Kennedy administration planted the myth that international crises could be solved by using the right amount of force . The myth was planted in the belief that using a little force could solve crises
 He planned on taking this public adulation with him to the polls, but his political motivations were stopped because of his death . He planned to take the adulation to the polling booths, but was stopped because he died .
 Kennedy’s assassination made him even more of a hero, and journalists continued to write about his victory after his death . Nevertheless, the assassination made Kennedy a hero and a hero .
 Kennedy’s media management techniques also had the negative consequences of pushing him to policies that he did not want to pursue . Kennedy's media management technique pushed him to pursue policies he didn’t want, say experts .
 Cuba became the dominant concern of the 1962 election, and Kennedy campaigned on the platform of a tough Cuban policy .
 Kennedy administration was aware of Soviet missiles in Cuba in October 1962 . It was paramount that the Kennedy administration get them out of Cuba .
 Journalists cannot be entirely blamed for filtering information during a national security crisis . Journalists helped advance the administration’s agenda, but not entirely responsible for filtering out information .
 Kennedy was a master manipulator and he perfected the art of media relations . Kennedy was known for his ability to manipulate the media . He perfected his media relations skills, he says .
 He cultivated a circle of elite journalists, and incentivized them with tidbits of information for favorable press coverage . He incentivized journalists to share information with him for favorable coverage .
 Kennedy used the papers as a forum for framing his political agenda . He emphasized his successes and omitted his shortcomings from the public record . Kennedy used his papers to frame his agenda .
 Historians have questioned whether such deception could happen now, and have reached mixed conclusions . Many historians have questioned the possibility of such deception now .
 Since the late 1960s, journalists and government investigations have decreased the level of secrecy . On the one hand, the secrecy has decreased since the late 60s, since the early 1960s .
 Watergate and Iran-Contra affair are two striking examples of a president misusing his presidential power . Government secrets are intended to protect the American people, but Watergate is a striking example .
 Presidents have taken a proactive approach to limiting government secrets . Jimmy Carter's Information Security Oversight Office and Bill Clinton's commission on government secrecy were created .
 The technological revolution of the post-9/11 period has rendered it almost impossible for the government to keep secrets from its people . In addition to the technological revolution, the government has made it impossible for it to hide secrets from the public .
 Edward Snowden’s 2013 allegations against the NSA illustrate a lack of government secrecy . Yet, there are still instances of unchecked government secrecy in the U.S.
 The American media continued its press strategy of supporting the president during the Vietnam War . It was not until the Tet Offensive that journalists became more skeptical of the president’s policies .
 The government continued to monitor press coverage during President Reagan’s Grenada Invasion, President Bush’�s invasion, and the coverage of the Persian Gulf War . The government monitored press coverage in the 1980s .
 As the press continue to be an active participant to the conversations surrounding foreign policy, there continues to be debate about the role that the press should play during foreign policy crises .
 Foreign policy crises continue to plague our society, but solution is not as black and white as disclosing secrets or creating an insular governing elite . Nevertheless, foreign policy crises .
 The press and the public should have access to classified information once a crisis has passed, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Information Security Oversight Office, Annual Report to the President, Fiscal Year 1979 . — Report of the Commission on Protecting and Reducing Government Secrecy . Information security Oversight Office .
 Newsweek — “How United States Voters feel about Cuba,” October 13, 1962 . Newsweek — "How United . States Voters Feel About Cuba"
 The “Ultrasensitive” Report and Testimony of the Board of Inquiry on the Bay of Pigs . Report and testimony of the board of inquiry on the bay of Pigs.
 Rusk, Dean, Robert McNamara, George W Ball, Roswell L Gilpatric, Theodore Sorensen, and McGeorge Bundy . Ball, Ball and Bundy are featured in the book, "McGeorge Bundy"
 The Bay of Pigs, Missile Crisis, and Covert War Against Castro.” in Kennedy’s Quest for Victory. “The Bay of Pigeas, The Cold War, and The Cuban Missile Crisis.’ in Kennedy's Quest For Victory. in . Kennedy