 Eisenhower stood firm and the Russians backed down . Kennedy made plain that the Americans wanted no change, the Russians did not persue the matter .
 The border between East and West Germany was guarded by watchtowers, barbed-wire fences and mine-fields . From 1945 to 1961 over 3 million people fled to West Germany . These people included Doctors, Mechanics etc. who were valuable to the economy .
 The route for refugees was closed by the building of the Berlin Wall in 1961 . People could still pass freely from East Germany into West Berlin, and from West Berlin .
 The wall became a symbol of the hatred of the two sides in the Cold War and the lack of freedom in Eastern Europe . The wall was built through and around West Berlin .
 United States troops crossed into East Berlin to find out how the soviets would react . U.S. troops crossed the border to see how East Berlin would react to the situation .
 On 27 October, direct threat of war when Soviets pulled up to checkpoint Charlie and faced the American tanks all day in a tense stand-off . If either side had fired on 27 October this may have lead to nuclear war, leading to the destruction of humanity . No deaths or destruction as
 Eisenhower refused to buy Cuban suar and helped Batista supporters prepare for an invasion of Cuba . Cuba got around this by drawing closer to Russia, who agreed to buy the sugar . In August 1962, Russia sent IRBM's to Cuba to help them .
 Kennedy demanded that the missiles in Cuba be removed from Cuba . No more weapons allowed in and Kennedy demanded no more weapons in Cuba .
 If they had tried to break the American blockede, and the Americans had reacted by sinking then, then WW3 might have broken out . -Khrushchev justified the missiles on Cuba by saying that America had their missiles in Turkey, which is right next to Russia . If they
 At the same time Castro remained in control of Cuba and the military leaders of America saw Kennedy as weak, piling on pressure for engagement in Vietnam . The world had got far closer to nuclear war than wanted .
 The defeat of the Cuba Crisis played a part in Khrushchev's loss of power in Russia . Treaty limited as only 3 powers signed and could still test their weapons .
 When America discovered this they could have fired their own missiles, but this would have lead to a wider nuclear war as the Russians would have retaliated by doing something in Berlin . This would have led to a larger nuclear war .
 Quarantine set up -Another threat of war as Russian ships were stopped by American blockade . Little deaths of destruction, except for one U2 pilot that was shot down over Cuba -Long-term implications .
 When Khrushchev lost power it showed how Russia had changed as he was allowed to live a normal life afterwards . Stalin killed people as he knew that if he had lost his power he would have been executed .
 Russia could have done it by themselves but wanted to show they had support from other countries . They found no armed opposition but public resented their presence . Russia wanted to prove they have support for other countries - they wanted to be seen as having support .
 Thousands fled to Austria, radio and TV keeping the outside world informed . There were several ugly incidents .
 The Russians had now precipitated a worse crisis and they settled it by taking Dubcek to Moscow and there persuading him to abandon his liberal projects . The Russians forced new constitution on Czechoslovakia in January 1969 .
 The process by which there was an attempt to improve superpower relations during the 1970s is known as Detente . In the 1980s, disarmers gathered in the capitals of Western Europ as there was a chance of nuclear war and they were afraid of dying .
 France and West Germany suffered their worst unemployment since 1945, while the eastern bloc countries endured constant shotages of foodstuffs and consumer goods .
 She desperately needed to import grain from Canada, Austalia and the United States and put up taxes in order to pay for this . This would have limited arms control as there would have been a focus on the economy rather than on nuclear weapons .
 Control would put pressure on the Middle East the oil lifeline to the USA and western Europe threatened . Control of Afghanistan would counter American and Chinses influence in the area .
 AQA History Spec B Exam 16th May 2014 . GCSE History AQA . A2 Edexcel Unit 3 A World Divided: Superpower Relations 1944-90 discussion thread .
 International Relations 1943-1991 4. / 5 based on 6 ratings . Superpower relations and the Cold War Detente, Easing of Tensions 0.0 .