 ICRC publications contain valuable information on the origins of the ICRC's involvement in the missile crisis . Their publications contain highly valuable information about the origins .
 The personal papers of Paul Riiegger are to be found in the Archiv fur Zeitgeschichte at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich .
 Former members of the ICRC or the Swiss Department of Foreign Affairs emphasize the importance of the part he played in easing tension in the Caribbean at the time .
 The ICRC itself summarized Riiegger's mission in two of its own publications . ICRC's mission was described in two publications .
 President Kennedy imposed a naval blockade on the further delivery of all offensive military equipment to Cuba . He also insisted on the withdrawal of Soviet missiles already in Cuba . After five days of analysis and debates, Kennedy decided on 20 October to impose the blockade .
 The American President was not prepared to run the risk of an air strike or a full-scale invasion to have the missiles removed, as had been originally discussed in the ExComm .
 Had either Kennedy or Khrushchev reacted too sharply, the crisis would have escalated into the Third World War . Kennedy or his Soviet counterpart would have reacted too quickly .
 The United States naval quarantine of Cuba was accompanied by a series of military and diplomatic moves and countermoves which were not all authorized by the political leadership of the two main opponents . The U.S. and Cuban leaders have not been able to authorize the quarantine .
 The events that followed made for the most tense week in the whole of the Cold War . The events were the first time the U.S. government had been involved in a nuclear war .
 The Cuban missile crisis was clearly outside the conventional and traditional field of operation of a humanitarian organization . The Cuban missiles crisis was 'outside the conventional' and 'traditional' field of operations .
 Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, Handbook of the it clear that this informal demarche was never authorized by the Kremlin . New information, however, has made it clear, that it was International Red Cross . Red Cross never authorized .
 Soviet Chairman gathered Presidium and Secretariat members in his dacha at Novo Ogarevo and stayed there all day and night discussing what to do if an American attack were unleashed . At the same time the Soviet chairman gathered the Presidium .
 In times of peace the United States armed forces are usually on DefCons . The U.S. armed forces usually use DefCons when they are in peace .
 The main task for Secretary-General UThant and delegates of the parties concerned was to sort out the conditions under which UN supervision of the dismantling of the missile sites would take place .
 The President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Leopold Boissier, agreed in principle . On that same afternoon of 29 October, 29 October the President of . the . Red Cross agreed to the agreement .
 His organization would be ready to accept such an assignment, but only on condition that there was a formal request by all three parties to the conflict — including Cuba — would be required .
 The debate was lively and some members rejected the idea of accepting the UN Secretary-General's request for 30 inspectors .
 Riiegger was to state the conditions of acceptance by the ICRC of the planned assignment to it and once again explain the humanitarian organization's motives in lending its good offices . Riiegg was to say the conditions had been met with the request .
 ICRC teams would work under the supervision of the United Nations . ICRC would therefore not assume direct responsibility for inspections .
 UThant agreed in general and suggested that Riiegger meet with the representatives of the three parties the next day . The meeting will take place next week .
 In his talks with the American delegates there was a wide consensus on the procedure, and the delegates even presented a list of Swedish ships which might be chartered for inspections by the ICRC . During the following meeting with the Soviet side there were clear indications that these inspections would never be carried
 The Soviet delegate stressed that the United States blockade, which was meant to be replaced by ICRC inspections, was illegal in his opinion . He said it should be liquidated once the Soviet rockets were out of Cuba .
 Riiegger requested a clear indication of when the operation was to begin and how long it was to last . Riiegg stated that ""a good week"" was necessary to put the corps of inspectors into operation .
 Riiegger reported the day's events in a long telegram to the ICRC in Geneva . Following these meetings, Riiegg reported the events to the International Red Cross .
 On 4 November the Soviet side signalled the possibility for the United States Navy, instead of the United Nations, to verify the removal of the missiles if Castro continued to oppose on-site inspections in Cuba .
 A solution for verifying the removal of the Soviet missiles from Cuba was found without UN participation . Thus a solution for verification of removal of Soviet missiles was found .
 Riiegger came to the conclusion that the planned ICRC inspections would never be implemented . As the United States simply continued monitoring the island by air reconnaissance with the Soviets' tacit consent, he concluded .
 This proposal was published in a leading article in the French newspaper Le Figaro on 6 November .
 Francois-Poncet obviously belonged to those in favour of a wider field of activity for the ICRC in the atomic age — including political missions .
 Documents indicate that Leopold Boissier, the ICRC President at that time, was seeking a more active role for his organization . As the documents indicate, and from what the present author has been told by the former Swiss ambassador and subsequent member of the Committee, Raymond Probst
 Willy Bretscher, a Liberal Democrat and Member of Parliament, wrote that there was no reason for the ICRC to take over a task assigned to the United Nations and which was outside the humanitarian field .
 There was a danger that, by taking part in an operation of a political nature, the ICRC would compromise its neutrality . The ICRC's neutrality is an absolute prerequisite to its humanitarian duties, he says .
 NL Rigegger, Dossier Boissier, 31 October 1963, ibid. Letter Petitpierre to 7 November 1962, NL Riiegger,  1962, . NL Rieggger, 1962, and 1963 .
 The documents show that the humanitarian organization was ready to play an extraordinary role by lending its good offices to the United Nations and the parties concerned for a highly political mission . The documents also show that .
 The ICRC's involvement set a precedent for the future engagement of the humanitarian organization in similar circumstances . The planned inspections of Soviet vessels by ICRC personnel never took place .
 Leopold Boissier gave the UN SecretaryGeneral the idea of asking the ICRC for help in this unusual task outside the scope of its traditional humanitarian mission . It comes as a surprise that it was probably the President .
 I'ONU declare pret a mettre a la disposition de I.ONU des delegues . Des delegues auraient pour déche de s'assurer that les navires sovietiques se rendant a Cuba ne transportaient pas d'armes .