 History in Your Inbox offers time period newsletters, special offers and weekly programme release emails . Get History Inbox .
 JFK signed the Cuba Quarantine Proclamation, 23 October 1962 . JFK signed it into place of quarantine in Cuba in 1962 . President JFK was assassinated in 1968 .
 JFK and his brother eventually pressed the decision to institute a blockade around Cuba, preventing Soviet ships entering the island . On discovering this, the Kennedy administration is torn between 'hawks' and 'doves'
 The ships turn back, and ultimately the warheads are withdrawn from Cuba . The ships are turned back .
 JFK didn’t cede to the hawks in launching an immediate strike on Cuba . To his substantial credit, JFK didn't cede . JFK's Cuba strike was a success .
 U.S. prepared to strike secret deal to withdraw nuclear missiles from Turkey in exchange for Soviet withdrawal of ICBMs from Cuba . Deal was struck at risk of political expediency, he says .
 Kennedy’s legacy is shaped by this ability to ‘thread the needle’ — face up to the Soviets challenge whilst giving them a way out . Kennedy‘threaded the needle' with his way out of the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 It is true that Kennedy was a cold political pragmatist, well-suited to these crisis moments . Kennedy was an ideal political pragmist, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Kennedy was the right man to lead the country in a crisis .
 In a post-WWII world, appeasement was a very dirty word . The dominant outlook in the military hierarchy was that nuclear war was inevitable and that the U.S. should strike first .
 Air Force Chief of Staff Curtis LeMay, National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy and Cold War veteran Dean Acheson all pushed for an immediate air attack on the Cuban missiles .
 It seems he was revolted by the idea that people could countenance a nuclear conflict so blithely . He seems to have been revolted .
 Kennedy himself played fast and loose with American lives, it must be added . However, it was added that Kennedy played fast-and-loose with lives .
 Political factors drove him to front up to Khrushchev in such a way that, had the Soviet Premier not called off the ships, a nuclear conflict would almost certainly have resulted .
 The Cold War was inherently full of posturing and bluster, but Kennedy would always heighten it . Kennedy, when given the option to dissolve tensions, always heightened them . Kennedy's decision to end the Cold War would be a mistake .
 RFK was major hawk who initially advocated a full invasion of Cuba . In reality, at the outset RFK had been a major hawk . RFK initially called for a Cuban invasion .
 When he did take on a ‘dove’ position, it was only after vociferously defending the hawk’ stance .
 He would later gain historic infamy as a spearhead of the war in Vietnam, but his thinking in this conflagration was central to its peaceful outcome . His thinking in the conflict was key to the peaceful outcome.