 Human civilization came close to being destroyed in 1962 . Anyone can read what you share with us .
 Schoolchildren were ordered into shelters; supermarket shelves emptied of soup cans and bottled water . Supermarkets emptied soup cans, bottled water and shelves were emptied of food .
 It was the most perilous moment of the Cuban missile crisis, and of the cold war . It was also the most dangerous moment during the Cuban Missile Crisis . The U.S. has never seen a nuclear missile strike .
 The danger of Armageddon did not begin, as legend has it, when the U.S. learned that Soviet missiles had reached Cuba’s shores earlier that month . Legend has it that the danger began when the United States learned of Soviet missiles .
 Fidel Castro’s fears and insecurities after the botched Bay of Pigs invasion and the failures of President John F Kennedy and Premier Nikita S Khrushchev to take him seriously .
 Cuba 50 years ago was far more dangerous than Iran or North Korea is today . With Soviet missiles stationed on the island and America poised to attack, Cuba was more dangerous . Iran and North Korea today are more dangerous today than today .
 The 1962 crisis shows that a small, determined revolutionary state, backed into a corner and convinced of its inevitable demise, can bring the world to the brink of catastrophe .
 Mr Castro’s interest had been piqued by the declassification and release of Soviet and American documents in 1991 and 1992, which both surprised and angered him . Mr Castro had been angered by the release of the documents .
 Khrushchev wrote that Mr Castro had become irrational and possibly suicidal . He wrote that the crisis had to end before Cuba ignited a nuclear war . These included long-suppressed passages from memoirs released 20 years later .
 In addition, declassified letters between Khrushchev and Kennedy revealed the extent to which Washington and Moscow cut Cuba out of negotiations, refused to consider Cuban demands .
 Washington and Moscow came close to Armageddon in Cuba, says CNN's John Sutter . Havana is a key to understanding how the world came to an end, he says . Sutter: "One must look not to Washington or Moscow"
 For the next 18 months, Mr Castro prepared for nuclear Armageddon, while Kennedy and Khrushchev sleepwalked toward the abyss . For the rest of the time, the Castro government prepared for Armageddon .
 The United States and the Soviet Union were clueless about the mind-set of the smaller, weaker, poorer party . Focused on their global competition, the U.S. and the USSR were clueless on the smaller party's mind .
 Kennedy wanted Cuba off his agenda and he resolved never again to cave in to his hawkish advisers and critics, who had continued clamoring for an invasion of the island, even after the Bay of Pigs disaster .
 Khrushchev wrote in his memoirs that the Soviet Union never intended to actually use the missiles . They were merely pawns in a game of superpower competition, he wrote .
 Castro believed the fundamental purpose of Soviet nuclear weapons was to destroy the U.S. in the event of an invasion .
 After centuries of humiliation and irrelevance, he concluded, Cuba would matter fundamentally to the fate of humanity . After centuries, he said, Cuba was matter fundamentally for humanity .
 Cuba couldn't prevent the onslaught, nor could it expect to survive it . Cuba couldn’t prevent the attack, nor can it expect it to survive . Cuba’s president, Vladimir Putin, was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives .
 Castro summoned the Soviet ambassador, Aleksandr Alekseev, to his command post . The Soviet ambassador was in Castro's command post at the time .
 Mr Castro couldn't understand why Soviet troops in Cuba were sitting on their hands while American planes were flying over the island with impunity .
 He urged Cuban troops to start shooting at U-2 spy planes with surface-to-air missiles . Cuban troops should begin firing on low-flying planes with antiaircraft guns, contrary to Soviet wishes .
 Alekseev later told us he felt “almost schizophrenic” when he sent the cables to Moscow, because it was his duty to represent the cautious Soviet position . Yet he himself, like Mr Castro, expected an American onslaught .
 Khrushchev took the initiative even as Kennedy was preparing an offer of his own . Terrified that a catastrophic war might break out, he made the move .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev had finally locked onto a common wavelength . It would take another three agonizing weeks to work out the details of the deal .
 All these letters were methodically dictated, translated, encrypted and then transmitted . The letters were then translated and then sent to the world .
 At the heart of the cold war absolute secrecy was the objective, not speed . Such slow communication in a time of crisis seems inconceivable today, but it was inconceivable .
 Castro wrote to Khrushchev urging him to use his nuclear weapons to destroy the U.S. in the event of an invasion . Castro was unaware of Kennedy’s progress toward a deal .
 At 3m., he arrived at the Soviet Embassy and told Alekseev that they should go into the bunker beneath the embassy because an attack was imminent . He arrived at 3m. ET and ordered the evacuation of the embassy's bunker .
 According to declassified Soviet cables, a groggy but sympathetic Alekseev agreed . Soon they were set up underground with Castro dictating and aides transcribing and translating a letter .
 Alekseev was shocked, but he dutifully assisted Mr Castro in fine-tuning the 10th and final draft of the letter . Mr Castro was shocked by the outcome of the meeting, but was not surprised .
 Mr Castro was calm as he composed this last will and testament for the 6. million citizens of Cuba and the 43,000 Russians on the island who would be incinerated alongside them . Mr Castro's last will was composed in his last will .
 Khrushchev hadn't understood that Mr Castro believed that Cuba was doomed, that war was inevitable, and that the Soviets should transform Cuba from a mere victim into a martyr . By ignoring Mr Castro’s messianic martyrdom, both Kennedy and Khrushche inadvertently pushed the
 Cuba then and Iran now share a revolutionary mind-set, a belief that Washington’s goal is regime change, and a conviction that nuclear weapons might guarantee their survival in the face of unrelenting U.S. hostility .
 The third player in today’s crisis is not a superpower but Israel, which views a nuclear Iran as an unacceptable threat to its existence . Israel is not the only superpower in the Middle East, but Israel is a key player in the crisis .
 Israel shares with Iran a national narrative that is steeped in the glorification of military heroism in the face of potential defeat . Whoever wins the presidential election must persuade the Israelis to restrain themselves, writes Aaron Miller .
 Israel’s overwhelming nuclear superiority means that Israel need not fear Iran . Iran's leaders are rational, and Israel needs not fear them, writes David Gergen . Israel needs to be wary of Iran, he says .
 America must convince Iran that it doesn’t need nuclear weapons, Obama says . Iran has nothing to fear from Israel or the United States, he says . Israel and the U.S. need to convince Iran to get rid of nuclear weapons .
 Cuba's insecurities 50 years ago pushed the world to the brink of catastrophe . Ignoring Cuba’s insecurity pushed the country to the verge of catastrophe, Cuba's leaders say . The U.S. has been in touch with Cuba for 50 years .
 Today we must be wary of backing Iran into a corner so that they feel they must choose between capitulation and martyrdom . We must not back Iran in a corner, so that it feels it must choose the right side .
 In 1962, the Soviets just barely stopped the Cubans; this time, there is no Khrushchev . This time, the U.S. has no chance of stopping the Cuban rebels in Cuba .