 The program is a quiz contest in which two colleges are represented by four students each . Students from two colleges will compete in the competition .
 The master of ceremonies will give a ""toss-up"" question and the first team giving the correct answer gets a ""bonus"" question worth up to 40 points . The first team winning the question will receive a bonus of up to 50 points .
 The Colorado College fund raising program is almost two-thirds through the first goal . The team with the most points at Fund Raising Program Approaches Four Million .
 This includes the one and onequarter million dollar grant by the El Pomar Foundation for a new library . The Olin Foundation also gave a grant of almost 1 and one-half million dollars for the construction of a new science building .
 Freshmen and upperclass students are invited to stop in at the TIGER office sometime between 3:15 and 5:00m. Thus, some two illion dollars has been raised from TIGERS lobs .
 Experience is preferable, but definitely not a necessity . Private subscription type pledges which state that a given amount will be paid in installments on given dates .
 A large part of the remaining amount is hoped to come from alumni subscriptions and donations of parents of Colorado College students . Colorado College hopes to raise the remaining money through alumni subscriptions .
 Up to the beginning of the summer months the campaign was waged only in the state of Colorado . It was being handled entirely by volunteer work of alumni, with the help of volunteers .
 From the beginning of June until October fifteenth there will be a total of fifteen ""kickoff"" dinners in various states and cities across the nation . The dinners will be held in various cities and states .
 Eventually it is hoped that there will be an active fund raising group in every city in the United States which has 25 or more alumni .
 The method of campaigning is generally personal contact with the Mumni groups by a member of the school administration .
 It is felt that this is much more satisfactory than the preparation of an expensive brochure. It is thought that this was much more satisfying than the . preparation of a . brochure .
 Some 10,000 alumni of Colorado College have graduated in the last ten years . This gives the school a potential to draw from for the purpose of raising money .
 The school is attempting to raise money for the construction of the sports complexes which have already been designed . At the moment, the school is trying to raise funds for the project .
 It is hoped that the parents of Colorado College students will be sufficiently interested in this to help out in some large manner . Colorado College hopes parents will be enough interested in helping out .
 The new freshman class this year could be the best in CC's history . CC Freshmen Men Top Girls, College Board members .
 Thomas Ross, director of admissions and associate professor of English, bases this assumption on high school records and college board scores . Ross: College admissions and English admissions are based on school records, board scores and other factors .
 The men had a higher overall average than the women, but the women placed higher in verbal scores . The men placed higher on verbal scores than women in the study .
 There will be approximately 40 of the 50 states represented in the freshman class . The freshman class will be comprised of approximately 40 states .
 CC now has 47 of the 50 states represented, along with 16 foreign countries . CC is represented by 47 states and 16 foreign nations .
 To clarify rumors, the ratio of men to women in the freshman class is 50:50 . Men to women are more than 50 percent in freshman class .
 Colorado College faculty announces the addition of 20 new members for 1960-61 . College Announces Twenty New Members to Faculty . Colorado College will hold classes in the fall of the year .
 The personnel have a wide variety of degrees and background experience . The personnel are trained in a wide range of backgrounds and backgrounds .
 Ursula Monroe, formerly a graduate student at Colorado College, and Edgar Racey, Jr., who has instructed at Pamona College, have taught at Colorado .
 David Van Becker comes to Colorado College from the Unive of California . Also new in the English Department is Mr Van Becker, who comes from California .
 Three instructors have been added to the faculty . In the field of foreign languages, three instructors have also been added .
 Esther Elston, who received her A.B. degree at Colorado College in 1960, will be instructing in the German Department . Elston will teach German at the college .
 Hertha Feyock, who was an interpreter for the Military Government of Bavaria for seven years, is also a new member of the German Department . Feyock was a German interpreter for Bavaria's military government .
 Richard Miller, who acted as chairman of the French Section of the Advance Placement Conference of 1960, is a visiting lecturer at the French Department . Mr Miller was chairman of French section of the conference of 1960 .
 Mr Jenkins received his M.S. degree from the Julliard School of Music where he also served as an assistant in music .
 History Department has added the largest number of new faculty members this year . History Department added the most recent faculty members to its history department .
 Geiger refused a nomination for a lectureship in American Civilization in Greece this year . Geiger was nominated for a lecture at the University of Athens .
 Laurel Ruch received her A.B. degree at Colorado College last year . She will be instructing in the Mathematics Department at the college .
 Glenn Brooks will be instructing in the Political Science Department this year . Brooks will instruct students in Political Science at the University of Columbia .
 Brooks worked as a Research Associate on the Commission on Government and Higher Education from 1957-59 . Brooks worked in Washington, DC, as a research associate on government and education .
 The ROTC Department welcomes Captain Louis Pistone as an assistant professor of Military Science and Tactics . Captain Pistone will be a professor of military science and tactics at the University of Columbia .
 Gary Cook, who received his B.S. degree and did graduate work at Colorado College, will be an assistant in Rastall Center in addition to his position as an instructor .
 Rastall Center Board has announced their movie program for the forthcoming year . Tear's movie program will focus on Tear .
 These movies will be shown in the WES room of Rastall at 7:30m. on the Sunday dates given below .
 Alexander Films will show a short film on CC, and panel members will be interviewed . Alexander Films also will interview panel members .
 All professors are asked to turn in names of students they consider possible candidates . All professors have been asked to submit names of potential candidates .
 Students must be able to think quickly under pressure, have poise, and have a wide range of facts at hand . Students must also have to think fast under pressure and have to have a variety of facts in their knowledge .
 Grades are not necessarily an indication of the kind of student needed, as some of the questions are completely nonsensical . Grades do not necessarily indicate a student's ability, however .
 It has been suggested that two boys and two girls make up the team although it is not necessary . Wynken, Blyken, and Nod Santiago, of Hemingway's Old Man and the Sea Simple Simon .
 A written exam will be given to all interested students . A faculty committee interview will also be conducted .
 Final selecion will come from a faculty committee representing each division of the college . Final selection will come after a committee of faculty members representing each college division .
 As a send off it has been suggested that the finalists face a panel of professors in a simile of the program, open to the public .
 Only the top schools in the nation are invited to attend the program this is an indication of the reputation CC has acquired . Since only the top school in the country are invited, this is a reflection of the program's reputation .
 Two former CC students, David Cowperthwaite and his wife, the former Karen Smith, were killed last July 17 . Richard Raymond of Denver, a student at Colorado School of Mines, was also killed .
 The accident apparently occurred about 3m. that Sunday afternoon as the trio were returning from a hike at or near the glacier . The accident happened in the early hours of Sunday .
 Cowperthwaite and Raymond were found 2»/l miles up a trail above Fourth of July campgrounds July 18 . Raymond Raymond was found July 18 near the campgrounds . Raymond was one of two dogs found in the area .
 The campgrounds are located five miles above Eldora, a mountain resort town west of Nederland . The campground is located near Eldora and is located in the mountains .
 It is speculated that Cowperthwaite was stunned and wandered for some distance before collapsing . The other two were killed instantly by a lightning bolt that struck the other two .
 Rescue units were called around noon on the day following the tragedy to search for the then-missing trio . Rescue teams were called to the scene of the three-decade-long-old crash .
 Units involved included the Rocky Mountain Rescue Group, the Cherryvale crew from Boulder and a four-man sheriff's crew . Units involved in the rescue were Rocky Mountain Rescuers, Cherryvale crews .
 The Cherryvale unit and an ambulance from Howe Mortuary in Boulder returned to the scene of the disaster early that morning to await daybreak and to carry out the bodies .
 No indication that any of the trio had been involved in a climbing or hiking accident . The victims were termed ""reasonably competent climbers" by Boulder sheriff's officers .
 September 13th marked the 100th anniversary of the birth of General of the Armies John J Pershing . Pershing was born in 1903 .
 Congress last June proclaimed the 13th of September as a day in memory of one of America's greatest military leaders . Proposed by the nation's military chief, President Eisenhower, the day was September 13 .
 Carson, members of the Pershing Rifles, Company D-9, Colorado College, performed in a half-remony on the paradi . Carson .
 The officii proclamation from the President and dedication of the parade ground was given by PR 1st Lt. First Lt. Lt. Cpl. Col. David Dickson . The ceremony was attended by the President of the Republic .
 Members of the PR company served as the center honor guard for the ceremony . Wallace Caldwell was honored by members of the honor guard .
 Members of the National Society of PERSHING RIFLES in the ceremony were Dale Dalby, Mark Stetson, Ed Parker, Jack Cashman, Richard Dugdale, Dan Bernstein, Les Whittaker, Les Wittaker and Gary Ziegler . Harry Di
 Members of the military department of Colorado College viewed the ceremonies with other noted military personnel . Louis Pistone was awarded the Medal of Honor .
 The ceremony was highlighted by a 19-gun salute and the renaming of the Parade Ground as General of the Armies John J Pershing Parade Field .
 Across the nation, members of PERSHING RIFLES along with all military organizations held ceremonies in memory of General Pershing . The ceremony was held across the nation .
 The Colorado College chapter appeared on television and in the local newspapers for their work for the occasion . Colorado College Chapter appeared on TV and in local newspapers .
 With this issue the TIGER begins its sixty-first and, hopefully, best year of publication .
 For the present staff, there are fifteen more issues before some changes are made . For the second semester staff there are fourteen issues before final examinations begin in June . Final examinations begin this month .
 June of 1961 should also see many more changes on the campus — changes in the wind as they've been referred to in past semesters . June 1961 will be June 1 .
 The library building will be under construction, the science building should be in the same state . The science building is also under construction .
 Groundbreaking for the five new fraternity houses is due almost any day and they will be ready for occupancy next year at this time . Groundbreaking is expected to be held at the beginning of next year .
 Colorado College is moving ahead physically and also in an academic sense . Colorado College has been in the news for more than a decade .
 We are pleased to welcome the addition of some twenty new professors to the faculty . The University of Cambridge has added 20 professors to its faculty .
 The Class of '64 Class '64 is the first of its kind to be in the U.S. Navy fleet . The new class is the largest in the history of the Navy .
 It will be intriguing to note whether or not the student body will move ahead with the school .
 The Freshman Class certainly has the potential — with a little work this potential can be developed to the benefit of both Colorado College and the class . Colorado College is looking to develop its freshman class .
 The primary purpose of school is to gain an education, says Tim Moe . However, as Tim Moe so aptly put it during the ASCC banquet, Tim Moe said, "School is to be a school"
 While books do not hold all the answers, they are the first place the students should look for them . Students should also look for answers from books, says author .
 If I or any other responsible Senior would give advice, I would be sure it would be to get the studies organized and find out how much time they will take, then look about for an organization to which to give your support .
 This is admittedly difficult when already organizations are recruiting new members, even before the school year begins, but you're certainly capable of making a reasonable decision .
 This Sunday, Shove Chapel will hold 5m. Vespers . This Sunday will be the 5th anniversary of the first meeting of Shove .
 Also participating in the service will be sophomore Bonnie Smith singing ""The Twenty-third Psalm"" by Mallotte . The service will also be held at the same time .
 Sundays with Harry Booth, assistant professor of religion and minister of Shove Chapel, and Dr. Dr. Harry Booth . Booth: "Shove Chapel" is a college of religion . Booth is also a minister of religion at the University of Oklahoma . Booth and Booth are also a professor
 On certain Sundays there will be guest speakers who will also hold discussion groups on the following Monday and Tuesday . Discussion groups will also be held on certain Sundays and Tuesdays .
 Father William Ryan of Seton Hill College, Pennsylvania, will lecture in January . Also lecturing in January on a Monday and Tuesday night will be Father Williams Ryan .
 Anyone wishing to help plan these various visits should join the Religious Affairs Committee . The committee will help plan the visits .
 Student participateion in the Chapel Choir and assistance in leading the worship service is also encouraged .
 In the northeast corner of the Chapel students will find the Chapel Study . The Chapel Study is equipped with tables, chairs, phonograph and a small library where books may be checked out .
 Kappa Sigma, Phi Delta Theta and Phi Gamma Delta fraternities will begin construction of their new houses late this fall . Kappa Sigma will be the first of three Kappa Sigma frat houses to begin construction this fall.
 Tejon street has been closed behind Palmer Hall for the new buildings . Tejon Street will be closed for the first time . The new buildings will be located in Palmer Hall .
 The new houses were made possible by a $308,000 loan from the Home and Housing Finance Agency . The new homes are made possible with the help of a federal loan .
 After that there will be a three to four weeks waiting period for the construction bids . The construction bids are expected to begin in the next three weeks .
 Formal ground breaking ceremonies are tentatively scheduled for Homecoming . Actual construction is expected to begin early December .
 Each house, designed by Carlisle B Guy of Colorado Springs, will house about 34 men with board table facilities for 50 men .
 Kappa Sigma houses will be in a semicircle with Kappa Sigma on the West side, Phi Gamma Delta in the center and Phi Delta Theta on the east side . Kappa Sigma will be on the west side of the circle . Phi Delta Gamma Delta will be the center of the semic
 Pub Board Organizes Writers' Workshop Week planned for the week of Octobei 1-7 . The week will be sponsored by the Publications Board of ASCC .
 This week is designed as a means to promote writing in general, and campus publications . This week will feature guest speakers, panel discussions, and practical writing workshops .
 The Rastall Center Board, the Tuesday Assembly committee, and the International Relations Club. Cooperating — with Publication, in this promotional undertaking . Cooperating with Publication is the Rastalls Center Board .
 Gary Gappert is director of Publics Board and Anni Hereford is chairman of Public's Board . Anni is chairwoman of the board and chairman of the publics board . Gary is also director of the Publics Network .
 Austin Bluffs was an inspirational setting for those freshman and game professors who braved early morning hours September 14 to eat a hardy breakfast in the open mountain air .
 Colorado College Tiger September 16, I960 ["" Rastall Board Plans First School Dance"] The first all-school dance of the year is tomorrow night .
 Dance to be held in Rastall Center dining room from 9 to 12m. The dance will feature the music of Al Dinero's band from Pueblo .
 The dance will be the first opportunity for the entire college community to get together before school starts . The dance is the first chance to meet up before the start of the school year .
 Kinnikinnik Needs Hew Contributions to this year's publications of the campus literary and art magazine . Freshman and new students are being especially urged to contribute .
 Students, teachers, administrators, and other campus personnel are eligible to contribute to the magazine . As in the past, all students, teachers and administrators are eligible for contributions .
 Two issues are being planned this year, the first scheduled to be published December 1, thus necessitating a November 1st deadline for contributions . The first issue is scheduled for December 1 .
 Selections of prose, poetry, photography, and art will again be gleaned from the contributions in 'ach of the aforementioned areas by a Board of Review . Selections will be made from the work of the board .
 The Board, .omprised of students, will examine each contribution anonymously . Each contribution will be examined anonymously so each contributor will have the same attention payed to his work .
 New Kinnikinnik co-editors, Jim Scarboro and Gary Gappert, wish to emphasize "that we hope most of the freshman class will try their hand at creating contributions for their Kinnikinik .
 Many freshmen have had little or no writing experience, and would be surprised, we think, at what they could do in the way of literary effort .
 Kinnikinnik is by no means, exclusively for people interested in literature, says the magazine's authors . In stressing the diverse content and authorship of the magazine, the authors say the magazine is not exclusively for literature .
 It is designed to serve those students interested in improving and displaying their means of self expression . It is also designed to exhibit creative efforts in the areas of art and photography .
 From your desk, you can earn a substantial addition to your income . From a desk you can have a substantial amount of income from your job . From your seat you can be a representative in your territory .
 VKKOffice, Vienna 66, P.O.B 128, Austria. Write for particulars and further details to VKK office .
 It is impressive, even in these days when mass enterti ■place, when audiences numbering millions, unseen by the artist, are in a sense in closer contact with him through their radio sets and hi-fi systems .
 Nowadays, a fantastically large number of people know the star intimately well without ever seeing him . Nowadays he knows a lot of people in the world intimately well .
 The phonograph has brought about a new kind of entertainer, the man who is heard, but not seen . This is one of the greate changes in the entertainment world that the phonograph, for example, brought about, and with it, it has sprung up— the man
 A truly great entertainer who has been heard by millions, but rarely seen, makes his way to Colorado Springs .
 Johnny and his quartet continue to belt out some of the finest sounds around as they now take over the Foxes Lounge in the Alamo Hotel . Johnny's quartet will be playing at the club .
 DIG SMITH is continuing through September 30th . For a unique style in jazz, promote in a haven for Martini lovers .
 KRDO's ""Night Time Jazz"" progr; the way for a late music break . Ken Shaw is a flip. A preview of his performances can be heard nightly at 11:30 on KRDO .
 The Air Academy Band Concert is scheduled for this Sunday, Sept.th at 3 p.m. at Arnold Hall . Ken Shaw is a member of the Ai Academy Band .
 I just heard some of their selections for varying taste and it promises to be quite an affair . The event will be held in New York City, New Jersey .
 They are being given out at various C Springs business, the Chamber of Commerce and yours truly has a couple to spare .
 Harold Copenhaver, conductor, assures me that the first of the series will be a big hit . Harold Cevallos: "The first of this season's series is going to be a great hit. Harold Copanhaver assures me .
 The melodrama has been the summer's most successful plague in Colorado Springs entertainment . It has dwindled from three to one .
 Imperial Players of Cripple Creek present "The White Slave,"" presented by the Imperial Players . The Imperial Players present the play .
 The Aspen Trees put on their Fall dress in Aspen, Colorado, this week . Highlighting your trip across the hill will be some stunning scenery .
 The Chanticleer is Colorado Springs' newest Supper Club . For the freshman with the adventurous taste, might I suggest dining at the new club . The club is located in Colorado Springs, Colorado Springs .
 "cuesta Mueho" is the Spanish phrase used to refer to the Spanish word for "cuestest Mueh"
 The world's greatest gospel singer Mahalia Jackson will soon make another appearance at the Denver Auditorium . Prices unfortunately range in and around the ""teens"" but the food is excellent .
 She is back by request of thousands and we're hoping to get her down to Colorado Springs for a night . We're hoping for her to be in Colorado Springs, Colorado Springs .
 The word is also out that a ""Folk Festival"" will also hit Denver in the coming .months with such greats as Pete Seeger, Odetta and possibly Belafonte .
 The event climaxed the annual All-American Indian Days held in Sheridan, Wyoming . The event was the culmination of the All-America Indian Days .
 Ru.sh week went into full swing Wednesday when all sororities held open house for rushees . Ru.Sh week began Wednesday .
 Kappa Kappa Gamma, Kappa Alpha Theta and Alpha Phi entertained at their first series series parities . Kappa Kappa Phi Kappa Gamma and Kappa Alpha Phi Kappa Phi Phi Phi Kappa Kappa Kappa Alpha Kappa Gamma Kappa Kappa Theta Kappa Kappa Sigma Kappa Phi Alpha Phi Phi Sigma Kappa Kappa Delta Kappa Kappa
 Delta Gamma and Gamma Phi Beta will wind up the first series parties today . Delta Phi Phi Beta and Delta Gamma Gamma Gamma Phi Phi Phi Gamma will end their first series party .
 Saturday, September 17 Kappa Kappa Gamma and Kappa Alpha Theta will hold preference dii . Thursday, September 21, will bring the fall rush schedule to a close .
 The fraternities also started off the rush week by holding open houses for all rushees, Wednesday, September 14 . The fraternity also held open houses on September 14 for students .
 The Sigma Chis and Phi Delta Thctas entertained at their afternoon parties . The Kappa Sigs and Beta Theta Phis prepared for their evening parties .
 Phi Gamma Deltas will hold an afternoon party today . Phi Delts will be on hand to entertain this evening .
 Saturday, September 17 Phi Gamma Delta, Kappa Sigma, Sigma Chi and Beta Theta Phi will entertain during the after . Sunday, September 18 Phi Gamma Deltas will close the evening parties . The Sigma Chis, Phi Delta Theta Theta, and Kappa Sigma will bring the
 MeIrose 3-1219 at Cache La Poudre ACA Summer Meeting . Colorado College's president, Dr. Dr. Michael L. L. C. T. J. R. B. Hahn, will speak at the event .
 Louis T Benezet, moderated a panel of small college presidents and professors this August . Louis T Tenezet moderated the panel and moderated it .
 The American College Association has held week-long sessions of discussion and study for the purpose of self-improvement under the auspices of the Ford Foundation for several years . The meetings are held in conjunction with Ford Foundation .
 It is not known at the present time whether the group will .be sponsored by the foundation another year .
 The group representing diverse viewpoints reached the point patible discussion . In the mountain setting, of a guest ranch formerly owned by a trustee of CC, Mr Arthur G Sharp .
 Present were presidents of religious colleges, including a Catholic priest and two nuns . Those representing schools where religion is no longer one of the four major study areas were present .
 These various backgrounds are evident in the discussion of the philosophical aspects of an education .
 It was generally believed that education must convey a philosophical outlook . It was also believed that it was necessary to convey a philosophy .
 Plato's belief that education should teach the elements of reverence and order without which society lapses into riot . Education should be penetrated through and through with unflinching rationality, says Plato .
 Tigers Open Football Season Tonight in Topeka Kansas . Colorado College Tigers enter the 1960 football season with some good, proven veterans, some mighty big gaps to fill . Tigers open football season in Kansas .
 The Tigers won five and lost four last year, but Carle wants to better that record this fall . Carle is looking to win five and lose four games last season .
 Another player who graduated Iknows it will be tough to improve and who will be keenly missed ' the mark . However, taking a realistic view of the season, Carle says he knows it's a tough task to improve .
 I ""We netted our share of the 1 breaks on the field and I hope we escape all the injuries we had last season. I hope they escape all of the injuries they had last year."
 "I would have to say that we will be the dark horse of e conference," he said . "But the team that ins will have to whip us," he added .
 Carle's biggest task will be filling holes left in the line by graduation . Carle will have to fill the gaps left in his team's ranks .
 He figures he is in pretty good shape at the ends, but he and Frank Flood, line coach, will have to build a new line from tackle to tackle . He and Flood will need to build new line-up from tackle-to-tackle .
 They also must find a man to kick off, kick point after touchtown conversions and field goals . They also need to find a kicker to kick point .
 Gary Richon, one of the best centers in conference, is gone . George Grant, a tackle who set new small college record with .■en field goals last year, is also gone .
 Davy Parker was voted the outstanding sophomore of the conference . Parker led the team in pass receiving and rushing last year . He was voted outstanding sophomore at the University of Washington .
 Carle figures the Tigers will be weakest at center, and also will be weak at tackle . Carle: Tigers are weak at center and tackle .
 Guard should be satisfactory, but thin, while the end positions should be the strongest . End positions should also be strong, while guard should be a thin, thin . Guards should be adequate, but not the strongest, according to FIFA .
 The Tigers should be strong enough in the backfield despite the loss of Haering and Parker, according to Carle .
 He will run Tony Sellitto, Scott Tippin and Ed Kintz at quarterback . He will be coached by Scott Sellitto . Sellitto was overall yardage gainer last year .
 Kintz is an all-around handyman in the backfield as well as being an able passer . Tippin also runs well, and Tippins is a good runner and passer .
 Most likely targets for the passers will be ends Jack Real, captain, and Ken Wisgerhof . Jack Real is likely to be a target for the passing .
 Real was the leading pass catcher among the ends last year . Wisgerhof was the team's leading pass receiver until he was injured in midseason . Real was a top pass catcher for the ends .
 Running backs are expected to be Pete Pleasant, Jim Dunlap, Billy Crockett, Wayne Deutscher and Vince Greco . Freshmen are also expected to play in the running backs .
 Next Saturday is the Tigers' first home game at Washburn Field at 2m. against St. Louis St. Mary's . The Tigers' next home game will be at 2 p.m.
 Jim Blair, Larry Bowman, Bob Broyles, Billy Crockett, Dean Dickson, Wayne Dutscher, Vince Greco, Ed Kintz, Pete Pleasant, Tony Sellitto and Scott Tippin are returning to the Tiger team this year .
 Returning on the line are Fred Emmerling, Bill Geary, Charles Henson, Robin Poole, Jack Real, Mike Romero, Clifton Rouse, Ron Strasburger, Kent Vick, John Ward, and Ken Wisgerhof . Returning on line is Fred Emm
 This year the team is in the able hands of coaches Jerry Carle, Frank Flood, Leon 'Red' Eastlack, and Gary Cook . This year, the team will be in the capable hands of coaching coach Gary Carle .
 Carle has been head football coach and athletic director of the college since January, 1957 . Carle is also the head athletic director at the University of North Carolina .
 In seasons prior to that time, the Tigers were the Tigers . Millers Miller Music Co. was the Tigers' most popular band . The Tigers are now the Tigers of the 1970s .
 Becker's Radiator & Body Shop is located at E Bijou St. Body & Fender Repairing and Painting . The shop is located on the corner corner of the intersection of the street .
 Cook is assistant football coach and assistant track coach and is a former CC gridiron star . Cook is also a former football and track coach .
 Rosie Rosie has earned the respect of coaches and players alike at Colorado College . Rosie's 25 years at the college have earned her respect from players and coaches .
 The Tigers tied for the Rocky Mountain Conference Crown in 1058 . In 1058, however, the Tigers won the conference crown .
 Carle believes in working his squad hard, and guarantees his team won't be ""outconditioned"" by any opponents . Carle's side are currently fourth in the Premier League table, three points behind leaders Chelsea .
 October 8— Colorado School of Mines ate Golden October 15 . October 15— Colorado State College at home. October 15- Colorado State University at home . October 8- Colorado University of Mines at home, October 8 .
 Traffic committee to issue warning tickets until September 23 . Traffic committee will issue warnings until Sept. 23 .
 Freshmen and transfer students will have their pictures taken Friday, men on Saturday and upperclassmen on Saturday . Upperclassmen will also have pictures taken Saturday and Sunday .
 Pub Board Selects Editorial Positions . Doug Norberg as editor of the 1961 Nugget and Anne Wilson as assistant editor . Anne Wilson will be assistant editor.
 Gary Gappert and Jim Scarboro have been chosen as the co-editors of the Kinnikinnik . Carol Coffman was selected to serve as the business manager .
 The first six ads presented by Students each week good for SI .00 Free Food Steak Shrimp Sandwiches . EDDIE MACKS GARAGE 3 1 7l/ 2 N T .
 He worked on publications in high school and is presently treasurer of his fraternity fraternity . He is currently treasurer of the fraternity .
 Miss Wilson, a sophomore, acted as class editor for last year's Nugget . Miss Wilson was class editor last year .
 Gappert and Scarboro hope to put out two issues of the Kinnikinnik this year . They hope to publish two issues each year .
 Gappert was the past editor of THE TIGER and is presently Chairman of the Rastall Center Board . He is the former editor of The Tiger .
 Scarboro, a sophomore, has done a great deal of writing on his own and was a contributor to last year's Kinnikinnik . Scarboro is a sophomore at the University of Alabama .
 Miss Coffman, a sophomore, was editor of the yearbook and on the editorial staff of her high school's literary magazine . She was also editor of a high school literary magazine and yearbook .
 Stafford, a sophomore, was student photographer for four years in high school . Stafford also served as photographic editor of his school paper and co-editor of school annual . Stafford is a sophomore .
 Use this world-famous daily newspaper for the next six months for $5, just holf the regular subscription rate . Subscribe now at $5 .
 Stipends Approved by A S C C C For Editors, Business Managers For Editors and Business Manager at Colorado College .
 Co-Editors Plan Innovations For This Year's Kinnikinnik Cash Awards . Cash awards and critical review service are two of the innovations planned for this year's .
 Gappert and Scarboro also plan to renovate the idea of two editions . The idea was last accomplished in 1952, when it was first published .
 Cash Awards of $15 each, will be awarded to the best entry in each of the areas of art, photography, prose, and poetry . $15 will also be given to the cover design .
 Those interested in participating in the cover competition should contact Dave Dunlap for the mechanical requirements for the cover .
 All the contributions will be done entirely by the student Board of Review . The recipients of the cash :s wards will be selected by a facilty member . Although the qualifying review :>f all the contributions .
 The critical review service will consist of a ally sheet attached to each conribution . The student 3oard of Review will record their lecision and opinion of the book .
 These enries will also be viewed by a memr of the English department who II add his comments on the tally beet . The tally will be added to the final tally .
 The faculty member's pinion though will not effect the decision . The decision will not affect the decision to publish the book .
 Early prose and poetry ontributions will be criticized at the pracical writing sessions to be held Ictober 1 as part of the Writers' Workshop Week sponsored by Pubcations Board .
 Deadline November 1 for all art and litiary contributions for the fall edion is November 1 . Deadline for all contributions for this year's edion will be November 1, 2015 .
 The fall issue ill then be published December . As before, anyone connected ith the Colorado College may antribute .
 Traffic committee to issue warning tickets until September 26 . Traffic committee will issue warnings until Sept. 26 .
 Only a limited number of exams will be available for students . Interested students are urged to see Dr. Dr. John Sutter at the University of Cambridge .
 On October 12 the finalists will face Professors Joseph Ball, Harry Booth, William Hochman, and Thomas Ross, in the W.E.S. room .
 All interested students are invited to attend the program . Albert Seay will act as master of ceremonies for the program and all interested students will be invited to visit .
 The new system provides ASCC stipends to the future editors and business managers of the TIGER, the NUGGET, and the KINNIKINnIK, stipends that will be publicized and sought after . ASCC will also provide stipends for future editors of
 It is believed that such stipends will raise the prestige of these publications and encourage students of the highest caliber to apply for them .
 At the same time, those winning them will be compensated financially in some measure for the heavy outlay in time and work that these positions entail . The positions will be paid for by the government .
 Under the new system expense accounts are reduced to the minimum and no expenses outside of some meals missed and transportation are to be considered . Such expenses are charged directly to the publication with such expenses being charged .
 The stipends for editors and business manegers of the TIGER and the NUGGET are $350 per year . Editor and business editor stipends cost $350 a year .
 The editors of the KINNIKinNIK will receive $300 per year (split in the case of co-editors) and the business manager receives $150 per year . The business manager of the . KINnIKINNik receives $100 per year and
 One half of the above amounts are to be credited to the students accounts at the beginning of each semester . The students accounts will be credited at the start of the semester .
 Plans for the Fall and Spring editions of the 1960-61 KINNIKinNIKS are being made . Staff intends to promote the active sale of the book to faculty members, staff, parents of students, alumni and alumni .
 A substantial part of the outlay for stipends for this magazine may be returned to the treasury . In this way a substantial part . of the . outlay . may . return to the Treasury .
 KINNIKINIK can be justified in receiving a stipend and the prestige of the newspaper can be enhanced . The business manager as well as its editor, can also benefit from the stipend . The ground floor of the ground floor began at a cost of about $9,
 This remodeling of the business office area and some of the other administration offices has gained two offices in the treasurer's section . The treasurer's office has been added to the business area .
 Other smaller projects included the planting of about 50,000 square feet of lawn, installation of new sidewalks, new curbs, gutt the trimming campus and dri trees .
 Nearly $100,000 worth of improvements are being completed on the Colorado College campus in preparation for the 87th year of classes . Colorado College will celebrate its 87th anniversary of classes this year .
 The projects are part of an overall program to improve the physical plant and facilities and to make the campus more functional and attractive .
 Last year, about $500,000 was spent on installation of a new heating system and other utilities improvements . Last year's heating system was installed in the city .
 Due to start this year are three major building projects including a new library, science building and three fraternity houses . The El Pomar Foundation gave $1,250,000 to start the projects .
 Remodeling of Ticknor Hall which was dedicated in 1898, at a cost off $18,000 . Remodeling of ticknor Hall at a total cost of $19,000. Remodeled of the hall .
 This hall was a girl's dormitory until 1957 when it was converted into an office building for the faculty . The hall was converted to a building for faculty in 1957 .
 A portion of Palmer Hall, dedicated in 1904, was remodeled in 1904 . New laboratory equipment was installed in the geology department at a cost of $25,000 .
 Jackson House at 1029 North Nevada Avenue was remodeled into office and classrooms at a cost of about $25,000 . Jackson House is located near the intersection of Nevada Avenue on the corner of the street .
 Jackson House has been Colorado College property since 1914 and was closed down as a men's dormitory in 1958 . Jackson House was Colorado College's first dormitory .
 Jackson House is now ready for use in Jackson House . Seven offices and 10 classrooms are now ready to use . Jackson House will be open to the public in 2015 .
 The seven offices will provide office space for 11 professors . The classrooms will range in size from 50-student to 10-student capacity .
 Cutler Hall was touched up on the outside and a long-range program of changes for the inside was launched . Cutler Hall has been touched up by the outside .
 Cutler Hall is the oldest CC building, with ground breaking taking place on July 4, 1877, and its two wings being completed in 1882 . Ground breaking took place in 1877 and the two wings were completed in the summer of 1882. Cutler Hall was the first CC building
 Opening Convocation of Colorado College will be held Tuesday morning, September 27, 11:00 Shove Chapel . During the summer, a remodel of the chapel was completed during the summer .
 Dr. Jack Real, president of the Associated Students of Colorado College, will preside and introduce Dr. Dr. Real . The Associated Students' President will be the guest speaker at Colorado College .
 Presentation of the Present's Prize for Scholastic Improvement is also included in the program . The program includes a presentation of the present's prize .
 The event will be opened and closed by an academic procession and recession in full regalia . It will be closed by a procession and opened by a student procession .
 Traditional ceremony is one which officially signals the opening of school by bringing the College Community together as a family for the first time . This traditional ceremony is a traditional ceremony .
 The first Writers' Workshop Week is definitely scheduled for the week beginning October 1, continuing until October 7 . Writers Workshop Week of October 1 will be October 1 .
 Saturday afternoon from 1:15 to 2 :45 three practical writing workshops will be held concurrently, dealing with prose, poetry, and technical writing . The workshops will also be held on Saturday afternoon .
 From 3:00 till 3:45 a coffee break will be held during which time the editor of each student publication will present the needs of his particular publication . From 3-00 to 3-45, the editors of each paper will present their needs .
 Tuesday morning at 11, an off campus author will be sponsored by the Student Assemblies Committee . An off-campus author will appear on campus at 11 a.m. Tuesday .
 A foreign correspondent of the Denver Post will be sponsored by the International Relations Club . Wednesday afternoon a foreign correspondent will speak at the club's luncheon .
 Of Colorado College Campus CC students who are interested in speech, drama and radio classes are asked to see Mr W Woodson Tyree or Mr William E McMillen .
 Annual awards are made for participation in speech, radio, drama, debate, debate and radio operating, radio operating and technical radio work or stage work .
 The Talent and Speaker's Bureau is open to all students interested in school and community service . The talent and speaker's bureau is open for all students .
 Students who can perform in any way — sing, dance, act, read, debate or play an instrument — are invited to join . Students can sing or dance, read or debate, debate, play instruments .
 Each year certificates of are given to graduating seniors who have given of their talents during their school careers .
 The all school Variety Show will be presented November 1, 2, 3 and 4 this year . Students will display their talents at the Variety Show .
 Republican Convention Monday With a Bang . John HANEY Frosh Agitation Began . Monday with a Bang J, ' r , . -“ Keynoter, Speaks to CC-ers on the CORNER .
 This committee 3d even take the initiative on inviting famous personages t0th . How h ever, Dr. Dr. John Defterios says, "This committee is very open to inviting famous people to meet"
 Benezet's comments went far beyond the everyday talk of lecturers and assemblies . He said: "I'm sorry for what I've done, but I'm not sure what I think about it."
 He touched somewhat upon the responsibility of the school to motivate its student more than it is now doing . The school should motivate its students more, he said .
 Friday will be a big day for all the sororities as they will receive their new pledges . C^trcek flews flews by Friday .
 Each house will have an informal dinner to welcome the new girls into the fold . The event will take place at the end of each week .
 The fraternities are winding up their fall rush schedule with preference dinners . The bids will come out tomorrow for the fall rush season .
 Class of 1964 will go down on record as one of the few classes to retaliate during the harrowing period known as Agitation . The class of 1964 was one of only classes that retaliated during the turbulent period of Agitation.
 Myrtle Slats, the all-American coed from such scenic spots as Prairie Dog, Kansas, has joined with the typical freshman man, Danny Dink, in composing new and interesting words to the dead, dreary CC Fight Song . Myrtle slats is the all
 After a busy week of meetings, registration and banquets, the freshmen came sleepily to breakfast on Monday morning singing the Rastall Fight Song .
 Tiger Club members invaded the dining room to question and agitate the Class of '64 . Class '64 was the first time the U.S. women were allowed to take part in a debate over the issue .
 Freshman agitation will continue at the same pace until Satunday, October 1, when the freshman-sophomore fight will take place . Freshman activity will continue until Oct 1 .
 If the freshmen lose, agitation will continue until the Homecoming weekend . The freshmen are expected to be freshmen at the University of Maryland .
 First Sunday morning service of the academic year will be held at Shove Chapel Sunday at 11m. Mr Booth Preaches First Sermon of Year .
 Mr Harry Booth, the minister of the chapel, will preach on the subject ""Peter and the Riddle of the Church" Peter the Apostle is the symbolic Father of the church .
 The ushers will be supplied by Blue Key and the Delta Gamma's will hostess . Delta Gamma will be hostess. The Delta Gamma also will host .
 GG Campaign Climbs With United States Steel Grant . U.S. Steel Foundation joins roll of national contributors to Colorado College Campaign .
 National chairman of the campaign recently announced a special grant of 520,000 from the foundation as part of its 1960 corporate of aid to education .
 Colorado College is one of 31 colleges and universities selected for the special grants . Colorado College was selected for special grants to help students in the fall .
 These grants were pai*t of a contribution program which totals $2,677,000 for various measures of aid to education . The grants were part of the contribution program .
 Colorado College will share from a contribution made to the Associated Colleges of Colorado of "" which it is a member . The college will also share from contributions made by a member of the association .
 The campaign is nearing the two-thirds mark in its drive for $6,000,000 for new facilities, renovation funds and other urgent needs . Harmon said that the campaign is nearly two-third of the drive for funds .
 The Colorado College Assemblies Committee is sponsoring college programs . The committee is looking forward to some of the fine programs that they will sponsor .
 As in previous years the programs will be held on Tuesday mornings at 11 at 11 a.m. The program will be well publicized as to subject and location .
 We will do the best job we can to bring programs of interest and enjoyment to CC and we are counting on you to give us the enthusiasm and encouragement we received last year . We will be doing the best possible possible possible to do this year .
 The Assemblies Committee often works in conjunction with other student committees .
 We would also like to invite any freshmen students who would be interested in working with us to contact us . We would like to hear from any students interested in joining us .
 Today's young people should study politics more than any other generation before them, says Dr. Dr. Andrew Keen . Dr. Keen: Young people should learn more about politics than anyone before them .
 Walter Judd, Republican congressman from Minnesota, spoke on Colorado College campus . Judd is a member of the Republican House of Representatives from Minnesota . Judd spoke at Colorado College in Colorado .
 Judd spoke to an overflow crowd in the WES room of Rastall Center at a meeting sponsored by the Colorado Col lege Young Republicans . Judd spoke at a Colorado College Young Republican meeting . Judd was the keynote speaker at the meeting .
 Senator Gordon Allott and Congressman J Edgar Chenoweth were introduced by Max Power, leader of the CC Young Republicans . Colorado Republicans seeking re-election also attended the meeting .
 Judd told students, "You young students should pay_ close attention to politics" Judd told the students, ""You young people should pay . close attention" to politics. Judd said .
 Judd told the audience that they must first know how to make a living and prove their abilities before entering-ing politics . Judd said they must learn how to earn a living before entering into politics .
 As young people study politics, they should also realize that objectivity is a means to an end . Objectivity should be a means of end, as well as objectivity, it is said .
 World War II was a medical missionary in China before and during the early years of World War I . Dr. Dr. John Sutter describes his days in China as a missionary in the 1940s .
 Judd discussed a Chinese military leader who is now minister of defense in the Chinese communits government . Judd also discussed a former military leader of the country . Judd discussed the role of the military leader in China's new government .
 'This man knew all the answers in communism and the communists are eager to work with such people. This man knew everything in communism,' he said .
 "We taught them to read and the communists gave them books to read,"" Dr. Dr. John Sutter says . Dr. Sutter: "We were very proud of our efforts to educate the world"
 Few Americans are prepared to argue with a communist because Americans do not bother to master the knowledge about their own way of life, he said . He pointed out that few Americans would be prepared to disagree with the communist .
 In many exchanges with the communists, Americans pit amateurs against professionals . Americans pit them against each other in exchange for money .
 "We let anyone go who has the money to go and the Russians always send pros. We let anyone . have the money, and we always let them go," he said . "The Russians always sent pros," he added .
 We send Iowa farmers and the Russians send agents who look like farmers, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "We're sending farmers to Russia. We're sending them to Iowa farmers"
 He pointed to American experiences with Hitler as an example of American inabilities to deal with professionals in politics . He said Hitler was a prime example of America's inabilities in dealing with politics .
 This article is intended to present the Republican stand in our great two-party system . In Opposi ti on 'In OpposiTi on '"" This article was intended to . present the . Republican stand .
 The one following this will be aimed at swaying the reader to the Democratic pomt ox view . The other one will try to sway the readers to a view of the Democratic view .
 Government sets or can alter, one's standard of living, field of endeavor, place of residence, ability to move about, etc. etc. Government sets, or can . alter, a standard of . living, a field of . endeavor, a place of . residence, or a
 In short, there are few if any, daily actions we take which are not affected by governmental influence from some quarter . "There is no daily action we take that is affected by government influence," says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Politics is the means by which the people make their desires felt in the government . Politics is a means of making the people's wishes felt in government . It is also the means for people to make their wishes felt by government .
 Since the second administratinn of Washington, political par-ties have been the means for the people to make themselves felt in politics . Since the first D.C. administration, people have made their way into politics .
 It is important for each of us to choose a party and to support our views and candidates in that party . Therefore, it is indeed important for . Each of us must choose a . party and support our . views and our candidates in . that party.
 It is also important that we support the party's choice often not identical with our own of stands and candidates, for such is the method of promoting effective government in our system . Such is the way to promote effective government .
 The man who disagrees with the stands taken by each major party can be much more effective in altering a party's position than without . He can be more effective by working within the party than without, he says .
 In a twoparty system, compromises and coalitions are made prior to the election of one party or the otherwithin the party . In the system, coalitions and compromises are made before the election, such as the election .
 As a party it has made mistakes and its representatives have succumbed to human fallacy . The Labour Party has also succumbed to a human fallacy, says Labour leader David Cameron .
 "The constant interplay among elements and factions of the party works constantly to lessen the errors and to present a better, more stable and more progressive program," party leader says .
 The choice between parties ought not to be based on just certain stands or actions of a party — probably events of the past . Instead, it should be a choice of parties, not just certain actions of the parties .
 The choice should be based on certain, basic, continuing principles upon which most all members of one party or the other agree . Party stands and part' actions will reflect these underlying principles, as indeed the cast should be .
 Republicans believe that each individual should be as free as possible to realize his own potential . Republicans say that each person should be able to achieve whatever he is able .
 Ht has a right to expect others to re' spect this freedom and an obliga-' tion to respect the freedom of others . Ht must respect others' freedom and respect others, he says .
 "The function of government is to guard and enforce these rights and obligations," says President Obama . "Government is to protect these rights," says Obama .
 Government should help individual when he is unable to help himself. Also, government should help thf individual when they are able to help themselves. Government should also help individuals when they can't help themselves .
 If possible, help should be designed to enable him to help himself . And, if at all possible, that help is designed to help him help himself, he says .
 Each problem faced by a governmental body should be handled at the lowest possible level . In a county, the individuals who are closest to that problem — in a county — have the largest voice in handling the problem if the county government deal with it .
 Thfj people have met the problem directly and have used their initiative to solve it . But more than that, they have met it directly and used it to solve the problem . The thfj community has raised awareness of the problem in Norway .
 Such would not be the case if the problem had immediately been referred to, say, thfl federal government . Such would have been the case in the past .
 In Opposition the people of the county would have had very little voice, and would have exerted far less initiative in solving their problems . At that level Colorado College Tiger had little voice in solving problems . In Opposition, the people would have exercised less initiative .
 Republicans believe that every individual should be aided and encouraged to develop his capabilities and reach his highest achievements, through his own initiative . Republicans, then, believe that each individual should develop his own capabilities .
 Franklin, Madison, Jefferson, Washington, Lincoln, Teddy Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson have been among the finest of men who used their initiative to make our nation strong .
 Kappa Alpha Theta with an average of 2,824, and Kappa Sigma with a fraternity high of 2.489, earned the highest scholastic rating for the second semester of 1960 . Kappa Sigma, with the fraternity high at 2,489, was the highest . Kappa Alpha
 Thetas were followed by Kappa Kappa Gamma, 2.749, Gamma Phi Beta and Gamma Phi Phi Beta . Kappa Kappa Phi Gamma was followed by Phi Phi Phi Alpha Kappa Phi Phi . Kappa Phi Beta was the second highest-ranking Kappa Kappa Alpha Kappa Kappa Kappa .
 The all sorority average was 2.658 compared to the all women's grade average of 2.636 . The average grade for the sorority grade was 1.658 .
 Kappa Sigma was 2.473; Beta Theta Pi, 2.404; Phi Gamma Delta Delta Delta 2.305; Sigma Chi 2.230 . Phi Delta Theta Theta was the second highest-placed group in the world .
 The all fraternity average was LI.406 while the second semester all men's grade point average was 2.378 . The second semester average was L.406 . All men's grades were LI. 406 .
 Interested individuals please contact either George English or Jack Cashman as soon as possible, in the TIGER office .
 We especially welcome letters about our publication as it's the only way we can give you the newspaper you want . We especially want to hear from your community .
 College seniors and graduate students may qualify for trainee positions following gradthe Federal Civil Service . The FSEE recruiting program is a recruiting program through which college seniors and grad students qualify for FSEE positions .
 Approxiexamination is being offered six times during the 1960-01 school year in all college cities . Approxiesxamination was offered in college cities across the United States .
 Civil Service Commission officials emphasize that students who take the examination early during the school year will have the best opportunities for appointments following graduation . Civil Service officials emphasized that the students who took the exam early will have best opportunities .
 Those who ap;j)y between September 29 and November 3 will take the test on November 19 . Those who took the test will be able to take it from September 29 to November 3 .
 The TIGER wishes to apologize to two of the new members of the faculty whose academic achievements were not fully mentioned in last week's issue .
 5,000 nation-wide appointments are made through the examination each year in such fields as general administration, business analysis and regulation, social security administration, management analysis, personnel management, budget management, tax collection and administration, natural resource management, investigation and inspection, information, electronic data processing
 Management internships are also offered through a special option of the examination . The examination is also available for management internships .
 Mr Howerton said that by passing this one examination applicants in effect apply to many Federal agencies at the same time .
 Freshmen and upperclass students are invited to stop in at the TIGER office sometime between 3:15 and 5:00 Tuesday afternoon . Freshmen are interested in working in some capacity on the Tiger .
 You buy any 5 paperbacks and we give you one 50c Mentor book of your choice FREE!!! . . Every Friday evening from 5:30 to 9:00. We give you a free Mentor Book every Friday evening .
 The first six ads presented by Students each week good for SI .00 Free Food Steak Shrimp Sandwiches . New USED BOOKS is the largest selection of books in town .
 The group plans to make its first official appearance at the football game tomorrow . The group has been approved by the ASCC .
 A meeting of niterested freshmen will be held today at 4 p.m. in Slocum Hall .
 Don Lavers, Bob Kendall and some of the cheerleaders will be there to help the freshmen plan their strategy for Saturday's premiere performance . The freshmen will be planning their strategy .
 CC Young Republicans will hold their first meeting Tuesday, September 27, at 4:30m. in Rastall Center . Clublicity Young Republicans are looking forward to the first meeting .
 Everyone who is interested in taking part in campaigning for the Republican ticket is urged to attend the event .
 Max Power, chairman, said that the group will participate actively in grass-roots campaigning . The group will also schedule as many interesting programs concerning the election as possible .
 International Relations Club will hold a brief organizational meeting for the purpose of electing officers and planning a program for the year . Club Holds Organizational Meeting on Tuesday, September 27, at 4:15 in the WES Lounge, Rastall Center .
 All interested students are welcome to this meeting and are urged to attend . The meeting will be held at the University of Cambridge .
 Clubs Conference which dealt with the topic of South East Asia was held during the spring term . Conference on the problem of overpopulation was held in spring .
 Mahalia will be singing such greats as ""Swing Low-Sweet Chariot" and ""When the Saints Go Marching In"" and ""Motherless Child""-plus .
 This concert promises to be a fine attraction with many moments of wonderful music . Set in an atmosphere that has made American folk music so great and popular .
 George Gershwin gave the American theatre its fullstatue folk opera folk opera . The show is based on American folk music .
 The setting is Catfish Row in Charleston; the story is that of a crippled Porgy and his love for Bess . The book is set in the heart of the town where Porgy is crippled .
 Various records of the scores, in part or whole, are available and should make nice additions to your record library . For those of you familiar with the story of Porgy and Bess and did not get a chance to see the movie, these records are available .
 One, in part, is an Andre Kostelanetz arrangement; while others are taken from the sound track and original play . One part of the arrangement is a version of the original play from the original version .
 The music from P&B is of th. finest and will make those late music breaks a welcome occasion . I feel safe in saying that the music is of the finest .
 The Alamo Hotel in San Antonio, Texas, is located on the edge of the river . The hotel is located in the heart of the city's most famous landmarks .
 Johnny Smith continues to entertain; and I use the word strongly . Art lovers can always find delight at the Fine Arts Center Museum . The Red Cloud Inn still makes for a pleasant evening .
 The London Shop for Men is a place where college classics in clothes are key words . The London shop for men is a great place to buy college clothing .
 EXCALIBUR blended scotch is something else, and if you are particular, the view in the quadrangle is quite nice this year . If you are very particular, it's quite nice to see this year’s EXCABUR .
 For the first time in U.S. history two presidential candidates will meet face to face in public debates . First time in United States history two candidates have met face-to-face in public .
 The Nixon-Kennedy debates will be one of the most controversial issues of this election year . The debates are expected to be the first presidential debate of the year .
 The Colorado College Assemblies Committee has reserved the WES Room for the viewing of these debates after which there will be discussions led by two faculty members .
 The first of the presidential debates, that of domestic policy, will be shown over KRDO-TV Monday, September 26 at 7:30m. in the WES Room . The debates are scheduled for September 26 in New Hampshire .
 Everyone is invited to watch the debate and participate in the discussion afterwards . The debate will take place at 7.30 p.m. ET on Monday .
 The WHICKERBILL art and glass studio is one of Colorado's finest art galleries . Refreshments will be served at the event .
 Colorado College Mountain Club member will give a rock climbing demonstration in the ampitheater in North Cheyenne Canyon as a delayed feature of orientation week .
 The area is the one used by the U.S. Army for similai shows during the summer . The area has seats for a large audience .
 Tin place is unique in that no other area exists where spectators can see ""live" climbing from comfort able seats . Tin place has no other place in the world where fans can see "live" climbers from comfortable seats .
 All members of the College community are invited, but must sign up in order to procure transports . The event will be held at the College of Charleston, Georgia .
 After the one-hour show thosi who have watched will be invited to make a 45 minute trail hike to Mount Cutler . Mount Cutler's summit over looks the Broadmoor area . After the show, thosi will be able to climb the summit of Mount Cutler, whose summit over
 Make reservations fo both transportation and supper af Rastall Center Desk . Make reservations for both transport and supper at the center of the center .
 The Golden Dragon is located at 1409 S EIGHTH STREET . Serving Family Style Lunches and Dinners . Warm clothing should be worn .
 In this non-conference game the favored Washburn Icabods were shown up defensively by the Tigers . The Tigers could make no good offensive showing by Joa,m „ e Weigel the 1959 Home until late in the game .
 The pep rally will be held Friday, October 27, and will feature rowning of this year's queen . TIGERS play St. Louis Cardinals in the Super Bowl on Sunday .
 Neither team could make much gain and it was begining to look like punting practice .
 It was in the second quarter that the Tigers finally began a moving drive . The Tigers finally scored a touchdown in the first quarter of the quarter .
 Jim Blair kicked a 35-yard field goal to put the Tigers out of front at halftime . Blair kicked the field goal with 2:36 remaining until hatftime .
 The drive started when Ed Wujcik pounced on a Washburn fumble deep in Tiger tei-ritory . The drive was the first of its kind for the Tiger Woods team .
 Tony Sellitto as the quarterback connecting with Bob Calder, with Scott Tippin and Pete Pleasant rushing on the field accounted for most of the gain . The game ended in a dramatic victory for Bob Calder .
 Chuck Henson picked off a Washburn pass and made it easily back to the end zone for a touchdown . The Icobods scored a touchdown in the third period with the Icobod on their own 34 .
 Later in the period Washburn retaliated with a touchdown of their own, but here the scoring ended . Washburn scored a touchdown in the second half .
 Tomorrow afternoon at 2m. the Tigers play their second game of the season against St. Louis City .
 Saturday afternoon CC plays Western State from Gunnison as their Homecoming rival . Saturday afternoon will be CC's Homecoming game against Western State .
 Each sorority and fraternity will decorate a float to form the main attraction in the parade Saturday morning . The parade will take place at 8 p.m. Saturday morning.
 Don Roll heads the committee made up of representatives from each fraternity and sorority . Roll is the chairman of the committee . Roll: "It's a good time for all of us to get involved in this kind of event"
 Wallet Lost Reward Offered Ray Babb, Ext. Babb's Wallet lost to Freddie Fros . Fros' Wallet lost wallet .
 Same Bad Menu fe fe It's Still All the Same Hasn't Changed a BIT . Still a BIG HELLO and WELCOME BACK from ffiMWlWi OPEN 7 Days Monday thru Sunday Monday thtu Saturday 9:00m. to 3:00 p.m
 Traffic warnings will be given until Monday and then tickets will be issued . Pat Beaver— Roger Woodbury married: Maryn Price — Leon Good son . Roger Woodburger married: Maryn Price .
 Budget forms for funds allotted from ASCC should be picked up from and returned to Mr John O Howard on the ground floor of Cutler or Chris Griffiths by September 30th .
 The allottment of stipends to be given to the editors and business managers of the Nugget, Tiger an<l Kinnikinnik has been approved .
 Editors and business managers of the Tiger and Nugget will receive $350 per year . Editors, business managers will also be paid $350 a year .
 Kinnikinnik edito will receive $300 per year and the business manager $150 per year . Kinnikinik editoro receives $300 a year and business manager will get $150 .
 The Executive Council feels such stipends will raise the pres tige of these publications and en courage students of the highest caliber to apply for them . The executive council feels such a stipend will raise awareness of the publications .
 Our first home football game is Saturday against St. Mary's St. Francisville .
 Dean Lloyd Worner presented the President's prize for scholastic improvement to Richard Dugdale, a junior at Colorado College .
 Colorado College Pres. Benezet: 'Education stands as a barrier against the herding force )f the totalitarian world"
 Benezet spoke at the annual Convocation held in Shove Chapel . The convocation was attended by all students of the college .
 The ser/ice was opened by an academic procession of college faculty and staff in their academic robes . The event was attended by students and faculty from the college .
 Benezet said, ""It tands out against the herding that is brought to bear by toil I itarians" The French poet said, "It tends out against herding"
 The replacement of in-individual thought by the herd-mind in be a terrifying thing . The replacement is thought to be terrifying thing for the herd mind .
 Le said that people who feel dessed at being lonely and afraid i world they never made, should tik of the antidote . If it liould happen in America, through failure of education such as ■s, then we shall indeed be done.""
 The thought that in America and rough liberal learning we still Lve that strength and freedom share in the process eof remak•r the world. That is, The thought . That is the thought that . in . America and Rough liberal learning . We still believe strength and . freedom
 Benet said, "Here at Colorado College lis past summer we have been too isy buildingto think much about irld disaster" Benet added, "We are too scared to think much of the disaster"
 Jeserve the kind of educational ■ocess Colorado College thinks, he said . Jeserve: Jeserve . Colorado College will offer students the chance to learn about the college .
 Sigma Chi fraternity holds an all school function, the Watermelon Bust, every year . Sigma Chi holds the event at all school functions . The event is held in honor of Sigma Chi members .
 The carnival is put up by sororities and independent women . It consists of carnival booths, beauty contest, melon eating contest and other activities .
 Preliminary tryouts for the play, ""Diary of Anne Frank," will be held October 5,6 and 7 at 3:00m. in Perkins Hall . The play is based on the diary of Frank Frank .
 The annual production of the CC Players will be directed by William McMillan . The CC Players' annual production will be the first of its kind .
 It was produced on Broadway in October, 1956 with Susan Strasberg as Anne and Joseph Schildkraut as her father . It was also produced in New York and starred on Broadway .
 Interested students urged to try out for any of the ten parts, which include five men and five women . The students are urged to audition for the roles in the roles of either of the 10 parts .
 The play requires a simultaneous set of four rooms, one of them a second floor room . Stage and production workers are also welcome to help with the play .
 "We must learn new Stages ... and we need many lies foreign students,"" he said . "We need many lie foreign students"
 Miss Amanda Ellis, associate professor of English, has been appointed Writer in Residence . P a changing world, a matter of active search is in part at least a processing process .
 This new position will free Miss Ellis half-time to devote herself to an already notable career of published writing .
 This appointment is effective the beginning of this semester and will allow her more time to complete the biography of Dorothy Wordsworth, which Miss Ellis is now working on .
 Miss Ellis completed a television story for ""Alcoa Presents,"" scheduled for October 4 . Miss Ellis recently tackled a new field of writing .
 Miss Ellis plans to devote more time to writing television stones . She has been asked to write a book on creative writing . Miss Ellis is also planning to write more about television writing .
 In her combined career as a teacher and writer, Miss Ellis has authored 15 books and more than 60 articles for scholarly magazines .
 Three of her books have been of particular interest to local people and citizens of Colorado . Colorado Springs and early-day Colorado is the story of Colorado Springs .
 Miss Ellis launched her writing career with a book, ""Representative Short Stories,"" which went through 17 editions . Miss Ellis is best known for her work as a writer .
 One, ""The Literature of England,"" was a history of English literature . Another was a balnced history of the English language .
 It was about Queen Elizabeth the First of England and was highly lauded by critics . It was highly acclaimed by critics for its portrayal of Queen Elizabeth .
 Reviewers praised Miss Ellis' ability to present Elizabeth as a warm, charming woman .
 Buses chartered to transport football fans to the Tigers' fourth game of the season against Colorado School of Mines at Golden . The Tigers face the Mines in their fourth game at Golden on Saturday .
 The buses will leave the Rastall parking lot promptly at 6:30m. on Saturday . The buses are expected to arrive at the end of the day .
 Tickets to the game may be purchased for $2.50 from members of Tiger Club and Black and Gold or at the Rastall Center Desk . Tickets may also be purchased from Tiger Club members or from the center .
 Publication Board Sponsors First Writers' Workshop Week . Three practical writing workshops will be held tomorrow .
 This week is designed to promote writing in particular and campus publications in general . This week will include workshops, talks by off-campus authors and writers .
 Beginning at 1:15m., workshops will be given on c "" poetry, and technical — ing. poetry .
 The prose and poeti shops will begin with critiques of selected pieces from the last two issues of the Kinnikinnik .
 Students planning to attend either or both of these workshops should pick up Kinnikinniks at Rastall desk and read the marked selections .
 The end of each workshop will be devoted to the reviewing of the personal work of those attending the workshops if they desire .
 Mr Robert Ormes of the CC English department will conduct the prose workshop . The prose workshop will be moderated by Jim Scarboro . Mr Scarboro will also be moderating .
 The poetry workshop will be conducted by Mr David van Becker, also of CC's English department .
 He will be assisted by Annie Hereford who will moderate the discussion . He will also be joined by an expert from the BBC Radio 4 programme .
 The third workshop, involving technical writing, will be conducted by Dr. Dr. John Defterios .
 Richard Stacy, an alumni of Colorado College, is employed by the Lasdou foundation of Colorado Springs . Stacy is a former college alumnus . He is now employed as a consultant by the foundation .
 Al science students interested in learning the techniques of reporting their laboratory work should plan to attend this workshop . The workshop will help students learn how to report their lab work .
 These workshops will conclude at 3:00m., at which time a coffee break will be held, and the editors of the various publications will elucidate the needs and functions of their publications .
 Interested students then will be given an opportunity to indicate their desire to work on campus publications . Students will then be given a chance to indicate they want to work for campus publications.
 This talk is sponsored by the Rastall Center Board . The talk will be held in the WES room at 4:00m.
 McCue is known locally as a stimulating book reviewer . Hei-self is the author of several books .
 Robertson, a book reviewer with regional reputation, will talk ut the regular morning assembly at 11:00 a.m. Robertson will talk . Robertson is a regional book reviewer who has regional reputation .
 Miss Amanda Ellis, writer-in-residenee at Colorado College, makes TV debut at Writers' Workshop Week . Coinciding with the event, Miss Ellis will be the television debut of Miss Ellis . Miss Ellis is a writer in-residence at the college .
 Annie Hereford, X-396. ntact be the talk presented on Wednesday, October 5, by the International Relations Club .
 Robert Hosokawa is a noted foreign correspondent for the Denver Post . He will be joined by Mr Hosokawawa for the next week's travel coverage .
 This first Writers' Workshop Week is being promoted by the ASCC Publications Board . ASCC is an attempt to further the cause of self expression and creative satisfaction .
 Gary Gappert is director of this project, under the chairman of the Publications Board, Annie Hereford . He is the director of the project .
 Four boys and four girls were selected after reviewing past records, talking to professors and looking at the exam scores . Four boys, four girls, were selected to represent the school .
 The eight finalists went to Alexander Films to view two past shows . On Sunday, October 2, they will view the first TV broadcast of the show . The show will be broadcast on Sunday October 2 .
 The two teams will be Gonzaga and California Tech., one of which we wil face on October 10 . Gonzaga will face California Tech. California Tech will face Gonzaga in the final game .
 On Friday, October 4, the eight will divide into teams of four in a closed simile of the program . The eight will be divided into teams in a team of four .
 For this session Bud Edmonds of KCMS will fit a buzzer-light system simulating the one on the program . Edmonds is a member of the KCMS team that makes the show .
 Frank Krutzke of the English Department will watch this trial run through and then choose the four contestants and one alternate . Frank Krutke will select the four students and the four alternate .
 A candidate must make separate application for admission to each law school of his choice and should inquire whether it wishes him to take the Law School Admission Test and when . The candidate must also inquire whether the school wishes to test him and when.
 Many law schools select their freshman classes in the spring preceding their entrance . Candidates for admission to next year't classes are advised to take either the November or February test, if possible .
 The Bulletin (in which an application for the test is inserted) should be obtained four to six weeks in advance of the desired testing date . The Bulletin is in which the application is inserted .
 Completed applications must be received at least two weeks before the desired testing date in order to allow ETS time to complete the necessary testing arrangements for each candidate .
 Whether publicity would-be a good [Lf for CTL is almost a rhetorical question is almost rhetorical question . CTL says it would be a good publicity stunt .
 The editor of the TIGER, thiough virtue of his position and experience on the campus, could be a greater contributor to the Committee than a Freshman who has been on campus only a relatively short time . These limits are only insofar as a new policy or program may be
 This above point is granted but it denvs the fact that CUL is not a school for potential leaders . CUL should not be considered a college for future leaders, it says .
 Rathe Rathe Committee handles problems of concern which pop up from various sources . Rathe committee is a committee which handles problems that pop up .
 ASCC Council suggested that the Atauub* tion consider the possibility of adding the Editor of the TIGER as a further voting member of the Committee .
 Each student and/or other mother of this college has three alternatives . Each mother has a choice of three alternatives to attending the college .
 He may stav and try to change, improve and better the climate and environment of the co-ed college . He may also try to improve the climate of the college .
 He may stay hiding his head in the Fikes Peak granite, oblivious to the inadequacies around him . But he may stay .
 The 21 juniors on the Deans List included Jayme Begot'', 3.62; Ronald Biodini, 3.42; Betty Burgoon, .62; Susan Cannon, .76; Mary Crenshaw..60; Cassius DeFlon, .56
 Sophomores included 28 students . They were Judith Alt, 3.47; Sonja Bei'g,. 3.41; Frances Buschke 3 69; Lvnn Carmichael..41.41 .
 David Logan, 4.00; Kathleen Lyons 4 00; Karen Min, 3.83; Dennis Mueller, 3 85' Donald Weber Norton, 3 .65; Gav Petzold 3.61; Nancy Powell, 3 40; Sandra Slough 3.62; Ruth Sn
 They were Athenia Athey, 3 75; Karen Bessesen, 3.75; Jean Daniels, 3 .94; Paulena Franklin . They were Athena Athey and Karen Bessen were 3 75 .
 Kidner, 3.70; Jerry Macon 3.84; Mary Mathews 3.56; Barbara Morgan 3.44; Max Power, 4.00; Charles Puckett, 4 .00; James Scarboro 3.83; Anne Schneeberger, 3 56
 The Publications Board will sponsor a writers' workshop speaker at the Tuesday assembly at 11m. in Perkins Hall .
 Semantics, definition, ignorance prejudice and laziness present some of the many difficulties in the communication of ideas . Semantics and definition, definition and ignorance prejudice are all difficulties in communication .
 Many factors explain the election of the Eisenhower administration eight years ago . When people meet on the In Opposition by Stephen Kushn . Many factors behind Eisenhower administration's success .
 The American people were tired of the tremendous sacrifices that had been demanded of them during the preceding 20 years . One explanation is that the American people are tired of being made sacrifices .
 They were tired from having rebuilt' an economy, from having saved the world for democracy for a second time, and from having contained the Communists in Korea . They had 'saved the world' from democracy for the second time and had saved it for democracy .
 The American people sat back, fat, prosperous and lazy in their beautiful bubble of complacency, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says the American people are encouraged in this reaction by the administration .
 Even so, occasionally some idea of world events would shoot into the bubble . Even though the bubble was full of jokes, there was still plenty of fun .
 Headlines told the people of massive retaliation, Sputnik I, rolling back the Reds, the Hungarian revolt, brinksmanship, the Geneva Spirit, the Suez Crisis, Castro, Katanga, South America's friendly greeting of Nixon, failure at Canaveral, parts 1, 2
 Little Rock residents were told of recessions, or "readjustments,"" of Little Rock . They told the people of growing slums, of school construction and of falling farm prices . Little Rock is a city of poverty .
 In that statement John F Kennedy has articulated the Challenge of the Sixties . In that . statement John . F Kennedy articulated the challenge of the . Sixties.
 On the one hand the uncommited new nations of the world are testing democracy and are watching our great experiment to determine whether or not rapid economic growth to meet the needs and desires of ever increasing numbers is compatible with the freedom of the individual .
 On the other hand the Communist nations are challenging the very existence of democracy . On the contrary, the Communist countries are challenging democracy, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Kennedy will lead America in the building of a better society at home through medical care of the aged, urban renewal, aid to education and increasing our rate of economic growth . Because of this and because a strong society . better enables us to check the Communist threat to the life of democracy,
 Senator Kennedy has made several proposals for countering the Communists . Senator Kennedy made proposals for counter-measures .
 The first is to increase our retaliatory power and to make our conventional forces more mobile and more balanced in the eventuality of ""brushfire"" wars . The first step is to make the country more mobile, more mobile .
 His statement on space technology is indeed applicable to the entire Challenge of the Sixties . His statement is also applicable to space technology .
 We wish this communication would carry over on the academic level . How we wish it would carry out on the university level .
 The writer of this article is a Catholic Priest, and I do not expect greement or compromise from anyone, only a spirit of communication . The writer is a priest and not a parishioner .
 A Catholic must communicate with Catholics, Protestants and Jews . Catholics must also communicate with each other and with Catholics . A Catholic .may be guilty of the academic, ivory-tower attitude, as well as . anyone else .
 Reciprocal actions of academism and isolationism will always end in ignorance, prejudice and suspicion . Reciprocrocrocism ends in ignorance and suspicion, says author .
 Most of us like the good, old, simple feet-on-the-ground attitude toward one another . "Most of us have a simple, simple attitude toward each other," CNN's John Sutter says .
 "We do not appreciate cynicism and suspicion on the street, in the market-place or in the neighborhood," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "We don't appreciate cynicism in the street," he says . Sutter: "Criminals and cynics should not be
 'Bad attitudes' are too often, though, found in our books and essays and speeches . These 'bad attitudes' too often are too • often found in books, essays, speeches and speeches, though .
 I say these things only as an introduction to the prevailing thinking concerning Church and State . I say this only as a . introduction to a . view of the . prevailing thinking about Church and state .
 It is not a part of Church doctrine to expect Papal jurisdiction to be exercised in the civil legislation of the United States, or even in Russia . Neither is it part of the Church's doctrine that the Papal can exercise papal jurisdiction in civil legislation .
 Senator John Kennedy does not want or expect Papal jurisdiction or influence in his political life in the U.S. Kennedy says he wants to avoid Papal influence in the United States . Kennedy: "I don't want to see Papal interference in my political life"
 Academically, it may be said that the Church is teaching a doctrine of separation of Church and State now . But then, this was not her teaching three centuries ago, when she had the upper hand .
 History can be reconstructed from sources that do not represent history as it was lived three centuries ago . Yet, in friendly fashion, can we not ask if it is not possible that history can easily be reconstructed?
 History was lived and realized in the individual persons in their individual times . History was . lived and . realized in . individual persons . individual times.
 Our reconstructions of history will never indivivate motives and personal thinking, says historian . We will never be able to reconstruct our own history, he says. We will always try to understand our own motives and our own thinking .
 One man in history makes a mistake that is all too personal in its meaning . His times and friends may suffer in subsequent historical reconstructions . The mistake may be a mistake in history .
 This article contains the thinking of the here and now, conditioned by my person; it is not an official document of the Catholic Church . This article is not a Catholic document, but it is a personal essay .
 The official Church i that the state rules the state, the Church rules the Church. What is of the official Churchi i that that . that is the state rule the state. i that is that the church rules the church. i That is what the Church i says .
 These societies are in constant danger of overstepping their jurisdictional rights . These societies should not be overstepped by the law, says the author .
 To strive for the perfect parallel is a difficult task, considering the nature of each contingent and varying circumstance, says CNN.com.com .
 'The contingent situation is always subject to' the law of experience, mistake and verity. The contingent situation, however, is 'always subject to the law, mistake or error'
 Tht contingent and individual situation is ornery, it always tries to slij through the necessary universalitj of the law or dogma . Tht. situations are ornery. They always try and slij .
 Constitution in the United Stati 'i 1 ' that is universal, but its applica 1 » tion in the world of the contingen ° x takes men of experience and ge n niusius .
 A mistake in judicial jud '""' ment does not invalidate the law or give right to suspect the law' ' ""' ment' is not invalidating the law, it's a mistake .
 It is on the ultra-per co ' sonal level, how thoughts and idea c01 always strain for the freedom o '. the personal and how they woii Ca and toil and disturb until the thi reach the level of personal com cot munication .
 Too often they ar tes confined and caged and angered i cor the verbage of the suspicious ac; demic atmosphere of unfriendl ness . Too often people are confined, caged, and angered .
 How easy it would I for a Catholic to become spitefi and suspicious of his Protestor friend when he hears that Senati Kennedy will not be voted for hi cause he is a Catholic . How easy a Catholic would be spitefi to become suspicious of a friend .
 He wonde whose conscience (political ci science) is being governed by ligion. He wonders if the conscience (politics) is governed by religion .
 If tl were true, whose conscience, the would be guided by union of who Church and State. The conscience of the people would be led by the union of the church and state .
 If I were to vote for or agaii Kennedy because he is a Cathol, I must 'then admit that I hold f the union of my Church and t state, what ever my religion woi be'
 I would inclined to think that he believ in the union of his Church 3 State. I would think that .
 P testantism's leading theologi Reinhold Niebuhr, is not of same mind as Dr. Dr. Reinhold . Dr. Reihan is not a believer in P. Testantism .
 I can suspect Protestantism because one no-Catholic-for-President-i-President i ing. i. ing. is Protestantism . "I can suspect Protestantsism because I'm Protestant," he says .
 A little vision and a little conifl nication will teach us to re; the separation of Church State, no matter whose Chur is . Niebujg .
 Colorado College Tige September 30, I960 i [3 A Catholic Presents State or the separation of lse's Church and State . This is a problem for exan . It is not the only problem for . exan tion, the separation . of . Church and state .
 Doctrinally, the Church is not juridically established to rule in secular sphere. Doctrally, it is not legal to rule the secular sphere . The Church has been criticized for not being able to live in secular spheres .
 The Church can enter the secular sphere only via the individual free Catholic . Besides, the Church can . enter the . secular sphere, the . individual free . Catholic .
 Richelieu (Richelieu) legislated in civil realms, but such action remains outside the risdiction of the Church, and en[■s the plane of civil society . Such action is not within the risiiction of Church, but remains outside of the ris
 This Churchman then acts in the civil plane of society with civil jurisdiction, regardless of the heirarchical function of his Church . This is the case of a Churchman acting in civil society with jurisdiction .
 One aims toward the society of good Churchmen, and the other toward good statesmen . One aims . toward good statemen, one aims toward good churchmen, the other .
 "We will forever be in greement as to matters that overlap in these two societies," says President Obama . "We are forever in agreement," he says .
 Never is it permissable to suspect the honesty and integrity of those who disagree, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 i Catholic should never violate i conscience as a political man, by creating a Church/State bloc for his own benefit or against the benefit of any other Church . Trust, friendliness and confidence must come from communication, i Catholic says .
 Like no Protestant should violate conscience by creating a Church/State bloc for his own benor against the benefit of any other Church, he says . Like Like Like that, he should not violate conscience . Like that. Like that .
 Neither does a man have the right to compromise his easonable ""commitment to his Church or State. Neither does he have the . right to . compromise his . easonable commitment to his . Church or state .
 The confession of the American 31 Catholic Hierarchy is no more a threat to Americanism than the confession of American Protestant Churches . The confession is no less a threat than that of Americanism, the author says .
 Perhaps in the coming election questions of Church and State will be clarified . Perhaps in this year's election questions will be answered .
 There may be a great step forward in comer munication . But nach more importantly, there may be an important step forward .
 Time and patience, ht honesty and openness will do much to establish a magnanimity of outlook and understanding for every of all denominations .
 Monday to Friday 1:30 i Saturdaj to 12 pro B rnm, spuii«f>ri' students from all over the United States (» participate and she received full credit)
 The Russians have done to the American image. They ""<*"" be seen wearing too brightly. When asked what the Russians had done to . the U.S. image.
 The image the Russians have tried to create is that of a Western capitalistic nation, which actually includes anyone on the other side of the Iron Curtain . Russia's image of the West has been tarnished by the Cold War .
 While in East Berlin, Siggi read many signs saying, ""Let's make an end to the provocations of Eisenhower and Adenauer,"" which typifies their way of thinking . The signs typify the way they think .
 Many of the Germans are ""immune" to Communist propaganda, she says . She says that many Germans are not hard to see through .
 Freshman class meeting held to explain the proceedure for the upcoming Freshman Class elections . Meeting also discussed the budgetary limits for campaigning and qualifications necessary .
 To be considered a nominee, a candidate must submit a petition signed by fifteen members of the freshman class . The petition is signed by 15 freshman class members .
 The nominees may put up their campaign posters anytime between October 7 and October 12 . This petition is to be turned in at Rastall Center no later than noon October 12. The nominees are to turn in the petition no later this month .
 Short speeches will be given by each nominee at a Freshman class meeting at Perkins Hall October 11 at 11m. Short speeches of five to ten minutes will be .
 One hundred years ago Abracolored or inappropriate clothes, dressed as if they were in their own backyards . One 100 years ago . People dressed in inappropriate clothes .
 During the months of June, July and August, many Germans feel it is safer to leave . Many Germans feel the country is infested with ""tourists"" from everywhere who violate the hospitality .
 In direct contrast to the tourist, the traveler is usually overlooked . He trys to make a good impression by being inconspicuous and to fit into the various situations .
 American students are always well received if they go to Europe with an open mind . American students should be well-received if they visit Europe with a positive attitude .
 Some people of Jewish descent, whose relatives had sufferd under the Hitler regime, were out for revenge . Some of the victims had suffered under the regime .
 Many were not interested in Germany and made no attempt to hide their feelings . Many of the people in the crowd were not keen on Germany .
 The United States realized that the ""American image"" in Germany was not very good, people of higher caliber were sent over . Relations between the Germans and those Americans with whom they came in contact improved .
 In the succeeding parts of his speech, Kennedy implied that he feels the nation is at a standstill as far as internal domestic matters are concerned . Kennedy said he feels he feels that the nation's internal domestic issues are at a "standstill"
 He stated that he is not satisfied with only 50 per cent of U.S. steel mills functioning . He said that he wants to see more of America's steel mills working .
 He does not like nine billion dollars of surplus food wasting annually . Food waste is estimated to be 9 billion dollars a year .
 He said he would like to see American schools turn out more scientists . Russia is producing twice as many scientists as the U.S., he said .
 Kennedy stated that he will not be satisfied until every American can enjoy the complete constitutional rights which are his . In summation, Kennedy said, "I will not bo satisfied until all Americans have the complete rights"
 Vice-President Nixon answered Kennedy's statements by agreeing basically with the goals he has set, but disagreeing with the methods through which he intends to realize them . Nixon said he disagreed with Kennedy's goals, but disagreed with his methods .
 Nixon voided Kennedy's statement that the nation is at a standstill by presenting statistical proof to the contrary . Nixon presented statistical proof of the contrary by presenting statistics .
 More schools have been built in the past seven and one-half years than in the 20 years prior to Eisenhower's administration . He stated that more schools were built in that period than in previous 20 years .
 Wages have gone up five times as much in Eisenhower administration as in Truman administration . Average family income is up 15 per cent in this administration as compared with 2 per cent for Truman's .
 Nixon asserted that the Republican party is for a program that will expand education, improve upon medical care for the aged and benefit the farmer . Nixon said that the GOP is for expanding education, improving medical care and improving the farmer's welfare .
 Democratic party also has goals in sight, but Republican methods of reaching them are more realistic and will better safeguard American free enterprise, he said . He said the Republican methods will be more realistic .
 Nixon stated that the test of a program is not how much is spent, but how well the program works . Nixon said the test is how well a program works, not how large the money is spent . Nixon: The test is whether the program is successful .
 Nixon-Kennedy continued from pafte 3 crease teachers' salaries . To improve educational institutions, direct government intervention is necessary .
 He does not feel .that the state and local governments can adequately handle this problem without raisingtaxes to an absurd level . He says he does not think . that the state or local governments . can adequately . handle this issue without raising taxes .
 Nixon, on the other hand, feels that' direct government intervention, especially in the area of teachers' salaries, will eventually result in the government telling the teachers how and what to teach, thus stereotyping all education . Nixon: 'Direct government intervention' will eventually lead to the government
 He stated that such government intervention will also result in the American people's sacrificing their individual rights of freedom which have thus far served as the backbone of the nation's progress .
 Nixon did assert that he felt federal aid was justified in the form of grants to the individual states, but that it should be up to the states to decide whether or not it would be used for teachers' salaries .
 He stated that taxes will always be essential if we are to remain a free nation . Direct government intervention also cannot function without taking money out of the people's pockets .
 Both candidates agreed that the United States, in order to hold its number one world position, must maintain a strong society, alert and ready to meet any outside threat . The U.S. must maintain its position as one of the world's most powerful nations .
 Nixon stated that it is time that the Soviet Union is moving faster than the U.S. He said it is because they are starting from a much lower base . Nixon said it was time to say that the United States was moving faster .
 All petitions tor the freshman class commissioners to ASCC are due October 6 . ASCC Notes By Betsy Gaskell Elections Elections Elections are October 6. All petitions are due to be submitted to the commission .
 There will be ., freshman class meeting October 11 at which time the candidates will give their speeches .
 The elections will be held on October 13 at Palmer from 7:45-11:15 m.m. and at Eastall from 11:15m. to 4m. in Rastall .
 Nixon stated that Kennedy's program says government insurance must be taken by everyone, his doesn't . Nixon said Kennedy's government insurance program says everyone must take it . Nixon: "Kennedy's program doesn't say everyone gets government insurance"
 Kennedy said fixed incomes wouldn't guarantee people would be able to meet their bills . He also said that fixed incomes won't guarantee those who live on fixed incomes . Kennedy also said people can't live off their fixed incomes, but they can't afford to live off bills .
 Kennedy opened his summation with the statement, ""Russia's 44 per cent of U.S. production is a threat whether Nixon thinks so or not"
 In conclusion Kennedy said, "If vou think things are fine as they are, vote for Mr Nixon" Kennedy said that if you think things were fine as well as the are, you should vote for Nixon .
 A M.O. opportunity to end Agitation Period tomorrow morning at the freshman-sophomore fight . The fight will take place in the freshman dormitory .
 At six in the morning there is to be a sock hop at Slocum prior to the fight at seven in Stewart Field .
 At this time the assent up the greased pole will begin but will probably be interrupted by sophomore-flung rotten eggs and other garbage . The assent is likely to start up the pole .
 There is a ten minute deadline for the freshmen to get the flag from the top of the pole . There is also a deadline for freshmen to remove the flag .
 The WHICKERBILL art and glass studio is located at 3.05 18 II North Cascade Ave. Bob Kendall, president of Black and Gold, has this to say about the freshman class .
 Mr Kendall was chief justice of Kangaroo Court which has held sessions the last two Thursdays . Mr Kendall has been in charge of the court for two years .
 Some sentences meted out were confinement in football uniforms for three girls and leotards and shorts for one young man .
 The Tiger Club and Black and Gold stirred up spirit through Agitation and Kangaroo Court . The freshmen created the spirit at the St. Louis University .
 A megaphone-manner crew of freshmen men dressed in wierd hats and tiger shirts helped cheer-leaders support the team vocally .
 This group was instigated by Tony Ayers and Miles Hopper and consists of John Levis, Dave Hayes, Steve Sabol . This group is a group of four men and three women . The group is known for its hard work in the past .
 In record time and with record enthusiasm, the Tigerette Club of freshmen women formed a solid cheering section .
 The spirit that is being commended is in evidence in the class of 64's version of CC's fight song . The spirit of the class-64's is evident in the rendition of the song .
 We're going to wreck that court another time. We'll wreck it another time . We're not afraid to wreck it again. When the big brave freshmen fall in line. We're getting ready to wreck the court again .
 Yea Freshman Class. We're going to bury our dinks 'way under ground . And when the Tiger Club begins to yell and shout Throw them out . .
 The Alphi phi actives honored their new pledwith a pancake dinner over at the house . Colorado College Tiger is a member of Alphi Phi .
 Dorothy Lynch, Margaret Parks, Susan Rowlette, Phyllis Rose, DonStory and Jo Ann Wallis are among the new pledges . The new pledges are Dorothy Lynch and Margaret Parks .
 Suzanne Armstrong, Sally Blanehard, Seece Boyce, Judy Dickison, Becky Dunbar, Susan Graham, .anda Hamilton, Susan Heidel, ii Larson, Joyce Manning, SuMerrell, Sue Miller, Sue . Miller, Nancy Parker, Carolyn Pelly, Paul
 Delta Gammas and Kappa Sigs got together for a picnic at Austin Bluffs . The Betas jnt over to the Gamma Phi house serenade the new pledges .
 The >w girls are Jean Albrecht, Nan Augenstein, Sue Baily, Sally Blair, Susan Brackney, Judy Clark, Sher■e Crowswy, Lydia Dunham, Lini Foster, Linda Hamilton, Martha Jaffrey, Deirdre Jones, Mary
 Gamma Phis had a dinner at the house to honor their new pledges . Gamma Phi Phi Phi had a ceremony to honor new pledges at their home .
 Kappa Alpha Theta The Theta chapter welcomed their new pledge class to the fold . The chapter was on hand last Friday to greet their pledge class and welcome them .
 The new pledges are Susan Bigelow, Nancy Bowers, Nan Burroughs, Elizabeth Coleman, Dianne Frew, Janice Hansen, Patricia Hay, Ann Herliby, Kathy Innis, Susan Kellogg, Sarah Mickelwait, Marsha Nye, Nancy Pett
 The Thetas got together with the Sigma Chis last Sunday for a picnic at Austin Bluffs . The Theta got together for the first time last Sunday .
 Pledging for the new girls took place at the house last Tuesday evening . Pledged for the girls were held in front of the crowd .
 Phi Delts were on hand to serenade the new pledges of Kappa Kappa Gamma . Kappa Kappa Phi is a national women's sorority organization .
 The girls are Charlotte Alderfer, Catherine Anderson, Ann Barber, Laura Dearborn, Suzanne Edwards, Glennie Eisele, Susan Louthan, Karen Mcllvaine, Wendy Miller, Dana Rhodes, Stephanie Row, Jann Rowley, Ann Ruth, Mary S
 Saturday evening the pledges were honored at a formal banquet over at the house . The pledges are honored with a banquet held over the house.
 Last Tuesday evening the girls were formally pledged into the sorority . The girls have been pledged into a sorority.
 Tish Arnberg, Sandy Ballard, Gretchon Fox, Anne Frey, Jo Anne Gray, Ruby Haslam, Jill Hicks, Fifi Maroney, Holly Menkel, Betty Rouse, Tricia Sohl, Sue Wahlberg, Nancy Rockwell, Diane Krushel
 On Sunday, October 1, the girls will sell smashers in the girls' dorms . The girls will also be selling the smasher in October 1 .
 Pledging is banned until October 15, I960 when fraternities that did not meet their quotas will be allowed to accept new members until their quota is reached . Fraternities will not be able to accept members until they reach their quota .
 Beta Theta Phi pledges are Gordon Axelson, Tony Ayres, Dean Behse, Tom Burk, Bill Casey, Spencer Cook, Charles DePuy, Quentin Florence and Myles Hopper . The new pledges of Beta Phi were announced in June .
 Kappa Sigma Kappa Sigma's new pledges are Conan'Cantwell, John Collins, Dick Cholakian, Arthur Daily, Fred Golding, George Graham, Jim Haley, George Klein, Dave Krell, Ray Libonati, Gordon Price, Steve Sabol, Clay Sor
 The new members of the pledge class are Jon Detrick, Tom DiMare, Jim English, Steve Frink, Ken Hanson, John Hocker, Brian Kellogg, Fred King, Karl Krauskopt, Harvey Lambeth, Charles Lawrence, August Meyer, Mancel Mitchell,
 The Phi Gams new pledges are John Bishop, Don Bradbury, Jeff Clark, Bill Grey, John Simus and William Stanisich . The Phi Gamma Delta is the largest chapter of Phi Phi Phi Kappa Kappa Kappa Phi .
 The Phi Gams and their dates got together for a picnic at Austin Bluffs . The group enjoyed a picnic in the middle of the summer .
 Fred Ahlevs, Walter Brayman, Bob Bruce, Bill Bowden, Chuck Deaver, John Gaubatz, Dick Hunt. Dick Hunt . Dick Hunt was Dick Hunt's first president of the United States .
 St. Mary's of the Plains is coached by Jack O'Leary, a former CC student and athlete . He coached ends and slotbacks for Tiger Coach Jerry Carle before taking his job at St.Mary's .
 St. Mary's is the newest college in Kansas, being formed only eight years ago . Mary's College was formed in 2003 .
 The Cavaliers outsized CC their line did little to stop the Tiger rushes . Even though the Cavaliers outplayed the Tigers, their offensive line did not stop the rushes .
 Scott Tippin and Pete Pleasant accounted for most of the rushing for the Tigers . Pete Pleasant also ran for more than 100 yards in the first half .
 Halfback Billy Crockett accounted for the most exciting play of the game with a sensational 56 yard run in which he darted and dodged for a touchdown after seemingly being stopped threctimes .
 Crockett's efforts and a touchdown were nullified by a clipping penalty . The penalty nullified the touchdown and the touchdown were overturned by the penalty .
 The Golden Dragon I4OT S EIGHTH STREET CHINESE-AMERICAN RESTAURANT Colorado Springs' most beautiful . Serving Family Style Lunches and Dinners very . Reasonable prices .
 Tareyton's flavor-balance gives you the best taste of the best tobaccos . The flavor-balanced tobacco company is known for its taste of tobaccoice .
 Picture a moonlight swim without a champagne breakfast in a secluded pool . Picture a Cba-Cha contest at all night discussion of philosophy while sobi or a stolen kiss .
 These are some of the things which imaginative people might do just for kicks . Check the local if promptly filled out, check the local .
 The anchovies are the seasoning in the stew of life, the anchovies in this pizza pie of existance . They are also the seasoning of life and the ingredients of life .
 Many exciting things are coming into view for those who find it hard to enjoy those loose haphazard hours . Altho not as imaginative, many exciting things come into view . The new series of films will be released in the summer of 2015 .
 Dazzling Delight is one of Broadway's newest hits by the masterful team of Rodgers and Hammerstein . The show is now showing the Denver Auditorium .
 The play is a delightful story of a Chinese family in San Francisco . It is "The Flower Drum Song"
 This musical comedy is a "dazzling delight" to quote one Walter Winchell . The musical comedy will continue at the Auditorium thru Tuesday .
 Tickets range from §2.75 for balcony seats to $5.60 for newspapers for the exact detail . Tickets for the event range from $2.25 to $3.60 .
 If the rush is on the week-end performance, phone the operator in Denver for information .
 This overtone of the Orient presents some splendid music for the popular taste . The music is from the Orient and is set in London .
 Alcoa Presents Play by Amanda Eliis K*ice in a while one gets a chance to write a few words about something almost personal .
 Alcoa Presents has selected this play as 'their opening for the fall season' Under contract by MGM studios in Hollywood, AlcoA Presents is based in New York .
 In ABC Television Advance Programing, ""The Death Waltz"" has been acclaimed to be one of the finest attraction to be seen this year . In ABC TV Advance programing, "Death Waltz" has been praised to be among the best attractions this year.
 Miss Ellis is to be congratulated many manv times for making us so very very proud . This, in my opinion, is one of the many great contributions that members of the Colorado College faculty have made and Miss Ellis should be congratulated .
 Behind the Turntable Ken Shaw, DJ and originator of ""Night Time Jazz— KRDO"" invites all jazz-loving CCers to listen each evening to the latest and greatest selection in jazz .
 Wednesday nights have been set aside as request-night for all CC students . Wednesday nights will be set aside for all students . Students will be able to request night out of school .
 CC's third touchdown came in the second period and was an 84-yard drive highlighted by an 18-yard dash by Tippin and a long Sellitto to Pleasant pass .
 St. Mary's scored in the second period with a 65 yard drive accomplished in 16 plays . The team scored a 65-yard drive in the first period .
 Tippin came through with his second touchdown of the game in the third quarter . Joe Cordova had recovered a St. Louis St.Minn fumble for a touchdown .
 He took a pass from Tony Sellitto for a 12 yard gain and then two more runs put him over the goal line . He took the ball for the first time in his career .
 The next Tiger TD was a long downfield attack which finally saw Pleasant doing the final running PuUTiwE W oijver your eyes, pardnerl .
 Pershing Rifles will hold an informal smoker in the WES Room of Rastatl Center at 7:45m. Sandra Arnett— Lozi Torma Engaged : Angela Clifford— Tom Absher Valerie McNaught Davis— David Parker Joannie Mills — Leroy McC
 Included in the program will be informal discussions about Pershing Rifles . The members will answer any guestions raised .
 There will be on hand an extensive assortment of weapons, radios and related equipment for the purpose of acquainting cadets with the equipment they will be using during the year .
 A new college coordinating body, the Calendar Committee, has recently been established by action of the Committee on Undergraduate Life .
 The new committee is under the chairmanship of Mr Richard Blackburn, Director of Rastall Center .
 AllCITY firemen were called in to remove the freshrr flagpole in front of Cutler . Firemen removed the flag from the flagpole .
 Especially needed are a slight boy for the part nf Peter, a friend of Anne's famI ily, and a small girl for part I of Anne .
 Mr William McMillen stated 1 that he hoped the cast would be chosen by next Friday so that rehearsals could begin bv October 15 . The cast of the play will be announced next Friday .
 "Volunteers for the crew in all 1 areas are welcome,"" said Mr McMillen .
 Anyone who would like to work on back stage produc| tion should contact Mr McMillen I some time today .
 The fall dramatic production will be presented on November 17, 18 J and 19 .
 David Jenkins, Colorado iceskating champion, returned home this week as star of the ""Ice Fol-. lies"" at the Denver Coliseum . David Jenkins returns to Colorado this week .
 Until he became a professional last he was the best amateur in the United States . Until he was a pro, he had been the best Amateur in the country .
 Mr Jenkins graduated from Colorado College with the class of 1958 . Mr Jenkins was a member of the national scholastic fraternity, Phi Beta Kappa .
 While he was attending CC he gained the United States, North American and World Skating championships . He gained the U.S. and North American skating championships .
 Last Winter, he won a Gold Medal for the United States in the Winter Olympics at Squaw Valley, California .
 Inter-American Cultural Convention awards for study in 17 Latin American countries have the same tiling deadline . The deadline is also the same for study awards in 17 countries .
 U.S. citizens must have a bachelor's degree or its equivalent by 1961; . knowledge of the language of the host country; and . good health. U S. citizenship at time of application .
 A demonstrated capacity for independent study and a good academic record are also expected . A demonstrated ability to independent study is also expected to be expected .
 Friday, October 7 from any Black and Gold or Tiger Club member or at the Rastall desk . The event will take place at the end of October 7 at Rastalls .
 Eight buses have been scheduled by campus fraternities and a possible total of 10 or 12 buses is the goal . A total of 12 buses has been planned .
 Annual Watermelon Bust festivities will take place this afternoon . Traditional contests and new areas of competition will dole out fun and watermelon .
 Booths constructed and operated by sorority pledge classes will be in business from 1 to 5m . Booths will be operated by pledge classes from 1-5m .
 There is to be a trophy given to the booth showing the greatest originality and one for the most flourishing business . There is also a trophy for the best originality of the booth .
 The Ray Kranz band will play for those who wish to kick up some dust from 2:30 until 4:30m. Ray will be playing from 2-30am to 4pm .
 Robert Stabler, chairman of the Zoology Department, and Sergeant Johnson of the ROTC Department, will judge the Queen of Watermelon Bust . The queen of watermelon bust will be crowned at the University of Wisconsin .
 Prior to this they will officiate at the watermelon eating contest between the sorority house mothers and sorority pledge class members .
 All money earned by the booths is turned over to the Campus Chest Drive . All proceeds from the booths go to the campus Chest Drive, which is turned into a charity .
 The film ""Africa Astir"" will be shown at Perkins Hall on Monday, October 10 .
 This film is the first in a series of four "Horizons Unlimited" travelogues to be presented in cooperation with the Colorado Springs Fine Arts Center . The film is a first in four of the series presented by the center .
 This personally narrated series is similar to the ones annually presented by the National Geographic Society in Washington, D. C., which are shown across the country by Burton Holmes . Burton Holmes personally narrated the series .
 Wakuta, the honorary athletic association for junior and senior women, elected new members last spring . Wakuta is an honorary sports association for women .
 Chessie Kemp, Beth Kendell, Mimi, Meek, Keekee Minor, Gwen Salisbury, Betsy Taylor and Connie Windle are featured in the weekly Newsquiz .
 Jean Wilfong is president; Sue Evans is vice-president; Ginger Gail, secretary-treasurer and Mimi Meek, publicity. The need for some centralizing college occasions has become increasingly apparent for some .
 A year of college occasions which has consistency, good timing and maximum impact, with scheduling conflicts being eliminated, is the principle aim of the Calendar Committee . The Calendar Committee aims to eliminate scheduling conflicts and eliminate them .
 The Commitee will coordinate respective events planned by the Assembly, Public Lecture and Religious Affairs Committees, the ASCC, and other college agencies undertaking events . It will be especially looked toward to coordinate events planned .
 Included in this year's plans are an increased number of college occasions with topflight speakers, preferably with nationally recognized names . This year's speakers will be at college campuses across the country .
 The student Board of Review for the fall edition of this year's Kinnikinnik has been announced by the co-editors, Garv Gappert and Jim Scarburo . A further objective of the Calendar Committee is to this year encourage accelerated planning for college events of the
 The Board of Review will pass on all the literary contributions submitted to the Kinnikinnik . It consists of five men and five women .
 It was felt that the Board, as chosen, represents a cross section of literary taste and background, and has no initial prejudice towards any one kind of writing .
 Art and photographic selections will be judged initially by Dave Dunlap, art editor, with the help of the art department . The art and photographic selection will then be judged by the art editor .
 Final selection of these contributions will be made by the editorial board . The editorial board will decide whether to make a decision .
 Cash awards for the best contributions in each area will be made on the advice of members of the department of English, who will also make their own comments .
 The remarks of both the student Board of Review and the faculty judges will be returned to the writer on the critic's tally sheet that is attached to each piece of writing .
 Additional information may be gained from Gary Gappert and Jim Searboro. Additional information can be gained by contacting Gary .
 The original edition of the original edition was issued in 1956 and had the largest advance sale in the history of the company . The original version of the book was issued by the company in 1956 .
 This is one of the few books appearing on the recommended lists of almost every lifcrary and state geological survey . The book is available in the UK, Australia and Canada .
 There are 36 pictures in color in addition to a number of photographs and drawings . The book is published in color and includes 36 pictures .
 College Bowl are Jim Floerchinger, Terry Kidner, Charles Greening, and Ann Wilcox . College Bowl is the College Bowl of the Year .
 Floerchinger is a senior chemistry major, and a member of Sigma Chi fraternity . She is a junior chemistry major and Sigma Chi member .
 Kidner and Greening are sophomore English majors . Greening is a junior history major . Kidner is a sophomore English major, Greening a senior English major .
 Willcox is a senior English major and a member of Kappa Kappa Gamma sorority . She is a junior English major at the University of Virginia .
 On October 12, the team will face a team of professors in a simile of the program open to students . The team will also face a professor in a simulation of the simile .
 The professors' team will include Professors Joseph Ball, Harry Booth, William Hochman, and Thomas Ross . Professors Ball, Booth, Booth and Ross will be on the team .
 Malcolm Richards, father of junior Meredyth and freshman Malcolm Jr. Richards, will be in charge of the banquet . The banquet will be held in honor of the seniors .
 Saturday the team will move into the Biltmore and that night free tickets to a Broadway show will be provided . Saturday will be the first time the team has moved into the hotel . Free tickets to the show will also be provided to the team .
 The program will be shown over CBS at 3:30 Sunday afternoon October 16 . The team will face the Universitv of Illinois in the game .
 KRCC-FM, the student-operated radio station, has returned to the air with a regular fall schedule . KRCC Announces New Programming .
 The station will carry special broadcasts of outstanding programs, events on the campus and it has launched several new programs . In addition to its regular programs of music, campus news and the Sunday morning services at Shove Chapel .
 Each day, Monday through Friday, at 4 to 5:15 a.m. music will be played for dancing .
 There will be dancing in Rastall Center in room 203 . With the cooperation of Richard Blackburn, Richard Blackburn will conduct the event .
 It is hoped students will come in after labs or studying and dance and relax until dinner . Students hoped to come in to relax after studying and dancing .
 Each evening, dinner music is piped into the aRstall dining room during the dinner hour .
 A new discussion program ""Freedom and Authority"" featuring professors and students is broadcast every Wednesday evening at 7:15m. it will be taped and rebroadcast on Sunday mornings at 9:30m. It will also be rebroadcasts on Sunday morning shows .
 Saturday afternoon features two programs devoted to jazz and conversation called ""On the Scene"" and ""Street Beat" Ed y Morey, Wil nborn, is the author of the book "Jazz"
 John HANEY prints Fridays by PEERLESS PRINTING CO. CO., Colorado . Prints Fridays by Peerless Printing Co.
 Colorado on the CORNER ASCC meeting last week was excruciatingly painful to all concerned, at least to those who took the time from the details of the meeting to view it .
 The Executive Council argued for some 20 minutes about the possibility of sending the band to the Mines game with various members making comments (usually for the second or third time) about how much was expected from the band .
 Race said he felt the band would add a great deal of spirit to the occasion and should not have to pay the full fare to Mines .
 Parents' Weekend and a Leadership Conference in the spring came before the Council . The Council also discussed the possibility of holding Parents' weekend and Leadership Conference .
 Moe and Levers felt that to hold the latter conference every year would be redundant . Moe, Levers: "To hold the . conference every . year would not be redundant. Moe and
 Followers of one year would be the leaders of the next, and that the followers of that year would lead the next . "They seem to forget that originality might possibly creep into* the program," says author .
 Real seems to feel that his position incurs no responsibility beyond attending a weekly meeting . In a summary, the meeting closed with an earnest plea from Mr Real .
 ASCC is doomed to die in a swamp of trivial bits rather than realizing the Preamble to their Constitution . It would appear though, that ASCC was doomed to . die .
 I want to thank you for letting me help in your campaign. First of all, I'm very happy to be able to help in this campaign. I hope you can help in the future of this campaign .
 "During this process I learned a great deal about the workings of democracy," says David Cameron . He says he learned a lot about democracy during the process .
 "I shall never again feel apathetic about my own vote for the candidates of my choice," she said . "I will never again vote again," she added .
 It is very simple — you decide what candidates or issues you support, and then you work for them with the other people who agree with you . It's very simple to say: You decide what you support and then work with the others who agree .
 Not always on a lofty, abstract plane, but often with mundane activities like stuffing envelopes or making some phone calls .
 You have strengthened your ideas, your political party, your democracy and your treasured way-of-life . Whether your side wins or not, you have strengthened ideas, political parties and democracy .
 Someone said that the strength of a democracy depends on organized opposition . The strength of democracy depends upon organized opposition, the author says .
 In attempting to persuade partisans, both groups stimulate thought and activity in a way which strengthens both sides, as well as the whole idea of democracy .
 I also learned much about the art of campaigning which will be useful in the future, and while working with some of the wonderful people who support you, I made many new friendships .
 We all owe you a debt of gratitude for your insights into the fundamentals of democracy and for your untiring, lifelong efforts to involve us all in exercising the responsibilities and privileges of ""popular sovereignty,"" without which it would wither and die .
 Your enthusiasm, insight and wisdom succeeded in broadening the base on which political decisions rest in our state . Your enthusiasm and wisdom helped broaden the base of our state, says Sen. Tom Steyer .
 In regard to your editorial, of September 30th, in which you stated that it would be of greater benefit to have the editor of the TIGER a voting member of the CUL . We wish to state our reasons for disagreement .
 CUL has a lack of communication to the student body, says the editor of the Tiger . That one of the major defects of CUL is that it has not been communicated to students, he says .
 The editor of the Tiger through virtue of his position and expepeience on the campus could be a greater contribute!to the committee than a freshman who has been on campus only a relatively short time . That the editor of . the Tiger could contribute! to the committee .
 That you as an i n d i v v i d u a 1 grow tired of siting as an ex-officio member on committees without a vote . That's what you need to do to be a member of the House of Representatives . That you can't sit on committees
 We agree that by sitting on the CUL the editor of the Tiger could rectify this problem . We also agree that he could sit on the board . We further agree that this is not the best way to address the problem .
 We feel, however, that the function of communication does not require a vote; and further, that this vote might prove to be unsatisfactory in the form of bias communication . We feel it might prove unsatisfactory .
 The function of the editor in this instance should be that of an unbiased observer rather than that of a voter . The editor's job is to be unbiased observer of an interested voter, not an interested observer .
 The Tiger editor is not a representative of any such segment, nor is its editor popularly elected . The editor is a member of a political party that is not popular with voters .
 Editor could best fulfill his function as a communicator by sitting without a vote on CUL, and that a vote is in no way necessary for the fulfillment of this function . Sitting as an ex-officio member on various committees is one of the responsibilities of the position .
 We feel further, that this vote would be a greater benefit if exercised by freshmen class commissioners, we feel further .
 You are entitled to your opinions, but some last comments are in order, CNN.com's John Sutter says .
 In answer to point number one, you seem to feel that the TIGER editor exists solely to report what is worth reporting and nothing more . The TIGer editor is happy to answer the question .
 If this were the situation, I would hardly go to such lengths to secure a position on the Committee. If this are the case, I wouldn't have gone to such length to secure such a position .
 It is agreed that a Freshmen Commissioner would be more familiar with freshmen problems than the editor .
 The editor could contribute more to the Freshmen, not that the Editor is more familiar with Freshmen problems . My point was that the editor could help more than the Freshman .
 I don't think you have given them adequate credit for their intelligence. I think they are intelligent people. I'm not giving them enough credit for intelligence, I think . I'm sure they are very intelligent people, and I'm very happy to see that .
 President Benezet requested four more students for CUL, but his point about elected members escapes me . Further, he said that CUL students should be allowed to attend CUL but that's not true .
 Judicial Board of the Associated Women Students is accepting applications for the position of editor of an interdormitory paper .
 Don't let yourself get upset if you are not "pursuing,"" or that lifelong is a little too much of prison sentence to look forward to, or that "self-knowledge and wisdoi are a little bit too far out of your reach" Don't get upset
 There are more specific goals for us to pursue if th cloud of haze does not spur you on . There are even more goals to be set apart from the haze .
 No longer are humiliated by the chai of being told to sign in for a three minute late . No longer will be humiliated by being forced to sign up for a 3 minute late. No longer is they humiliated by signing in .
 The HONOR SYSTEM teaches us self reliance when we know dam w, that we still have to be in by 10:30 or whenever it may be . Now there is left only the humility of being told daily th the . humility . of being . told daily . the HON
 Girls all realize that if they are late, someone has to stay up and unlo the door for them . We are learning the habit i self-control because that is undoubtedly what gets our girls in on tin every night .
 The girls are learning the self-adhering to the set of rules which they are told is best for them . That is to say, the girls are . learning to . adher to the rules .
 "And then we have war games, right here at our peaceful liberal arts oasis," she says . "We're going to war games right here," she adds .
 Colorado College has again demonstrated the value of compulsion in achieving its ends, means, or something, by leaving the required major in leadership in it curriculum . Colorado College is a fortress of learning and knowledge .
 Many a convincing argument has been given for this major in ROT( One is its disciplinary value . Another is the disciplinary value of the major . The major major is a major in the Army National Guard .
 Discipline, as defined by tti ROTC, includes the ability to shine shoes properly, and to do ungues tioningly that which you might not understand or agree with . Discipline is defined as discipline .
 ROTC was compulsory when students came to CC, it was compulsory . Another argument to qualitfy the compulsory nature of militai things is that each and every one of us knew, when we came to come to CC .
 And besides ROTC is a good draft dodgering device. This by itself justifies its being hi . And besides, it's good draft dodging device.
 It also helps avoid work, and as we all know, everyone wants to be a chief, and it's not just one of the tribe . It's also also a way to avoid work .
 Thomas ferson claims revolutions are valuable to a country . Thomas claims the revolution is valuable to the country .
 Fifty minute intervals— your mind gets a seconds stretch about thinking preceding acting, and having the strengt to follow your convictions . Your mind gets to thinking before acting .
 Like returning to the nunnery an obeisantly prostrating before the Apogee Which Synthesizes because y know the law of gravity . Like returning . to the . nunnery .
 You are taking a great liberty in defining the position of the editor of the TIGER editor . Finally, you are taking the liberty to define yourself as an editor .
 My ""pay"" as you so bluntly put it, is somewhat depleted by the hundreds of miles of driving done by the staff, the meals missed and the hellish responsibility of meeting a deadline every week .
 ASCC Constitutut ion says that the TIGER Editf shall be an Ex-officio member the Executive Council of AS< nothing more . The ASCC constitution states that the "TIGer Editf" shall be a member of the executive council of ASCC
 In Opposition in a democracy if we will take the trouble ami responsibility necessary to make it so . JH Colorado College Tiger October 7, I960 .
 I say you helped because your respect for the contribution of each of us makes us respect our own contribution . We can take it from there, and soon everybody is helping and you have achieved your purpose — not personal agreement, but good government . I say .
 We are apt to think of the government as ""they;"" to lose the meaning of the great words like freedom, democracy, civil rights, etc., etc. We forget the simple truths, says the author of the book .
 The only way it can become an unfriendly, outside force is if we neglect our responsibility of making our desires known . We need to make sure that our desires are made public, and that they are not ignored .
 You are vividly aware that the ""we"" is made up of many categories of people whose varying needs must be taken into consideration in solving government problems— ALL of them . Not just labor, or management, or profssional men, or farmers, or housewives or oldsters .
 In dealing with these varying needs, you exhibit an awareness that one reason the metal of our democracy rings so true is that it contains such a combination of alloys . The metal of the metal is so strong that democracy rings true, it has such a strong combination of alloying alloys
 I want to thank you for teaching me the importance of working in the political party of my choice . "I am proud to be able to work for my chosen party," she says .
 Working in a party makes it possible to ""vote for the person"" with more knowledge and intelligence . Working for a party gives you the chance to vote for the candidate with more intelligence and knowledge .
 The name means a person. Now, after helping do the work which keeps a party operating, the name means 'a person'
 "I have met and worked with him, and know his family, and his principles and approximately how he will approach his job if elected," says Sen. Ted Cruz . "I know his principles," says Cruz .
 In almost no ease is it just a name —a part of that ""they"" which makes voting almost meaningless . The name is a part of the "they" which makes it almost meaningless to vote .
 "As long as we contribute the money needed to keep them going, we retain their control. As long we contribute we retain control. We retain control of the organisation," says the author .
 "I have learned to feel comfortable with its problems and responsibilities and personalities," she says . She says she has learned to 'feel comfortable' with her job as a journalist .
 As one citizen of a democracy to another, I thank you, Mr Fred M Betz, for teaching me full citizenship . We are not full citizens until we asume full responsibility of citizenship and that the exercise of citizenship is rewarding .
 The professors who will give the three lectures in the annual Fall Faculty Lecture Series have been announced by Professor William Fischer, chairman of the lectures committee . Martha Tilley Boderman begins Faculty Lectures .
 Milton Snyder, assistant professor of chemistry and Mr Bernard Arnest, professor and director of the school of art . Milton Snyder is assistant . Mr Arnest is the director of art at the University of Cambridge .
 S2S wai ; the fevorous quest Wally Caldwell . A soft light envelopes the earth with transparencies . S2W wai .
 He listens to the vague stirrings; but neither sees, nor hears, he dreams . He listens, but neither hears, nor sees, or hears .
 The depth of his troubles but heightens the memory of his iost happiness . He was diagnosed with depression after the birth of his son .
 "Insensive desires possess him; he struggles against the grief that enfolds Oh unplaeable necessity to believe and to love" "This whole being filled with sudden desires for pleasure"
 Colorado College is located near the Colorado College campus in Colorado Springs, Colorado . The college is located on the campus of Colorado College, Colorado Springs .
 The famous Embers Steak House has added that pleasure as they now offer dancing nightly . The famous restaurant now offers dancing nights .
 The Embers, located at 21 S. Wahsatch is featuring tunes by the Embers Trio . Dancing is held nightly from 10m. to 1:30m.
 The Embers still offers its traditionally excellent food at amazingly reasonable prices . It's a great place to eat at the Embers .
 Their Martinis are nothing but great, especially when they're in abundance . The Martinis were created in the 1960s and 1970s .
 This is guaranteed not to put too much of a dent in your budget . This seems like an ideal evening out on the town and is guaranteed to not be too expensive .
 The Broadmoor Theatre presentation is first on the agenda . For the movie-goers who like the hilarious aspects of show biz, the show will be first on their agenda .
 Peter Seller is a union shop steward — a ludicrous but often petty-bourgeois Marxist, in an uproarious satire on labor and management . Seller looks like a fanatical potato, looking like a ubiguitous potato .
 The Royal Ballet of London will soon grace the Denver Auditorium Theatre . Grace to Come will be Grace to come to Denver .
 Margot Fonteyn and Michael Somes, two truly outstanding performers, will be featured . Margot will be Margot's co-star in the upcoming PBS special .
 For those lovers of the ballet, I would suggest making reservations now . The ballet is set to take place at the end of the year .
 I personally am looking forward to this performance and am convinced that it will make an enjoyable evening's entertainment . I personally hope that this performance will be an entertaining evening of entertainment .
 Arty The Artist of Colorado Springs and vicinity Painting and Sculpture Show is now on exhibition at the Fine Arts Center .
 The show is well worth an afternoon, altho some of the selections are arty miscarriages . Some of the show's best-liked by the audience, but the show is not perfect .
 An open Jazz Concert could be in store for the students of Colorado College . Through various contacts with the musicians of the Air Force Academy, an open jazz concert could be held .
 The Falconaires are a 17-piece orchestra composed of professional musicians . They have played with some of the country's top name band; emphasizing Billy May and Stan .
 These hired musicians by the AFA have organized a Jazz Orchestra that is undoubtably great and they want to play for us . The AFA has hired musicians for the purposes of this year's Jazz Orchestra .
 PERSHING RIFLES of Colorado College is trying to organize a night Jazz Concert right here on campus, presenting these men and some really fine music . CC is in an effort to better relationships between CC and AFA .
 The idea of an admission charge of 50c a head could be put to good use as a donation to the Campus Chest Fund . It will give a much better relationship between the two schools; besides giving all of us a ""togetherness night""
 Soon a petition will find its way around campus for all students and faculty to sign if they think this is a good idea . The petition will be circulated around campus to show support for the idea .
 "We would be only too fortunate to have them entertain us and be a service to the Campus Chest. Believe me they're great," says LZ Granderson . Granderson: "They're great"
 He listens to the vague stirring; but neither sees nor hears ... he dreams . This whole being filled with sudden desires towards the fevorous quest for pleasure . He listened to a vague stirring .
 The ASCC committee was formed last year by the ASCC . The committee has as its purpose the continual betterment of Colorado College courses . Colorado College students are encouraged to take part in the committee .
 The functions of the Student Curriculum Committee actually may be defined in terms of four main areas . The committee is tasked with teaching students how to use the curriculum .
 Committee advises faculty and administration about course programs that students have constructively criticized . Committee also advises administration on course programs criticized .
 Second, it collects opinions and advice concerning courses required during the first two years in order to improve these courses . It collects opinions about the courses required to take part in the study . It also collects advice about how to improve the courses needed to complete .
 The committee also offers opinions on matters that the administration seeks advice from the students . The committee offers opinions from students on matters on campus .
 It makes suggestions dealing with non-curriculum problems such as the scheduling of examinations .
 Membership in the Student Curriculum Committee is composed of one sophomore, one student from each division, a member of the ASCC who serves as chairman and faculty advisor if necessary .
 Anyone wishing to serve on the committee may obtain an application at the Raatalt desk . The application is available at the desk of the office of the committee .
 Selection of members will be made by the ASCC Executive Council, Academic Calendar 19ti0— Fall Semester Oct., Suturday Homecoming Nov., Thursday Mid-semester grades due from faculty Nov. Nov. Thursday Thanksgiving holiday Nov. to Dec. Dec. Selection of
 Christmas recess begins at Jan., Thursday Christmas recess ends 8m. Pre-registration for spring semester begins Dec. Dec., Saturday Christmas recess starts at Jan. Jan.
 Chess Club will hold its first meeting today from 1 to 4m. in the Berg Heil Room of Rastall Center . Mid-year examinations begin Jan. Jan., Thursday, Jan. Feb. Jan. 2019, Jan., Feb. 2014, Jan.- Feb. Feb.,
 Charles Puckett, president; Jack Cashman, vice-president, and Max Power, secretary-treasurer . Max Power is secretary treasurer; Charles Pucksett is president .
 The club sponsors are Mr Al Johnson, instructor in business administration, and Mr Woodson Tyree, associate professor of speech .
 The German Club will hold its annual fall picnic at ""Lazyland"" in Austin Bluffs . The club will be holding its fall picnic on October 9 .
 There will be plenty of recreation and refreshments and each paid-up member is entitled to bring one guest . The event will be free to take place at the end of the month .
 Brandt and his wife have invited the German Club to their home for an evening . Brandt has invited the club to his home for the evening .
 Colorado College International Relations Club held its organization meeting on September 21 . The club is based at Colorado College .
 Margaret Speer was elected to succeed Stephen Kushnir as president of the organization . Speer replaces Kushnir, who was elected by the organization in 2010 .
 Bob Kramer became vice president, Joan Bernau became treasurer and Margi Taylor was elected secretary for the coming year . Bob Kramer was elected vice president and Joan Berna became treasurer . MargiTaylor was elected the club's secretary .
 Discussion of the annual Rocky Mountain conference followed the elections . Discussion was held at the Rocky Mountain Conference .
 Those who are interested in joining the CC delegation are invited to contact Dr. Dr. John Defterios of the CC .
 A CC professor who teaches Greek had trouble talking to 20th century Greeks this summer . A professor at Colorado College says Greek is still Greek even if you know it . Mom's book is the largest selection in town .
 Miss Dorothy Mierow, instructor in geography and museum curator at CC, traveled to Greece and other places in Europe during the summer . Miss Dorothy is a museum curator and geography instructor .
 Mierow found he cound read the newspapers, but had trouble talking to Greks . Greks had trouble reading the newspapers but was able to talk to him .
 The Mierows left Colorado Springs soon after the spring semester ended . They left the Colorado Springs campus soon after .
 From the U.S. the Mierows flew to Copenhagen, Denmark, and then North for a tour of Norway and Sweden . The Mierow family was in Sweden and Norway .
 Next they went to Oberamergau to see the world famous Passion Play, and from there to Switzerland, Italy and to Greece before returning home .
 Trier, the home of St. Jerome, is a long favorite study of Dr. Jerome . Trier was a favorite of St, Jerome's .
 Medical Test Given For 1961 Graduates Saturday, October 29 is the date for the Medical College Admission Test . The test will be given to 1961 graduates .
 Students applying for admission to medical colleges in the fall of .1901 are to complete applications at least two weeks before the testing date .
 The examination fee is $15 including reports for up to three medical colleges . The exam fee includes reports from up to 3 medical colleges.
 The tests will be given at Colorado College and other established testing centers listed in the October 29, I960 announcement . Colorado College is listed as an established testing center .
 The test is designed to measure general academic ability, understanding of modern society and scientific knowledge . The test was designed to test general academic abilities .
 Those interested are to apply early as no application can be guaranteed acceptance after deadline . Applicants are advised to apply as early as the application is not guaranteed acceptance .
 The last program of Writers Workshop Week will be held this afternoon at 4m. in the WES room . "Writing for TV and Radio" will be broadcast at 4pm .
 Wally Caldwell, presently employed ' part time by KRDO-TV, will present Mr Singer . Wally Caldwell is currently employed as a part time reporter for KRDO .
 The rest of the Writers Workshop Week had been deemed a success by its director, Gary Gappert . Writers Workshop was deemed a successful by its directors .
 The first six ads presented by Students each week good for 51.00 Free Food Sept. 1 6 South Walnut . Sept. 2: Free food Sept. 3: Free Food .
 The program is open to college men and women graduates mainly in the humanities and social sciences . Each elected fellow receives a $1500 stipend for living expenses plus full tuition and family allowances .
 The program is designed to encourage college seniors of outstanding ability to study for advanced degrees with faculty jobs as their goal . The Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation is administered by a $24,500,000 five year grant .
 Every candidate for the award must be nominated by a faculty -member . The fellowship winners of this academic year will be made known by March 15, 1961 .
 John Sweney was the recipient of a Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship . He is now working toward his Ph.D. in English at Claremont Graduate School, California .
 The Fellowships are being offered in most of the popular sciences and in those social sciences which fulfill the requirements of basic scientific methods . The fellowships will be offered in both popular and social sciences .
 Dr. Dwane R Collins and his wife were guests and later on in the evening were guests . Dr. Collins was also guests .
 Collins made a speech to Judy Gray who won the award for the outstanding scholastic achievement in the chapter . Collins made the speech at the end of the speech .
 Pixie Campbell and Barb Standhardt won the award for the highest mother-daughter award . Saturday will be a busy day for the Betas . Pixie Campbell will be the first woman to win the award .
 In the afternoon they will get together with the Thetas for a picnic at Austin Bluffs . They will also have a picnic in the afternoon with the family members .
 A group of Betas and their dates will head for the football game on a chartered bus . The Betas will play in a football game at the University of Cambridge on Saturday .
 The pledge class officers are president, Jim Sperry; vice-president, Charles Short; treasurer, Tim Florence; treasurer and secretary, Bill Greeley . Sgt. at arms, Tony Ayres, is the sergeant at arms .
 Delta Gammas held formal pledging for their new girls . Delta Gamma is a sister-in-law of the Delta Gamma organization .
 Delta Gammas and Sigma Chis got together for a picnic at Austin Bluffs on Saturday . The two organizations got together to celebrate their 70th anniversary .
 The new members of the IWA are Carole Coffman, Jane Dawson, Denise Garriques, Nancy Kitzmiller and Sally Twaddle . The new IWA members will be the first female IWA to join the group .
 Zulu Wahlberg and Nancy Kitzmiller have chosen Zulu to be their queen candidate . Nancy will be their watermelon eating contestant . Zulu will be the queen .
 Kappa Sigs and their dates will also board a bus and attend the Mines game tomorrow night . Kappa Sigma will also travel to the game with their dates .
 The Kappa Sigs will go to the Kappa house for the serenade of Will Johnson and Marcia Moses . Will Johnson will perform at the house of the Kappa Kappa Kappa house .
 Gamma Phi Beta was formally pladged into the sorority last Friday evening . The sorority is the largest sorority in the country .
 Gamma Phis will meet at the house for an informal dinner before the meeting . Gamma Phi members will meet Monday evening at the home of the Gamma Phi Phi sisters .
 Phi Delta Theta will be off for the Mines game at Golden, Colorado . Tomorrow the Phi Delts and their dates will go to the game .
 On Monday the Phi Delts and Thetas will get together at the the WHICKERBILL art and glass studio ONE OF COLORADO'S FINER :ONTEMPORARY GIFT SHOPS ME .
 Kappa Alpha Theta will go to the Theta Housi for the serenade of Kathy Bruci and Sam Coleman . The Ph Delts will be joined by the Phi Phi Phi Delta Delta Delta Sigma Phi Phi Kappa Phi Phi .
 The Phi Gamma Delta pledge dance will take place at the Ph Gam house tonight . The Phi Gams and theii dates will get together at the house for the dance .
 Phi Gams will also be head ing for the football game with the football team via bus . PhiGams are also heading to the game via bus to get to the football match .
 Mary Sue Hedrick won the award for the greatest improvement . Linda Christen sen and Eleanor Jones received the highest mother' daughter average . Eleanor Jones was awarded for the highest mothers' average .
 Tomorrow Judy Bensel and Ele;> nor Jones will become active mem bers of the chapter . Neither will be active members of the book .
 This afternoon the annual Sigma Chi Watermelon Bus,t will take place . Sigma Chi students will be taking part in the fun fun at the annual event .
 Tomorrow night the pledges hold their pledge dance for the tives at the Hackney House . The pledge dance will be held at Hackney's Hackney house .
 On Tuesday, October 11, thi freshman class will hold a clas; meeting in Perkins at which time those running for class commissioner will give speeches .
 ASCC passed that ASCC wil sponsor parents' week-end annual ly. All budget requests for school committees should be turned int> Chris Griffiths as soon as possibb is possible .
 Heads for Parents' Week End and Song Fest are needed . Anyone who is interested may get an application at Rastall desk .
 Kath Bruce Bruce-Sam Coleman Engaged: Darlene Thomas (Victoria College)-Dave Slane Lynne Wendelin -Mike Robbins - Mike Robbins Zan Zumwalt -Dick Davit Married: Denice Schacht Gary Thompson. Kath Bruce -Sam Coleman . Lyn
 Intramural Board held its first meeting of the season on September 20 . Colorado College Tiger October 7, I960 Intramurial Board releases schedule . Intramoor Board announced beginning dates for the various intramural sports .
 Representatives from the teams on the board are Newell Bossart, Beta Theta Pi; Bruce Houghton, Kappa Sigma; Bruce Franklin, Phi Delta Chi; and Dick Givan, Zeta . Representatives from each team are on board .
 The 1960-61 intramural touch football schedule began Tuesday with the Kappa Sigs playing the Zetas . The 1960s-61 touch football season began with the 1960s season opener against the Zeta .
 The schedule calls for one game on each Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday for five weeks . The schedule for the five weeks includes one game each Tuesday .
 The next six months for $5, just half the regular subscription rate . Sigma Chi The Christian, Science Monitor Subs at Ht Now Mce .
 The Christian Science Monil One Norway St., Boston 15, Mass. Send your newspaper for the ti, checked.
 After knocking off three Kansas teams so far this season, the Tigers enter Rocky Mountain Conference play tomorrow with a game in Golden against the Colorado School of Mines . The game will be played in Golden .
 Eddie Kintz acted as quarterback through most of the game in the absence of Tony Sellitto who injured his ankle early in the game . Sellitto was forced to leave the field with an ankle injury .
 Neither team scored in the first period, but the Tigers took a substantial lead with three touchdowns in the second period . The Tigers took the lead with a score of three touchdowns from the Tigers .
 Pete Pleasant drove over for a TD and then added his first of four conversions to make it 7-0 . The first score came early in the period . Pete Pleasant also added four conversions .
 Hays added their first score, made the conversion and the conversion . The score became 14-7 after Hays' first score .
 The final scoring for CC came in the third period when Scott Tippin ran over the line . The final score for CC was a goal from Scott .
 Hays began to threaten the Tigers lead with two touchdowns in the last quarter . Hays came out of the game with two touchdown runs in the second quarter .
 The team championship will be decided after the first round of medal play . The team will be determined after the opening round of play .
 The nine low scorers in the first round will 'qualify for a second round' The individual champion will be based on 36 holes of play . The individual winner will be determined after 36 holes .
 Play will be governed by USGA medal play rules and contestants will play in threesomes . Contestants will be able to play in three-person teams in the event .
 Tippin skirts left end for a short gair as Sellitto blocks out an opposing player . Sellitto blocked out the opposing player in the closing stages of the match .
 The flag was so close to the ground that the freshn it do the >rd in • of ; seconds . The flag is so close that it does the <rd in ; seconds.
 The general opinion among the freshmen is that the sophomores should have had to polish the tigers since they lost . The freshmen are disappointed that they didn't have to polish up the tigers .
 Fresh Freshmen threw it at each other during breakfast at Slocuni . Some of it was stolen during the breakfast, but there was plenty left .
 Most of the excitement took place after the fight when fist fighting broke out between the freshmen and uperclass boys . The fight was between freshmen and the uper class boys .
 No one was hurt but only bruised up a bit . Blue Key members were present at the scene .
 MElrose 3-394(5 LOOKOUT yell the frosh as they charge into the defenses of the sophmores at the freshman-sophomore fight last Saturday morning . MElros 3-395(5 OUT)
 Lunch Dinner Frosh Commissioners Start Campaigns Fri . Candidates for freshman coi missioners may put up eampai; posters from October 7-12 .
 ROSS KKOM CAMPUSi REPRESENTIVE WANTED in your territory . From your desk you car earn a substantial additior to your income . Try Our Fresh PIZZA .
 The Colorado College International Relations Club and German Club are co-sponsoring a talk by Mrs. Kiep of the German Embassy Speaks on Berlin . The talk will be held at Colorado College .
 She will speak on the topic, ""Berlin/' on Thursday, October 20 at 4:15m. in the Shove Chapel Lecture Room .
 Kiep is Women's Affairs Secretary of the German Colorado College Embassy in Washington . She is the secretary of the embassy in Washington, D.C.
 This position was newly created in the German Foreign Service in 1051 and Mrs. Mrs. was the first woman to hold the position in the Foreign Service .
 Her husband was a leading figure in the German resistance movement against Hitler . She was married to a leading German resistance leader .
 Hitler was executed in the Nazi purge that followed the July 20, 1044 attempt on Hitler's life . He was executed .
 She was one of those who realized that the future of German democracy would depend on the extent of German women associated themselves with public affairs in postwar Germany . When the time came for rebuilding Germany, she realized that she would be a role model for women .
 Kiep's primary function in the U.S. is to maintain close contact with American women in public life and American women's organizations .
 The senior class will paint the home bleachers in time for the homecoming weekend . Saturday afternoon, October 22, from 12:30 to 4 :30m. at Washburn Field with paint brushes .
 Dr. Louis T Benezet, Dr. Lloyd Worner, Dean Lloyd . Worner and Dr. Juan Reid, Dean Christine Moon, Mr Richard Kendrick, and Mr. Richard Kendrick .
 Bentley Gilbert are helping the class with the planning and publicity of the project . Bentley Gilbert is helping the students with the publicity of their project .
 Seated from left to right are ""Willie"" Willcox senior and Terry Kidner, sophomore . Seated are "Willie" Willcox, senior and "Terry Kidner" Kidner .
 The team left this morning on a jet plane froi . Tonight they will be guests of CC alumni at a dinner and Saturday night the teai Broadway stage production . Saturday night they will play in a stage show .
 Each of the five Rastall Center I committees of Special Events, I Dance, Coffee Hours, Films and Publicity handles one phase of planning .
 The board has scheduled a movie to be shown in the Center on October 23 . On October 23 the board will show a movie .
 The feature to be shown is "Wilson,"" starring Alexander Knox, Charles Coburn and Geraldine Fitzgerald . The film will be shown at 8.30 p.m. ET .
 October 25 marks Rastall Center's first year as college union . The film is an historical account of the political life of Woodrow Wil .
 Refreshments are to be served and favors will be given from 3 to 5m. in the Rastall lounge .
 Double dip ice cream cones will be sold for a nickel that day in the Hub to help commemorate the first anniversary of the first day .
 This rally is a search for the ""treasured keg"" in automobiles over an 80 mile course . The rally is an attempt to find the "treasured keg" in cars over 80 miles .
 The car that travels the course in the time and mileage which most closely agrees with that of the officials who have pre-determined it will be judged the winner . The winner of the race will be the owner of the car .
 Details on other Rastall sponsored events will appear in the following weeks in the TIGER and on bulletin boards on campus on campus .
 All who wish to protest tickets should attend. ASCC Room— Rastall Center . All who want to protest should attend .
 Variety Show Tryouls Continue Next Week . Variety Show is underway and acts are being reviewed .
 Any interested individuals or groups may arrange for an audition by contacting Sylvia Stenovec or Ina Begerow or Mr Woodson Tyree .
 The Variety Show is run in conjunction with the Colorado College benefit for the Community Chest . The show is held at Colorado College .
 Pershing Rifles held its annual smoker in the WES room in Rastall Center . The annual smoker was held last week .
 M-l A-l carbine, two types of hand radios used on the battle field and dummy ammo for the weapons . Hand radios used for the battle are also used in battle .
 Captain Dale Dalby gave a short talk on what Pershing Rifles expects to accomplish this year . Captain Dalby also gave a brief talk about what he hopes to accomplish in the summer .
 The annual regimental assembly already held this year at Fort Carson with Co. Co. of the Army was already held earlier this year .
 D-9 and CC Pershing Rifles as hosts, a dance this winter and other events to be announced later . The event will be held in conjunction with a dance later this winter .
 All ROTC cadets are welcome to our meeting next Thursday at 7:30 m.m. in the ROTc building . The meeting will be held at 7.30 a.m .
 Discussions on ""Freedom and Authority,"" man's oldest political and social problem, will be heard during the present semester over the Colorado College radio station, KRCC-FM .
 Freedom and authority . Will be discussed from three points of view, personal, social and religious .
 Great books of western civilization will be used as a base for the discussions . Great books will also be used to base discussions .
 Foreign Service Officer Examinations will be given on December 10 in 65 cities . Exams will be held in 65 different cities .
 To be eligible a candidate must be between 21 and 31 years of age on October 24 . Students who have studied economics, administration, language, history or political science will find this a good opportunity for travel .
 Candidates passing the written test will be given an oral test within 9 months . Candidates must pass the oral test in 9 months to be able to pass .
 After July 1, 1963 fluency in French, Spanish or German will be a requirement . Fluency in Spanish, French, German or French will be required after July 1 .
 Those who pass the oral test will be given a physical checkup and background investigation . Those who do not pass the test will undergo a physical and background check .
 Insurance, educational and retirement benefits are granted, as well as annual and sick leave . The city is granted by the state of New York .
 Write to the Board of Examiners for the Foreign Service, Department of State, Washington 25. 25 .
 Class members are working with Mr Kendrick and other members of the administration . They expect to see the class out ""in full force"" on October 22 .
 The faculty and administration plan to quench the seniors' thirst while they are working by serving them cokes . Staff and administration will serve the seniors cokes while they're working .
 Dean Worner and Dean Reid are urging all faculty members and friends of the college to lend their paint brushes for the afternoon . The event will be held at the College of Art in New Haven, Maryland .
 They are to be turned in to Mr Kendrick's office any time before October 22 .
 Donators are asked to label their brushes if they wish them to be returned . Donators should label them if they want them returned .
 The senior class will receive $225.00 from the school administration . In exchange, the students will receive the money from the administration .
 It is in this way that the class hopes to pay for its class gift, senior steak and graduation party . The money will go towards senior steak, graduation party and senior steak .
 All sophomores, juniors, seniors and seniors are eligible to apply for the Curriculum Committee . All students are eligible for the committee .
 Applications are available at Rastall desk and are to be returned to the desk or to Mariana Cogswell by noon, Monday, October 17 . Applications are . available at the desk and return by noon .
 Any professor who feels a student would fit the requirements may contact Miss Cogswell . Any professor with a student who fits the requirements would be contacted by her .
 Don WOLFGANG, PENNY DAVIDSON, Vicky Morey, Wally CalDWELL and Vicky ERIKSON are among the stars of the show .
 Kennedy said, "I think it unwise to take the chance of being dragged into a war which may lead to a World War over two islands which are not strategically defenswhich are not strategic defens"
 Both men committed themselves to a Summit Conference if and when Mr Khrushchev provides tangible evidence that he is willing to negotiate and not just ready to grind out more propaganda . Both men commit themselves to the Summit Conference .
 Both men agree that an increase in taxes might be a necessity in the future . Both men agreed that an increased tax hike might be necessary .
 Each agreed also on the economic means of decreasing tax revenues if our economy should experience a recession . Each agreed to reduce tax revenues .
 Both men were in agreement but on the following questions where they assumed a specific stand, their opinions were as different as their personalities . Both men agreed on the preceding points but disagreed on the questions .
 Nixon pointed to the defeat of the question of seating Red China to prove that U.S. prestige abroad was at an all time high . Mr Nixon said the current United Nations session and particularly the defeat, showed that United States prestige abroad .
 Mr Kennedy also pointed to the vote of the five neutral nations and to the increase in votes on Red China's side in the seating question . United States prestige was at a new, all time low, he said .
 Question posed by Mr Morgan of ABC News gave rise to the biggest difference of opinion involving foreign affairs .
 This question dealt with the defense of Formosa and the islands of Matsu and Quemoy . This question was asked about Formosa's defense of the islands .
 Calling for a ""clearly defined line of defense,"" Mr He said, ""These two islands are i the area of freedom. Call for a clear line of defence"
 "We should not force our Nationalist allies to get off of them and give them to the Communists," he said . "We need to not force ourselves to get on them," he added .
 "If we do that, we start a chain of reaction, because the Communists aren't after Quemoy and Matsu," he says . "We don't want to go after them, because they're not after them," he adds .
 It is really too bad that both men could not have been as specific on all issues discussed as they were on these I have enumerated .
 Both men desire the presidency because they believe that their ideas are the best for the American people as a whole . However, both men are faced with the necessity of playing politics .
 Only after we have associated the remarks made on the debates with the proposals found in the platforms and with the remarks of both men to certain groups, we will be able to gain a clear view of which man is better .
 Rehearsals for the production of "Hansel and Gretel" have been underway for several weeks .
 On April 20, 21 and 22 ""Cavalleria Rusticanna"" by Mascagni will be given. The show will take place in Rome .
 The Association, now in its second season, is under the directorship of Miss Edalyn Burger and Dr. Dr. Peter Burger . The Association is now on its third season .
 Talent for the Association comes from Colorado Springs and the outlying community . Talent for Colorado Springs comes from outlying communities .
 Birgitta Nachmanson was CC's foreign student from Sweden in 1959-60 . She wrote that she had a marvellous year at CC and the rest of the States .
 "I learned very much both in regard to actual knowledge and in way of living," she says . She says she learned a lot from the book .
 I was met with an overwhelming friendliness, especially at the College, from both faculty and students, but also everywhere else I went in the States . The College is located in Washington, D.C.
 "You have a kindness and helpfulness that is so spontaneous that I don't think anyone that comes to the U.S. can help liking it," she says . "I think anyone can't help like it"
 Parkudden Djurgarden, Stockholm, so that anyone who comes to Sweden can look me up. Parkudden is Stockholm, Sweden, where I was born .
 Young Democrats challenge the Young Republicans of Colorado College to debate the facts and issues of this momentous presidential election . Birgitta Nachmanson is a member of the Young Democrats and volunteers at Colorado College .
 Everywhere, in cities and towns and on college campuses throughout the nation, we issue this challenge . "Everywhere" is a challenge to the nation's leaders .
 "We believe that our candidates, our record and our platform can easily withstand the arguments offered by Nixon and his supporters," the candidates say .
 I should like, subject to the approval of our organization at its next regular meeting, to accept your challenge, I should . I would like to accept the challenge, but it's subject to approval from the board of directors .
 Citizenship Club is the appropriate coordinating and sponsoring body for such activities as soon as possible . I would suggest that arrangements be made through the Citizenship Club .
 I would further suggest that these debates be publicized and open to the college community and the townspeople . The debates should be publicized, open to college community, the college and the community .
 "I too am confident that our platform, progi'ams and our entire slate of candidates can withstand the vigorous and necessary, if poorly founded, opposition to which they have often been subjected," says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 I would urge our opponents to remember that there is a distinction between fair-minded conviction and rabid bigotry . There is also a difference between rabid bigotry and bigotry .
 "We shall endeavor to maintain fairness and to adhere to the objective of enlightening those who audit the debate, rather than that of partisan bickering," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Gayle French Plays Lead in ""Anne Frank"" The cast for the ""Diary of Anne Frank"" has been chosen . M~ax S Power, Chairman Gayle . French plays the lead .
 Gayle French will play Anne Frank with Jim Fox, Donna Duncan, Peggi Benham, Leonard Dalsemer, Carol Elfring, Robert Halsbaiid, Richard Rundell, Liz Quint and Doug Cowles in supporting roles .
 A cast meeting was held Thursday and rehearsals will be every night starting Monday . Rehearsals will start Monday starting at 8 p.m.
 Girls are needed to help with the fitting and boys are needed with set building . Girls need to help dressers and help with fitting .
 There will be a meeting for all seniors interested in graduate work Tuesday . The meeting will be held for seniors who want to graduate work .
 The history of this hemisphere as it exists today, begins circa 2 A.G. with the old woman who lived in a shoe . Oaaaock Spengler, Tornybee. and Oasock .
 She had so many children she didn't know what to do so she moved most of them into a shoebox . Most of the children were so small she had to put them in a shoepox .
 They adjusted well to shoebox living because they were represented on the Snowshoe Board which made it very democratic and everyone always lives well in a democracy . They adjusted very well to living because of the board's representation .
 Most of the children adjusted so well that most of them lived in the shoebox for 3 years . Most of them spent the third and last year at the centre of their education . The children adjusted well enough to live in a shoelace for three years .
 You could pretty much determine if you wanted to live in the toe or the heel and if you were really lucky you got a bit of sole all your own . If you were lucky enough you got to live with your own, you could live in your own shoe .
 Your bedtime was a little later than the younger's which meant they really looked up to you . And to top it off, your bedtime would be later than your younger's . 'Your bedtime is a little late,' she said .
 The third year children still knew that Someone cared and if you got that ""emergency long-distance phone call"" the old woman in her pink and yellow slip would run upstairs, downstairs, all thru the town to give you that message .
 There is only one thing that doesn't seem true to life in this history — there were no wars . There is no wars. There was no wars, and there was no peace. There were no war. There are still wars.
 This was Mother Gooseville . But then this shouldn't be so strange; after all, this was Mother gooseville .
 But that day and those people and those cares are little more than myths now . The day and the cares of those who were there are now mythic now .
 No one lived like that ever, except maybe during the backwards times of the Spartans or Russian communists . You'd laugh and say that no one lived that way ever . No one has ever lived in such a backwards way, except the Spartans and Russian communists.
 You can go over to the new reference library, the one down on Pikes Peak and Cascade, and somewhere you'll find all the old papers and things and can read about it for yourself . You can also find the old reference library .
 At one time on this campus they practiced confinement for a punishment . At one . time, it was used as a punishment for a child's behavior .
 It is not too clear what crime this punishment was for, but apparently it stemmed from being a girl . The punishment was equally distributed to women students .
 Colorado College Tige only applied at night, as though they distinguished between the degrees of misdeameanor that could be committed between the afternoon, and the aftermidnight .
 Many of the girls which could have leases which allowed them outside for certain short periods of time, if they told their masters who they were . However many of the girl's leases could allow them to be out for a short period of time if they tell their masters .
 "We are proud of our maturity and the education .we are getting, and can't imagine going to class with any kind of Traditional inhibition," says the author .
 The ancient practice was practiced in ancient times . Yet there is even a funnier tradition that was practiced .
 This consisted of a group of women students who took it upon themselves to further confine students who tread on tradition . This is the group of students who want to keep students from treading on tradition.
 These were the hollow women . Someone got up on their puppet stage with them and severed their lines . They collapsed to the stage, falling apart at the seams .
 She ordered strawberry ice cream with chocolate sauce with Chocolate sauce, then ate it with her left hand . She ordered the ice cream from a vending machine .
 We lead, we march, we sing: Onward Christian Soldiers, spying as in war, with the cross of psycho, slandering as before . We lead and march, they sing: "Onward Christian soldiers" We spy, spy, march, sing, spy and sing:
 CC Young Republicans will hold their next regular meeting, Tuesday, October 18 at 4:30m. in Rastall Center . The CC Young Republican caucus will meet at 4 p.m. at the center .
 There will be a discussion of the proposed debates with the Young Democrats Club and a discussion with local candidates . State Representative Norman Ohlson will be at the event .
 Robert Hosokawa is a foreign correspondent with the Denver Post . Students heard him briefly on the subject ""Gathering News Abroad,"" describing his field and offering views on aspects of American policy .
 First, those who are "" «ciated with the national wire Services an dthe major newspapers, jving permanently or semi-permaLntly in the locale of their tour .
 There are those ake himself whom he called ""fiasco [ditors"" that were assigned specific specific \oblems in foreign relations . Secondly, there are those he called "fiasco ditors" that he called himself .
 Mr Hosokawa pointed out that some of the coverage of Premier Khrushchev's press conferences was inadequate . He said that Communist interpreters soothed over the more violent and violent language of the Russian leader .
 Wally Caldwell Espresso — A Way of Life — A way of Life . Not too many years ago, the art of coffee drinking started a national institution . More is demanded of today's press than precise statements about coffee .
 All forms of coffee have been given a contemporary touch as more and more coffee-lovers call for the immortal espresso .
 Mr Hosokawa pointed out that vith the present plurality of diponiatic languages, the corresponlent must have at his command at east one or two .
 To present this feature, the correspondent has to supplement his first-hand observations with firm background konwledge of the people and events in his assignment .
 Citizens can no longer afford to maintain only a passing interest in international relations, Mr Hosokawa said . Citizens can't afford only to maintain a 'passing interest', he said .
 Seated from left to right are Nancy Cox, Judy Alt, Francie Glasscock and Don Oden . Seated were Nancy Cox and Judy Alt .
 Colorado Springs has its own coffee house . Colorado Springs is one of many big cities in the world of coffee .
 Michelle's is not as bohemian as Michelle's, but it presents itself as a place well worth visiting . Michelle's restaurant is located in New York, New Jersey .
 The pseudos, beats and boherns congregate with those of savoir-faire to drink all types of coffee and teas .
 Foreign coffee recipes have clasped to the red, white and blue bosom of the western world and has become a way of life .
 A most distinctive and unique array of paintings and sculpture are still on view at the Denver Museum of Fine Arts . Perspective Perspective: A most unique and unique, unique, array of works still on display at the museum . Perspective: " Perspective Perspective Perspective" Perspective Perspective . Perspective .
 Presently the ""66th Annual Exhibition of Western Art"" is on exhibit and will continue through October 23 . Presently, the exhibit will be on display until October 23 at the National Museum of Art .
 The Fine Arts Center Museum has a small, but worthy collection of artworks .
 Harry Bertoyia is a member of the Art Center's Art Center Music Room . The Art Center is home to a collection of works from the past .
 This first in the series will run from Oct.-22 and should prove to be delightful evenings as have previous performances .
 A few familiar faces will be seen — one Doc Stabler, who is great anyway . The new series is set to be released on May 1 .
 KRCC presents i JAZZ I Nows the Time EVERY THURSDAY— 8-10:00 P is §7.50 and all performances take place in the Fine Arts Center Theatre .
 This is the first of a series of four plays which will bring such actors as Brian Donlevy, John Carradine and Edward Everett Horton within echoing distance of Colorado Spgs .
 Shelley Berman is scheduled to appear at the Denver Auditorium, Oct. and 30 . Berman is known for his wit and instinct . Berman will be appearing at the Auditorium .
 This advanced notice is for you Berm anlovers to make reservation soon . Berm anthusiasts are encouraged to make reservations soon .
 A sell-out is predicted by those of cool, so one had bolter get a move on it quick . A sold-out was predicted by the cool-cool crowd .
 The striking cover photo was done ,by Fine Arts Center staff member Myron Wood . The cover photo is done .
 Delta Gamma, Kappa Alpha Theta and Gamma Phi Beta are the top three universities in the Phi Phi Beta fraternity . Delta Gamma is the most prestigious fraternity in the world . Kappa Alpha Phi Beta is the third most popular fraternity, followed by Delta Gamma .
 When the sun goes down behind the mountains, the world holds its breath a moment . The world holds a moment as the sun descends into the darkness .
 Your heart quickens as you watch the trails ignite, then breatlessly see the fiery color extinguish itself . The fiery color is softly slipping your Western borizon into gentle darkness .
 The remains of a day can be seen in the foot prints of the hills and you reach out, trying all you can, but never touching the bounds of your new horizon . You reach out and try to find the best way to reach out .
 Becker's Radiator & Body Shop is located at 16 E Bijou St. Body & Fender Repairing and Painling . Becker's is located on the east side of the road .
 Advanced as it may be, this airplane has one thine in common with the first wargalleys of ancient Egypt . Find with the air and space Vehicles o( the future .
 For certain young men this presents a career of real executive opportunity . For those young men, this presents an opportunity to become a top executive .
 To qualify for Navigator training as an Aviation Cadet, you must be an American citizen between 19 and 26/2-singlc, healthy and intelligent . You must be a U.S. citizen aged 19-26/2/singlc .
 A high school diploma i^ required, but some college is highly desirable . A college degree is required for most students .
 Aviation Cadet Program for Navigator training . See your local Air Force Recruiter for training .
 i am between 19 and 26 1 /?, a citizen ol Ihe United States and a hlgti school gradate liege . i am . a citizen of the U.S. and a student of the United States . AVIATION CADET .
 EDDIE MACK'S GARAGE 3171/j N Tejon . Each day of the tour was carefully planned. Each day was meticulously planned.
 Miss Bohlke and some of the girls attended a dance in Leningrad, Russia . After entering through Finland they stopped to visit the city of Lenedrad .
 She was ""surprised to hear the band playing jazz,"" but the two step was all they danced to any type of music . The two step is all they dance to .
 Everywhere the people are extremely proud to show something given them by an American as they were when Miss Bohlke gave a young man a pack of American cigarettes or when she gave an older woman a tube of lipstick and some earrings .
 Always something is given in return for a gift of any type, no matter how insignificant it might seem to us . Always something was given in . return for any type of . type of gift, even though it might be small, is given .
 All through Russia Miss Bohlke found that they have ""the most terrible food I've ever eaten"" with i exception of their bread and ice cream . All through . Russia .
 Milk is impossible to get so the students had ice cream . Namelyi shirt/skirt . . . and pullover/pants .
 Geologist from a un sity told Miss Bohlke that his dream was to go to America because there he could find freedoi . One geologist said he wanted to move to America to find the freedoi.
 When the group left, the people waved good-bye, saying the word meer, meaning peace . The group left the group, which left, said the word "meer" meaning peace.
 During the tour pictures could' L be taken of everything exceptlr, bridges and soldiers .
 Onpi the way out of Russia their lug gage was not searched very fully fully . Onpi was on the way to Russia on his way to the airport .
 We Are Completely Stocked with the FINEST SKI EQUIPMENT . Also all KINDS of SPORTING GOODS and OUTDOOR EQUIPMENTS .
 The WHICKERBILL art and glass studio OWE OF COLORADO'S FINER CONTEMPORARY GIFT SHOPS ME 3-05 18 .
 When it was explained that none of the students had applied, the opinion was still that these students were prejudiced, the styles improved slightly . The styles of some of the styles were improved slightly.
 The American Embassy in Moscow referred to the travelers as the ""Adventure Group" because they did tour Southern Russia . The group toured southern Russia .
 The Embassy gave thgroup copies of the U.S. magazine Amerika to distribute among the people . While ii> Moscow the Embassy gave the group copies .
 The Russians are always eager to read and look at pictures concerning the Americans, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The Golden Dragon is located at 1409 S EIGHTH STREET in Colorado Springs . Serving Family Style Lunches and Dinners .
 Former Fitter for Stars Al Tailoring nd W01 Alteratio Specialist in WHITE TUX . Me 3-1824 1'h E Colorado Ave.
 Saturday night the Tigers traveled to Golden to open Wference play against Colorado School of Mines . Since this was the first lonf'erence game of the season, the Tigers hurt their chances of winning the Rocky Mountain Conference crown .
 CC finally red a TD with but two seconds lining in what almost turned to be a scoreless first half . :te Pleasant went over from the yard line and then made the version of the version . Pleasant .
 A penalty ainst the Tigers nullified the and the second attempt by [easant was short, ilarly in the second half the Miners retaliated after interceptone of Tony Sellitto's passes, ey fought their way down to the yard line and then ;er the Tigers
 Later in the quarter the Miners reatened again but the Tigers covered a Miner fumble on their n 20 to end that threat . The Miners ended the quarter with a fumble from the Tigers on their own .
 Billy ockett kicked the ball over his own four after revering the ball . The pass to Billy ocksett was back to kick s far over his head and he was >pped on his own .
 Miners' ball, . . and they soon aped over the line with less than ninute to go in the quarter . But then it was • Miners’ ball . Miners won’t play for the rest of the quarter.
 The final drive of the game came in the closing minutes of the last arter when the Miners worked jir way deep into Tiger territory . The Miners were finally stopped on the one yard line by a determined CC defense .
 Sellitto was unable to get the ball out of this precarious position and on the second play he was dropped in his own end zone for a safety . The final score of the game was a safety and the result was a touchdown .
 Several busses of avid football fans from CC were there to cheer for their team and uphold the rivalry between the two schools . The rivalry between CC and CC is a two-year rivalry .
 Tiger fans proved the victors in at least one respect — their prize of a miner's helmet . At times the school spirit reached a physical point and the Tigers fans proved to be the winners .
 KEN WISGERHOF, number 81, is shown seconds before catching a pass and successfully completing an 87 yard touchdown run against Mines .
 Intramurals start with three games of the intramural season . The first three games took place last week . Intramural teams have been in action this season .
 In the first game, score was initiated in the game with an eight yard pass play from Hanks to Johnson . The first game was held on Tuesday, with the score being initiated .
 The Zetas retaliated with a draw play which resulted in a 20-yard touchdown run by Dutkowski . The game ended in a touchdown for Dutowski . The Zetaas were able to field a field field field goal .
 Hanks intercepted a pass late in the second half . Hanks intercepts a late interception in the first half .
 The Zetas quarterback mishandled the hike from center and the ball went into the end zone for a safety . On the next play, the quarterback also mishandled a hike from the center .
 In the second game the Phi Gams initiated the score with a 15 yard TD pass from Bergman to Parkow . The Sigma Chis retaliated with a pass which covered 20 yards for a TD from Floerschinger to Rhoades . In the third quarter the Sigma Ch
 They completed the extra point with a pass from Floerschinger to Art Ackerman . The extra point was completed with an extra point for the visitors .
 Floerschinger hit Ackerman for a 40 yard TD pass play . The Sigma Chis intercepted a pass from the Phi Gams and intercepted it . The Phi Chis won the game by a score of 40 yards .
 FloerschingerAckerman team took over again on a 30-yard TD pass play . In the second half the FloershingerAckererman team had a 30 yard touchdown pass play play .
 Bishop intercepted a Phi Gam pass and lateraled Simus who scooted 50 yards for When It's Music It's Miller-, Miller Music Co. Simus scored a 50-yard touchdown for the team . Bishop intercepted Phi Gam's pass and helped Simus score 50 yards .
 Lurie made a two-yard touchdown plunge and then passed to Lawrence for the extra point . The first score came from Lurie's two yard touchdown plunge .
 All freshman men interested in playing on the freshman basketball team are asked to meet Tuesday, October 18 at 4 p.m. in the gymnasium at Cossitt Hall .
 Men interested should contact either Coach Leon East lack, X-20G or Coach Gary Cook . Coach East lack needs to be contacted by either Coach East or Coach Cook . The X-305 men are looking for a new coach .
 Lurie and Lawerence connected for a 40 yard TD pass play . Lurie, Lawerence, Florence and Florence connected for the extra point and the final score .
 Betas had the Alpha Phis over for an informal dinner at the end of the night . The Betas are proud of their Alpha Theta Pi .
 Awards for outstanding scholastic achievement will be given at the time of the awards ceremony .
 Phi Delta Theta played host to the Thetas for an informal dessert . Phi Delts hosted the Theta for a dessert at the end of the evening .
 The pledge class officers are president, Hank Rase; vice-president, Eav Mithun; social chairman, Bill Pelz; warden, Steve Sabom; and song leader, Chuck Lawrence .
 Kappa Kappa Gamma Tonight is the Kappa pledge dance and open house combined . Kappa Kappa Phi tonight is the pledge dance, open house and pledge dance combined .
 The Kappas will have the football team over for an informal dessert on Monday eveing .
 The Theta pledge dance and open house is tonight . They are president, Don Bradbury; social chairman, Rick Carrol; secretary-treasurer, Bill Gray and song leader, Tony ShaKappa .
 Thetas got together with the Betas for a picnic at Austin Bluffs . The Betas and the Thetasa got together for the first time .
 This weekend the Sigma Chis will play host to the Sigma Chi chapter from Greeley . Sigma Chi is a chapter of the Sigma Phi chapter in Greeley, Colorado . This weekend, the Greeley chapter will hold a Sigma Chi event .
 On Saturday both chapters and their dates will get together for a picinc. Saturday's picinc will be held at the end of the weekend .
 The officers of the pledge class are president, Chuck Beaver; vice president, Fred Luft, social chairman, Pete Law; secretary-treasurer, Dick Hunt, and house manager, Bill Ward . The pledge class is also known as the Pledge Pledge of the Year .
 Alpha Phi The Alpha Phis will hold their annual pledge dance and open house tonight . Alpha Phi will hold an open house and pledge dance tonight .
 New officers of the pledge class are president, Dick Cholacian; vice-president, Bob Anton; and social chairman, George Klein . Kappa Sigma pledge class is Kappa Sigma's first year of existence .
 Saturday afternoon is the annual Kappa Sigma-Gamma Phi Beta footbal game . Tomorrow night is the pledge dance which will be held at tbe Saturday afternoon . Saturday afternoon will be the annual K-Sigma and Gamma Gamma Gamma football game .
 Delta Gamma pledge officers are president, Many Hamilton; vice-president, Sue Heidel; secretary, Joyce Manning; secretary; treasurer, Suzanne Armstrong; song leader, Ellen Price; and junior Panhellenic representative, Nancy Parker .
 Thursday the chapter will give a fresh, dinn in ho ■ of the pledges . The pledges will be made at the end of the month .
 ASCC is going to allot $100 to the radio department so that the F.M. radio station can be carried to the different buildings in the school . ASCC notes that ASCC has allocated $100 for a radio station .
 All boys who are interested in becoming cheer leaders should get in touch with Don Lavers . All boys interested in being cheer leaders need to get in contact with Lavers.
 Senior Class will paint the home bleachers in Washburn Field on Saturday afternoon of October 22 . The senior class is going to paint the bleachers .
 Application blank at Rastall desk should be turned in before Monday, October 31 . Parent's Week-End, Song Fest and All College Conference applications are being turned in .
 Tareyton's flavorbalance gives you the best taste of the best tobaccos . Product of <Jnt.com.com .
 Candidates in order which they spoke are Sue Heidel, Susan Hile, Susan Holdorf, Lynda Johnson, John Levi, Al Loosli, Mancel Mitchell and William Pelz . Coleman Travel stead and Dick Woods are the candidates .
 i Authority study program as part of the Colorado College curriculum . II pr 'b iliirl • Freedom and Freedom and (Continued from i Authority) II .
 The discussions will be between faculty members and students enrolled in the Freedom an Authority classes . The discussions are expected to take place between faculty and students .
 Colorado College faculty mem bers who will be in charge of thi discussions will be Mr Harr; Booth; Booth, head of the religion depart ment, Mr Glenn Gray; and Mr Gray .
 Mr Wright of the physics department, Mr Carleton Gamer of the musk' department and Mr George Mill of the fine arts department. Mr Mill also featured in the photographs and videos .
 Dr. Boderman says Bureaucracy And Bigness Are Here to Stay . Boderman: Bureaucracies and bureaucracy that accompanies it are here to stay .
 Boderman: Society could not abolish bigjess if it tried because it needs bigness to attain the high standards of life Americans are demanding . Boderman says society could not . abolish big jessess if . it tried .
 Today the first posters for the Homecoming Queen of 1960 will appear . Colorado Springs, Colo., October 21, I960 Colorado College CC Students Adventure Into Homecoming Fairyland .
 The crowning ceremonies will take place at Washburn Field, Friday, October 28 .
 Boderman used the word jureaucracy to refer to the big uanagement operations of government and business . Boderman also used it to include big porations and big unions, and to include fund raising .
 He pointed out that all have problems and are organized with a core of experts . He said that all of the world's problems are organized and have problems .
 It needs .bureaucracy for the high standards of living that the organization makes possible . The organization needs bureaucracy for the living standards it makes possible, says CEO .
 As long as people want production of automobile, we will have big organizations and their as,"" Dr. Dr. says . "As long as we want production, people will want big organizations"
 Big corporations such as exist in the steel and auto industries have changed employeemployer relationships . Big corporations are no longer possible for the employei to know the employee on a perplane .
 Boderman said unions now also use the organization techniques g business . Boderman: Unions are now also using the organization technique to boost their business .
 Even the most successful agriiltural ventures are big and organized with their own bureaucracies, he pointed out .
 Some operations found in fruit indus try in California are simply ""factories of the field,"" and depend on their own bureaucracies to run them . Others are simply simply simply "factories" of the fruit, Dr. Dr. says .
 All big organizations have thenselect corps of experts and man who make the decisions . All big corporations have then select corps of . experts and . man who makes the decisions.
 Most decisions can not be revoked without having already had a great impact on the American scene, Dr. Dr. John Sutter says . Dr. Sutter: 'Most decisions can't be revoked if they have had already had great impact'
 The question of public interest vesus private interest must be considered and government must be the referee . The question is whether the public interest should be considered by the government .
 Bigness is not an unmitigated evil, but the bureaucracy that accompanies it presents it presents a dilemma . Bureaucracy, a Dilemma, presents the problem of bureaucracy, says Dr. John Sutter .
 The U.S. has benefited from big corporations and their big production, but who controls the power of these rporations? Dr. Dr. John Sutter says the United States has benefited .
 Boderman pointed to General Motors with 750,000 stockholders and American Telegraph with 1,100,000 . Boderman: General Motors has 750,00 stockholders . American Telegraph has 1,000,000 shares .
 "They have the real power and can control areas of economic health in the U.S.,"" Dr. David Gergen says . "The real power is that they have control over economic health," he says .
 Only in politics does the United States have two parties, Boderman said . Boderman pointed out that only in politics is the U.S. having two parties. Boderman: "Only in politics do the parties have parties"
 "Even generals are turning in their stars so they can write books to present the opposite view,"" he said . Even generals "turns in stars" to write books .
 Boderman said he did not know where today's trends will lead, and added, ""One thing for sure, you can't go home again" Boderman says he does not know what today's trend will lead to .
 Dr. Hochman Discusses Convention System Tuesday at 11 a.m. in Perkins Hall, Dr. Dr. J. Hohman discusses the convention system . Tuesday will be at 11:30 p.m., 11:45 p.
 Dr. John Defterios will give us an insight into the program and strategy of the Stevenson convention . He will also give us a behind the scenes report on the preparation and planning that goes into a convention .
 Hochman will also point out a few of the abuses of the convention system which he thinks should be corrected . The convention will be held in New York City, New Jersey .
 A dinner for the College Bowl team is to be held Tuesday, October 25, 6:30 in Bemis . A dinner will be held for the team on October 25 .
 There will be a 50 cent charge for those paying college Board and $2 for all others . There will also be a $2 charge for all other students .
 Due to the rain, the bleachers are too wet to be painted by the Senior Class this Saturday, October 22 . The Senior Class will paint the bleacher bleachers this Saturday .
 All faculty and friends who loaned paint brushes for the afternoon are asked to pick them up at Mr Kendrick's office in back of the ROTC building .
 The Commissioners apologize for any inconvenience which may have been caused by the cancellation of the project . The Commissioners plan to carry out the project at a later date .
 We of the TIGER wish to apologize for the erroneous hours of operations mentioned in the advertisements about Howard's Bit and Bridle Restaurant . Watch for further information concerning this will be found in next week's issue of die magazine .
 10 per cent off on Sundays for CC students with activity cards . Monday thru Saturday, 9-3-3, Sunday 9 to midnight. Sunday 9-10-11 .
 Rastall Center celebrates its first anniversary as a student union . Tuesday marks the first anniversary of the center's first year as a campus union . CC's student union will celebrate its anniversary Tuesday .
 To celebrate the event the board will hold a reception in the main lounge where refreshments and an anniversary cake will be served . The board will also celebrate the anniversary with a reception .
 There will be a special display on the bulletin boards in the lobby depicting the dedication of Rastall .
 The student union is fast becoming the focal point on the college campus . The union is becoming a focal point for students at the University of Columbia .
 The queen and her attendants will ride as honorees in the parade the following morning . The queen will be honored at the end of the day .
 Floats from all Greek organizations and the Independent Men and Women will compete for first, second and third place . Floats will compete from first to second place in the competition .
 Floats this year will center around the theme of Fairy Tales and Folk Lore . Floats will be held on the same theme .
 Alpha Phi's float will bo ""Aladdin and His Lamp,"" Delta Gamma's will be ""King Midas and the Golden Touch" Gama Phi Beta's, ""Little Black Sambo""; Kappa Alpha Theta's, "Peter Pan"; Kappa Kappa Gamma's,
 Beta Theta Pi will have ""Brer Bunny"; Kappa Sigma, ""In the Days of King Arthur""; Phi Delta Theta Theta, ""Seven in One Blow"; Phi Gamma Delta, ""Tom Dooley""; Sigma Chi, ""St. Louie"; Sigma
 Floats must be at the line up area, between Cascade and Tejon at Vermijo, by 7:46m. Floats need to arrive at the start of the race by 7.46m .
 Bob McGrew with an 11-piece orchestra and a vocalist will provide the music for the Homecoming Dance at the Broadmoor Hotel from 9m. to 1m. Homecoming dance will take place at 9m .
 Tickets may be obtained from Blue Key members or purchased in Palmer for $2.50 . Tickets may also be purchased in the Palmer area .
 Two years ago Homecoming marked the ground breaking for Rastall Center . Last year the Center was dedicated to the Center .
 Pep Rally— Crowning of Queen— North End, Washburn Field SATURDAY, Oct. 29 7:40m. Pep Rally .
 Ground-Breaking for the new Libi and San Rafael St, 12 noon Homecoming Luncheon and Rally . Rastall Center Dining Room. Ground-breaking for the New Libi St. ground-breaking . 12 noon Luncheon, Rally and 12 noon luncheon and 12
 Special tables for classes holding reunions, 1944, 1945 and 1935 (1935 Silver Anniversary Reunion) 2:00m.m.
 Reserved aeats in Section 17 for alumni and parents of students, $2.00— Washburn Field 4:30m. The game starts at 4 p.m.
 Benczet and members of the Faculty will greet alumni and friends of the College . Rastall Center Dining Room 5:00-0:00 a.m.
 Open House — Fraternities, Sororities and Independent Men and Women 9:00m.-l:00 p.m. Open House .
 HOMECOMOMEN QUEEN candidates are from left 1o right Elizabeth Quint, IWA, Betty Bungener, Theta, Linda Cray, Alpha Phi, Abett Icks, Delta Gamma, Meredyth Richards, Kappa and Ina Begerow,
 Editor: "I am happy to have a happy ending in this story" " " " is the work of a young man who is committed to the art of art," says author .
 We are agreed that it was a pleasing weekend. Co lor:i .to on the CORNER .
 This is one of the few times in the history of one's career which was dedicated to the achievement of brains rather than brawn . If the welcome which was afforded the team is any indication, then we might be safe in saying that this is a rare occasion .
 We do not wish to detract from the football team who certainly are most deserving of plaudits in their own right . But the enthusiasm was good to see. While we do not . wish to . detract from football team they certainly . certainly deserved to be most deserving .
 This is not by any means a half-cocked idea but one which could provide some measure of entertainment on the campus . The idea is not a bad idea, but a good idea for the university .
 They discussed the value of a degree from the ""right"" college . One of their comments is quoted below .
 It would appear in the light of the past articles of Mssr. Oaasockian Reflections it would appear to be a reference to the past .
 We Who Observe and Speak on Campus Kulture that all is not right with the world. Kulture . We who observe and speak on campus Kulture: "All of the world ... is not all that's not right"
 This in itself is not to be chastised for the world is far from the garden of perfection we would have it be. The world is not as perfect as it would have been, says the author of the book .
 When an entire newspaper begins to be known by one column rather than the column for the newspaper, then it is with sadness and mixed emotions that we send the lad off to the land of nod for a quick forty .
 Anyone interested in heading any committee, except the Blue Key Dance Committee, should pick up an application blank at Rastall desk .
 The Geology Club held a meeting in Palmer Hall last Tuesday, October 18 . Clubiicity by Ginny Metcalf . The club's members met at Palmer Hall .
 This was for the purpose of introducing the new foreign students attending Colorado College to the committee's members of the faculty . The committee was introduced to the faculty by the students .
 Other officers are Steve Kushnir, vice president; Tina Stonorov, secretary, and Bob Thrasher, treasurer .
 The senior class will paint the bleachers tomorrow at 12 p.m. The seniors will also prepare a skit for the Variety Show .
 The freshman class commissioners are planning a class meeting soon . Dick Woods, Sue Heidel and Mancel Mitchell are planning to hold the freshman class meeting .
 The Johnnie Smith Quartet played in Perkins Hall last Tuesday . Voting for the queen will be Thursday and FriSmith, Jazz Guitarist, plays in Perkins .
 Johnnie Smith is one of the contemporary jazz greats . Residing now in Colorado Springs, Smith is now living in the U.S.
 The Quartet is composed of Johnnie Smith, guitar; Dave Timmerman, bass; Sammy Colon, piano and Micky McPherson, drums . Johnnie's band is based in New Jersey .
 The band is currently appearing nightly in the Springs at the Alamo Hotel . They are currently appearing in the spring at the hotel .
 Quartet played ""Prelude to a Kiss"" and ""Satan Doll,"" reminiscent of Duke Ellington . Quartet also played "Satan doll" and "Prelue to a kiss"
 The Sigma Chis have received five new pledges . L^reek flews flews .
 These boys are George Burmeister, Chuck Cornell, Bob Pinger, Doug Shaw and Dave Waif eld . They were the original members of the original cast .
 Phi Delta Theta has two new pledges to add to their group . The Phi Delts have pledged two more pledges this year . Phi Delta theta is a chapter of Phi Phi Delta Phi Phi Phi Theta .
 The pledge dance will be held tomorrow evening in the Crystal Room at the Alamo Hotel .
 Phi Delts will take some boys from Hope House bowling bowling next week . The boys will go bowling at the end of the day .
 Beta Theta Pi is on the look-out for their exchange student from Italy . The Betas are looking for an exchange student in Italy .
 Kappa Kappa Gamma held bi-annual mother-daughter banquet at the Village Inn . Kappa Kappa Phi Kappa Gamma is a national women's sorority organization .
 After the banquet the Kappas hurried back to the house for the Founders Daydessert which was given to them by the alums . The alums gave them the dessert .
 Sunday, the Kappas will entertain the Phi Gams at an informal dinner at the house . Sunday, Sunday's dinner will be an informal affair at the Kappa House .
 Kappa Alpha Theta has six girls who will become Theta actives . Theta is a sister-in-law of Kappa Alpha Phi Phi Phi Kappa Kappa Kappa Theta .
 These girls are Stephanie Ames, Marti Breternitz, Betsey Campbell, Susan Connelly, Nancy Heitz and Margie Taylor . The girls are on a mission to help raise money for charity .
 Six girls were initiated into the sorority this week . Delta Gamma is a sorority in the U.S. Delta Gamma .
 These girls were Susan Block, Diane Johnston, Sharon Lindsey, Mimi Meek, Portia Van Meter and Kiki Minor . Susan Block and Diane Johnston were among the girls pictured .
 After initiation a banquet was held for the new initiates at the Hackney House .
 The Delta Gammas will have their faculty picnic at Monument Creek Park on Sunday . Sunday's event will be a faculty picnic in Monument Creek .
 After the speech, an informal coffee was held and a questions and answer period followed . After the talk, the crowd gathered to ask questions .
 On Friday, October 21 at 89 at 89 there will be a TV viewing of the last KennedyNixon debates in the WES lounge of Rastall .
 This will be followed by commentary by adhere n(s to each party together with questions from the floor and general discussion . This is followed by a panel of experts on each party's positions .
 One year ago next year, Cassius De F was a member of Phi Delta Theta Phi Phi Phi Theta . Cassius celebrated his birthday with a broadcast over KRCC . The IWA broadcast is a celebration of his birthday .
 Rastall Center was officiall opened under the direction of Richard Blackburn, center direi tor, and Gary Esch, center board chairman . Tuesday, Tuesday, was the opening day of the center . The center is located in downtown Atlanta .
 Rastall Center Board wanted to create new center of campus activity . They er deavored, alongwith the Rastal Center Board, to create . The board is looking at creating a center of student activity .
 There are half a million meals served in the dining room and 150,00 cups of coffee in the Hub . There are also 150,000 coffee cups in the hub .
 A 20 per cent rise in book sales in the book store indicates a new interest in reading . 1,200 meet ings held in the sundry nooks of Rastall reveal a new out look on campus responsibilities for many .
 Th 3,400 record check outs show something too, either a new av. preciation of music or the discovery of a new way to ""cool it"
 The ever-changing art exhibits offer opportunity for ey exercises, chuckles, and new understanding of the arts . The ever changing art exhibits are open to the public .
 Even college discontents use Rastall as a gayly colorei soapbox for their self-enforced bitterness . Even college students use the center to vent their grievances .
 The prediction by some that J Rastall would herald the end of their peculiar life, fall flat oi 7 h its face . The fraternities have seen the prediction fall flat on the face .
 The same groups have just extended their uniqui personalities to a larger arena, and their increased interactior ,, with other group members has just reinforced their own grou; personality .
 The heterogeneous, cosmopolitan image has been expanded and extended by Rastall . All in all, the heterogeneous and cosmopolitan CC image was expanded and expanded .
 Every constituent has retained its own identity but has picked up the flavoi and seasoning of the others . It has not been a melting pot but rather like a pot of stew, where every constituant has retained their own identity . It's not been the melting pot, but
 GMG New Poetry Workshop ' starts Tiies., Oct. 30 . Do somethin; with your campus center .
 A series of poetry workshop sessions to be held monthly for the remainder of the 19-10-61 academic year is being planned for all CC students interested in composition of poetry .
 The workshop grew out of interest shown by students in the Writers' Workshop Week held recently at CC . The workshop will be led by Dr. Dr. Michael Lister, who will lead it .
 The workshop will have no official connection with either the English Department or any particular ASCC publication . It will be devoted solely to analysis and discussion of poems written by workshop participants .
 Poems to .be discussed should be left at Rastall desk by the Thursday evening before the workshop . Poems should be submitted to be discussed by the end of the week .
 The poems will be mimeographed and copies will be available at Rastall desk on Friday evening . The poems .will be available to be read at the end of the evening .
 Future dates for workshop meetings are tentatively scheduled for December, January 10, February 21, March 14, April 18 and May 16 .
 The purpose of this weekly art cle is to inform and inspire members of our college communitiy . V. V. is to inspire and inform members of the community .
 Each week we shall recom mend books, certain campus activties, and various events in Denver and Colorado Springs ai eas . We will recomm mend books and other campus activities .
 Jaime Laredo, The youngest violinist to win the Queen of Belgium's Award ternational competition . Denver Symphony Concert Sei ies: November 9 .
 Denver Symphony Concert Series, Kitredge Building, Denver, Coloradi Colorado Springs Opera Associaption: November 3, 4, and 5 — ""Han sel and Gretel"" by Humperdinck . Denver Symphony concert series is Denver, Colorado .
 Motivations — maybe, common interest — perhaps, a need for leeding each other — possibly. would like to think that these ingredients blended sucessfully with enthusiasm promotes the spirit of a town . The spirit of the town can be found in a town's spirit .
 The city's traffic is subtituted for a more relaxed and subtle terrain, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 The symphony, the gal;ries, the opera and the ballet are replaced by . . Come to think they are not replaced at all, they are here and as big as life taelf. They are here, they say .
 Civic Players still giving a brilliant performance of ""The Gang's All Here,"" through Saturday, October 22 . The Civic Players are still playing the musical .
 Jolorado Springs Symphony conductor, Walter Eisenburg, undergoes x tensive rehearsals before each performance with his orchestra . Eisenburg's orchestra consists of housewives, doctors, and garage mechanics .
 The next symphony is scheduled for November 0, and believe me, they sound real good . The symphony will take place on November 0 .
 Colorado Springs Opera Associaion presents ""Hansel and Gretel,"" November 3, 4 and 5 . Colorado Springs will present the opera on November 3 and 6 .
 Dorthea and Norman Jornick rehearse with the Colorado Springs Symphony for the ballet presentation of ""Peter and the Wolf,"" scheduled for December 3 . The dance also makes its Christmas debute .
 There is more here than meets the students' Oret|ye. Oret |ye. A invple reason can be that there is more to be done here than meet the students .
 I find it hard to believe that such ambitious efforts come from a all town. I find this hard to imagine, but I'm not surprised. I'm proud of the efforts, and I hope they will be successful .
 'his is not a hick town, rather a town rich in the things that make life lorth living. Most of these things are 'en to us free as compared to the many hours spent preparing for them .
 If we could enjoy some of these assets, our four years at Colorado would in turn be much richer . Colorado would be richer if we were able to enjoy these assets .
 I find it enjoyable walking through is small town watching the people combining their efforts towards common goal . The town is small enough to be a small community of small people, says author .
 Try it, you o might find that there is a certain spirit, a great spirit — shall we y— The Spirit of a Town. Try it!
 Either may be used in any college or university where there is a chapter of Alpha Lambda Delta . Use of the phrase may be limited to a chapter in any chapter of Delta Delta .
 Any member of Alpha Lambda Delta who graduated in 11.58, 1959 and 19fJ0 is eligible . Any member has maintained the scholastic average throughout her college career is eligible.
 Graduating seniors may apply if they maintain this average to the end of the first semester of this year . Graduates will be able to apply if their average is maintained at this time of year .
 Applicants will be judged on scholastic record, recommendations submitted, the soundness of the applicant's project and purpose . Applicants are judged on need, academic record and need . The application will be submitted at the University of Cambridge .
 Application blanks and information may be obtained from Miss Christine Moon, dean of women . Application is required to be submitted by the dean of students .
 Application must be completed by the applicant herself and submitted to the fellowship chairman by February 15, 1961 . The application must be submitted by the application itself and submitted by February .
 Alpha Lambda Delta has pledged two new lembers . The sorority is the naional scholastic sorority for freshnen women .
 Miss Wallaci; .econd semester Miss Bessesen and will be initiated on November 15 . Miss Bessen and Miss Wallac will be initiated .
 If you've married, moved, or come of age since the last eSectfoa, read this BRIDES . Even if yon were a registered voter under your maiden name, you have to register under your new 'married"" name .
 If you have ""turned 21 M. M. <or if you'll be 21 by Election Day), register now . Register now .
 The KINNIKinNIK co-editors, Gary Gappert and Jim Scarboro, expressed the feeling that the interest of area writers in encouraging the development of young college writers reflects the need for more and more people able to express themselves creatively .
 Gappert and Scarboro also expressed the feeling that the young writers of the college could profitably benefit by having their works exposed to the critical eyes of a professional writer .
 His main achievements lie however in relating of western history in book form . His main achievement is relating to western history .
 The first issue, with Sprague's forward, will be published the first week of December . Sprague will be the first issue of this year's edition of the magazine .
 It will be smaller than last year's book but only because of two issues planned . Two issues are planned for next year's edition of the book .
 A smaller book is a better way to absorb the contents of a smaller book . This is so that the student has a better chance of absorbing the content of the book .
 The deadline for all material, prose, poetry, photography and art is November 1 .
 These three former candidates were elected from a slate of thirteen who campaigned and presented their individual stands last week with the election climax on Thursday and Friday .
 Africa is the subject of the regional conference of International Relations Clubs, which is taking place this weekend at Westminster College in Salt Lake City, Utah .
 A delegation from the CC club, headed by Bob Draggon and John Hammer, will attend this meeting . The CC club will hold a meeting at the end of the month .
 There will be a genei'al discussion by members of the local group . The group will report on the discussions in Salt Lake City .
 Me 3-1824 9I-2 E Colorado Ave. Former Fitter for Stars Al Tailoring ind Women's Alteratiot alist .
 Candidates found common ground on only two issues — defense of Berlin and condemnation of religious bigotry . In a bitter battle of acrid political jabberwocky, each man obviously attempted to say a great deal but mean little .
 Nixon called for a united front of Republicans and Democrats on this question . Nixon concurred with Kennedy, calling for unity .
 Both men dropped political fronts to join ranks in condemning religious fanaticism of the Ku Kluv Klan . Both men said they hope that the presidential race would not be decided on religion .
 Kennedy: U.S. should urge Chiang Kai-Shek to evacuate these islands for defensible positions on Formosa proper . Kennedy: "The indefensible nature of these two islands"
 In opposition, Mr Nixon reiterated his argument that these two islands are in the zone of freedom and consequently they should be defended .
 This issue provides a focal point or point of departure from which we must decide which man's views are correct . This issue is important beeaust it provides . It provides a . focal point to which we can decide which . man's view is correct .
 In itself, the Quemoy-Matsu problem is just one of many issues but this issue involves a future decision .
 'No one can say whether Mr Nixon or Mr Kennedy's position is the correct position for the welfare of this country,' says historian .
 "Because this decision involves the future, we may able to answer this question on ideological basis, but never oi practical one. Because this . decision involves a future, it may not be easy to answer, but it may be very difficult to do so,’s Mr.
 The farm program, federal expenditures, and all other important issues of this campaign involve the future . Likewise, the farm program and federal expenditures of this year's election are important issues .
 As with Quemoy and Matsu, we must divorce idealism from practicality in deciding which man's views are right for our country .
 Each man is playing the role of idealistic politiciai par excellence . For remember, each man is . playing the . role of an idealistic politician .
 The WHICKERBILL art and glass studio OWE OF COLORADO's FINER CONTEMPORARY GIFT SHOPS ME 3-0518 I I North Cascade Ave. the WHICERBILL .
 Curtains open on the 1960 CC Variety Show at 8:15m. on No-ember 1, 2, 3 and 4 in Perkins Hall . GG Talent Featured In '60 Variety Show .
 This year's show not only features student taient but is produced, directed and promoted entirely by students . The show is produced and promoted by students from high school to college .
 Business and promotional managers are Doug Norberg and Rod Peck who are candling the publicity, tickets and programs for the production . The show will be held in New York City .
 The Tiger Club will be ushering ihe CC students and faculty as ■ell as other show-goers into this year's Variety Show .
 Membership on the committee is open to representatives of organizations and to any other students interested in the work of the group .
 On Thursday, October 27, the Foreign Student Committee is sponsoring a reception for foreign students on campus . The reception will be a chance to meet faculty, administration and interested townspeople .
 This reception will be held from 4 to 6 p.m. in the Kappa Kappa Gamma Lodge, 1100 Wood Avenue . The reception will take place from 4-6 p-m.
 CC lost its second conference game of the season last week by being downed by the Bears of Colorado State College . CSC Bears hand CC CC second loss of season to the Bears .
 Besides the loss of the game, the Tigers lost their great ground-gainer, Pete Pleasant . Pete Pleasant was the Tigers' great ground gainer .
 The Tigers lost several yards for all of their remaining games . With that, the Tigers lost yards for several games .
 Pleasant scampered across the goal line from five yards out to score a touchdown . The Tigers took the initial lead in the first quarter with a five-yard touchdown .
 In the closing seconds of the second period, the Bears scored on a 16 yard pass play and they tied the score . The Bears scored a 16-yard pass play to tie the game in the second quarter .
 It was the Bears turn to score again in the third quarter and they went over from one yard out, converted the kick and made the score 14-7 . The Bears turned the score into a touchdown in the second quarter .
 With four minutes remaining in the third quarter, a CSC man intercepted a pass in his own end zone and was immediately downed by Jack Real for a safety . The safety was a safety for Jack Real .
 In the final period the Bears took advantage of a Tiger fumble to work their way down to the goal line and make the score 21-9 . The Bears were able to score a touchdown in the final quarter .
 Scott Tippin scored the final scoring of the game in a three-yard plunge for the hosts .
 Tomorrow the Tigers play their third conference game of the year when they meet Idaho State Colat Pocatello, Idaho .
 The team of Hanks to Northern accounted for two touchdowns in the first half . Hanks and Northern account for two of the touchdowns .
 Kendell took a pass from Hanks for another Kappa Sig TD . At the end of the first half the Kappa Sig hud a substantial lead of 190 .
 In the second half the Phi Delts retaliated with a TD pass from Weld to Case . Weld also threw a touchdown pass to Case in the first half of the second quarter .
 The Kappa Sigs came back to score again when Johnson intercepted a pass to make the final score 25-7 . The game was a nail-biting game for the Kappa Sig .
 The first score of the game and the only one for the Phi Gams was a 50 yard run for the TD by Simus Simus . Simus was the only score for the game .
 The Zetas scored two TDs in the first half, one on a pass from Batley to Love and one from Dutkowski to Dutkowski . Love and Batley scored a touchdown in the second half .
 In the second half Boychuk passed twice for touchdowns, once to Fordyee and once to McAlpine . Boychuk also passed for touchdowns in second half .
 Floerchinger passed to Rhodes for another TD in the second half . Ackerman took the pass for the extra point . The score came from a touchdown pass from Rhodes to a touchdown .
 Floerchinger connected with Ackerman for another Sigma Chi score . Ackerman scored for the first time in four years .
 The Mountain Club in conjunction with the American National Red Cross is sponsoring a course in First Aid . First Aid Course Open to Sturents is open to anyone who wants to learn .
 The course will be taught by Stuart Richter, a qualified instructor from the Red Cross . It will be held on Friday afternoons from 3-5m. The course is being taught by Mr Richter .
 Students who will be taking the course are required to have a Red Cross First Aid Manual . Students will be required to take the course .
 SScp Traffic Committee Announces Revisions and New Regulations . The Traffic Committee, with the approval of ASCC, has made several important revisions in campus traffic regulations .
 The first two parking spaces in the parking area immediately in front of Montgomery are reserved for non-student visitors from 7 to 6 seven days a week . Montgomery is located on the north end of the campus on the campus .
 The remaining spaces are reserved for student visitors to the girls' dorms . The remaining space is reserved for students to visit the dorms.
 There is a 10-minute loading zone in the area from McGregor to the main door of Bemis Hall . The loading zone is 10 minutes long .
 The Alpaca sport jacfcet with suede elbow patches is light weight and comfortable . Lightweight and comfortable, it has sueded elbow patches .
 In Slocum Hall area there is no parking on the east side of the east entrance of the parking lot . Also a no-parking area is marked on the west side of a parking lot next to Perkins Hall . No parking is also marked on a no parking area next to
 The driveway which is parallel to the west wing of Slocum is a service drive only . The driveway parallel to west wing is only .
 If the fine is payed within 48 hours at the Treasurer's Office, a $1 discount is allowed . The fine is only if you pay it within 48 days .
 Traffic hearings take place every two weeks on Tuesday evening in Rastall Center . Traffic hearings are held at the centre of the city's busiest traffic centre . The hearings are scheduled to take place on Tuesday evenings at Rastell Center .
 Late registration or a change in registration should be made at the Rastall Center desk . Late registration is required at the center of the event .
 Ann Willcox greeted the crowd of enthusiastic students that braved the rain to meet the victorious College Bow] team . The team won the game in a rain-soaked rain .
 Louis T Benezet spoke of the needs of CC and so started a state-wide campaign drive for funds . Louis T
 Both Vice-President Brossman and Mr Wynn of the Olin Foundation also made brief speeches . slides of the new science building were shown .
 After the banquet the team took a midnight subway ride to Times Square and ate roasted chestnuts . The team also took a night out in Times Square to eat chestnuts before returning to Biltmore .
 On Saturday they had some free time and went their different ways . The team members went their own ways on Saturday .
 Jiaii Floerchinger and Terry Kidner went sightseeing and shopping in New Jersey . Charles Greening went shopping and ""window snooping"" along Fifth Avenue .
 All went to Rockefeller Center and then lunch at Schrafft's . Of course, all went for Rockefeller Center .
 The afternoon was passed in the Guggenheim Museum then a dinner at La Vert Galant . The evening was spent at the French restaurant .
 Sunday was spent in what the team came to regard as a second home, studio 52 . Sunday was the first time the team had been in studio 52.
 After lunch the teams went into warm-up sessions, practiced using the buzzers . They got used to lights, cameras and the manner in which the program was presented .
 There was a final dress rehearsal with make-up and timer and then the show was on .
 Willcox and Willcox went to Leone's for dinner, complete with fiddling gypsies and naming desserts . Willcox's daughter named desserts .
 The team left at 11 Monday morning and arrived at 1:50 to be greeted by an enthusiastic crowd of students dismissed from classes to greet them . The team traveled from 11 a.m. Monday morning to meet the team at 1.50 a time .
 Sidelights of the teams' trip include the acquisition of Albert La Douce, the small tiger that is literally worshipped by the team ami . The small tiger had a prominent spot on the first part of the show .
 G.E. also handed each team member a list of eight appliances and told then, they could have their pick of one to take home . The team was then given the list of appliances to choose from .
 Without his staunch support and iron nerves the team felt it would have been far too tense and nervous to do the program as a game instead of a death struggle . Without his support the team would have felt too nervous to play .
 "The Bowl"" is a GAME, and whether we win or loose next week, we have already proven ourselves to the world," says the coach . "Whether we win, or loose, we are already proven themselves to the the world. Bowl ""is a GAME," he says .
 Anyone wishing to serve on the Student Curriculum Committee should obtain an application form at Rastall desk . The application form will be available at the Rastal desk .
 NEW DUAL FILTER Product of <Jfik ■J/mL.ituan Uo€ajeso~<£mpa <w — UuVa££& is our middle name <o a t < 1.1 .
 Tareyton's flavor-balance gives you the best taste of the best tobaccos . October 21, I960 — Dump Western State, Tigers Vol. Vol.
 Voting for the 1960 Homecoming Queen will be from 9 to 4 today in Palmer or Rastall . I960 Colorado College Snake Dance and Bonfire Start Homecoming Tonite Tonite . Voting will be held at 9 a.m. to 4 a day .
 Tonight a bonfire and pep rally will be held to start off the homecoming weekend . Homecoming weekend starts at 8 p.m. Saturday .
 About 8:30m. a truck and band will go to each dorm and fraternity house to pick up people and lead the snake dance down to the north end of Washburn field .
 Proposed Library Has Four Floors, 48,000 Sq. lew Library has four floors, four floors and four floors . Library has been proposed as a permanent home to the Tigerettes .
 The design of Colorado College's new library has been completed by the Chicago firm of Skidmore, Owings and Merrill . Sunken Courts will be the largest library in the country .
 The first level will be below ground and will contain a core of book stacks surrounded by two seminar rooms, a smoking study, a microcard reading room, a typing room and several lounges . The second level will contain two seminars rooms, two microcard-reading rooms and a
 The main floor will be enclosed jy four glass walls and will house the card catalog, the circulation e desk, the reference irea, a periodical room and the new Jbook shelf . The new J book shelf will be located in the main floor of the building .
 The rest of the loor will be devoted to technical work \ spaces and the librarian's iffice . The librarian will be in charge of the library .
 Upper two levels will house the bulk of the book stacks plus the reading areas . The upper two levels of the building will house ;he bulk of book stacks .
 Levels ""11 also contain the special collections rooms, four conference rooms and a typing room . These levels ""11" are located in the basement of the museum .
 There will be a slightly sunken paved memorial court on the west side of the library extending to within eight feet of the sidewalk on Cascade Avenue . The memorial court will be located on the library's west side .
 To the east of the building will be a sunken garden court flush with the lower level of the library . The garden court will be flush with a lower level library's lower level .
 Floor space in the new building will be approximately 48,000 square feet compared to Coburn Library's 13,000 sq. feet . Floor space will be about 48,00 square feet .
 This ^increase will provide space for iOO.OOO volumes and seating for )00 readers . The increase in size will also increase the size of the iOOO .
 Construction is scheduled to begin in early January near the present site of West Hall . Construction is set to begin near the site of the new West Hall.
 Ground-breaking ceremony for the new library will take place Saturday, October 29, at 11 a.m. as part of the homecoming weekend festivities . The ground-breaking will be the first time the library has been opened .
 Those participating in the ceremony will be President Louis T Benezet, Mr Armin Barney, chairman of the CC Board of Trustees, Mr Charles Tutt and Mr Richard Beidleman .
 This is the first of three groundbreaking ceremonies to take place during the year, says college vice-president .
 Groundbreaking for the science building will be in the spring . The fraternity housing project will begin some time around the beginning of 1961 . Ground-breaking will begin in the summer of 2012 .
 Actual construction for the new library is scheduled to begin near the first of the year in order that the building will be ready for the fall of 1962 . The new library will be built in 1962 .
 Funds for the construction of the library were given by the El Pomar Foundation . The library is located in the town of El Pomars .
 Alpha Lambda Delta is having a meeting of all women students who live off campus on Tuesday, November 1, at 4:30 in the WES room in Rastall .
 Students are reminded that the Kinnikinnik deadline for material is next Tuesday, November 1 . Students are asked to submit material for next week .
 Contributions of art, prose, poetry and photography may be turned in at Rastall desk .
 Olin Hall, Colorado College's proposed science building, was designed by the Houston, Tex., firm of Caudill, Rowlett, and Scott . The proposed building would be the first of its kind .
 Palmer Hall's outer architecture is designed to blend with the solidarity of Palmer Hall and yet give the impression of modernity . The outer architecture of the building will blend with Palmer Hall . Its outer architecture has been designed for the purpose of modernising .
 The lecture room will be surrounded by a cantilevered platform 10 feet above ground level . It will have a lecture room surrounded by the platform . The platform will be 10 feet higher than ground level.
 The first level will be devoted to storage space, classrooms, and service areas . The first floor of the building will be dedicated to classrooms, storage space and classrooms .
 Chemistry classes and laboratories will be found on the third level . Biological sciences will reside on the fourth floor of the building .
 Also on the fourth floor will be a greenhouse and housing facilities for the Warren-Aikens collection, a research co-collection of animals found in the Rocky Mountain region .
 Olin Hall will be an artistically pleasing addition to the campus as well as a function one . The new hall will be the first of its kind to be built at the University of Columbia .
 It has been designed with both the science and non-science major in mind . It is designed to be both a science major and a non-Science major .
 The interior of the building will be furnished with this wide diversity of users in mind, but the overall effect will be one of unity . The interior will be decorated with a wide variety of users, but it will be designed to reflect the diversity .
 Don Roll acting as master of Dean Juan Reid has a short speech planned . Coach Gerald Carle will introduce the football team and the cheerleaders . Don Roll will also give a speech to Juan Reid .
 Lynne Vincent and her baton twirling act will follow the introductions . The show will be held in New York City, New Jersey .
 The captain of the team, Jack Real, .will light the bonfire and burn a mountaineer in effigy .
 The queen candidates will be presented and the Homecoming Queen will be crowned . The Homecoming queen is expected to be crowned at homecoming .
 Saturday morning the parade starts downtown at the courthouse on Tejon at 9:30m. Saturday morning . Saturday's parade starts at 9 a.m.
 A dozen floats made by the Greek and Independent organizations along with bands, bands, Tiger-Tigerettes and twenty Oskasita members will participate .
 During half time, the Tiger-Tigerettes will drill and the winning floats will be announced . Winning floats will also be announced at half time .
 The Greeks and Independents will hold open houses for everyone . Afterwards, the Greeks and Greeks and independents will hold public houses .
 Bob McGrew's eleven piece band and vocalist are providing the music for dancing . Bob's 11 piece band provides the music to dancing .
 Kennedy said that the present administration lacked new ideas and has allowed the American position in the world to lag because of its paucity of ideas . Kennedy said the present government lacks new ideas . He said the U.S. lags behind the world because of the lack of new ideas
 President Eisenhower has had no counterpart to the Marshall Plan . or the Truman Doctrine . Hepointed out that President Eisenhower had had no . counterpart to a Marshall Plan or Truman . Doctrine .
 Kennedy: There has been a deterioration of foreign policy and of U.S. prestige . Kennedy: America's prestige has been tarnished by foreign policy, foreign policy . Kennedy says the country has suffered a decline in prestige and power .
 President Eisenhower's canceled trip to Japan and Nixon's South American trip were examples . He pointed out as examples of President Nixon's canceled trips .
 Kennedy said the United States is not using its §9 million food surplus properly . Kennedy said that the U.S. is using the surplus to feed the nation's food surplus . Kennedy also said the surplus is not being used properly .
 He thinks the government should give more for school lunch programs and to underdeveloped countries . He thinks more money should be given to developing countries .
 If these countries have food, they can afford to take more chances, says Kennedy . Kennedy: "If these countries are hungry, they will be able to take chances"
 Senator Kennedy's critical attitude of the nation's military strength is based on the judgment of Gens. Gen. Eisenhower and Gen. George W. Eisenhower .
 Gavin, Gruenther, Ridgeway and other leaders who differ with Eisenhower on basic points . Gavin: "Imites' views differ from Eisenhower on some of the most important issues of national security .
 The girls are not learning how to protect the campus from invasion as rumor has it, but rather the Tigerettes and Tiger Clubs are learning their drills for the Homecoming game tomorrow .
 Buffie Buffum, president, Jann Rowley, vice-president and Jona Rowley are the Tigerettes . Susan Bigelow, poster chairman, is the Tigerette of the m o n n I h chairman .
 The enthusiasm shown at these games is oidy a part of the enthusiasm of these girls . However, the enthusiasm shown by these girls is a big part .
 They make posters advertising all the games, signs for the field and decorations for the goals .
 Soon they will plan a money making project comparable to the spaghetti dinner of last year . Soon they'll plan to plan a similar project .
 The Tigerettes plan to make it read even higher in the remaining months of this year . The indicator now reads high and the team wants to keep it even higher .
 Several reunions are planned as part of the 1960 homecoming festivities . Reunions will keep CC Alumni active, says Miss Lorena Berger .
 Class of 1935 are commemorating their 25th silver anniversary reunion . The class of 1935 will hold a 25-year-old reunion .
 Special activities include a cocktail party Friday night and the silver anniversary banquet at the Broadmoor Saturday night . Special activities are planned for the Silver Anniversary .
 William O Lennox, the former Betty Foster, and the Kappa Kappa Gamma homecoming queen of 1935, will ride in an old La Salle in the homecoming parade . William O. Lennox and Betty Foster were homecoming queens of 1935 .
 Something new in the line of reunions is the ten year anniversary of the Freedom and Authority course . It is the first time the course has been held in ten years . The course is now being held in the UK .
 Fifty people who have attended classes in this course over the past ten years expected to return . Fifty people are expected to attend the course .
 Two other reunions, one a combined reunion of the classes of 1944 and 1945 and the other a championship football team reunion of 1949 and 1950, are planned as other highlights of homecoming weekend .
 Marcia Moaes. stetnite, Krannje FerbSluckton, Mimi Jones and Mimi . Jones, B Tonflkemper, Morcarct t'u-lo. u-lo-lo .
 ASCC must serve to survive . Unless the ASCC as an organization, furthers the goals of each student to succeed in reaching his goals, it is sealing its own fate .
 Students' goals are not as diverse and polyglot as one might imagine, for if one measures the long term, more general goals of each student and disregards some immediate, very transient goals, one will find a great similarity .
 Most of the CC student body, in coming to CC, has declared itself, at least implicitly, as favoring the ideal of the WHOLE MAN . The ideal is the broadly and liberally educated person, the broadly, educated person .
 This broad education does not solely mean an appreciation and education in the various academic disciplines, but very definitely infers an education from A to Z from Asquith to Zen . This includes an appreciation of the academic disciplines .
 A mature person is a person who has realized both his potentialities and his limitations . The idea is that a college, especially one like ours, should turn out a mature person . The college should be able to turn out an 'adult person'
 Each student surely expects some measure of success in at least one of them, and if he is a voluntary member of this liberal arts school, the chances are that he wants quite a bit of success .
 The idea behind our government, as behind all governments, is that the function of government is to do for the people that which they cannot do as well for themselves . The idea of our government is that it is to help the people, as well as themselves .
 The goal of ASCC is helping to fulfill for each of its constituents, the goals he has set, or is setting for himself . ASCC's goal is to help to fulfill the goals of each member of the board .
 It should readily be agreed that without ASCC the individual would experience more difficult attainment of his goals . ASCC is a non-profit organisation that helps individuals achieve their goals .
 ASCC is either not doing its job, or else has lost its justification for existence . If not, ASCC should not be doing their job . ASCC has been criticised for its lack of transparency in recent years .
 ASCC then, if it accepts the above, must consider everything that comes before it in that context . The ASCC must also consider everything else before it comes to an ASCC decision .
 Student goals are defined as whether or not an event or action will directly or indirectly aid the fulfillment of student goals . That is whether the student's goal is to fulfill it, or not it will aid the student goals of the school .
 The various committees of ASCC have been set up to insure that proper attention is paid to special areas, to wit, the social, the intramural, the publications, publications, the curriculum, and committees .
 Other committees of ASCC, constitution, goals and election are striving most particularly to insure that the ASCC develops the necessary efficiency to be effective .
 The finance committee has the responsibility of financially sponsoring and promoting those activities that the students want, or should have, say the students .
 The enthusiasm and communications committee has the most responsible administrative position of all . It must seek to create and promote an atmosphere and climate where each student will want to be a significant and contributing member of the ASCC in its full sense .
 The area in which ASCC has the most indirect power, and the least direct power, is in the area of the ex-officio . The area of ASCC's most direct power is the area where ASCC is located . ASCC also has the least indirect power in the
 The various ex-officio, almost wholly autonomous bodies of ASCC are to a great extent laden with responsibilities that are implicitly given to ASCC in its guardianship of the student college welfare . ASCC is in charge of the students' welfare .
 ASCC serves as a watchdog for student interests in these areas . The power and responsibilities of these groups are best left where it is best left . ASCC should serve as an independent watchdog for students' interests .
 In sum, let it be said that ASCC has the heavy responsibility of the welfare and freedom of all the students in all the corners of campus life . ASCC is responsible for the welfare of the students at all levels .
 ASCC has no more than a watchdog role in those areas where students are able to insure their own welfare . ASCC is a watchdog for students' welfare, not just students .
 The ASCC must take corrective action in those areas where student interests are being abused, or left unfulfilled, says Gary Gappert . The student interest is being abused in some areas, he says .
 Dear Editor, I would like to congratulate your column writer of ""On the Town" who writes so constructively. I would also congratulate your columnist for writing constructively .
 Wally Caldwell is doing much to counteract the asinine cynicism that is so prevalent in the U.S. Wally Caldwell says he's doing much for the sake of the country . Caldwell: "I'm not afraid to be cynical, but I'm proud to be optimistic"
 Colorado Springs does have a lot to offer as does Colorado College and it is good to hear credit given where credit is due . Colorado Springs is a great city and Colorado College has a lot of things to offer .
 I am writing as a rank newcomer to the CC community, and in so doing may step on a few established toes . The fact that I have recently come from another college may lend a certain new point of view .
 If I am, in my ignorance, simply trying to revive dead issues, please excuse my efforts. If you are, in your ignorance, just ask me if you are trying to resurrect dead issues .
 "As I see it, one of the major aspects of a college is its cultural contribution; it is in part a justification for our existence" "One of the colleges' major cultural contributions is the cultural contribution to its existence," says Dr. John Sutter .
 We maintain that the presence of a college is good for a community as a whole, as we are, in a sense, in the culture business . We are in a culture business, and we are in the college business .
 It is particularly in its offerings in the public arts that the college carries on its task of bringing culture to the community . Music, the drama, fine art and fine art, the radio station, public lectures, etc. etc.
 Fine Arts Center is the biggest single feature of the college's public arts program . The Fine Arts center is the largest in the university's public art program .
 The Hirschhom collection of modern sculpture is without a doubt the finest of its kind in the world . The community owes the Center a debt of gratitude for the opportunity to see it .
 "While these may be fine pictures (or, given a set of values characterized by a certain absence of taste, they might be so considered," they might not be considered . They are not art, and have no business in the offerings of an institution ostensibly devoted to art, he says
 The problem is that every ""Swan"" precludes the possibility of a ""La Strada"" being shown . Every ""Some Like It Hot"" is a Cocteau or an Eisenstein . Every "Swan" precludes any possibility of being shown; every ""Some
 It may be objected, by the committee of one which chooses the films, that art films are not commercially feasible, that they will not draw the crowd that ""A Man Called Peter"" (or, by extension, u l Was a Teen-age Werewolf"") will .
 Drama Department is offering ""The Diary of Anne Frank" as its first selection this year . Drama Department offers "Anne Frank" The drama department is offering a selection of the book .
 "This was an enormously successful production on Broadway, and millions have had the opportunity of seeing the movie" "The movie was a hugely successful show on Broadway," the director says .
 Instead of watching cautiously for things which will sell, the theater should produce things which are too risky for Broadway or even Civic Theater production . It should take advantage of this fact, and should produce risky things too risky .
 Jonesco or Sarte or Beckett or Pirandello may never father wide-screen movies or make their producers rich, but they are the sources of the greatest vitality in the modern drama .
 I had been told of the excellence of the dance program long before I came here, so I expected that the talents of students and teachers would result in exciting events . I had hoped that the talent of students, teachers and students would result exciting events.
 I am sure that an enjoyable time will be had by all, but I am equally sure that there are many more exciting offerings which would be just as enthusiastically supported by the community as a whole . I am also sure that a more exciting event would be held in the U.S.
 The radio station seems to be under the impression that it is directly competing with the local stations . The shame of this is that the BBC Third Programs, the Northwestern Reviewing Stand of the Air, the Pacifica Foundation, tapes can be had virtually for postage .
 The college has the facilities, the talent, the heritage and, most important, the obligation to make a positive cultural contribution to Colorado Springs and to its own student body . If I may prolong an already over-long letter, I would like to say simply that the college has .
 If there were enough interest evidenced by the student body and the faculty, something might be done . As nearly as I can determine, this is not being done, but I .believe that if there were . enough interest shown, this might be . done, he says .
 This week Cap and Go sents: Jose Iturbi, concert pianist . Phi Delta Delta Theta B pri Un Cap & Go wi the IWA Ushers: Phi Delta . The Ushers are Phi Delta.
 Palmer High School Audit will be held on November 10, November 10 . For tickets, phone ME 3-1602. For tickets to the event, call ME 3.1602 .
 There will be male cheerleadi for homecoming . Don't forget to gf your tickets for Hansel and Grete .
 Rastall C ter Board went to the Region 1 ACU student union board confet ence that was held at the Un versity of New Mexico at Albi querque .
 On Oct. the delegates he a speech on ""Brainwashing"" by Mi Fred Clarch of Boeing Aircrafi . He said that this could be used solving the problems of a studf union .
 I gripe about being ""forced"" to take rot-c, but I really wanted to take it . Sure, everybody does, but everyone does, and I wanted it, I really did .
 The officer who protects them, especially the officer, says he looks up to the officer . "Whatever people say, they do sort of look up to them," he says .
 "You're not really defending the country, you're really preparing to go out and destroy in the name of the state," he said . "Guy came up to me the other day, said," said Mr. Wilson . Wilson .
 Better to push the buttons — plenty of people would be killed, but the rest of us could rebuild what's left . Better than pushing the buttons would be pushing the button, but it would be better to push it .
 Can't stand these guys always harping about government forcing them into the army, officers forcing them to take orders . 'Can't stand this guys always saying government forced them to join the army'
 "Nobody likes it, but we've got to do it to protect our freedom from force," says President Obama . "We're not going to like it. Nobody likes it," says Obama .
 Sometimes I wonder how I will be any moro worthy of taking other men's lives into my hands in combat than those under me, but this is why I'm training . Sometimes I wondered how I would be any Moro worthy to take others' lives .
 These pacifists talk about new approaches to solving problems instead of war, but I don't see much action . "These pacifists are pacifists talking about new ways of solving problems," says CNN's John Defterios .
 Bi-lateral disarmamei seems a better hope . Non-violei resistance, just let 'em coi coi . Bi-lovers' resistance seems to be the best hope for the world .
 Negotiations go on at the same time, while sides are arming to the teeth . Nobody do it, though, while negotiations go on, though .
 Alumni Pat Willi and Sue Day held a cocktail rty for the team that afternoon . The team held a tipple at the end of the day .
 The team dined in the Garden Room of the Biltmore before going to the theater with Mr and Mrs. George and Pauline in the theater . The team also dined at the Garden .
 The teams went through the usual warmups and dress rehearsal . Alumni Jack Tench, Kirby and Dottie Howlett, John Bellis, Dan CrecelJohn Frenkel, Jo Anne McLaughlin, Sue Day and Sally Post were also in attendance .
 Albert pointed out that both the teams enjoyed themselves tremendously during the warm-ups, before and after the show . Albert said that both teams enjoyed each other tremendously .
 He swears heard the Vanderbilt team offering to do a soft shoe routine during the half time . The CC team offered to contribute folk songs to the half-time show .
 After the show the Vanderbilt l invited the CC team to dinner, but CC had to decline both this generous offer and the offer for Terry Kidner to return this week as the Vanderbilt mascot .
 The team arrived back on campus Monday, October 24, at 1:30 . They were very pleased with the warm welcome afforded by the students . The team returned to campus on October 24 .
 Both semesters of the beginning course in general geology are covered in 24 chapters . Geology is a general course that covers both semesters in two years .
 Most of these were obtained from the United States Geological Survey's photo library and were individually selected by Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter is a member of the Geological Survey .
 Professor Pearl Pearl was selected for the task which he began five and a half years ago . Field retired he suggested a new author and Professor Pearl is the author of the book .
 Vanderbilt faces Franklin & Marshall College College of Lancaster, Pennsylvania, next week . Next week's game will be Vanderbilt's first game of the season .
 An interesting sidelight is that this school is the one attended by the brother of team member Ann ""Willie"" Willcox . The brother of Ann "Willie" Willcox attended this school .
 He also stated that America is seen as a nation with ""all the power, but also the biggest help for Western Europe" He also said that America was seen as the nation with "all of the power," but also a "biggest help" for Europe .
 Karel attended the Institute for Representation Abroad in the Netherlands where he was president of the student body . Karel is the son of Karel, who was born in 1987 .
 The school is only a two-year institution, but students carry about 30 hours . Students carry 30 hours of studying .
 Karel has now graduated, and when he returns home he will be ready to take up a profession there . When he returns to his native country he will become a doctor .
 Before a student leaves on the exchange, he must know something about the country which he is going to visit and speak it .
 Karel says that he still has difficulty understanding the professors in some of his courses . Karel still struggles to understand some of the professors' words .
 The opinion is that Americans are ""very noisy; there is always a lot of talk,"" Karel stated . Karel: Americans are very noisy and always talk a lot .
 Bus drivers remember regular passengers and will often wait for them if they are late . Bus drivers will wait for regular passengers if they're late .
 Karel thinks students of college age here are more mature because they break away from the home earlier . In the Netherlands the parental influence on the children is extended to a later age . Karel says college students in the Netherlands are mature .
 College life is much the same, but the student-teacher relationship is less formal here . The students and teachers are less formal in the United States .
 There are no women at Karel's school in the Netherlands but many do attend universities . Many women at the school attend universities, but some do attend university .
 He mentions also that he is happy to live in the Kappa Sig house because he feels this gives him a better picture of campus life . He mentions that he feels he is "happy to live" in Kappa Sig .
 Jack Walker and Max Power, chairmen of the Young Democrats and Republicans, announced this week that representatives of their clubs will meet to debate issues and candidates in the current campaign for the presidency .
 The debate will be held in the WES Lounge of Rastall Center at 7:30 p.m., Tuesday, November 1 .
 Each debator will make an opening statement of about five minutes duration . Then each will have an opportunity to ask questions of the opposition, and comment on the answers .
 The debate is open to the public and every interested person is invited to attend . The debate will be held at 7.30pm on Thursday .
 Deltu Alpha Lambda Delta is having a meeting Tuesday, November 1, at 4:30m. in the WES room in Rastall for all town girls . The meeting will be held at 4.30m .
 For private tutoring, girls should contact Sandy Weir or Ann Armstrong . For private tuition, girls can call Sandy Weir, Ann Armstrong or Sandy Weir .
 The Black and Gold Club will be selling excess sweatshirts at $3 on Friday, November 4 in Rastall from 4-7m.
 Mountain Club is sponsoring a first aid class in conjunction with the American Red Cross . Mountain Club sponsors first aid classes with the Red Cross in conjunction .
 The classes will be held in Rastall from 3-5m. on Friday afternoons beginning October 21 .
 The first in a series of training lectures was given to the new plebes of Pershing Rifles at the meeting October 20 . The first series of lectures will be given to them .
 The pledge dance was held in Rastall on October 22, The next meeting will be held on November 3, 2015 .
 They are Marty Breternitz, Nadine Chang, Kay Mathews, Ann Seely, Carol Swartz, Lynne Vincent and Isabel Williams . They are the group of women who have been married for more than 30 years .
 Wakuta Jean Wilfong is the new president of Wakuta, the honorary athletic association for junior and senior women . Wakuta was founded by the Wakuta Women's Athletic Association .
 Other officers are Sue Evans, vice president; Ginger Gallalee, secretary-treasurer and Mimi Meek, publicity chairman . Sue Evans is also vice-president of the local council .
 Pixie Campbell, Jan Fry, Kris Hoof, Chessie Kemp, Beth Kendall, Keekee Minor, Owen Salisbury, Betsy Taylor and Connie Windle have been elected to the organization . New members elected include Pixie Campbell and Jan Fry .
 Young Republicans heard James A Braden, candidate for the Colorado House of Representatives and Don Higby, . candidate for District Attorney for the 4th Judicial District .
 The Young Republicans will have a debate with the Young Democrats on November 1 at 7:30 m. in the WES room in Rastall . The debate will take place in the same room as a debate .
 KAREL LEEFLANG, foreign student from Holland, and Alexe ""Boots"" Stockton, TIGER reporter, discuss the American image abroad .
 Need for better communication both with tween ASCC and the student body . Needed better communication with ASCC, student body and the students .
 A report made by the secretary of ASCC at the end of each semester to the student body telling what ASCC has done . during the past semester . The secretary of the secretary makes the report at the . end of the semester .
 A permanent agenda to be kept in the ASCC files for reference purposes purposes .
 To better facilitate weekly announcements of ASCC, such announcements should be broadcast over KRCC and the dormitory intercommunications system . KRCC should also be used to broadcast weekly announcements .
 Personal appearances of members at special events of interest to the school . Members of the school are invited to make public appearances .
 Issuing invitations to leaders of various campus organizations to attend a Council meeting . Discussing with the Council their function on campus .
 An ASCC Banquet at which recognition is given and introductions made of the new ASCC officers .
 October 28, I960 • Colorado College Tiger HOMECOMING I960 . I960 will be broadcast from 2:00-5:00 a.m.
 Rastall Center 9:00-11:00 a.m. registration is required . Pick up tickets and pick up tickets from the Rastalls Center .
 Colorado College faculty received new titles during the summer as they received promotions . Ground-Breaking for the new Library and San Rafael St. Five Receive New Promotions .
 The five are Robert Z Brown, George S McCue and Wilber H Wright, all promoted to full professor . Bentley B Gilbert and William R Hochman both promoted from assistant professor to associate professor . Two other members of the faculty also were promoted but they are on leave of absence
 Reinitz is teaching in Finland this year on an exchange arrangement under the Fullbright Act . Reinitz teaches in Finland on a year-long exchange arrangement with Finland .
 Professor Brown is a member of the Zoology Department staff . He came to CC in 1954 as an associate professor . Professor Brown has been at CC since 1954 .
 Professor McCue has been teaching at CC since 1935 when he joined the faculty as an instructor in English . He has taught at the university since 1935 .
 Bentley Gilbert has been a member of the history faculty of CC since 1955 . He has been an assistant professor at the university for more than 60 years . Gilbert is a history professor at CC .
 He came to CC as an instructor and was promoted to assistant professor in 1956 . He has been at CC since 1956 .
 12 noon Homecoming Luncheon and Rally . Report to Alumni by President Benezet . 12 noon homecoming luncheon and rally at Rastall Center Dining Room .
 Special tables for class a holding reunions, 1944, 1945 and 1936 (1935 Silver Ann, versa -,' Reunion) J 2:00m.
 Reserved seats in Section 17 for alumni and parents of students, $2.00_Washburn Field 4:30m. The game is scheduled to begin at 4 p.m. ET .
 Benezet and members ot the r acuity will greet alumni and friends of the College . Rastall Center Dining Room 5:00-6:00 p.m.
 Fraternities, Sororities and Independent Men ar, Women 9:00m.-l:00 m. Open House . Men and women 9 a.m. to 9:30m.
 The Phi Delts are trying to put their frame together while the Gamma Phis are occupied with the beginning busy work involved with every float . This year some of the organizations got their usual late start to the float .
 Homecoming and mid-terms come at the same time, wouldn't life be great if they didn't come at same time .
 I960 GC Student Body Hails from 46 States and 15 foreign countries . Colorado College student body is represented in 46 states and 15 countries .
 Colorado College has a total of 1,346 students this year with 1161 undergraduate students . Colorado College also has 1161 undergraduates this year .
 These figures represent a total increase of 61, with an increase of 93 in the undergraduate student body and a decease of 32 among other students .
 States not represented are Alaska, Louisiana, Mississippi, South Carolina and Vermont . Alaska and Louisiana are not represented .
 Canada, 36; Chile, 3; The Netherlands, 2; Australia, France, Germany, Japan, Lebanon, Mexico, Panama, South Africa, Spain, Taiwan, Thailand and Thailand are represented .
 The new pledges of Kappa Sigma are Ted Uline, Pat Smith, Ed Mason, John Barker and Ed DeGeorge . Kappa Sigma is a national fraternity of men and women .
 The boys will serve dinner for their dates which will be followed by the traditional champaign party . The party will be held at the end of the evening .
 Gamma Phi Beta had a most successful pledge dance at the house . Gamma Phis had a pledge dance last Friday evening .
 Kappa Sigs played against the Gamma Phis in a football game out at Lazyland . The Kappa and Gamma Sigs play each other in the football game . The game was played at the end of the weekend .
 Six pledges became Theta actives last Saturday afternoon . Refreshments will be served, Kappa Alpha Theta Theta .
 Stevie Ames, Marti Bretemitz, Betsey Campbell, Sue Connelly, Nancy Heitz and Margie Taylor are all new members of the board . The new board members include: Stevi Ames, Betseys Campbell, Nancy Connelly and Betsey .
 The most improved were Susan Riley Hillis, Linda Robeson and Sue Connelly . The most improvement were Susan . Hillis and Robeson were the most improved .
 Ruth Snodgrass presented Lynne Vincent with the Theta pin for the highest scholastic attainment . She was presented with the pin by Theta president of the University of Cambridge .
 Polly Franklin presents Marti Breternitz with the ring for outstanding pledge . Polly Franklin presented the ring at the centre of the award-winning ceremony .
 Beta Theta Pi had President Louis T Benezet foi dinner . The Beta^ had a dinner with the President of France .
 The chapter will ' receive a silver tray which will be presente.l at a luncheon on November 12 at the Hilton Hotel in Denver .
 Phi Delta Theta has added another new member to their chapter . The Phis have added another member of their chapter to their ranks .
 Delta Gamma pledges had a luncheon for Anchor Girls at the Village Inn . Anchor girls had a lunch at the village Inn .
 Phi Gamma Delta thank the Kappas for a very nice dinner last Sunday evening . The Phi Gams wish to thank them for the dinner . Phi Gamma Gamma Delta is a sister-in-law of Phi Phi Phi Kappa Kappa Kappa Phi .
 Last Tuesday morning was the mother-daughter breakfast over at the house . Alpha Phi is a sister-in-law of Alpha Phi .
 The first interview was conducted with Eugene Lyons, special assistant to the president for personnel management' and the second with Dr. Dr. Michael Lyons . Dr. Lyons is the president of the University of Washington, Washington .
 In the interviews it was brought out that these two men favor their respective candidates for different reasons . The interviews were conducted by both men .
 Freed feels that in forthcoming election the no great diqerence between the two men and thus he favors the party which has the platform most in line with what he thinks is best for the country . Freed says he favors party which he thinks best for country and country .
 Mr Lyons, on the other hand, seems to base his choice on his own personal knowledge of the ■andidates .
 Richard Nixon is better qualified to lead the U.S. than John Kennedy is based on a number of ■easons . Richard Nixon's feeling that Richard Nixon would be better qualified for the presidency is a series of reasons he says he thinks he would be a better candidate .
 Mr Lyons feels that Nixm's experience is of great value o a president of the United States . Mr Lyons says he feels the experience will be valuable to a president .
 Nixon has shown the country how he can handle himself in various situations, says Lyons . Lyons says Nixon's actions have been mmendable .
 Mr Lyons said Kennedy was prone to make rash statements that he later regretted . He said Kennedy made rash statements he regretted later on .
 He feels that a man holding the highest office of the land should not be one speaks with little reflection, especially in dealing with unfriendly foreign powers . He says he feels that he should be one of the highest in the country .
 Mr Lyons feels that Henry Cabot Lodge is well qualified to assist the president . Mr Lyons also feels that Mr Lyons believes that Henry Cabbot Lodge will be well qualified for the job .
 Experience seems to be a strong point in favor of both Nixon and Lodge . Both men are likely to win the White House race .
 Now the oters must decide whether or not they approved of the actions taken jy Nixon and Lodge and Lodge .
 In an interview he stated that the important differences between the parties are the domestic programs and not so much the foreign affairs policies . In the interview he said that the main differences are domestic programs rather than foreign policy .
 Freed estated that the Republican viewpoint on aid for the aged was one of limited government interference . Freed said that according to this feeling, the only freedom would be from government control .
 The Democratic party, on the other hand, offers freedom from worry and fear in regards to sickness . The Democratic Party offers freedom to worry, fear and fear .
 Freed feels that the private sectors of the economy have shown themselves incapable of dealing fairly with the schools and the local governments are in need of assistance . Freed says the private sector has shown themselves unable to deal fairly .
 The national government should undertake to better the schools in line with the Democratic plank designed for this purpose . It is his opinion that the national government .
 It cannot be said whether one should vote on a basis of what the party policies are rather than the qualities of the man seeking the office . It is not said whether a vote should be based on party policies rather than qualities of candidates .
 "The important thing is to seek knowledge about both the party and the man," she says . The important thing to do is seek knowledge of both the parties and the person, she adds .
 Then and only then .will the voter have rational grounds for his choice . Then .will he be able to choose a candidate for the presidency .
 Family Stylo Lunches and Dinners are served at 16 E.Kiowa The Golden Dragon in Colorado Springs, Colorado .
 Russell Johnson has served twice as an ROTC instructor at Colorado College . He leaves CC this week for regular duty with an Army field unit once more .
 Carson where he wilt be a platoon sergeant in the Second Missile Command. Carson . Carson is the son of President Richard Nixon . Carson .
 He expects to serve the remaining years of his Army service with field units . The Army veteran says he expects to spend the rest of his life in the field .
 Sergeant Johnson has made up his mind about a second career . Sergeant Johnson is currently serving out one career, but has decided to focus on a second .
 He decided a few years ago that when his Army career was finished he wants to teach school . He decided to do it when he was in the Army .
 Sergeant Johnson plans to attend what courses he can during the next three years to earn more credits . Sergeant Johnson wants to attend as many courses as possible as possible to earn credits .
 The show will include 22 separate acts representing a number of individual groups and several Greek groups . The show is set to include 22 acts representing 22 different groups .
 Various guitar numbers are scheduled in the program . The group known as Folk Singers, Inc. will sing guitar guitar numbers .
 This act is led by Ray Chatfield who has been appearing professionally in Aspen and has come to CC for the show . This act was led by Chatfield, who has appeared professionally in Colorado .
 Ray and the other members of the group, Mike Grace, Edith Fulton and Pat Swartwood will sing folk songs of all types . Ray and Mike Grace will sing all types of folk songs . The group will also sing folk music .
 Student directors of this year's production arc Ina Begerow and Sylvia Stenovec, aided by faculty advisor Mr Woodson Tyree .
 Ron Peck and Doug Norberg are acting as business managers and Betsy Foote is in charge of tickets . Ron Peck is also the business manager of the show .
 Bartlett's Quotation Quiz: Can you match , id usually under ten come up with phrases . Bartlett has a list of phrases to test your knowledge of quotes from Bartlett .
 Dr Glenn Brooks, instructor of political science, will speak to the First Congregational Church Social Action Committee on Sunday, October 30, at 7:30 . The meeting is open to the public and will be in the library of the Christian Education Bide-, 20 E St.
 Kennedy Campaigns medical aid under the social security system because private insurance companies have failed to form adequate programs for our senior citizens . Kennedy said that the differences between the two candidates are sharp .
 Senator Kennedy does not think it is a good idea to name any possibilities for the cabinet before the election . The speaker said in regard to making Stevenson a member of the cabinet .
 Kennedy believes in long-term grants, strong military position and serious efforts toward disarmament . Kennedy: To help restore U.S. prestige Kennedy wants to restore prestige .
 He thinks that the TV debates have had a great effect on the American people . He says that the debate has had a positive effect on American voters .
 Hana Rosenhaupt, national director of the Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation, will present an assembly . The assembly will also be held at the National Fellowship of America .
 Rosenhaupt, a former teacher at CC, will remark on the opportunities and demands of graduate education . He will talk about the challenges and challenges facing graduate education at CC .
 His talk will be broadly gauged to interest both underclassmen and the general public . Although of particular interest to upperclass college students headed for graduate school, his talk is expected to be aimed at underclass students .
 The Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation offers 1000 fellowships each year to cover the first year of graduate study for persons generally interested in teaching careers . The foundation is based in Washington, DC .
 The program is underwritten by the Association of American Universities, Carnegie Corporation and the Ford Foundation .
 Folk Music Society currently presents the Colorado Folk Festival in Denver . The festival is one of the biggest attractions to be seen this season .
 Odette, acclaimed by critics and folk singers alike as the most exciting folk performer of this generation, will give her striking arrangements of ""Water Boy,"" ""Take This Hammer,"" and ""Midnight Special" .
 Peggy Seeger, Ed McCurdy, Oscar Sladek and Jimmy Driftwood are among the 12 performers to be viewed . Seeger is one of the top 12 performers in the world .
 Tickets are $2.50, $3.00 and 53.50 . Tickets may be purchased through the Folk Music Society, 1723 East 16th Ave., Denver .
 These entertainers typify the personality and 'presentation of American folk songs' and should highlight the weekend for you lovers of folk music .
 I have a program listing of the complete show and will leave it on the Eastall Center desk for any of you wishing to note the entire concert . I have also left it on my Eastall center desk desk .
 Paul Klee, like the German expressionists, is heir to Gothic linealism as well as Gothic fantasy . Perhaps the freest, most intuitive expression of pure fantasy is found in the work of the Swiss artist . Klee is the heir to German expressionism and Gothic fantasy,
 The Fine Arts Center presents a selection of quality shows from its many quality shows . This show is well worth an afternoon's viewing and is one of the many quality .
 HANNA KIEP, with the ai Putkammer, speaks to the CC Ge of Margaret Speer and Peter Von nan Club and the IRC about Berlin .
 In 1959, Yale students reactivated the long-dormant Yale Bicycle Club and held an Invitational Bicycle Championship at New Haven . Approximately 18 colleges and universities competing .
 In May of this year, sprint racing was added to the competition and the event spread over two weekends in Hartford and New Haven . In May, sprint races were added to this year's competition .
 Included in entries were Princeton, Harvard, MIT, MIT and the Academy of Aeronautics . Princeton and Harvard were among those who entered the contest .
 The Yale Bicycle Club has scheduled seven meets for the fall, climaxing in the Northeastern Intercollegiate Open at Manchester, Conn., on November 24 .
 Old EH is also planning to host once again its Invitational races in May of 1961 . The Invitational will be held in May 1961 .
 The road championships will take place at New Haven at the 6^ mile Olympic distance . The 6-mile Olympic distance will be at the New Haven venue .
 Mis Kiep expressed the optimistic attitude with which she said the West German people regard ths possibility of German reunification . A Berliner herself, she said Berliners regard the possibility of reunification as positive .
 Kiep als< spoke about the refugee situation in Germany today, particularly oi the border of the Iron Curtain, ai well as many informative fact; about the city of Berlin itself .
 The Christian Science' Monitor is now at rk Price* You can read this world-famous daily newspaper for the next six months for $5, just half the regular rate .
 M ed £ care forrr then The Christian S ience Mon tor P-CN . One Norwoy St. C. is located in the U.S. The Christian Christian Center is located at 1-CN.
 Sky Lyon fired three .birdies to shoot a fine 82 at the Patty Jewett Golf Course last Saturday . Lyon went six over par on the first four holes after going six over . over par . Lyon shot three birdies in a row to shoot an 82 . Lyon was six over
 The nine low men in the tie for ninth place play the second 18 holes to determine the individual championship . Yesterday and today, the nine low-ranked men play the last 18 holes in the tournament .
 Art Berklund, Bill Casey, John Gray, Rich Love, Tim Florence, John Rinder-necht, Tom Coitnecht and Bill Pelz are among the stars .
 The exams will be given December 10 in Albuquerque, Denver, Salt Lake City and Phoenix . The examinations will be held in three cities .
 This is the only time they will be offered during this school year . The only entrance route for liege graduates into trainee positions with U.S. Information Agency .
 In addition to the written examinations, they will also be required to pass an oral examination emphasizing American culture, history, geography and government . They will also have to pass a physical examination, a psychiatric-psychological examination and undergo pre-employment clearances .
 Junior officers appointed as Foreign Service Career Reserve Officers, Class 8, $5G25 to $6345, plus overseas allowances . Junior officers are appointed as . Foreign Service career Reserve Officers (Class 8)
 Training is conducted at various overseas posts throughout the world . After orientation in Washington, D C, training is conducted in various overseas locations .
 Becker's Radiator & Body Shop 16 E Bijou St. ME 3-0075 Radiator, Body & Fender Repair, Repair and Painting repair .
 Pleasant's college football career ended in the CSC game when he suffered a broken ankle . Pleasant's high school career ended when he was injured in the game .
 Pleasant was second in the conference in scoring, second in rushing and . third in pass receiving . Pleasant was injured in the knee injury .
 Tippin, who with Pleasant was gaining much for the Tigers by rushing, was out of the game be' cause of back injuries which ho too acquired at the fatal CSC game .
 Billy Crockett, Dan Kaltenbaugh, Gail Bundy and Joe Cordova are missing from the team . Also missing is fullback Billy Croockett because of a leg injury, guards DanKaltenbaugh and Gail .
 CSC halfback Vince Greco suffered broken bones in two fingers of his right hand when his band was stepped on late in the game . Greco was also injured in the match .
 Larry Bowman played for Pleasant in the Idaho game . Reuben Trinidad started in place of Tippin . Larry Bowman started in the game .
 The Tigei's' scoring spree came in the third quarter when quarterback Tony Sellitto fired a pass to Terry Halloran for a 24-yard touchdown play .
 This had been set up by a 22 yard pass to Ed Kintz and by two short passes to Halloran . This was the first time Halloran had scored a goal in the first half .
 The Tigers made a two point conversion with a Sellitto to Kintz pass play, This made the score 40-8 . The Tigers then made a touchdown with a two-point conversion .
 Bengals scored 28 points in the first half and then added 28 more in the third quarter and 21 in the fourth . Bengals scored 21 points in fourth quarter and 28 in first half . Bengals added 28 in third quarter, 21 in fourth .
 The Tigers with so much of their strength and scoring potential missing just could not get in the game . The Tigers were beaten by the Tigers in the first half .
 So far the Tigers have an 0-3 record in the Rocky Mountain Conference and a 3-3 overall record . So far, the Tigers are undefeated in the conference and have only won one of their three games .
 Sellitto is second in the conference in passing and third in individual total offense . Sellitto leads the conference for the second-highest passing total offense in the league .
 Sellitto is first in overall ground gaining for the Tigers . Sellitto also leads the Tigers' ground gaining ground gaining .
 Sellitto has accounted for two touchdowns on short rushes this season . Sellitto also has two short rushes for short rushes .
 Last week's game was a good example of how he is relied upon for passing, especially since the injuries of Pleasant and Tippin . This week's match was the first time the two players have been ruled out of the game .
 The Tigers threw 3S passes, completed 13 and had intercepted 13 in the Idaho game . The game was the first time the Tigers had intercepted a 3-S pass .
 For the Tigers Pleasant and Tippin are number one and two in rushing and Pleasant is third in pass receiving . Pleasant is also number one in passing receiving and is second in punting for the Tigers .
 Pleasant is the leading scorer while Tippin is second in scoring . Pleasant is also leading scorer in the league .
 Pleasant leads extra point conversions for the Tigers . Ken Wisgerhof is the leading punter on the team and is second in pass receiving . Pleasant leads the Tigers' extra point conversion team .
 Miller Music Co. sells music at 1124 N Weber SCOTT, ME 4-7350 . For rent, visit www.michael.com/rent .
 Governor narrowly escaped the anger of an unruly mob which besieged him in Palmer Hall . In fact, the governor of Colorado narrowly escaped .
 In May of 1894, an organizer of the Western Federation of Miners by the name of John Calderwood precipitated a strike in the Cripple Creek basin . The strike soon developed into a class war, with miners fighting for their lives .
 Governor David H Waite sent the Colorado Militia, under the command of Thomas J Tarsney, to the Cripple Creek district to enforce law and order .
 Governor Waite was a vociferous Populist, as was General Tarsney, and their idea of justice was not that of the mine owners in the district .
 After a cooperative endeavor between the militia and the striking miners gave the appearance of law and order, the militia was recalled .
 Several hundred miners held Bull Hill, crowned by the camp of Altman, as a military force . Altman's camp of miners held the hill as a defense force .
 Sheriff Bowers, of Republican EI Paso County, lined up an army of ""deputies"" which was composed mostly of ex-policemen and ex-firemen from Denver who had lost their livelihood at the behest of Governor Waite .
 During the violence that ensued, William S Slocum, CC president, was asked to go to the Cripple Creek district to try to obtain a settlement . During the violent incident, the CC president tried to get a settlement from the district .
 Governor Waite again decided to take action after the situation worsened . Waite says he will take action when the situation worsens .
 He himself decided to obtain a settlement favorable to the miners . But this time, he decided to get the miners a settlement .
 The governor went to the district and was given full power to negotiate for the miners . The governor has been given full control of the district .
 This was not a particularly desirable situation as far as the mine owners were concerned . This is not the first time a mine owner has been involved in a mine disaster .
 The governor and the leading mine owners assembled in Palmer Hall at Colorado College in order to reach an agreement . The agreement was reached by the governors of Colorado and mine owners .
 The mine is a sporting proposition, Gentlemen \ rather paradoxical espresion, meant to inform you of he lush plush quality end lardy durability of these conulity . They have a smart in fori that places you at ease .
 Governor Waite agreed to the wage and hour demands of the miners . But he insisted that the strike leaders must not be prosecuted for criminal acts . They agreed to wage and an hour demands, but governor Waite insisted .
 This condition was unacceptable to the mine owners and it resulted in the collapse of the conference . The mine owners were unhappy with the condition of the meeting . The conference was held in a bid to save the conference from collapse .
 The people of Colorado Springs were honestly terrified by the insurgents and their Populist leaders . But if the mine owners were grimly upset by the insurgency, the people were actually terrified .
 The strike was ended, after nioti violence and the return of thi militia, on June 10, 1894 . The strike ended after a period of violence and violence .
 The Poetry Workshop meeting will be held Tuesday, November 1 at 7:30 in the ASCC room of Rastall Center .
 Copies of poems to be discussed will be available at Rastall desk Friday evening, October 28 for those who want to read the poems before the workshop meeting . Copies will also be available for those interested in reading poems .
 Lit combines a unique inner filter of ACTIVATED CHARCOAL... with a pure white outer filter . Lit combines an inner filter with an outer filter of pure white . white .
 The segregation question she ,ys is ""all a matter of politics,"" ;ith the two main pai'ties being asically language groups . The two main language groups are African American .
 The tationalists, the i-uling party, are omprised of Afrikaaners . whites jrhose descendants are primarily hitch hitch hitch .
 The Jnited party, comprised of Engspeaking whites, supports ■quid opportunity for blacks . They believe strongly in 'suppressing the blacks'" while the Jnite party, consists of Eng speaking whites, believes strongly in "suppressing blacks"
 Nationalists hink that if the blacks were put ui an equal basis they would soon iverrun the country . Nationalists think that if they were put on equal footing they would run the country.
 Ifrikaaners are very narrow-mindid in their thinking . Often uneducated themselves, ifrikaanerers are often narrow-minded .
 They are opposed to the idea of ■ule from a foreign shore . Along with he racial problem, they are velemently opposed to he racial problems .
 It is polish for any one to think that he situation will continue because Pi other parts of Africa there are forceful leaders among the blacks . The situation will eventually reach the point Inhere they will be able to help ■heirir own kind in other provinces .
 The government lannot ""combat the whole of Af'ica,"" in trying to suppress the 'lacks forever,"" says the government . "The government l cannot combat the . whole of . Af'ICA," says the . government .
 All proofs for the class section of the 1961 NUGGET must be turned in to the Rastall desk by Monday, November 7 .
 Those who have not as yet picked up their proofs, please do so and also return . Please pick up your proof and return to the page .
 A Traffic Committee hearing will be held Tuesday, November 8, at 7:30 p.m. in the ASCC room . The Traffic Committee will also hear a hearing on November 8 .
 Applications for the Student Curriculum Committee are open to juniors and seniors interested in science . Applications are available for students interested in the subject subject of the committee .
 Applications for Leadership Conference and Songfest Weekend are due this week . Applications for the Leadership Conference are due to be submitted this week.
 Joseph Moore, sophomore, was the winner for the drawing for the 10 volume Popular Science series sponsored by the Encyclopedia Americana . Moore won the prize for the series . Moore is a sophomore at the University of Washington .
 Fall Lectures Give View of New World Man inhabits a new world, according to the conclusions drawn by the participants of the faculty lecture series, concluded October 27 by Dr. Dr. David Perry .
 Man's new world is not new in a physical sense but in a cultural and intellectual sense, says the author . He says it is not a physical world but a cultural, intellectual sense . The new world has been created by a new generation of people, he says .
 The lecture series, entitled ""The Consequences of Complexity and Communication," featured Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter was a member of the lecture series .
 He stressed the need to further the documentation and distribution facilities of our country so that senseless duplications will not occur . He stressed that further documentation is needed to ensure that duplications do not happen .
 The community of scientists must also be able to keep in touch with each other, and not get misled by the jargon of the various disciplines, scientists say . Scientists must also not get misleading by jargon, they say .
 Man is forced to become a specialist in his own field, and his capabilities are no longer able to meet the demands of being universally informed . Man's capabilities no longer meet the needs of being universal informed .
 Both Snyder and Arnest mentioned the new aid provided to man by various electronic memory devices but these do nothing to help man synthesize new thesises from the data being collected around him .
 Arnest asked the searching question of whether or not the i n a t e capabilities of man could be improved through genentics . Arnest asks the question: Whether man's capabilities can be improved by genentic drugs .
 Bodermann, on being asked of the value of our small school in the big world, replied that such schools are the periphery of the new world . Those in attendance by exposing them to fields in the humanities in which they can flee momentarily for relief, he said .
 Will the people flock to art, as the Beats did, and use art as a permanent escape from our new world? Will art be a place for both the rich and the elite to commute?
 The small school, it seems, holds the answer to what kind of leadership our new world will have . The school is a small community of small people .
 Snyder mentioned the need for colleges and universities to encourage more students to study our new world . Snyder also said colleges should devise ways and skills of better documentation and assimiliation of new data .
 Bodermann proposed that bureaucracy, with its widespread influence, and relatively small concentration of power, is not inherently bad because it does bring many benefits with it . He said bureaucracy is not necessarily bad, but it brings many benefits to it .
 It becomes bad only when individuals are kept from being an effective part of it, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 14 students from the Colorado College Dance Studio under the direction of Norm an and Dorothea Cornick . Among the cast are 14 students .
 Judy Hawthorne, Susan Hughes, Cynthia Lamb, Susan Lobaugh, Holly Menkel, Cynthia Morin, Rita Osburn, Paula Peake, Sarah Reeves, Terrie Reeves, Davey Ann Singer, Marietta Wilhelm and Alicia Young .
 These dancers have been studying dance at Colorado College from two to six years . The dancers have appeared in various Colorado Springs productions .
 She has sung in church choirs, operettas and has soloist for many womens and social clubs . She has also sung in churches and in musicals .
 She placed first in a contest in Chicago sponsored by the Society of American Musicians . She won the contest .
 First Spadeful of earth was turned Saturday mornine for the new Colorado College library . Colorado College's new library will be located in Tuttville .
 The new library will be named the Charles Learning Tutt Library . Mr Armin B Barney, chairman of the Colorado College Board of irustees announced the name .
 A recent study was made of the political preference of the faculty at Colorado College concerning the two major candidates for President of the United States . Senator John Kennedy and Vice-President Richard Nixon were the two candidates for president .
 This study was sponsored by the Young Democrats of Colorado College and was carried out by Marine Randol and Harris Sherman, both members of the Young Democratic Party . Marine . Sherman: "This study is a good example of a young person who is committed to the Democratic Party"
 John Kennedy — 46 Richard Nixon— 19 Independent or undecided . Results by departments include Natural Sciences Kennedy — 6 Nixon — 10 Independents — 3 Social Sciences Kennedy . Kennedy — 12 Nixon — 12 Humanities Kennedy — 1 Independent .
 The annual CC Variety Show opened Tuesday night, November 1, with a rendition of ""There's No Business Like Show Business,"" done by the CC dancers . CC dancers also performed on stage .
 Hank Poole, a suavely elegant young man, made a change of pace in the first half of the show .
 Charles Charles Learning Tutt is a former Colorado College trustee and is president of the El Pomar Foundation . Charles is a member of the foundation's board of trustees .
 The El Pomar Foundation gave the college $1.25 million to help launch the college's S12 million fund drive . Colorado College's new library was presented to Colorado College last year by the foundation . The college is raising funds for the college campaign .
 After ground breaking, Tutt was presented with a small silver shovel in memory of the occasion .
 Tutt, who was with her husband for the event, was presented with a large bouquet of roses .
 Colorado College President Louis T Benezet presided over the ceremonies . Students, townsfolk and alumni of the college who returned for homecoming .
 Bid letting is expected to be completed soon and construction will begin on the new library about the end of the year . Construction will begin at the end off the year.
 The building is scheduled to be ready for use when the fall semester opens in September of 1902 .
 The new library will be built at the southeast corner of Cascade Avenue and San Rafael Street . West Hall, a onestory wooden building, is now occupied by West Hall . The library is located on the corner of the corner .
 West Hall is scheduled to be moved from the site early next month so that earthwork for the new library can begin . West Hall will be moved to the library's new home next month .
 The Charles Learning Tutt Library is one of two new buildings to be built soon on the CC campus . The library will be the first of two buildings on the campus to be completed .
 Stockton, looking quite demu and innocent, then told ALL about Aunt Clara, who apparently was anything but . Stockton then told all about aunt Clara, and Aunt Clara .
 The Alpha Phis folk songe .were well done and were arranged by members of the group .
 Mary Elizabeth Bradley performed with her usual excellence and savior faire . The audience was treated to an excellent performance .
 Frances Audier directed and directed the Oscar-winning film, "Frances Audier" Audier is an award-winning director and actress . Audier stars in the critically acclaimed film .
 Kappa Alpha Theta proved that lovely legs and lovely voices don't necessarily have to go together . Kappa Alpha Phi Phi Phi Kappa Kappa Kappa Theta is a college sorority sorority sisters in New York .
 Julia Anderson gave her folk songs rhythm and charm . The drum duo of Bill Fisher and Dick Brigham make one wonder why we ever left the jungles .
 Pete Cheney started off the second half with two unusual numbers, accompanying himself on the guitar . Pete Cheney is a member of the band . Cheney was joined by a guitar player .
 Lynn Vincent needs no praise, everyone knows how thrilling her twirling can be . Lynn Vincent's twirling twirling is no less than a million times .
 A taltened job of ""Johnny Smithing"" was done by Bill Oakes and Dean Roath . The film was released in November 2011 .
 Kappa Sigma fraternity's rendition of 'Sweet Adeline' proves the art is dead forever . Kappa Sigma's rendition proves the barber shop quartets were in danger of coming back .
 Louis Arietta and Friends proved there is nothing quite as exciting as well done Latin music . The band was formed by the Latin pop group, which is based in Colombia .
 Three numbers have been left out of the show, including three numbers left out . Those of you who are familiar with the show will realize that three numbers are missing .
 The class of '01 is likely to go down as the most notorious in the school's history . The class '01 will likely be one of the most infamous in school history .
 Their portrayals of various CC professors, along with dialogue and lyrics, were not only hilarious, but managed to be so without being nasty and hurting peoples feelings . The students' portrayals and dialogue were hilarious .
 'They deserve all praise and plaudits for being the highlight of a great show' 'The highlight of the show' was 'the highlight of their show'
 Kappa Kappa Gamma proved that Ann ""Willie"" Willcox has much more to her than just brains .
 Vicky Morey: "I don't think it's a good thing for Colorado students to send us a letter to the editor" "I think it was a great thing for the country," she says .
 Will Jol Carrie Sanborn, Marty Brctcrniti, Frannii.FrrbBtein, Sue Taylor . Sue Taylor. Will Jolie Sanborn and Marty Brcniti. Sue Taylor are also on the cover of the book, "Will Jolie"
 Monday a gentleman from the National Student Association visited the campus and spoke during ASCC meeting . Colorado on the corner of the corner spoke .
 The decision was based on the fact that dues alone would cost a little under one hundred dollars a year . Other criteria upon which we based our decision were the fact of the cost of dues alone .
 This does not include the cost of sending delegates to the conventions or regional meetings . Such participation must be considered if any real benefit is to be obtained from the organization, says the author .
 The organization would cost more than it is worth to the school, according to the report . The report concludes that the organization would be more expensive than it would be .
 The gentleman who spoke Wednesday mentioned the availability of programs by which we could avoid the mistakes other schools have made should we set up an honor system . We can't see referring to the Deans by their first names .
 NSA seems to forget that the purpose of these programs is twofold, the NSA says . The purpose of the programs is to gather intelligence, not to harm the privacy of individuals .
 First, is of course the program itself, but second is the experience gained by the people who have set it up . First, the program is a program that allows you to learn about how to use the program .
 It was stated that the students of this campus had a responsibility to consider people and students abroad and to act with our fellow students . The students said that they had a duty to speak with the Department of State .
 This is undoubtedly where NSA received its label of ""leftist"" from many groups . This is where NSA was labeled 'leftist' by many .
 "We feel that the students have a larger responsibility to themselves on this campus. Frankly, we feel that . We feel that students have to be responsible for themselves," the author says .
 Colorado College does its share where the foreign students are concerned . Colorado College has a reputation for its foreign students .
 It is doubtful as to how much more we could do where organizations outside the campus are concerned . It's doubtful as much more could be done for organizations outside of the campus .
 Last, one criticism has been written of NSA which this column heartily subscribes to . NSA has been criticised by some of the world's most powerful agencies .
 NSA tends to do the thinking for the groups, rather than act as an organization which collects the thinking of the groups and acts accordingly . NSA is said to be a collection agency rather than an organization that collects the thoughts of groups .
 We predict a victory for Vice-President Nixon on November 8th . November Eighth is November Eighth .
 ""Newsweek,"" ""Time"" and "" United States News and World Report"" have conducted polls which show Kennedy out of front . However, their polls are commonly lacking in two facts .
 The religion of Senator Kennedy has not been a factor of any of these polls, CNN says . Kennedy's religion is not a factor in any of the polls, it says .
 Mr Nixon has a long record of defeating Democrats, many of whom were considered more firmly entrenched in the hearts and ballots of the people than is Mr Kennedy now . Second, Mr Nixon is a long-time winner in the polls, he says .
 If Nixon carries three of the eight states considered a tossup, he will have enough votes to win the election . Further, should Mr Nixon carry California which at the last report was for Senator Kennedy by a margin of one percent with some people abstaining, he would have enough voters to
 A candidate must hold a baccalaureate degree prior to the beginning of his law school training and be in the upper quarter of his graduating class . Candidate must hold baccalureate degrees before the start of his legal training .
 He must request that his score on the Law School Admission Test be sent to the School of Law for consideration in conjunction with his undergraduate record . Law School admission test must be submitted for consideration .
 Arrangements for this test should be made through the Educational Testing Service, 20 Nassau Street, New Jersey .
 Ideas, reactions and reactions should always be welcome, however, they should be presented only after a fair and thorough knowledge of the situation has been acquired . Ideas and reactions are welcome, but must be presented with a thorough knowledge, says author .
 Mr Racey's uninformed criticism of both the Drama Department and the Dance Department . It would seem more gracious of him to wait until he had attended at least one performance .
 The problems faced in production, not to mention costuming, casting, etc., by Mr McMillan and by Mr and Mrs. McMillans, were the problems faced .
 Cornick is working on a very limited budget with a group of amateur performers . His worries include giving the participating students the interest, enthusiasm and sheer determination to give of their time eagerly . Cornick hopes the students will be inspired by the experience .
 The Fine Arts Center came in for its share in the form of Mr Racey's personal objection to the selection of films shown each week .
 Mr Racy has obviously missed the pleasure and the headaches of serving on a selection committee that is trying to ""make ends meet" and at the same time please the public .
 His own choice of ""La Strada"" as a supreme example of ART in this medium, leads us to believe that were he allowed to program the movies there would be even more left to be desired . His choice of La Strada is one of the most beautiful examples of art in
 Criticism is excellent when wellinformed and there is no doubt that improvements could be made in all areas mentioned, as well as in every department at Colorado College . But perfection is hard come by, and these particular criticisms were too freely given, too broad in scope .
 In reading Mr Racey's letter last week I agree with his thesis that the radio station is under the impression that we are competing with any of the local broadcasters in output of drivel or anything else for that matter . But I can't agree that the station's statement that the .
 KRCC has consistently programmed for the past 10 years of our existence over 50% of its air time on cultural activities . KRCC is known for its cultural activities, including cultural events, and has been programming for 10 years .
 This year they include classical music, opera, BBC tapes and freedom and authority . Shove Chapel, the Sunday morning sermon, is produced by eight members of faculty .
 We average 46 hours on the air weekly and of this over 20 hours devoted to cultural broadcasts . Of this, 20 hours are devoted to the cultural broadcasts. We are dedicated to cultural broadcasting .
 The remaining hours are devoted to public service (news, debates, lectures, special features and interviews with prominent people) and what Mr Racey in his ""highbrow"" attitude probably objects to, popular music .
 We, as every radio station in the U.S. play this pop music, which may disgust Mr Racey, because the majority of students on campus want to hear it, he says . We play music that may disgust him, but he says, "because of the students on
 KRCC's function is to train students who may want to go on into professional radio when they finish college . KRCC also trains students who want to be professional radio students .
 This means that the student must learn how to run a Disc Jockey Show, write the scripts, commercials and other lowly mundane trivia that is required in the professional field .
 KRCC is proud of the students who have gone on into this field and have made a success of it . "This can only be learned by practice, not by theory," says KRCC .
 We do program the BBC tapes and we would enjoy airing more of them along with the the the countless other ""canned"" shows that are available to us . We students must team more than how to run a wireless tape recorder or record player .
 KRCC will allow you all the time on the air that you wish if you will care to put on a series of programs to raise our cultural level to your cultural level . However, in all fairness to you Mr Racey, KRCC does not allow you the time you wish .
 "This, I can say, is a lot more than some of the other groups or organizations on this campus have done," says President Obama . This, he says, is "a lot more" than other groups on campus .
 The group has fallen to many insults and embarrassing situations, not because they plan it that way, but because a few students take it upon themselves to make insulting remarks about the Zetas . It has been so, in past years, that our group has .
 Our group has been classified upon such things as good-time boys, drunks and the attitude of ""what the he -"" let's live it up. Our group is known for their attitude of "letting it up"
 If this instance were to happen to other organizations on this campus, nothing would be said . But these are individuals and if this were not to happen, it wouldn't be said, says university spokesman .
 A member of the Zeta organization err in life and it becomes a big item of talk here on campus . But let a member of Zeta err, it's a big issue of talk .
 "Our group is superior in that a group must be strong in order to fight these accusations," he said . "We have done so in the past and will do so in a future," he added .
 We do not wish to accuse any person or organization for wrong doings against our group, but I would like something claerified as to certain standards required and to this point I'm not going to indulge .
 Reid was 'instrumental in helping us draw up a recognized constitution' Reid, who was instrumental in drawing up a constitution . Reid was also instrumental in helping to draw up an international constitution .
 We have as our advisors Mr William Barton and Mr Alan Johnson of the Business Department. Mr Barton is as well as Mr Johnson, who is also advising us on the development of the project .
 The Zetas have gone through all the formalities binding an organization together such as the Zeta . The Mexican drug cartel is known for its violent tendencies in Mexico .
 As many professors, alumni and students can tell you, this has never been done before, but it has now happened . "This is never a done before," says one of many professors .
 "We pay no dues and any social function or otherwise that we participate in is solely by money out our pockets for that event," says the Zetas . "The major factor with an organization such a . organization such as ours is that we pay no . dues," he says .
 M ; of our group are here on scholi ships and would not be here if they were not for these gifts . M . of his group are on scholary ships . M ; . of this group are . here .
 The subject or main objective this letter is in reference to Homecoming parade . The subject of the letter should be the Homecoming Parade . The parade will be held at homecoming homecoming .
 "I hope a all that you do not take this ter as a letter of protest, comply or the like. I hope a . all that . that you don't take this as a protest, complied or the . like . I do not think this is a protest or a letter
 It is a letter requ, ing clarification by the organic . that headed the parade. That headed the . parade. It is not a request for clarification, but a request to clarify .
 Wi oth tended the meetings and such events to do with participati the parade . Wi ot tended to the meetings, such events were held by the participants .
 Our ideas conceited floats as well as those of othgroups and organizations sented at this meeting .
 Capone "is a legend just as Crockett or the rest are. Our groi groi of representatives explained plan for our float in this para and it was said at the meeting th this would be accepted becaui Capone"" Capone is a legend, just as
 "We went through much trout and toil, trouble in rinding mom to start and trouble in getting | gether authentic dress," she says .
 We did mi work and when the final monn came we were as ready as others. We did our best work and we were ready to be ready . We were as good as others, we were always ready to win the game .
 We know that we i joyed ourselves as much as I spectators enjoyed us. We went through the wh parade and we know that . We went . through the . wh parade . We know . that we . joyed themselves as well as the spectators . enjoyed us .
 When I shouting was all over, here is where we received our kick in l pants. When I shouted, here was where I got my kick in .
 After the parade, we were told by a member of the Homeconiii Parade Committee that we entered as a novelty act or have you . We were given a certificate of approval by the parade committee for the act .
 My main argument is that group should have been told at t meetings before Homecoming, which we were represented, as our status in the parade . The parade was held at the end of October .
 We s very disappointed and disgusted the way our newly formed groi the Zetas, were treated . We are very disappointed, disgusted and disgusted with the way we were treated. We are not happy with the treatment we received, we are disappointed .
 If you have been wanting to ski, but are not sure aboul how to go about getting started, or if you are just beginning, then there is a nighl planned j ust for you .
 Plan now to attend a ""Skiers' Evening"" on Tuesday, November 15 at 7:30 in the WE> room of Rastall Center .
 All the dope will be given about the nearby areas along with the common terminolog) of skiing . Skiing is a form of form of skiing, and skiing is an important part of the ski experience .
 No i you Dr. Janet Gretc Dona . I960 L MA I Fre This to fre This to tl Janet Gretr Dona.
 Despite ominous threats of war, mankind may be nearer to true peace than most people suspect . Dr. Glenn Gray discusses ways of war and peace in his new book, "War and Peace"
 Glenn Gray is professor of philosophy and head of the Philosophy Department at Colorado College . He is also a professor at the University of Colorado .
 He made his observation in the lead article of the October issue of the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists .
 The title of the article article is based on the final chap> ter of his book, ""The Warriors; Reflections on Men in Battle,"" which was published last year .
 Dr. David Frum says Armageddon may not be a certainty . Admits that it is speculative to believe Armageddon is not a certainty, Dr. Frum said .
 Gray wrote, ""One may wonder if men could not be lastingly untied by great expectations, great adventures, and great projects," Gray wrote . Gray wrote: "One may question if men can not be . untied"
 "If through listening devices, already in operation, or space exploration we establish communication with other beings, the effect will be profound,"" wrote Dr. Dr. John Defterios .
 The change to peace would be great because man has always had war and has even glorified war, Dr. Dr. David Cameron says . Dr. Cameron: "Man has always been war, and has glorified it"
 Even allowing for for a certain exaggeration in the literature about war, Dr. Dr. John Sutter says the war was 'inevitable' Dr. Sutter: "Even allowing for an exaggeration, the war is not without exaggeration"
 War has made many men feel more alive than any peace we have so far devised, says Gray . Gray said war has made men feel 'more alive' than any other peace ever devised .
 Gray added, "For the ordinary man of Western society the twentieth century has provided security from want and physical comforts to an extent unheralded in earlier times" Gray said .
 It has hardly fulfilled other needs of his, less clamorous needs, but perhaps equally important . It's hardly fulfilled his other needs, he says, but it has also fulfilled his own .
 "I refer to the needs of adventure, of risk, and hardship in the search for personal significance by way of supra-personal goals," says the author of the book .
 "I think that the nation which finds the courage to risk greatly in the cause of peace will not only be educationally advanced, but also religiously aware of man's intimate connection with the rest of creation,"" Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. says .
 The realization that we are not alone in the vast cosmos would have on some of us at least, a greatly cheering effect . It would be a great cheering effect for some of the world's most curious people .
 Dr. Muelder Visits Campus for 3 Days . Theology, science and politics will be the topics discussed by Dr. Dr. J. Mueslder . Theological, science, politics and theology will be discussed .
 His visit was sponsored by the Religious Affairs Committee and the Assemblies Committee . His visit is sponsored by his visit to the Capitol .
 Will anyone who knows the whereabouts of JoAnne Weigel's wallet kindly return it to Loomis or Rastall desk? JoAnne's wallet has been missing since last week .
 Pixie Campbell, Nadine Chang, Sue Evans, Chessie Kemp, Mimi Meek, Keekee Minor, Jean Torcom and Jean Wilfong .
 Members of reserve team are Tish Amberg, Sue Bigelow, Annie Hereford, Debbie Smith, Donna Story, Bonnie Toxby, Sandy Williams and Sandy Williams . The reserve team also includes members of the reserve team .
 Tuesday, November 8, at 7:30 m.m. The German Club will have a meeting in the WES Room at Rastall . The club will meet at the end of November 8 .
 A special feature of the program will be some choral music under the direction of Mr Jenkins and solos sung by Mr Harrv Booth . The program will also feature some solos by Mr Booth .
 The main festivities were launched Friday night at the annual bonfire rally held on Washburn field . The event was held at Washburn Field in downtown Minneapolis .
 Lynn Vincent ranks seventh in the nation as a baton twirler . After the bonfire had been lit, she performed with fire batons .
 Meredyth Richards of Kappa Kappa Gamma sorority was the Homecoming Queen of 1960 . She was nominated by the five sororities and the IWA . Richards was chosen by the student body as the queen .
 The traditional Homecoming parade down Tejon highlighted Saturday morning's events . The traditional parade was followed by the traditional parade of Tejon .
 The parade included marching groups from the ROTC, Tiger Club and Tiger Club . The parade was held in honor of the students .
 With an Artcarved engagement ring you can't be sure you are getting your full diamond's worth . With an artcarved diamond ring, you can be sure to get your full diamonds' worth .
 Every ring is guaranteed in writing for cut, color, clarity and carat weight . Ring is guaranteed for cutting, color and clarity .
 ArlcarveeTs® Permanent Value Plan — gives you nationwide proof of value . Only ArlCarveETs® permanent Value Plan gives you national proof of your value . And only Arl CarveeTS® Permanent Valuable Plan .
 As for design— you'll find the newest, brightest diamond ideas in town . As for . design, you'll also find the latest, brightest diamonds .
 MEIrose 3-6069 Tjgerettes; floats representing Greek and independent organizations and a riding group from Oskasita Riding Club . MEI rose to 3,6069 MEI .
 Twirler, Lynn Vincent, led the parade to the music of the CC Band and the Homecoming Queen and her attendants, as well as queens of other years, rode .
 CC Tigers face the Western State Mountaineers on Washburn Field . At 2 p.m., the CC Tigers will face the WMU at Washburn field .
 At half time, in spite of a sudden dust storm, the winning floats were presented to the spectators .
 Delta Gamma for ""King Midas and the Golden Touchdown"" and Gamma Phi Beta's ""Little Black Sambo"" and Kappa Kappa Kappa Gamma's ""Pied Piper of Pike's Peak"" tied for third place . Delta Gamma went to Delta Phi Phi for ""Kappa Kappa Gamma
 The cross-country race following the parade of floats was won by Jeff Clark of Phi Gamma Delta . Jeff Clark won the race .
 Tiger Club and Tigerettes presented a formation drill based on 1960 as an election year . The formation drill was based on the election year of that year .
 As a special item of the half time show, ""Rosie"" Collins was honored for his 25 years of service training CC teams . Collins was presented with a transistor radio by Dr. Dr. Phil .
 CC defeated the Mountaineers 17-3 in a snowstorm-filled game . CC fans stayed throughout the game to cheer their team to victory .
 The Out Post is a somewhat intricate dinner spot in Colorado Springs, Colorado Springs . It is located on the outskirts of town at a somewhat elaborate restaurant .
 In a setting of the gay nineties, with old-time piano and all, The Out Post has an atmosphere that is rare for most clubs and a menu that meets the standards of the finest gourmet .
 You will not want to miss lobster, curry dishes, roast Long Island duck with orange sauce and beef ka-bobs .
 The Out-Post is located at 3840 North Nevada and is open daily except Sundays . It is located in Nevada .
 The immortal monster, better known as the witch in Hansel and Gretel, has a special message for opera lovers at Colorado College . The opera presentation is at the Fine Arts Center tonight and a matinee tomorrow .
 A reminder that the Symphony presentation is November 10 at the Palmer High School Auditorium . The Palmer Symphony presentation will be November 10 .
 Leaves are vastly falling from the trees on our campus to. give ;in mrsel almost gloomy landscape . Willi Are prts Wl vork iew t ogs ife, i ■est 1 of thi j-.al.fe md t ruiiv<
 The final presei tation of the Variety Show is tonight . Some worthwhile acts may befctions i-ed .
 Mary Elizabeth Bradley are to be congratulated for truly fine performances . The pair were given a standing ovation at the end of their performances .
 The abundance of guitars are accented by Luis Arrietta, the Folk Singers Ina and Julia Anderson who are especially good and worth the price admission alone .
 Dick Brigham should gain a note of appn for his versatile use of the conga dram .
 MOHL'S Book Home honoring Dr. Dr. MeIrose 3-3946 NEW BOOKS .
 Di Seay was presented with engraved silver dishes and an ice bucket . They were presented with a sllve ice bucket at the ceremony .
 Ray Chatfield sing ers provided light enterrainmeni which was followed by a short tal by President Louis Benezet . The Ray Chatterfield singers provided a light entry to the stage .
 All three speakers said the individual losing his sense and significant participation in the world around him .
 "Our olution has placed us in a portion to alter both ourselves and selves and our world," says the author . "We are in a part of ourselves to alter ourselves and ourselves and the world"
 Wally Caldwell as master of ceremonies was his usual urbane self . Wally Caldwell provided just the right touch and direction while announcing the acts .
 By working 32 hours per day for weeks on end they put together a show that was a delight to the eye, ear, and all the senses of humor imaginable .
 Musical instruments must be in tune, but tuning should be done off stage, not during an actual performance, it only ' distracts the audience and annoye's them'
 The I960 Variety Show could be termed nothing less than a success, and a huge success at that . All in all, the event was a success at the I960 variety show .
 One could only wish that the money that went to the Campus Chest could equal the pleasure received from the performances . The money went into the campus Chest .
 The new plebes are Robert Straight, Bill Lang, Dean Roath, Drane Wilkinson, Jay Vickernian, Coleman Travelstead, Jim Talman Dennis Suave, Charles Rowland Russel Olds, John Morgan . The list of new plebs is Robert Straight .
 Bruce Lew, Charles Ladd, Donald Jones, Eric Hsfjard, Bob Halsband, Jeff Goulart . Donald Jones: "I'm glad to hear from Bruce Lew," Donald Jones says . Bruce Lew: "It's been a great year for Bruce"
 Bruce Lewias has been elected by the plebe class as their plebe leader and his assistant is John Morgan . Bruce Lew lias was elected as their Plebe leader .
 These two competant men have the job, among other things, of assigning' plebe privilages .
 Pershing Riflemen and plebes will go to Fort Carson for an intensive field problem . On Sunday, November 13, the men and women will go for a field problem.
 Pershing Rifles cover several miles of terrain under simulated battle conditions . The exercise will take place in a simulated battle zone . Pershing's soldiers will simulate battle conditions under simulated battlefield conditions .
 Many types of weapons will be used, among them are B.A.R.'s, M-l's, 3.5"" rocket launchers, calibur 30 machine guns, etc. Among them are B.A.'s machine guns, rocket launchers, 
 This fall's coat sheds to reveal the smartest set of undercover agents ever: a suit, an overblouse and skirt or a matching dress .
 Colorado College Tiger Tigers Score First Conference Win; Beat Mountaineers 17-3 . CC football team whittled down in size from 42 to 28 men upset Western State College Mountaineer of Gunnison .
 Both teams were looking for their first win in the Rocky Mountain Conference . Both teams are looking to win their first game in the conference .
 The large homecoming crowd was greeted with ideal weather during the first half of the game . Cereblizzard conditions arose and the game took on a different atmosphere in the second half .
 The Tigers were forced into a punting situation but Ken Wisgerhof could not get the kick off so he threw to Vince Greco, who was dropped by the Mountaineers on the CC 44 where they took over . The Tigers won the game by a score of 14-14
 From here they worked their way down to the 14 where CC defenses halted them . From here, they worked the way down the 14th hole .
 They made a successful held goal attempt which was to be their only tally of the day, and made the score 3-0 . It was the only goal scored by the side of the game .
 The Tigers retaliated when Western State were held deep in their own territory after receiving a punt . Western State had received a punt from the Tigers in the first quarter of the game .
 After getting as far as their. attempt to punt they . attempted to punt but the ball sailed far over the kicker's head . The game finished 0-0 at half-time after a penalty was missed .
 He picked it up behind the goal line but was immediately downed by some Tigers for a safety . Making the score 3-2, he picked up the ball behind the line . He picked up it but it was intercepted by a Tigers player .
 Terry Holleran took a punt on his own 49 and ran it all the way back for a CC touchdown . Then with only 3:28 remaining in the half, he ran it back to a touchdown for the team .
 Going into the second half, the score read 9-3 in favor of the Tigers . Jim Blair converted the extra point to put the Tigers ahead of the score .
 Ringing the bell with the authority of Big Ben is the achievement of those who are soundly attired for campus life . Ringing Big Ben's bell is an achievement for those who wear well-dressed .
 Our selection of sweaters in orlons and wools, crew neck, shawl collars, *■ and high V's, sues as pictured are all . . The sues are all for the betterment of man .
 Apparently the Mountaineers were confused by the blizzard as they watched the ball roll dead without attempting to get it . The ball rolled dead without being able to be recovered .
 The Tigers could not get anywhere with the ball and the attempted field goal was short . The Tigers failed to score a field goal in the first quarter .
 The Mountaineers were forced into a punting situation again this week . The team was forced to punt for the first time in their history .
 The ball sailed over the kicker's head, and again he was downed behind the goal line for a safety . The score was 11-3 at the end of the first half .
 Blair kicked another field goal in the third period . The Tigers added another three points in the second period .
 Western State then had the ball on their own 20 but another bad center resulted in the Tigers getting the ball back on the three yard line . Western State had a chance to get back into the game but a bad center caused the Tigers to lose the game .
 Sellitto sneaked across for the touchdown, but it was nullified by an illegal procedure penalty . Sellitto's touchdown was also nullified after a penalty was given in the first quarter .
 Blair came in for the Tigers to get another three-pointer to make the final score of the game 17-3 . The Tigers were unable to get any further in the game .
 Tomorrow the Tigers travel to Alamosa, Colorado for another conference game . The Tigers play Adams State College in their next game .
 A pass from Lurie to Lyons set up the only Beta TD play in the first half . The only Beta touchdown play was the only one for the team .
 Ackerman opened the scoring by pulling in a pass from Floerehinger and running 10 yards for the touchdown . Ackerman also scored a touchdown in the first quarter .
 Lurie again took over when he intercepted a Sigma Chi pass and ran 30 yards for the touchdown . Ward then intercepted a Beta pass and then ran to score a touchdown . Lurie and Ward both intercepted passes and ran for touchdowns .
 "Bring Your Laundry with Your Dry Cleaning MeIrose 3-7883" "In by 9:00 DIRTY -OUT CLEAN BY 4:30"" on BOTH LAUNDRY AND DRY CLEANING 10% CASH AND CARRY
 Weld came into the spotligj again in the second half as j threw two scoring passes . Weld came in for the spot in the first half of the game . Weld also came in to assist in the other half .
 Golf Sky Lyon of the Beta Theta team won the individual g championship . Lyon shot an in the second 18 holes of the tramural tournament held at Patj Jewett Golf Club .
 Hockey practice began last w for the Tigers with 29 men ti_. ing out for the first praetia . Coach Tony Prasca said he work that group for about r* weeks and then cut down to ab 18 men .
 They are Wayne ( Bill Goodacre, Stan Moskal, Bill Moskar, Br™ Dutkowski, Larry Gilber son, Bob Curfee, Edie Boychuc Ken Hartwell and Gordon moth . They were Wayne and Stan Goodacre .
 There will be a lot of new faces on the club, don't know how we will fare in i season, but we should have an teresting club,"" he said. There will hi lot of . new faces .
 After th game, the Tigers will go to Pi ver on the night of December to play an exhibition game again the Denver Pioneers, last year NCAA champion . The game will be played in December .
 The building was presented to the college by the Olin Foundation N which granted the college $1,490,400 for the structure . The college was presented with the building by the foundation .
 Three members of the Geology Department of Colorado College attended the annual meet' ig of the Geological Society of merica and Associated Societies Denver . The structure probably will have four floors with about 65,000 square feet of space .
 The three members of the faculty were Professor William Fischchairmau of the department, Mr Trowbridge Grose, associate professor, and Mr John Lewis, instructor .
 Four students were Robert Schock, Ted Callender, Fred Peel and Cecilia Travis . The four students were students at the University of Cambridge .
 Several geologists from all parts of the United States and a number from foreign countries were in attendance at the meetings held in the Denver Hilton Hotel .
 Talks were given at a number of stops en route to Castle Rock, Palmer Lake and the Perry Park area . Talks were held at a series of stops during the trip .
 The group also visited the Garden of the Gods and the site of the first oil well in Colorado . The first well was drilled in 1862, on the bank of Oil Creek .
 The last stop was in Red Canyon at the famous dinosaur quarry discovered in 1877 . Red Canyon was the last stop at Red Canyon .
 CC will enter two two-man 'earns in the Senior Division and one four-man team in the Novice ivision . CC will also enter two teams in the Junior Division .
 Members of the Senior -on teams are Max Power 'TO Charles Puckett, and Chris '1'iffiths and Jack Cashman . Max Power is Max Power, Max Power and Charles 'to Charles' Cashman.
 Derating the affirmative case in the Novice Division are Jack Walker Wd Dave Furgason . The negative issues will be debated bv Max Jaylor and Dave Bitters . Jack Walker will be Jack Walker, Dave Bitter and Dave Walker respectively .
 Debate Club sponsors sponsors of the Debate Club re Mr Al Johnson of the Ecoomics Department and Mr R M. udoff, instructor in history .
 For students only, this meeting is designed to answer student questions on the place of the gifted student in today's world, both in higher education and the society at large .
 Professor Cohen will meet with interested faculty in Bemis Hall to report on honors programs in many leading institutions in the U.S. He will also meet with faculty to discuss honors programs .
 On November 17 in Palmer 210, Professor Cohen will meet with one of the Freedom and Authority classes, from 10 to 12m.
 Students who are unable to come on Wednesday evening are invited to attend this class to hear and discuss with Professor Cohen . Professor Cohen is a professor at the University of Cambridge .
 Cohen has been the leader in the promotion of honors seminars for gifted students . Cohen has in recent years been a leader in promoting honors seminars . Cohen: "I am proud to be able to continue to work with the world's most gifted people"
 Cohen has gained national distinction as the foremost authority on Honors programs at the state universities . Cohen is a national authority on honors programs at state universities and colleges . Cohen has won national distinction for his work on honours .
 He is in great demand as a consultant in establishing such programs at hundreds of universities . He says he is now a consultant to establish such programs in universities .
 The growth of concern and courses for superior students is perhaps the outstanding new feature in American education in our time. It's a new feature of American education, the author says .
 Professor Cohen is "rapidly becoming our national leader in this movement," Cohen says . Cohen: "Professor Cohen is rapidly becoming our ... national leader of this movement"
 Students urged to hear this frontier in education from the man who knows most about it . Students are urged to listen to the story of the frontier education frontier .
 Coach Jerry Carle and Captain Jack Real of the CC foothall team wish to express their thanks, on behalf of the whole team, for the fine support given them by the student body and alumni . Despite the adverse weather conditions, the game was played against Western State .
 "By opening night Thursday, November 17, our very able CC Players should have a first rate play."
 Seeing but a small preview of the play, I definitely want to go back and enjoy the rest of the rest .
 Gayle French is very convincing and puts much feeling into the part of Anne, Anne . She plays Anne in the role of the Queen of Wales .
 All of the cast has had previous experience either in CC productions, summer stock or other .
 Last year's lead in ""Brigadoon,"" Leonard Dalsemer, is back as Mr Van Daan this year . Leonard is back for the role this year in the film .
 Bob Halsband, a freshman, has had much experience in high school productions and is very good in the part of Peter . The production is set in New Haven, Massachusetts, on March 8 .
 Although far from elaborate, much time has been spent in getting the appropriate period outfits for the characters .
 Such things as brown oxfords and long 1940 European skirts are not too easy to obtain . Such things are brown oxford and long European skirts not too hard to obtain.
 After exhausting CC's collection of costumes a search through the Salvation Army and Thrift House was made . CC's costume collection was exhausted and a search was made for the costumes .
 Professor McMillen, his associate director, Georgia McClay, and the whole cast and crew are presently rehearsing nightly to bring us a truly great CC production .
 Senator Kennedy had won the popular vote in Alabama and Mississippi, but the electoral delegations of these two states remained unpledged . New Mexico still hung in the balance .
 Only five of Alabama's 11 votes would go to Kennedy . All eight of Mississippi's electoral vote remained on the ""unpledged ticket"" under Governor Ross Barnett .
 The only thing that rang clear in this confusion was that Senator Kennedy with 33-1 electoral college votes at minimum would be the 35th President of the United States. Kennedy would have been the 33th President .
 The trend for the rest of the nation to follow was established early in Connecticut where Kennedy won by an even bigger majority than ' expected'
 Kennedy ran surprisingly well in the farm belt but lost Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Ohio, and Wisconsin . He also won close races in Illinois, Michigan, and Minnesota .
 The name of Senator Lyndon Johnson carried the traditionally ""Solid South"" again for the Democrats again .
 Snow fell in the Rocky Mountain area but the majority of the states here went to Vice-President Nixon . In the sunny West, Kennedy won California and Nevada but lost in Washington and Oregon .
 Kennedy won in the three most populous Catholic states of Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Connecticut . But he also carried the four most heavily populous Protestant states of North Carolina, West Virginia, South Carolina, and Georgia .
 Kennedy expected to win Ohio as Nixon expected Delaware but both states did switch around . Both states switched around . Kennedy expected Delaware to win .
 Kennedy won the key industrial states with large Catholic population . He lost in the states of Kentucky, Tennessee and Oklahoma .
 Fourteen of these gubernatorial positions were held by Democrats and 13 bv Republicans . Fourteen Democrats held these positions .
 The status soon to be wil be 36 Democratic governors and 14 Republicans . Unofficially, 17 Democrats were elected and 10 Republicans . Tims, the status soon-to-be wil be .
 In the Senate 34 seats were contested, Democrats unofficially winning 21 and Republicans 13 . Democrats won 21 of the 34 seats in the Senate, Republicans 13 of the seats contested .
 A Roman Catholic was elected to the most powerful office in the land . For the first time in our' history, a Roman Catholic has been elected to a powerful office .
 Students who expect to receive the bachelor's degree or its equivalent are eligible to apply for admission to the school . Regardless of their undergraduate major, students can apply for the school's admission .
 Sho from left to right are Dick Rundell, Donna Duncan, Leonard Dalsem Gayle French, Carol Elfring, Dud Coles, and Jim Fox fit* •tf**' -DAVE FURGASON .
 "Changes in the Wind" is entering a new phase on the Colorado College campus . Colorado on the corner of the corner .
 It is not the place of this column to judge the comments which have been or are being printed, but we must say that we view this more obvious concern of the school's efforts with pleasure .
 There has been a rumor that these letters are only the beginning of many and if they follow the same theme as the others, they are more than welcome . The letters are welcome .
 The building program has had the effect of a shot of adrenalin . Undoubtedly, the building program is having the effect on adrenalin.
 A second or third look is being taken at the status of student government, the construction of some courses and the level of extracurricular entertainment available on or about the campus . The results are bound to be gratifying provided what momentum that now exists is not allowed to dissipate into
 We watch for the continuation of a more obvious participation in campus affairs than has been apparent in the past . It is with hope and perhaps a little apprehension that we watch for a change .
 Senator 3Jorjn ISenneoo fu the office of iprss&eni of the lilnrtcu States. The office of the  President of the U.S. is located in Washington, DC .
 "I hope that others — especially students — will participate in what should be a continuing debate about our cultural program," she says .
 The replies to Mr Racey's letter were nothing but offended defenses 'of the status quo as such' The replies were 'defensive defenses' of 'the status quo such as such,' he said .
 I seriously doubt that ""don't make waves"" and ""whatever is, is right"" are good mottoes for a college of liberal arts . I doubt that "whatever is is right" is a good motto for a liberal arts college .
 Both reply letters stressed the practical obstacles involved in raising the level of our cultural programs . Both replied to the letters stressing the need to raise the levels of our programs .
 Many modern plays, such as some by Beckett and Sartre, can be produced with much less expense than ""Brigadoon,"" and, I should add, so can those of Shakespeare and Webster . Many modern . plays, like some by . Beckett . and
 I question whether vocational training should loom so large in KRCC's activities . Incidentally, I also question whether the KRCC should focus on vocational training so much .
 Radio technique can be learned more efficiently in six weeks at a good . trade school, which Colorado College is not . Surely radio technique can't be taught more efficiently .
 A high level cultural program is expensive, not in dollars, but in imagination and efforts . A high-level cultural program can be expensive, but it's important to be creative and creative .
 Both answers implied that students would most readily respond to such forms as Broadway hits and popular music . More important, both answers implied students would respond to Broadway hits .
 The liberal arts college, as the guardian of ""that ""highbrow"" culture, must not cater to existing taste, but cultivate new tastes for the excellent, wherever it appears .
 I hope that members of the academic community will join me in demanding that Colorado College be satisfied with nothing less than excellence . Colorado College should be "satisfied" with excellence, says President Obama .
 Boyce has been involved in the mechanics long enough to know all the good reasons why the status must remain quo . Boyce objects that Racey's comments were made before he had been here long enough .
 If he is serious in his statement that improvement could be made in all departments of the college, he should welcome remarks made by someone who has not been submerged in the mechanics .
 The significant thing about it is that a young instructor as good as Mr Racey finds a lack of concern for excellence in our aims, although we have the potential for excellence .
 The college has changed so rapidly that we have forgotten many things in a short time. The college is changing so rapidly, it has changed rapidly. We have forgotten a lot of things in just a few short years. We are proud of our students' achievements.
 We have gotten remarkable things moving in so short a time that we do not notice that we are paying for it with our life's blood . Not coffee-spoons, but in committee meetings, compromises, plans, programs, programs .
 Those who seemed so young just five years ago now seem so decidedly middle-aged . Those who seem so young now seem decidedly middle aged, they've been in the middle of the decade .
 Mr Racey will learn the good reasons in time, says Racey . Racey: "People who are so nice that they shouldn't be criticized, the engulfing nature of committees"
 If we find someone who is willing to talk out, for heavens sake, let us welcome the shout and encourage him to speak his piece loudly . Let's welcome someone who's willing to speak out, let's welcome his shout .
 The Zeta entry was listed on the parade judges' score sheets, and I, at least, was never informed that it was not a qualified entry . Zeta was listed in the parade's score sheets .
 The final standing of the Zeta entry might well, and most wisely, have been left to the parade judges . When and how the Homecoming committee reached its decision I have no idea .
 I, for one, not enjoyed it immensely, but gave it the second highest rating of entry on my own score sheet . I gave it a rating of 'second highest' on my score sheet. I'm not sure what happened to the film .
 I do not, however, speak for ar other judge. I would like the Zetas to know thi . I would also like to tell the Zetaas that I would not be surprised if they had been killed .
 Honesty, humility, morality and honor are character traits that we all admire . Honesty and humility is a character trait that all admire, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Their qualities have intrigued philosophers, writers and theologians through the ages . They include their qualities of religion, philosophy and theology .
 You can tell the character o every man when you see how he receives praise . You can also tell the true character of every man, says author .
 Cap and Gown will periodically present for publication in the TIGER short reviews of books suggested by the members of the faculty . Cap & Gown is the author of a book that is published by the University of Columbia University .
 The books chosen are not technical and detailed, but understandable and interesting to the layman . They are chosen to be more interesting and more accessible to laymen .
 Fred Sondermann entitled, ""Internationa] Politics in the Atomic Age,"" by John H Herz.
 Professor Herz deals with the fact that the modern state has really become an anachronism, but that we seem unable to think of alternative forms of organization . Herz: The modern state is really a very strange form of organization, but we seem to have no idea of alternatives .
 Dear Editor, SO many Americans have real interest in foreign students and their respective countries . So many of you Americans are interested in foreign student studies .
 The main reason for our being here is to compare cultures, not to be prize exhibits of the International Relations Club . We are not going to be prizes exhibits, we are comparing cultures . We will be able to learn from each other's cultures.
 Americans should not leave all the work of contact between Americans and foreigners up for us alone . I am suggesting that you inhibited Americans should be more involved in contact with foreigners .
 Tell us how to run our countries, ask tions about those countri thing, only do help us to come into contact with more of you than our close friends . Tell us what you think about about the country .
 How often when you have heard foreigners say they dislike Americans, have you wished they would go back where they started from? Have you wished you would have gone back where you started from.
 Following the Homecoming parade, the question arose as to the status of the Zeta entry . Zeta is a member of the University of Cambridge .
 Since the Homecoming weekend, I have attended a Zeta meeting where the situation was discussed and settled . Since the weekend, the situation has been resolved, says Zeta .
 It was decided it would be a good idea to inform the student body as to the status of the Zeta entry in the parade .
 The Zetas were judged on exactly the same basis as all other entries in the float competition . The Zeta's float was judged by the same judges as all the other entries .
 Their entry came under the classification of legends— the validity of which was never in question . Their entry into the world of legends was never under question .
 Some mention I think should be made of one of the better acts in the Variety Show, that the critics seem not to appreciate . Some mention should also be made in the show .
 The Gamma Phi act was one of the .best and most entertaining I have seen since the Silver Follies were closed in Chicago in 1951 . The show was a great success .
 The Tigerettes and the Bengals, the freshman pep clubs, are holding a reception for the football team Saturday, November 12, after the game until 6 . The reception will be held in the WES Lounge .
 Truth is the trial of itself and needs no other touch, And purer than the purest gold . Truth is a trial of its own, and it is the only thing that can be made pure .
 Morality knows nothing of geographical boundaries or distinctions of race or geographical boundaries . Morality of morality is not limited to geographical boundaries, race, it is said .
 The difference between a moral man and a man of honor i^ that the latter regrets a discreditable act, even when it haworked and he has not been caught . i^ The difference is that the moral man regrets the act even though it worked and he hasn't been caught
 Arnest Featured In Tuesday Assembly Tuesday at 11m. in Perkins Hall, Dr. Arnest . Arnest featured in Tuesday Assembly at 11:30 a.m.
 Mr Arnest spent the summer in Afghanistan on a cultural exchange program with the Department of State .
 He traveled around the country and painted as well as earning the distinction of being the only U.S. artist to have an art exhibit in Afghanistan .
 i Mr Amest's talk is being sponsored by IRC and the Assemblies Committee . The topic of his talk relates his experience with the foreign service offices .
 CC's Lynn Vincent is a sophomore from Casper, Wyoming . Leading the CC Homecoming parade is only one of the many pportunities in baton twirling .
 Miss Vincent ranked first in the Wyoming state competition for six years and placed seventh in the entire nation in 1959 . Miss Vincent also placed in the Variety Show and the Homecoming rally and bonfire .
 Since she entered college, Miss Vincent has dropped out of competition because of the hours of practice necessary to keep in shape . Miss Vincent says she wants to compete again because of her lack of practice .
 Miss Vincent is listed in "Who's Who in Baton Twirling" as a judge and teacher . She is paid up to $40 a day for judging and teaching .
 This group, which goes by the name of the ""Lyn-ettes," placed second in the state competition this fall . This group of girls placed second .
 "Few people realize how organized baton twirlers are,"" says Miss Vincent . Miss Vincent says she is proud of her baton-twirling skills .
 Each contest must be approved by the National Association of Baton Twirlers . Contestants must be certified judges .
 Contests are leld on a local and state level and the national competition in Januis held in conjunction with the Paul Winter Carnival . Contestants are held on a national level and on a state level .
 Miss Vincent noticed that most of the girls in ■mpetition started twirling at the je of four or five . She has gone to the nacompetition five times .
 He stated that there are conflicting strains and stresses in our political system . He said that there were conflicting strains of stresses in the system .
 Candidate may take one position in one part of the country an another position in another part of country . Candidate may also take a position in the country's other parts . Candidates may take positions in both parts of the United States and Canada .
 A loss is bearable if the rules of the game are followed, but in the final days of a campaign the field values are often put aside . A loss of the match is bearably bearable, but it is not always the case in the campaign .
 Muelder felt that the television debates made performers, rather than campaigners, out of the candidates . He said that the debates make performers out of candidates rather than candidates .
 The debates also caused issues to be made of situations (such as the offshore islands of Matsu and Quemoy) that are not really fundamental to the campaign issues .
 If the debates are to be used again a definite format should be set up . A definite format is needed for the debates to be held again, says David Cameron .
 Muelder regrets that the U.S. people are not well prepared to understand the relationship of church and state . He says the American people don't know what the relationship is between church and government .
 The separation of church and state does not mean the religious leaders can't discuss politics and state preferences . The separation is not a matter of politics or state preferences, religious leaders have said .
 Becker's Radiator & Body Shop is located at 16 E Bijou St. Radiator, Body & Fender Repairing and Painting Repairing & Painting .
 The eBn.gals' main objectives are to instill and bolster school spirit and enthusiasm . They will work with the Tigerettes to make an organized and effective cheering section at as many of the college's home athletic events as possible .
 One of the activities of the Bengals will be to provide some function honoring the players of the various teams at the end of each season . The Bengals will provide some functions honoring players of each team .
 This Saturday, after the football game with New Mexico, the Bengals in conjunction with the Tigerettes will hold a reception for the football players in Rastall Center .
 In addition to sports events, the Bengals will initiate or participate in other constructive projects which will be beneficial to the college . The Bengals will participate in or initiate projects that will benefit college students .
 The Bengals have limited their membership to not less than 20 nor more than 30 people . The Bengals' membership is limited to only 20 or 30 people, the Bengals say .
 In the years to come their constitution provides for the election of members of the freshman class at the time of the elections by a three fourths positive vote of the retiring sophomore members . In the future, the constitution of the university's freshman class commissioner will be elected by a third .
 The Bengals have elected Bill Greeley, president; John Lewis, vice-president; Ed Loosli, secretary; Bill Hybel, treasurer, and Steve Sabol, sargent-at-arms .
 The Colorado College Pershing Rifles Company is taking part in ceremonies at Fort Carson to rename the parade ground to General of the Armies John J Pershing Drill and Parade Ground . Pershing lifles plans to meet and meet with the troops .
 Pershing Riflemen will again return to Fort Carson for a field problem using full battle dress and weapons for small engagements over about the same terrain that they used last Spring .
 Pershing Rifles will meet on Thursday, November 17, in the ROTC building at 7:10m. The next meeting will be at 7 p.m. on November 17 at 7.10m .
 A place I ve keen meaning to mention for some time now has added' omethmg ; r* w One of the most delightful cotTeo shop, „™ °' tn ™ 1, f ""'i 18 I""*' PikM P<
 The Krusl '“,”„, K ee has some of the best coffee and home-made pies IV eve, ha 1 an 1 snack or luncheon engagement . The Krushl 'K ee' is known for its coffee, home-
 The Colorado Springs Chorale will present Brahms' ""Gvpsv Songs"" s, Re"" V ,K F T, Arts C """" ter 'TI,PV wi "" '""'
 The production was viewed by some 10 mi . “,le and is considered to have been one of the top full attractions . We haye been informed by many sources that this production was . viewed by many . sources .
 MGM has asked Miss Ellis to write anothe, v for their Alcoa series . Being strongly impressed, MGM have asked her to write for their series .
 A magazine has been put on the stands especially for those of you interested in the cultural events of Colorado springs . From all of „s t „Ms. Ellis congratulations and good luck .
 It's the KEMH Fine Arts Guide, a guide to regal entertainment each month . It's also a guide-to-royal entertainment guide to the Palace .
 The purpose of this meeting is to find ways in which women living ofT campus can feel more a part of college life . The meeting will focus on ways to help women living on campus feel more connected to campus life .
 Last spring the national convention of the International Relations Club met at Harvard . IRC last spring met at the Harvard campus to discuss international relations .
 The main discussion at the convention is at present being carried out throughout the Uaited States and college campuses . The convention is being held in the United States and is currently being held at college campuses across the country .
 This movement is to set up a civilian foreign service corps to be sent to other nations for the purpose of training . The idea is to be set up to train foreign service officers in other countries .
 A follow-up discussion of the assembly will be held that night at 7:30m. in Rastall, room 207 . The assembly is expected to be followed by a further discussion on Wednesday night .
 All college students are urged to attend and take part in the movement of the civilian corps .
 Students are asked to give their opinions on the subject to the International Relations Club . Students are also asked to talk about the subject in the club of International Relations .
 Renita Appel, Mary Rardone and Diana LeBosquet are the new olFieers of the French Club . The new members of the club are Renita and Mary .
 The French Club will sponsor a French table in the Rastall cafeteria every Wednesday at 12 noon . The club will sponsor the French table every Wednesday in the cafeteria .
 In the near future, Oskasita is planning to hold a ""Dinner Ride"" for all members of the group .
 Colorado College Tiger K^Areek flews B\ t'HANMi: HKUS1 I IN Alpha Phi . Last Monday the Alpha Phis went to the Kappa house for an informal dessert .
 Alpha Phis had a tea for the national officers that are visiting the chapter . The national officers visited the chapter on Wednesday .
 On Sunday evening the Betas will go to the Alpha Phi house for an informal dinner . The Betas are going to Alpha Phi's house to celebrate .
 Gamma Phis went to the Beta house for dinner . Beta Thcta Pi went to dinner at the Gamma Phi house . Gamma Phi Phi Phi Gamma Phi Pi was a member of the Beta Phi Phi .
 Betas and Gamma Phis got together for a picnic out at the Star Ranch . It will be held at the Alamo Hotel from 8:30m. to 12:30pm .
 Kappas and Delta Gamma played a football game last Sunday . The game was quite a game between the Kappassas and the Delta Gammas . Delta Gamma is a college football team .
 The Delta Gammas won by one touchdown, while putting two of the Kappas out of circulation . The DeltaGammas put two of them out of service .
 Delta Gammas and Thetas will get together for their costume dance at the Patty Jewett Golf Club . Delta Gamma and Theta's costume dance will take place at the club tonight .
 Fred Sondermann will give a lecture at the house on the election returns . Fred will be giving a lecture on election returns at the end of the month .
 Gamma Phi Beta had a picnic with the Betas out at the King Ranch . Gamma Phi Phi Beta members of the Gamma Phis held a picnic at the ranch .
 Phi Gamma Delta The Phi Gams will have their annual Bowery dance tomorrow night at the Apache Inn . The Phi Gamma Gamma Delta will be holding their annual dance tomorrow .
 Kappa Alpha Theta had a party for the girls in the house and their guests to watch the election returns . The Thetas watched the election results on Tuesday night .
 Edward Cass, district president, will be visiting Theta chapter on the first of next week .
 The Phi Delts will replace their traditional PhiDelt She-Delt dance with the Flintstone Rock . Phi Delta Theta Theta will hold a new dance on November 19 .
 Charlie Greening, a junior from Mahwah, New Jersey, is a new Phi Delt pledge . Greening is a junior at the University of New Jersey .
 Kappa Kappa Gamma had informal dessert for Alpha Phis and Thetas . The Kappas had an informal dessert at the Alpha Phi and Theta Kappa Gamma .
 The Kappas had a party for the girls in the house and their guests to watch the election returns on Tuesday . The girls were invited to the party .
 Sigma Chis will go to Kappa house for an informal dinner on Sunday . Kappa Kappa Kappa house will host the informal dinner . Kappa house is a fraternity house in honor of Sigma Chi members . Kappa is the oldest fraternity in the country .
 Bill Fisher played for the occasion and the chaperones were Professor Paul Jones and Mr William Barton of the Economics and Business departments . The chaperone was Professor Jones and William Barton .
 German Club Features Music and Pictures by Marcia Moses . Harry Booth sang ""Der Neugirige"" and ""Ungeduld"" by Franz Shubert .
 Booth followed by the Madrigal choir directed by Mr Donald Jenkins . Booth was followed by Mr Jenkins' solo solo solo at the end of the evening . Booth's solo solo followed by a solo solo from the choir .
 The group, largely exposed to the German language only two weeks ago, beautifully performed Brahm's ""Liebeslieder"" and other numbers .
 Siggy Hepp's narration of her slides taken in Munich, Germany during her stay there last year . The slides were taken during Siggy's stay in Munich .
 Adjournment of the club meeting followed its usual form of group singing and refreshments . The club meeting was held at the end of the meeting .
 Rocky Mountain Conference formed in 1909 to replace the old Colorado Intercollegiate Athletic Association . Rocky Mountain Faculty Athletic Conference now in its 51st year . Conference was formed in 1908 . Conference is now the largest in the country .
 Colorado College was one of the founding schools of the conference . Colorado College has been an active and competing member ever since .
 Dean Edward Parsons of Colorado College took the initiative in organizing the conference . Parsons is a college professor at Colorado College .
 The Golden Dragon is located at 1409 S EIGHTH STREET CHINESE-AMERICAN RESTAURANT . Merv & Hazel Isaac are serving family style lunches and Dinners .
 This brought order to what had been a pretty free-wheeling approach to collegiate athletics in the Rocky Mountain area . This brings order to college athletics in Rocky Mountain region .
 The athletic boards of the colleges were composed of students . The student managers for each sport were responsible for the administration and financing of athletics .
 Cries went up of professionalism, professionalism, campus raiding and low eligibility standards . Cries were raised about low standards, professionalism and low standards .
 Since the invitation was ignored, they decided to boycott the two"" schools until they did join . The two schools are now boycotting each other in protest .
 Because of the size of the conference, a round robin schedule was next to impossible in most athletics . Round robin schedules are next-to-none of the sports teams .
 Conference was divided into eastern and western halves for basketball, track and baseball . Eastern and western half of the conference was divided between basketball, baseball and track .
 In 1937 the schools that had come to be called the ""Big Seven"" of the conference withdrew to form the Mountain States Conference . The conference was known as the "Big Seven"
 Colorado College, Colorado School of Mines, Montana State, Colorado State College and Western State College were left out of the "Little Five" of Colorado College . This left the ""Little Five""
 They were left with the conference title, records, and a less than fat treasury . The team was left with a conference title and records .
 After World War II, Idaho State College joined in 1949 and Adams State College in 1954 . Adams State in 1954 and Idaho State in 1949 joined .
 Montana State College withdrew in 1956 leaving a six-school loop in a fairly well defined geographic area . The loop was created in 1956 after the school withdrew from the state college .
 Trip lo Mexico Planned During Spring Vacation . First meeting to discuss spring vacation trip to Mexico wj' be held Tuesday, November .
 Stu dents unable to meet at this tiro may get in touch with Miss Lauri Perry of the Spanish departmen at Hayes House 14, X-234 . Stu can also be reached by Miss Perry of Hayes House .
 The price of the trip will b S130 which includes round-trii transportation and all expense while in Mexico for the 10 day trip . There will be visits to the pyramids, Chapultepec, Cuernevaca Taxco and possibly Acapulco .
 Governor Rockefeller has just assumed control of the Republican party . Rockefeller will continue to solidify his holdings ir* that party .
 The election of 1960 will be re memhered as one of the closeever but whether or not this elec tion signifies the ultimate decisiur remains to be seen . The election was re-emergued in 1960 .
 Delta Gamma in contest with Kappa Kappa Gamma . Colorado College Tige ACCO Products: November I I I, I960 I In DG Wins Over Kappa Powder-Puff Game Game .
 Tins annual game between these two sororities is a traditional event on many campuses across the country . Tins are a traditional game between the two sorority sisters on campus .
 This Sunday afternoon, November 6, 1960 is the first time jn CC history such an event has been featured . Look across the field on -;3PB this chilly-nippy day, we see a crowd of avid fans gathering .
 We also see the hundred-yard football field cut in half to lessen the odds of possible touchdowns . Our vision s not limited to the east stands [S we also see]. We also want to see the 100-yard field cut to half .
 The pre-game festivities include the Kappas in white sweat-shirts mining through passes and practice drills at the north end of he field . The DG's in navyilue sweatshirts likewise running hrough passes and . practice drills it the south end .
 We in the announcers' booth iecide the reason to be the final adjustment of uniforms and the ipplying of make-up .
 The flags, scarfs, hankies and what you dangling from the playirs' back pockets are the tackling evice . The flags and scarfs are among the items left in the back pockets .
 Extra after-touchdown loint will be made by running or lassing over the end line . The play formations are ilaimed and plotted by each team, with each team's play formations .
 The last nd by no means least difference is the fact that the players' staistics are not for release . The players' stats will not be released .
 Eddie Kintz and Kent Vick, both f the CC varsity football team, today's referees and we now them on the field talking to the team captains . Abett Icks for Delta Gamma and Chessie Kemp and Meredyth Richards for Kappa Kappa Gamma are the team leaders
 The DGs first eleven are Sally Adler, Sue Block, Nancy Dehlin, Becky Dunbar, Sue Evans, Patsy Griswald, Diane Johnston, Keekee Minor, Lynn Pelly and Portia Van Meter . The first eleven of the DGs' first eleven
 Kappa Kappa's starting line-up is Kay Anderson, Ann Barber, Linda Christensen, Mariana Cogswell, Joan Jilka, Chessie Kemp, Mai-da Moses, Stephanie Row, Ann Ruth, Jan Sarder and Susie Stonefield . Kappa's line-
 Coaching Kappa Kappa Gamma are Chuck Henson and Ken Wisgerhof . Bob Broyles and Jack Lutz are coaching Delta Gamma . Chuck Hensen is coaching Delta Kappa Gamma while Chuck Wisgerhoff is coaching .
 The game is about to begin, and it's about to get underway in the first half .
 Kay Anderson crossed the line for the first touchdown making the score 6-0 . Delta Gamma kicks off as Kappa Kappa Gamma receives the ball . Kay Anderson has crossed the . line for a touchdown .
 Kappa now kicks only to see the DG's fumble as they retrieve the ball and in a matter of minutes Connie Windle is over for the second Kappa touchdown .
 The DG's now get the ball on Kappa's kick as Ginger Gallalee plunges over for Delta Gamma making the score 13-6, Kappa . The score now stands 13-5, Kappa.
 Excitement and enthusiasm run high for the Kappas, again in possession of the ball, but it must be too high . Excitement runs high but it is too high for them to get the ball back .
 Eleanor Jones now in the game attempts a pass, ZECHA& ADAMS CONOCO SERVICE STATION high and short into solid and crowded territory only to have Mimi Meek, in for Delta Gamma, intercept . Look, Eleanor Jones is now trying to pass a pass .
 Four cheerleaders in red innovations cheerleaders cheer on at half time . The east stands for Kappa Kappa Gamma - Kappa Kappa Kappa Phi .
 Lynn Carmichael, Jo Keiser, Sheila Watson and Jill Tyler are on the panel . They will be joined by Sheila Watson, Jill Tyler and Jo Carmichael . Carmichael is a former radio personality . Sheila Watson is also a radio host .
 Mimi Meek in a ""snake play"" plows through the Kappa line and with Abett Icks they bring the DG's out in front lp-13. Now in the fourth quarter, Mimi . Meek is in the lead in the final quarter .
 Kappa Kappa Gamma members are invited to be the guests . A bulletin lias just been handed in and with one glance it can be seen that this contest reaped soniccasualties .
 For Kappa Kappa Gainma, Linda Christensen has suffered two sprained wrists . Joan Jilka suffers a torn ligament in her shoulder . Linda Christensen also has sprained wrist and Joan Jilska has torn a ligament .
 Chessie Kemp is a victim of a casualty in her right foot and Ann Ruth is nursing a cut tongue . Ann Ruth also has a cut to her tongue after being cut in her foot .
 Patsy Griswald now lias a torn cartilage in her nose and Barb Justis a torn ligament in her knee . Patsy Justis now has a torn knee ligament and a torn nose ligament . Justis is the first woman to have torn a knee lig
 They finished with a 1-4 record, beating the Mountaineers of Western State at Homecoming (or their one conference victory) The team finished with one conference win and one defeat .
 Paul Jenson is the new science member of the Curriculum Committee . Jenson has been in charge of the science curriculum since 2007 .
 Any unaffiliates interested in this program should contact the athletic office . The program is sponsored by the University of Alabama .
 The Tigers were scoreless throughout the first three periods . The Indians scored a TD in the first quarter, one in the second and two in the third . In the last quarter, the Indians were ahead by the wide margin of 28-0 .
 The Tigers held the Indians to a touchdown in the first quarter . Then in the last quarter, the Tigers made some touchdowns of their own .
 One came when Reuben Trinidad went over after a CC drive from their own 27-yard field . Another came after Reuben Trin Trin Trinidier went over in the first half .
 The next I'll came when Joe Cordova ran over the goal line after the Tigers had intercepted an Adams State pitchout . The Tigers intercepted a pitchout from Adams State before running over the end line .
 Kintz threw to Chuck Henson for the two point conversion which made it the final score of the game . The game ended in a victory for the Packers, who won their first game of the season .
 This week we give free malts to the following — William Hunter Charles Ritchie Richard Croll Jo Anne Lewis Judith Gray Elizabeth Tucker . No strings — just call and get your FREE MALT this week .
 Camera Store Photographic Equip Kachina Lounge Alto Vista Hotel I 18 N Cascade Ave. The COMPLETE Camera Store is located at 930 North Tejon Street .
 Roosevelt Collins, Colorado College's wellknown athletic trainer, received an award Saturday . Collins received the award during the halftime ceremonies .
 Louis T Benezet, president of the college, made the presentation of the plaque and a transistor radio as a token of the recognition . Louis T
 Collins has been trainer at Colorado College for 23 years . Collins has had as much to do with shaping of the spirits of CC players as he has thenbodies .
 Collins is one of the most welt known and respected athletic trainers in the country . A one-time pre-medical student, Collins is now one of America's most respected trainers .
 He has one of tlie best sets of hands in the business, but even more important is his vast knowledge of how to take care of injuries . He has a vast knowledge about how to deal with injuries .
 He not only takes care of CC athletes, but the faculty and staff, and often thenfamilies . He also cares for the faculty, staff and staff .
 Physical therapy practice extends to assisting one of Colorado Springs' leading orthopedists . His physical therapy practice also includes assisting an orthopedist .
 A former CC player, who also played service ball, says ""Rosie"" is the best knee man in the country .
 If Collins does anything better than taking care of the physical and mental pains of his athletes, it would be cooking . Collins is known for his cooking .
 Collins is known affectionately to everyone as ""Rosie,"" a nickname for Roosevelt . Collins is affectionately known as "Rosie" by everyone in the public .
 President Roosevelt was born 56 years ago in Baton Rouge, Louisiana . His mother named her only son Roosevelt in honor of the president .
 He and his wife have a daughter, Natalie, now married and living in California . He and her daughter are still married .
 After high school he went north to try to obtain his youthful ambition . He went to North America after high school to pursue his dream .
 "Things were tough for me, and so I had to quit there,"" he said . "But things were tough ... but things were . tough for him, and he had to . quit there"
 Collins had to give up his desire to be a doctor . He was determined not to go back to Louisiana without some sort of professional training . Collins had given up his dream of being a doctor, but was determined to return .
 Collins still holds a job at Colorado College . The athletic director there helped Collins land his next job, the one he still holds at Colorado .
 When Collins came to CC in the fall of 1935 he brought with him his knowledge, experience and hands . Collins came with him with his knowledge and experience .
 With equipment, and personality, he went to work and today he probably is one of the most widely-known men on the CC campus .
 Sometimes he is remembered by graduates after those former students have forgotten many of their professors . Sometimes graduates forget many of those professors, sometimes they forget them .
 A few years ago, a young political leader from California confided to one of his fellow Republicans that he had a stiff neck . The Broadmoor Hotel in New York has a reputation for its reputation as a host of politicians . The hotel is now hosting a series of high-profile
 The fellow Republican was Attorney Leon Snyder, then Colorado's national committeeman . Snyder is now Colorado's Republican state committeman .
 Collins went down to his trainer's room in Cossitt Hall and readied his equipment on Sunday morning . Collins: "It's a good start to the season, but it's a long way from it"
 Collins took the stiffness out of Nixon's neck and has been an admirer of Nixon ever since . Collins: "I'm a fan of Nixon. I'm a big fan of his work. I love him"
 He can reeite the strengths and weaknesses of many of the players, but does not have a favorite .
 "Some were great, but others were just as great considering the amount of natural ability they had,"" he explained . "Some of the best players in the world were great," he said .
 Collins figures that football causes more injuries than the other sports . Collins says football is more likely to cause injuries than any other sport . Collins: Football is the most dangerous sport in the world .
 When a man with a bad ankle reports, Collins goes to work and soon is probing the injury with his fingers . Collins goes on to probe the injury in a bid to find out what happened .
 The patient is in no mood to look at broken, cells and probably is flinching from Collins' probing fingers . Collins: "The patient is not in a good mood"
 The next week, when he is getting around on the ankle almost as well as before the injury, the man is likely to drop into Collins' office to thank him for the treatment and kid Collins about those strong fingers .
 Collins likely to return the kidding anil josh the man about flinching when Collins' fingers probed into the sore ankle . Collins in turn is likely to give the man the chance to return .
 "It has been pleasant here. Oh, I would like to ho finished medical school, of cour But, that is true, it has be pleasant here," she said .
 It combines a unique inner filter of ACTIVATED CHARCOAL with a pure white outer filter . The taste of the product is mild and smo .
 Homesickness is the first malady to strike Americans when they serve their country in a land such as Afghanistan .
 Arnest is chairman of the art department of Colorado College and e Fine Arts Center School . He talked Tuesday morning at the regular ..■i^mblies session on the campus .
 There will be a meeting of all individuals who would be interested in applying for Editor-in-Chief this Friday noon in the TIGER office in Rastall . Arnest spent most of the summer in Afghanistan on a cultural mis"" State Depart
 Included in his duties |he painting of 10 works of art iring his time there . Included among his duties was the painting of a portrait of the Queen .
 The picres were presented to the Aflanistan government by the United States ivernment . The picrees were presented by the U.S. government .
 Arnest said, "The first thing that its Americans is a savage homeickness" Arnest also said that Americans were homeickened by their homeliness . Arnest wrote, "America's first thing is to its American heart is to be homeick"
 The Voice of .meriea radio is jammed by the [ussians, and all that we had to ead were bulletins put out by the . irious governments with agencies Afghanistan . The Voice . of .Meriea is jammed .
 Arnest explained that the bulleiis mostly reported what various olitical leaders around the world id about a given problem . Arnest also explained that they were used to report what the world's leaders thought about a problem .
 Persian is little known and re are almost no teaching aids ull for it . There are no teaching manuals for it.
 Booklets sued about the Afghan language 'ere written by linguists and are useless', he said . He pointed out that the booklets are useless and written by experts .
 Most Americans in Afghanistan tve a dazed look on their faces oon after they arrive there . Most Americans are dazed after arriving in Afghanistan .
 Arnest points out that while merica and Russia may each have delegation living in the same otel, the members of the two jelegations do not speak to each other . Arnest pointed out that .
 Like roads, flour fills and such thangs that have a eginning and an end, they have an end . Like roads and flour fills, flour fillers have to be filled and filled .
 The Afghans will ace the educational help only from America, he says . But on the ther hand, the Afghans will need help from the U.S.
 "Birds 'N Tigerland" is the name given to the all-college jazz festival scheduled for November 22 . PR Hurls All-College Jazz Concert the 22nd by Wally Caldwell .
 Falconaires are a 17-piece orchestra composed of professional musicians of the Air Force Academy music staff . Pershing Rifles of Colorado College are pleased to present the Falconaires .
 Some of these men have played with such great name bands ""as Stan Kenton, Les Elgart and Billy May" Some of the men have been with such a great name band as Stan . Kenton and Elgart have played together .
 Jazz and contemporary music lovers will be treated to an evening of jazz and contemporary jazz . They, are pros from the word go and present the evening of music .
 The concert is absolutely Free to the students and faculty of Colorado College . The concert will begin at 8-30 at Perkins Hall .
 With ""A"" number of plans made, the concert should prove to be as professional a production as the musicians themselves .
 Falconaires will perform at the Falconaires' annual concert . The Falconaires have been performing at KRDO's "Night Time Jazz Show"
 Falconaires have been booked almost solid for the last five months . The Falconaires are happy to make an appearance at Colorado College .
 Wally Caldwell, executive officer of Pershing Rifles, and jazz concert program director, will act as master of ceremonies and official PR host . Wally Caldwell will be master of ceremony and PR host. Wally Caldwell is the executive officer and jazz program director .
 Anyone who can legally drive a car in Colorado or has a friend who qualifies can enter this rally . The cars travel a pre-planned course of 80 miles or more . Riders are guided solely by hints listed on the rally sheet .
 There will be lots of food, dancing, music, and — the KEG, contents unknown, for the winners . Arriving at the secret destination, there will be a secret destination .
 The winners will be that driver and navigator who arrive at the destination with an average speed closest to that pre-determined by the rally officials . The winner will be the winner of the race for the first time .
 The winners, and their friends, will have the privilege of emptying the contents .
 Their names will be engraved on a plate on the KEG which will stand in Rastall Center to inspire future entrants . The names of the winners will also be engraved in a plate which will be on display .
 Rally will start from Slocum parking lot at 4:30m., Friday, November 25 . Rally will take place at 4 p.m. Friday, Nov. 25 . The rally will be held in the parking lot .
 Participants must register at Slocum or Rastall desks on or before November 23 .
 Conduct Committee Publicizes Its Decisions and Jurisdictions jurisdiction on the campus . Conduct committee Publicizes its Decisions . jurisdiction on campus .
 Four student members of the committee are elected each spring from the sophomore class . They serve during their junior and senior years . The committee is made up of four students .
 Authority delegated by the president of Colorado College ami the Executive Council of ASCC which gives the Student Conduct Committee the power to sit in judgment on cases .
 These involve student misconduct, except for cases handled by the Honor Council, the residence hall councils or other bodies . These cases are normally handled by Honor Council or other body .
 Cases may be referred to the committee by anyone in the college community . Students, 'faculty, administration or supervisory personnel'
 Until recently the committee's action on individual cases has not been publicized . Until recently, the committee has not publicized individual cases .
 This year, all decisions will be published in the TIGER in order thai the student body will be aware of the committee's function . This year's decision will be made public in order to inform students of its function .
 Last year the committee acted on nine cases which involved 11 students . Last year, nine cases were acted on by the committee .
 Drunk and disorderly and use of vulgar and profane language in Loomis Hall are among the reasons for the incident .
 Colorado Springs police say it was a DUI incident in downtown Colorado Springs, Colorado Springs . The incident occurred while under the influence of alcohol .
 Unauthorized presence in the women's residence hall area after hours after hours while under the influence of alcohol . Unauthorised presence in women's dorm area after after hours .
 Resisting arrest, as a result of driving at an excessive speed, while under the influence of alcohol, is illegal in the UK . This is the first time a person has been charged with resisting arrest in the country .
 Violation of a state law involving ""joy riding,"" which is the unauthorized use of a privately owned vehicle . Violation is the result of the law involving "joy riding"
 Decisions in two of these cases resulted in dismissal of two students from Colorado College . Colorado College students have been dismissed from the college .
 Leaser penalties included probation, fines and some personal counseling directed . Leaser fines included probation and fines .
 Six of the 11 students involved are no longer at Colorado College . Five of them were suspended for disciplinary or academic reasons . One of the students involved graduated .
 The remaining five students have made the readjustment and have been recognized as good citizens on the campus . The remaining 5 students have been readjusted .
 "The Diary of Anne Frank" is a direct recount from the diary “f a V ou”u„g g'rl winch has been dramatized by Francis Goodrich and Albert Heekett . Curtains open at 8:20 .
 Anne Frank, Gavle French is the young girl during the Jewish persecutions of the early 1940's with her mother Mrs. Anne Frank . Anne Frank is the daughter of Anne Frank and Mrs. Frank .
 Her sister, Mm-got Frank, played by Peigi Benlmm. Her father, Otto Frank, Played by Jim Fox, n ‘d her sister Mm ‘got Frank. Frank’
 They are in recluse above a business owned by Mr Kraler, Doug Ciwlos, and his secretary Miep, played by Liz Quint . Liz Quint plays Liz Quint in the play .
 Van Daun and their son 1 eter are played by Leonard Dalsomer, Carol Elfring and Robert Hnlsband, respectively . The couple's son is played by the same trio of actors .
 Mr Dusscl, a stray dentist, Richard Rundell, has been added to the cramped quarters of the hospital .
 A simultaneous set of four rooms with one second floor room was slaved over by the production and acting classes under the supervising eye of director William McMillan .
 Associate director is Georgia McClay, while Roger McKee is the stage manager . Prompting the CC players is Gerri Gene Bnrtz following their costuming by Carol Elfring .
 This is excluding CC students whose activity cards can be punched in return for a ticket . CC students can punch their activity cards into a ticket to get tickets .
 PR's ""Birds in Tigerland JaziCo" present a panel dis ject ""Reflections on Defection,"" Tuesday in Perkins Hall .
 The discussion will cover the nature and techniques of brain washing in the 20th century . It will also cover the causes and qualities of defection both from the East to the West and the West to the East .
 Other aspects which will be discussed are the relationship between psychological and sociological abnormality on the one hand and principles and ideals on the other hand to the decision to switch sides . The relationship between sides at all at all is discussed .
 Mr Edgar Racey, instructor in English, will act as questioner and moderator .
 Vicky Moroy is the editor of this week's News and Sport section . She is the author of the book, "Vicky" Moroy . She has also written a series of articles for this week on campus .
 Denny Prior, Jeff Goulnrt, Charlie Rowsitpr, Max Power, Linda Haneborc. Max Power: "I'm not going to let it slip up," says Max .
 Henry Leoper Smith compressed the world's population of 2% billions of people into a town of 1000 population . He comes up with this cross section of people . The world has a population of around 2% billion people .
 Americans would produce 16 per cent of the town's total supply and eat all but 1 per cent . The Americans would eat all of the city's food supply .
 The lowest income groups among the 60 Americans could have more than the average in much of the rest of the town . Lowest income groups are among the lowest-income groups in the city .
 As we count our blessings, (and our precious few hours of relaxation) perhaps we should wonder whether Tom Turkey is a blessing or a curse .
 The discussion of Edgar Racey's opinionated letter is the most interesting thing the TIGER has run since it so unwisely dropped Oaasock . Racey is the author of the book, "Edgar Racey" Racey: "The discussion of Racey
 Professors Cornick and McMillen must mount their productions on astonishingly small budgets . Boyce is quite right in noting that Prof. Cornick must mount his productions on a budget of $1,000 .
 Messrs Racey, Van Becker and Mason are equally right in insisting that we need not be held back by the cultural level of past performance .
 Professors Cornick and McMillen must sell tickets in order to break even . The fact is that both of the Professors are quite willing to discuss, they say .
 The college allows a budget for the spring dance program, which is roughly one-third the amount Cornick estimates he must gross in order to pay expenses . All CC students and staff get in free .
 Dance and drama are limited to productions which are reasonably sure to be popular as well as artistic successes . Dance and Drama is therefore limited to shows which are sure to have been popular . Dance is a popular form of art .
 Experimental works would be expensive, not because they are intrinsically extravagant, but because the producer would have to take the risk of being patronized only by a non-paying audience . Experimental works are expensive, but not because of the risk they pose to be patronized .
 The wealthy and the well-to-do in Colorado Springs are willing to pay only for arts with mass appeal . Colorado Springs has a reputation as a national city with a national reputation .
 The tastes of the student body are shifting faster than the administration can keep up with them, says the dean of students . Students say they want to see a change in the way the administration has dealt with the student experience .
 Fire could destroy four-fifths of the bleacher seats on Washburn Field, and everyone who wanted to witness one of our surviving gladiatorial contests would still be comfortable . The stadium could still be used for a game between the two teams .
 Last year a few student songsters on their own hook performed Heinrich Schutz's exquisite ""Passion According to St. Mary's"
 Variety Show displayed talents ranging from excellent folk singing to serious ecstatic drums . This year the Variety Show was the first time the show had been held in London .
 I am confident that the administration is willing and capable of responding to the upward shift in student taste, whether the rest of Colorado Springs is prepared to go along or not .
 We have financial Merlins who have already pulled millions out of hats; surely hundreds for experiments in art will not strain their talents . We have a financial Merlin who has pulled millions of dollars out of hat .
 This is the best time in decades for any member of the public to give a shove in the direction of creativity, experiment, and highbrow culture .
 Members of the faculty have given a few pushes already in these columns . Members of faculty have already given a push already .
 I want to make a public acknowledgment of appreciation to those students who have so wonderfully labored in the UN spotlighted areas of theatre to put ""Diary of Anne Frank" on the stage .
 Groups of volunteers stitched and . lengthened and . shortened and dyed costumes day after day . groups of volunteers showed up to crawl under and around the two grand pianos on stage helping to build and paint the attic set .
 Many of these workers arrived after program copy had to ,be at the printer . Many of the program copies had to be printed .
 The cast has worked diligently, often under trying rehearsal conditions, long and hard . The cast of this year's cast have worked diligently under trying rehearsals .
 It is the crews, however, programmed and un-programmed, who have made it possible for them to act out their play . The crews are programmed, but not programmed, they are unprogrammed. It's the crews who make it possible to act .
 With ash-strewn tongue and sack-cloth cow], I must admit we all feel we have had a rewarding— and cultural — experience . With ash strewn tongue, we have a rewarding and cultural experience .
 It is to mildly question the statement of Mr Van Becker that vocational training should not be too important a part of KRCC's activities . KRCC says vocational training shouldn't be a major part of its activities .
 Every college graduate does not go on to get his Master's or Ph.D. anymore than every high school graduate goes on to college . I am sure that everyone will agree that every college graduate is not going on to have a Master's degree .
 If a liberal arts education as a background, it could be the "open door" to a job . If a student has learned the fundamentals of being a radio engineer, an ad salesman or an announcer, it may be the 'open door' to a career .
 In a society such as ours, we must always remember the importance of earning a living . We must also remember that we need to always remember how we can earn a living. We need to be able to do our jobs.
 Colorado College is not a teacher's college, but a student who has included getting a . teacher's certificate along with his degree in whatever his major is, will have a better chance of getting a job if his original plans do not work out .
 I do not mean to sound mercenary, but I feel there has to be a practical as well as idealistic side to an education . I feel that there has been a practical and idealistic aspect of an education, not idealistic, to be successful .
 We need your informative and ""cultural"" programs actually done not just talked about . We need programs that actually do not just be talked about. We need more programs that are actually done .
 We wait with breathless excitement your brave offer to actually participate . We wait to hear from you!
 Running tapes from other sources is a poor substitute for our own college inventions . Running tapes of other sources isn't a good substitute for college inventions. Running tapes is a bad substitute for your own college invention.
 We are contrite for our one hour ""pop"" music but we also feel the loveliness would be Van-RaceyMacey . Van-Macey would be the name of the band that we call ourselves Van Racey .
 Much more courageous if the fresh breeze could crystallize into something of cultural consequence . Much more courage would be if it could crystallise into something more of a cultural consequence, says CNN.com .
 Entertainment is the big thing this week as Colorado College unfurls some evening entertainment wonders . Colorado College will be hosting some of the world's hottest events this week .
 The fabulous FALCONAIRES scheduled to perform at the all-college ""Birds In Tigerland Jazz ("" cert"" on the evening of November 22"
 Members of PERSHING RIFI are in the midst of a publicity campaign to secure a full house for occasion .
 The concert is scheduled to start at 8:30m. and last until m.m. or until everyone leaves .
 The conservai the sweet and provocative will plague the minds, the fingers and feet all present. Accents of the wild"", the conservai . Accents .
 Yours truly will act as maof ceremonies so please do not throw tomatoes or stones . Yours Truly will be acting as a guest of ceremonies .
 This pre-Thanksgiving celebration should prove to be an excit event . I hope to see as many students and faculty members there possible .
 ODETTA TO star in FAULKNER'S ""SANCTUARY"" I just received some first hand information from St. Louis County, Missouri .
 This is something to watch for and more information will be given when received . More information is given when given .
 This is a play where all emotions and sentiments of oppression are no longer inward, but out ward and on the surface . This is the play where the emotions are not inwardward, but outwardly and on surface .
 The set deserves special comment for it reeks with poverty, mension and sensitivity . This message is conveyed in the clothing, th $ walls, the lights and all means by which the sensitive eye and . can translate .
 The interior may not be common to many us, but oppression, in one form or another, is . The interior of oppression is not a common theme for many of us but oppression is .
 Miss French conveys her message in a way that unifies the actors with the an ence. Miss French is not only convinci but conveys .
 After the curtain opens, the barrier between the stage and audiei is broken and you become an invisible part of her diary . The show is set to be shown in London at the end of October 31 .
 Herlado the qualities of an elderly lady living in the period of Jewish persecute L is played with grace and skill . The play is set in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Tenderness and temperament combim with wisdom present themselves in the form of a good actress, says the actress .
 His part as relatively wealthy man, now in poverty, is a hard one to execute . But fortunately fortunately fortunately his -ability proves itself as he renders a fine performance .
 Mid-way through the play they start giving exceptional pel mpn formances that unify the sentiments and personalities of the time . Mid-ways through the game they start to give exceptional pelmpn for mances .
 The real stars are, as usual, behind stage in the forms of Mr an as 1 Mrs. and Mrs. 1 . The real star of the show is Mr. an as well as Mr and Mrs .
 It will probably be one of the best evening's entertainmei this season . It will be a great evening of entertainment for the first time .
 Student activity cards will gain admission; SI. 25 for the general public . SI 25 for th general public.
 Mr Jenkins, a baritone, will give a concert of arias and songs . He received his musical training at Oberlin and the Julliard School .
 Carlton Gamer is composer-in-residence and a regular faculty member of the music department . He is a regular member of faculty at the University of Columbia University .
 Mr Jenkins has chosen arias by Handel and songs by Purceli, Brahms, Faure, Charles Ives and C Armstrong Gibbs . He has also chosen songs by Brahms and Ives .
 In addition, his program will also include a song by the local composer, Jean Miller . In addition to the program, he will also feature a song from the composer .
 The Sunday afternoon concer in Perkins Hall have been pr sented for the last 12 years by tl music department as a gift to th community and a contribution the musical life of this city . Colorado College Tiger .
 Tli are given free of charge by t performing members of the mu faculty, artists of the region a master students of the music d partment . Performers of the . mu faculty are performing free .
 There will be one concert every month fr November through May, all them on Sunday afternoons . The program will be i nounced each time in the lo newspapers .
 Life in Afghanistan hiscussed by Arnest I Tuesday's assembly, which was Resented by Dr. Dr. Arsenseni .
 Bernard Arnest, IjrL'L'tor of the school of art, was an Interesting look at his experiences t Afghanistan during the past iUinnier . He was an interesting look into his experiences with the Afghan army .
 Arnest showed slides jid gave a commentary on the sola! political and economic situajon in Afghanistan . He also gave a view of the country's political, economic and political situation .
 "He lives in a very primiive state, and because of this, editions are very unsanitary and [sease is common," he says . He says .
 Hardship posts include places where it is difficult adjust to unusual customs, lanuage problems and more primiive living conditions . Hardships posts include lose places where people live in unfamiliar places .
 In the adustment, man faces an ""unbelievble and almost savage homesickand a feeling of remoteness rhich is fostered by the environlent and isolation"
 However it is very dificult for an individual with a famly to feel these ""theoretical comensations"" when the living condiions are poor, the educational faes are not good and children lly do not have many friends heir own ages .
 Professor Max Lanner attends jCi ivention in Chicago . Lanner will represent Cololeifado College at the annual Convenion of the National Association of Ichools of Music .
 Colio College music department an ibs been an accredited member of his association since 1941 . Dr. tli janner will also hold several relearsals with the eminent violinist . Sidney Harth. Harth .
 Mr will appear in Perkins Hall m Sunday, January 15, in a solata recital . Dr. Dr. Mr. Mr will also play solata solata .
 Delta Gamma seniors took their sneak at the Spruce Lodge . The seniors took a photo of themselves at the lodge .
 Tomorrow morning the D.G.'s will have breakfast from 8:30 to 11m. for all women . Breakfast will be held from 8 to 11 a.m. tomorrow morning .
 The Phi Gams went to the Gamma Phi house for an informal dessert . Gamma Phi Beta Gamma Phi Gamma Phi Phi Phi Gamma Gamma Phi Alpha Phi Phi Sigma Phi Gamma Beta Beta Phi Phi Alpha Gamma Phi Delta Gamma Gamma Alpha Phi Gamma Alpha Gamma Gamma Gamma Beta Phi Gamma Sigma Gamma Phi Sigma
 Gamma Phis will have a Thanksgiving for cerebral palsy children on Saturday afternoon . The group will also hold a Thanksgiving in honor of the children with cerebral palsys .
 Helen Moxen, province director, visited the chapter last Monday and Tuesday . The chapter was visited by the province's provincial director .
 Cass, the district president, had a very successful visit during the first part of the week . Cass had a successful visit to the district . Cass said he had a 'very successful visit'
 Next Monday evening is the serenade for Janice Hansen and Karen Johnston . Hansen and Johnston are both pinned to Sigma Chis .
 The Thetas and the Betas will get together for an informal dinner on Tuesday . The Betas have been in touch with each other for several years .
 Kappa Kappa Gamma had dinner with Sigma Chis over dor dinner . The Kappas had dinner at the end of the weekend .
 Gamma Phi-Kappa costume ball will be held tonight in the Crystal Room of the Alamo . The costume ball is held in honor of Kappa Kappa Kappa sisters .
 Beta Theta Pi had dinner with the Kappas over for dinner . The Betas had dinner in honor of their Pi sisters .
 The pledges and the actives will battle it out in a football game this afternoon . This afternoon the pledges will play a football match against each other .
 Phi Delta Theta pledges took a sneak with the Thetas . The pledges were pledges from Phi Delt Theta . The Theta is a sister-in-law of Phi Delta Delta Phi Phi Delta .
 It was so well planned that the actives spent about two hours covering almost every inch of the Black Forest . The Black Forest is one of the world's most beautiful forests .
 Phi Gamma Delta will donate food to the Union Rescue for Thanksgiving . It will go from 8:30m. to 12:30 p.m. The Phi Gams will donate the food to Union Rescue .
 The Phi Gams had a very good time at the Gamma Phi dessert last Monday evening . The Phi Phi Phi dessert was a big hit .
 Eric Hender, president; Jim Dyson, vice president; Bill Grabowski, recording secretary . Mark Weber, corresponding secretary and historian, and Dale Dalby, treasurer . The new officers will be announced at the end of the year .
 Sigma Chis had a most enjoyable evening at the Kappa house last Sundav evening . Kappa Kappa Kappa house was held in honor of the Kappa Kappa sisters .
 Judy Alt is a social affiliate of the Alpha Phi chapter of Alpha Phi . Clay Towne joins the pledge class this week . Towne is a member of the chapter's pledge class .
 Last week, 27 records were purchased, including Tchaikovskv, the Hollywood Bowl Symphony Orchestra, show tunes, Ray ConifF and show tunes .
 Equipment was on display, a ski patrolman was present and movies and refreshments topped off the evening . Equipment was also on display and there were refreshments .
 Siggi Hepp and Bob Selig told of studying their junior year abroad at the ""Coffee Hour"" held Wednesday afternoon . The two students spoke of studying abroad .
 Late-day fashion is unbeatable when it's shaped this lean, this lithe, this lovely . GAY GIBSON was born in New York .
 The name of William Jackson Palmer is a far-from -forgotten one here at CC, but, I fear, the man who belonged to that name is quite forgotten . Palmer, Gone But Not Entirely Forgotten by Max Power, will be on display at the end of the
 William Jackson Palmer, 18361907; Union cavalry General, pioneer railroad builder, prophet of Colorado's greatness . Palmer died in 1836 at the hands of a Colorado woman .
 He mapped the route of three transcontinental railways, supervised the building of the first road to Denver, organized and constructed the State's industries, cherished its beauties, founded Colorado Springs, fostered Colorado College, and served our Sister Republic of Mexico with sympathy and wisdom .
 This inscription reveals the General's career of accomplishment and something of his characit's easy as P.V. to recognize true diamond value .
 Only Artcarved offers P.V.P.P the exclusive Permanent Value Plan . The plan gives guaranteed proof of the enduring volue of any ring you choose .
 Similar plaques can be seen in Denver Union Station, at Salt Lake City, at the Colonial Railway Station of Mexico City, and at the Hampton Institute for Colored Students in Virginia .
 Many volumes could be written about the undertakings and the personality of General Palmer, General Palmer .
 I shall, however, confine this article to a brief discussion of the last years of the man's life which, I hope, will give the reader an insight to his character . I shall not reveal how much of his life was spent in his last years .
 At the turn of the century, General Palmer ended his business career with the sale of the Rio Grande Southern Railway and his interests in Denver and Rio Grande .
 He did not end his active life, and the benevolences which he poured out to this community during those ensuing years still have great meaning to us here . He poured out his benevolence to the community during his years, but he did not .
 Among others, he gave Monument Park, Palmer Park, land for the Public Library, the landscaped parkways, the High-line Drive, and Palmer Hall .
 It is said that he could have had a brilliant career in politics — there is much evidence that this is true — but that his dislike of public functions and of public speaking kept him from seeking high office .
 He spent his years of retirement at Glen Eyrie, at the mouth of Queens Canyon . He spent most of his retirement at the site .
 There he read widely and carried on voluminous correspondence with friends and business associates . He also had a large library of books, magazines and journals .
 Mr Hamlin Garland by name has left accounts of Glen Eyrie and also of a camping trip . General's extravagance was easily seen in the great stone mansion and formal gardens .
 Each day a programme was laid out in ""orders"" issued in due form by the head of the expedition, and this arrangement held . This arrangement held.
 On October 27, 1906, the General was thrown from his horse near Glen Eyrie . The General died of his injuries in the fall .
 A man of his age might well have succumbed to a broken neck, but not William J Palmer . Palmer died at the age of 50 on Sunday . Palmer's funeral was held in New York City, New York .
 His active life commenced once again, although he was now paralyzed from the waist down . He was paralyzed from his waist down, but his active life resumed .
 The two events late in his |jf show most clearly the qualities of generosity, ization, and extravagance ai humane and indeed, a touching ture . The events show the generosity of generosity and ization .
 After his paralysis prevei him from riding and hiking, he had a large st^a, car specially fitted with a bed . It was not an uncommon sight in the hills around Glen Eyrie to see ft General's car, loaded with servant > 01 and children, making its
 General Palmer had alwaj maintained an active interest t his old Civil War outfit, the Fif teenth Pennsylvania Cavalry, had always tried to attend its am nual reunion in Philadelphia . General Palmer was unable to travel to the reunion, and resolved that he would have travel to him
 Outstandinin event was reception given fo them at Glen Eyrie . Reception was the most memorable reception for the couple .
 His generosin extravagance and vision can be perceived in his many gifts ‘,,, projects which still stand.” ‘,.”, projects still stand .
 Perhap we can find something of an ample for our own lives in spirit of General Palmer, General Palmer . We can find a lot of things for us to do with our lives, says Mr Palmer .
 The Colorado College dining c1 I alls are a self-supporting enterprise . Mason Susan King, David Logan and David Logan .
 Their onlv source of in-' ,me is from student tuition which covers the expenses of ,od, heat, light and general maintenance . Student tuition covers the costs of heating, heating and other expenses .
 The dining halls employ 50 perms. Aside from the stue nt employees and the Hub, the dining hall employs 50 staff members .
 In effect the dining halls in Pif in very similar to a restaurant, the dining hall is a restaurant . These employees are paid social security and other benets, including social security .
 In Oeber of this year, the amount lent on meat was $7,000 and for ilk and cream, $4,000 . In OEber of 2013, the amounts lent for meat and cream were $8,000. The amount lent for food was $
 Vegetables are jually pre-packaged or canned . mits are also canned, but when seasoned fresh they are served fresh .
 The problem of keeping co-eds im and athletes fat can only be lived by the women using self-straint on the portions, since e meals are geared to the men . Football, hockey and basketill players have their own train""j*j tables .
 These open on the first * ' ' ' September for the football playand continue to continue to the end of the ockey season .
 Spemeal before a game consists of an eight ounce canned vegetable, baked itato, toast and tea . They have a speal before the game which includes an eight-ounce canned vegetable .
 Students' other students' consumption is the same as those for ie other students, except for the rge amount consumed . The amount consumed was the same amount of alcohol consumed .
 Eating a good breakfast prevents snacking on fattening things the rest of the day . According to Miss McNary, if you are trying to maintain a trim figure, eating a healthy breakfast can help you stay slim .
 The initiation of new members ot Alpha Lambda Delta will be held Tuesday, November 22 at 6 P in Rastall . Clublii lublicity by Ginny Metculf is a member of the Delta Delta .
 This is a monthly listing of interesting events for students in Colorado Springs . Colorado Springs is a city of opportunity for students .
 The Spanish Club will meet in Hayes House Library at 7:15 in. in . Tuesday, November 22 . The meeting will be held at 7.15 in .
 The Tigerettes, along with the Bengals, held a reception last Saturday in Rastall for the football team . The program will consist of a film, slides and music on Mexico Dues are Jl, Tigeretes .
 Kitty Tytler was chosen as Tigerette-of-the-month at the meeting on Thursday, November 10 . At the meeting, Kitty was chosen to be the month's Tigeretter .
 She was chosen on the basis of attendance, enthusiasm and service . She was given a stuffed tiger after being chosen for service .
 The Tiger Club is having a party for the Colorado School for the Deaf and Blind in Rastall Recreation Room, Sunday, November 20 from 4 to 7m.
 Linda Robeson is m charge and Nadine Chang is in charge . Barbie Lambie Lambie and Marty Breternitz are assisting . The team is on the ground in New York .
 There will be a breakfast at the Delta Gamma house Saturday morning from S:30m. to 11m. Saturday morning . Pan-Hellenic breakfast will be held at Delta Gamma House .
 The purpose of the meeting will be to discuss the election and its results ;tnd to plan the club's calendar for the remaining part of the ;chool year .
 In a typical storybook finish the Tigers almost ended up victoriously as they scored three TDs in the last quarter of play . The Tigers scored three touchdowns in the final quarter of the game to win .
 The Tigers pulled within two points of Highlands in the final minutes of the match . The Highlanders had outplayed the Tigers considerably throughout the game . But all of the game was outplayed by the Tigers .
 New Mexico scored seven points in the first quarter, seven in the second and twenty in the third quarter . CC held New Mexico scoreless throughout the last quarter .
 Sellitto scored on a three-yard quarterback sneak after a fumbled kickoff . One minute later he scored a quarterback sneak for the Tigers .
 With two minutes left in the game, Bob Calder scored on a 28 yard pass play . Then there was no more scoring until with two minutes to go .
 With ten seconds left in the game, Jim Blair tempted a long field goal on the third down . The Tigers on the 42 of Highlands, Highlands, won the game with 10 seconds left .
 The Tigers ended their football season with an overall 4-5 record . They ended their season with a 4-4 record .
 Dan Kaltenbaugh is shown trying to keep the mi from turning the corner and breaking away from the mi . Dan Kalterbaugh was trying to prevent the Mi from turning a corner .
 Betas romped the Phi Gams 40-0 in the first game of the last week of intramural football . The Betas are the first team to win a game of their own .
 The Betas opened the scoring in the second half when they recovered the ball in the Phi Gam end zone . In an aei'ial play Lyons made another conversion* Lyons made an extra conversion*
 First score came as Floerching hit Ackerman with a 15 yard 1 pass . Sigma Chis beat the Delts in the other game, 18-6 .
 The Phi Delts got their i score when Weld passed to Weld for a 60 yard touchdown . Weld's pass to Weld was a 60-yard touchdown for Weld . Weld also threw a touchdown .
 Flinger threw two touchdown passes to Ward and Trotter . Flinger then threw two more touchdown passes .
 Army-Filled Weekend Experienced by PR's last week-end . Colorado College Pershing Rifles members .
 On Friday they left the ROTC building at 7:45 m.m. and were taken to Fort Carson by military transportation . On Friday night they left ROTCs at 7.45 a.m., leaving the campus at 7 p.m.; Friday morning they were taken
 A granite marker and bronze plaque were donated by the First National Bank of Colorado Springs . The plaque was unveiled at the parade ground in Colorado Springs, Colorado .
 A short speech was given by Major General William H Gill, Retired, to dedicate the grounds . Major General Gill was also present at the ceremony .
 A 19 gun salute was given to General Pershing in tribute to his work in the Army . The 19-gun salute was a tribute to the general's work .
 Pershing Rifles company went to Fort Carson for a field problem devised by P/R Captain Dale Darby . The field problem was devised by Captain Darby.
 Red Army was an attacking force from the Gulf of Mexico moving north into North America . The Red Army invaded North America in the early 1900s .
 The Blue Army -was finally able to stop the advance of the Red Army and to launch a counter attack themselves . The Blue and Red armies were able to defeat each other's advance .
 Decker and Captain Pistone of the Colorado College ROTC staff were present as advisors and judges . Decker and Pistone were also judges at the event .
 The staff at Fort Carson supplied the material for the field problem and the training ground .
 The bulk of the squads was made up of plebes . The majority of the squad leaders were sophomores and the majority of them were plebes. They gave the orders to the squads .
 The P/R staff is very proud of the performance by the whole company, especially since they had never been in the field before,"" Dalby said .
 Oanforth Foundation Offers '61 Fellowships . The Danforth Foundation is an educational foundation located in St. Louis, Missouri .
 Danforth Graduate Fellows invites applications for the tenth class of Danforth graduates . Applications are being accepted by the University of St. Louis, Missouri . Danforth will host the 10th class of graduate fellows .
 These must come from college senior men and recent graduates . They are preparing themselves for a career of college teaching .
 The Foundation welcomes applicants from the areas of natural and biological sciences, social sciences, humanities and all fields of specialiaztion to be found in the undergraduate college . Applicants must be in the natural, biological sciences and social sciences .
 Lloyd Worner has been named as the liaison officer to nominate to the Danforth Foundation two or not to exceed three candidates for the 19C1 fellowships . The Danforth foundation will nominate two or three candidates each year for the fellowships.
 These appointments are fundamentally ""a relationship of encouragement"" throughout the years of graduate study . The appointments carry a promise of financial aid within prescribed conditions as there may be need .
 If a man receives the Danforth Appointment, together with a Rhodes Scholarship, Fulbright Scholarship or Woodrow Wilson Fellowship, he becomes a Danforth Fellow without stipend, until these other relationships have been completed . If a person receives a . man receives . a Rhodes . Scholarship,
 Reserve books may now be checked out for overnight use one hour before the library closes . Reserve books can now be used overnight at the library in the U.S. library .
 Reserve books may be picked up a half hour earlier that was previously possible . This policy, which has already gone into effect, means means means that reserve books are picked up earlier .
 The Tiger Club held a parly given by the Tiger Club for the School for the Deaf & Blind in Colorado Springs .
 GG Players Produce Success in ""Diary" The Colorado College Players again hitched their wagon to a star and came out with a success . GG Players produced a successful album of songs .
 Miss Elizabeth Quin in the part of Miep appeared stiff, trving to put her best foot forward . ""and finding the decision hard to make, leaped. leaped," she said .
 Miss Texas, Donna Duncan, surmounted the ""ya all"" drawl to portray Mrs. Mrs. Mlep . Miss Duncan was Miss Texas .
 Doug Cowles in the character of Mr Kraler depicted a helpful, sincere gentleman but sloppily overdid it at times . The film was based on the book, which was released in October .
 Jim Fox, Otto Frank, brought out the character in earnest amateur style . Otto Frank brought out an amateur amateur style of the character .
 The tonality of her voice brought forth a heartwarming young girl who created an uncomparable mood from beginning to end . Her voice was the perfect combination of music and personality .
 Van Daan, Leonard Dalsemer and Miss Carol Elfrlng, were excellent and challenging parts met well by the actors . The audience was engaged in the best part of the play .
 Despite a well performed sister role, her age was constantly fluctuating . Despite the well-performed role, she was constantly in constant flux .
 A professional air was given to this frustrated mother's boy who lightened the oppression of the play . It was a professional air given to the play by the frustrated mother-of-one .
 'Peter Van Daan, Robert Halsband, was truly a delightful youth who grew up and awakened to reality'
 The confession scene contained a note of insincerity, despite the strong and powerful performances of all . Otto Frank's last words, ""She puts me to shame,"" — too booming a tone to end an oppressive drama .
 Hours of work went into a magnificent set, costumes, costumes and makeup, lighting, sound and props . Hours were spent on the set .
 Just one note — ""Silence is a virtue"" — especially applies to backstage transitions . The show is set to be shown in New York City on Saturday .
 Those of you who saw ""Diary of Anne Frank"" witnessed the best production yet seen on the stage of Perkins Hall . The best production ever seen was the best of the show .
 In this play were all the human emotions and thev were portrayed in ..•very light . Because in this play are all the . human emotions . And the human . emotions were portrayed . in a very light. Because in . this play .
 Cal Poly Colorado College contributes to Colorado Springs Community Chest and California Polvtechnical Institute . ASCC treasurer Chris Griffiths says ASCC made contributions to the Colorado Springs community Chest and to the California PTSI Institute .
 A contribution of $84 was made to the Colorado Springs Community Chest for general use . The money will be used for general purposes .
 This money was drawn from the campus chest fund . This money is in turn made up of profits from the variety show each fall and auction profits from campus chest auction .
 The second sum of $25 has been sent to the California Polytechnicai Institute to be contributed to a memorial fund in memory of those team members who died in the recent airline crash at loleda airport .
 The Coloi-ndo College International Relations Club will sponsor an open meeting on Thursday, December 1, at 8 in the WES Lounge of Rastall Center . IRC Discussion will be held on Soviet Education .
 Mr Shockley was one of 21 American school superintendents who recently made a trip to the Soviet Union . The trip was sponsored by American Association of School Administrators .
 The group spent more than three weeks in the Soviet Union . They traveled extensively in the Russian, Ukrainian, Georgian and Lithuanian Union Republics .
 The major cities in which they inspected schools were Leningrad, Moscow Tbilisi, Kiev, Kiev and Vilna . The children's school was inspected by the Russian government .
 Mr Shockley served as District Superintendent in Georgetown, Colorado . He also served as County Superintendent in Clear Creek County, Clear Creek .
 Highest College Board Scores Held by Frosh . There will be opportunity for guestions and discussion from the door . Discussion will be led by Mr Shockloy .
 The College Board scores showed the most about the class ability of the freshman class at Colorado College . Colorado College's freshman class was ranked No. 1 on the College Board .
 This freshman average is the highest received by any class at Colorado College . Colorado College's freshman average was the highest of any class received .
 Mr Donald Jenkins, baritone, performed Sunday, November 20 . The first concert of the annual winter concert series was performed by Mr Jenkins .
 The first part of the program consisted of selections from Handel and Purcell and four pieces by Brahms . The second part was a selection of four pieces from Brahms and Handel .
 Carlton Gamer of the CC music department then performed ""Six Little Piano Pieces"" by Arnold Schoenberg and ""Aria da Capo,"" an original composition . Carlton Gamer then performed a piece by composer Carlton Gamer .
 Mr Jenkins followed with three selections by Faure and three English selections to finish the program . Mr Jenkins then selected three more English selections from Faure .
 When called back for an enclore, Mr Jenkins sang a musical version of Milton poem .
 Grand Rally Today; 4:30 Begins Search reward— the keg. s The starting point for the race S0 e 'mL P , re ' P -n""'; letl C0UrSe of ab °ut SO miles wdl be Slocum parkin,'
 Basketball Season Opens December 2 . The mco-Gl basketball schedule h»8 has been released .
 Idaho State State has been dropped while the Air Force Academy has been added to h va.-s.ty schedule . Idaho State was dropped while Air Force was added to the schedule .
 The IFC should demand certain standards of performance from all chapters, says the IFC . "The IFC needs to be more transparent and more transparent," says IFC chief executive .
 It should be a responsible organization facilitating communication of understanding between the college administration and the students . The college administration should be responsible for communication between the students and their peers, says the author .
 It should not overemphasize judicial functions in too many instances, nor should it be thought of by other organizations as strictly a punitive organization . The U.S. Supreme Court should not over emphasize its judicial functions too much, it has said .
 "These are some of the ideas that we feel are the basis of our operations," says CNN.com's chief executive.com .
 Many feel that many feel that we, or more correctly I, am not fulfilling any of the responsibilities that are required to insure those ideals, I and we are trying. Although many feel we are not fulfilling those responsibilities, I am trying. We are trying, he says .
 At present we are engaged in formulating a system of rush that will be acceptable to all chapters on this campus and the college administrators . At present, the college is working on the system .
 "This is not an easy task, and can't be handled overnight," says minister . "We are handling the problem very well, and making much progress toward that objective," he says .
 In the past, we have had the problem of lack of good public relations, but this in time may be alleviated. In the future, we may have a better public relations system, says the BBC .
 Ted Worcester of the Sigma Chi House is our public relations representative, and although we actually have done little so far to achieve merit, I'm sure that in the near future, we may start to balance our public PR to a favorable light .
 We feel that perhaps the weakest link in the IFC is lack of attendance of regular members . The IFC has been criticised for its poor attendance record . We are happy to clarify that IFC does not have a 'weakest link'
 The presidents of each house and an elected member from each house sometimes have trouble making all meetings . "As a result we sometimes meet with entirely different personnel, which makes it much harder to transact old business," he said .
 We feel that Major Johnson will be able to help us considerably this year . We hope to see him back in action for the first time since his retirement .
 One thing that might interest you people, is the relationships between house-mother and fraternity members . One thing we're thinking about is the relationship between the house mother and fraternity member .
 Major Johnson feels that there is a definite problem in this area . The IFC also is aware of the problem, and the IFC is aware .
 We don't know exactly how to go about solving this problem of lack of respect toward these women, but we are at least thinking about it . We're at least trying to solve it, but it's not clear how .
 Rastall Center will sponsor a coe-d ""SkiDitioning"" session in Cossitt Gym .
 An introductory movie was shown which highlighted CC students in Aspen . CC students were shown how they learned to use the language of Aspen.
 Sheets of valuable information to the beginning skier were made available to those attending .
 The next day 27 ski pole given to interested students by Rastall Center . 27 ski poles given to students by students .
 "Ski-Ditioning"" program to be held in Cossitt Gymnasium December 1 from 7:45 to 8:30m.
 The purpose of this session is to provide some effective exercises to help condition beginning skiers and all other skiers for the physical fitness necessary to enjoy the sport .
 Harry Fontius, Bob Kendall, Beth Kendall and Annie Hereford will instruct for the session . The session will be held at the end of the week .
 SKIERS and POTENTIAL SKIers attended the ""Skiers Evening"" which was held recently in the WES room .
 Speakers included Harry Fontius, Abett Iclcs, Beth Kendall and Bob Kendall . The event was held in honor of Beth Kendall .
 A creative, demanding atmosphere is as crucial for a college's success as the intellectual midwife for her students . A creative atmosphere is also crucial for the success of a college, she says .
 Students need to bring it out of the classroom and into their lives, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "A good college will alway ask the students to become their own creators, their own atmosphere. Paradoxically, a good college asks them to become themselves creators," says Dr. Andrew Keen .
 College was never meant to become a dozen pages in our mental scrapbooks to chuckle over in our middle years . Fraternities and sororities notwithstanding, college was not meant to be a bunch of pages of our memories .
 My misunderstanding of the removal of board table for the hockey team Thanksgiving Day brought about concern among the students and an injustice to you . I'm sorry for my misunderstanding of removing the board table from the school .
 Signed by 49 students, the fact must be shown to them that the administration and you were not removing the board table, the letter says .
 Alpha Lambda Delta held initiation for the new members, Karen Bessesen and Charlotte Wallace . Sincerely, Stephanie Ames Ames Clublicity .
 Miss Christine Moon, dean of women, was initiated as an honorary member of the group . Miss Moon was the first woman to be initiated into the society .
 The Alpha Lambda Delta tutoring system is available for students in the U.S. Students can take advantage of the tutoring program .
 Shove Vesper Service Scheduled December 4 at 5 p.m. Shove Chapel will hold an advent vesper service in December 4 .
 Knapp has selected poems dating from the sixteenth to the twentieth century . The poems range from Shakespeare and Milton to those of Auden and Eliot .
 The college chapel choir will perform a late seventeenth century mass by Marc Antoine Charpentier .
 The choir of 25 voices will be assisted by a small string ensemble and organ . The choir will have 25 voices and will be joined by a string ensemble .
 Van Cliburn with the Denver Symphony Orchestra will perform on November 29 . The Denver Auditorium Arena will be open to the public for the performance .
 The American Shakespeare Festival Acting Company presents ""A Midsummer Night's Dream" starring Bert Lahr as Bottom . The company will perform the play at 8, 9 and 10 .
 Evenings, Orchestra, $4.95; mezzine, $5.40; balcony, $3.30, $2.20 and $1.65 . Evenings: Orchestra, mezzanine and balcony prices range from $3 to $4 .95
 Matinees, Orchestra, $3.85; mezzanine, $ 3.30; balcony $2.75, $ 2.20 and $1.65 . Orchestra, mezzinine, balcony $4.99; balcony, $4,500;
 This month's movie will be shown Sunday, November 27 in the WES room at Rastall Center . The movie is the latest in a series of movies to be shown at the center .
 It is on epic treatment of human jealousy and the dangerous limits to which it can run . "It's on the dangerous limit of which it is allowed to run," says author .
 Bring a flashlight and there is dinner and dancing at the end of the road . There is no need for a flashlight, but there is also a chance to enjoy a dance .
 Christmas is coming to Rastall with a Christmas party from 7:30 to 9m. on Thursday evening, December 1 . The party will take place from 7.30pm to 9pm on Thursday night .
 Watch for the following Rastall Center events — — ""Othello"" will be shown in the WES Lounge at 7:30m. on Sunday, November 27, with no admission charge! — Wednesday, November 30, Dr. Dr. Phil will appear in the R
 Ne w s Albert Seay will spoilak at the coffee hour from 4-5m. on ""The History of Jazz"" in the WES Lounge .
 There will be a tea in the WES Lounge for all Rastall committee members . Handouts and instruction to help you become physically fit for the sport of skiing .
 The assembly was held Tuesday, November 22, in Perkins Hall . Brainwashing was the topic discussed in the assembly .
 Panel members include Gler Brooks of the Political Science hov Department, Lt. Membe of the University of Cambridge . Membe was the first member of the panel .
 Arthur Decker of the Military Science Department and Professor Carl Roberk of the Psychology Department . Professor Roberk is also a psychology professor .
 Roberts defined brainwashing as a negative term for extreme forms of control . Roberts defined the term brainwashing in the book .
 Many such attempts go on in society, but brainwashing is an extreme and undesirable form of this . Brainwashing is a form of an attempt to brainwash people, says the author of the book .
 The Communists achieved a small amount of control in 95 per cent of the American prisoners in the Korean War .
 They brought this about by utilizing the re-enforcement 6t motivational variables and through intense stimulation (punishment | and deprivation) They brought about by . utilizing . re-enforcing 6t . variables and . intense stimulation .
 The prisoners' pei'ception and discrimination were decreased, and when complete control of the environment is present there is no limit to the possibilities . The prisoners were able to control their pei’ception .
 The military hopes that such i situation as Korea, never happen again and it will try to maintaii itself so that it does not happen again . The war was sudden, the training hasty and the education level of the men was ninth grade .
 A code of conduct for military personnel has been devised to confirm American standards and beliefs . If il should, it should be a code for American military personnel, it would confirm their beliefs .
 The fact that behavior is irrational anil change can't be accepted must be accepted, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The fanatic nature and effectiveness of Communist ideology must also be accepted, says the author of the book . Author: "The fanatic nature of Communism must be accepted"
 The Communists even use brainwashing to train their own leaders and agents . The Communist Party uses brainwashing techniques to train its own leaders .
 Our citizens should be armed to resist mass persuasion — brainwashing . Mr Brooks suggested an effective counter resistance .
 Our society should concentrate on the facts that make values less firm. We would then be better able to resist the Communists . We would be better than he could resist the Communist Party.
 Professor Roberts concluded that rational education will not work by itself . There is not enough emotional conditioning concerning our country, flag and principles, he said .
 A patriotic reaction is not learned rationally as walking and talking are, and it is unfortunate that flag waving is looked down upon . Flag waving is a reaction not learned as much as walking or talking .
 There will be a junior -neeting, Tuesday, November i at 11m. in the WES room in the Rastall Center . The sophomores are jving their class meeting in iove Chapel at 11 m. on Nomber 29 .
 Tomorrow afternoon the girls are having a tea for ""Mom"" Russom, the former housemother for their chapter and for the CC chapter of Beta Theta Pi . Russom is a former housemom for the chapter and the former CC chapter . The girls will remember Russom as a
 Russom, who is in Colorado Springs over the Thanksgiving week-end, is now a sorority housemother in Fort Collins, Colorado . Russom is in the Colorado Springs area to celebrate Thanksgiving .
 Delta Gammas had the Betas over for dinner, and the girls went to the Sigma Chi house for dessert . Delta Gamma is a sister-in-law of Sigma Chi sorority sisters .
 Gamma Phi Beta The Gamma Phis had a very successful 1920's Costume Ball with the Kappas last Friday evening .
 On Saturday afternoon the girls had a party at the house for the cerebral palsy children . The party was held at the home for the children with cerebral palsys .
 The Christian Science Monitor is half the regular subscription rate . Subscribe now at half price to read this wortd-fomous doily newspaper .
 Kappa Kappa Gamma held a mother daughter breakfast at the Kappa house last Saturday morning . Kappa Gamma members and guests went to the house for breakfast Sunday morning .
 Next Monday evening the Thetas will go to the Phi Gam house for dessert, and on Tuesday the girls will have dinner with the Betas . Kappa Alpha Theta will also have dinner at Phi Gam's house next Monday .
 The Independents will have their grades given along with other social organizations at the end of the semester . The students' grades will be announced at the beginning of the year .
 Vivian Arviso, Miss Indian America, visited the Observatory and presented the group with a picture of herself in full costume .
 LA JUNTA COLORADO SPRINGS College Liaison BONNIE WHITELEATHER MEIroie 4-7744, Ext. Ext. is the college's college Liaison .
 Kappa Sig pledges went to Denver, Colorado, for a sneak trip . Kappa Sigma pledges took their sneak trip to Denver last Friday . Kappa Sig pledge boys went to Colorado .
 Kappa Sigs will elect a Toilet Bowl Queen on Sunday afternoon at the annual Toile Bowl game . The Kappa Sig will play in the annual game .
 Phi Delta Theta Flintstone Rock last Saturday night was a huge success . The Phi Delt Flintstone rock concert was a big success . Phi Delta theta is a chapter of Phi Phi Delta .
 Next Monday evening the Phi Delts will have a dessert with the Delta Gammas . Next Monday night they will meet up for a dessert .
 Phi Gamma Delta The Phi Gams are having the Thetas over for a dessert next Monday evening . Phi Gamma Gamma Delta is Phi Phi Gamma Kappa Kappa Kappa Phi Phi Phi .
 Sigma Chi had a double serenade with the Thetas . Sigma Chis had a du du duet with the Tas on Monday night .
 After a pledge-active football game last Friday afternoon, the Betas went over to the Delta Gamma house for dinner . The Betas have a pledge active football game .
 Zeta The Zetas have completed the arrangements for their semi-formal dance to be held at the Hackney House on November 26 . Zeta will perform at the event on November 27 .
 S EISHTH STREET CHINESE-AMERICAN RESTAURANT Colorado Springs' most beautiful . Family Style Lunches and Dinners are served at the restaurant .
 Chairmen have been chosen to head committees for the AllCollege Conference in February and Songfest in April . ASCC Announces Events' Chairmen Chairmen .
 Tom Rivers and Janet Fry head the committee for the All-College Conference formerly called the Leadership Conference . The conference is now known as the All College Conference . Tom Rivers is the chairman of the committee .
 The conference will discuss problems of the college and promote interest in college affairs . Consisting of panel groups and discussions, the conference will be for the purpose of discussing problems of college and promoting interest .
 Songfest chairman, Jerry Northfin, will meet with the social chairmen of all organizations on campus to decide on the categories for the songs . Songfest will be held at the University of Columbia College of Music .
 The judges will then give a decision based on a definite point system set up by the song committee . The song committee will then decide whether to give the song a chance to win .
 Songfest will be one of the scheduled events for the two days of Parents' Weekend . Songfest is part of the event planned for Parents' weekend .
 Anyone interested in announcing for the Songfest should contact Northern Northern. Northern.com .
 Parents' Weekend chairman has not been chosen . Any junior or senior interested in this position should see Tim Moe .
 Becker's Radiator, Body & Fender Repairing and Painting repair and Painting is Becker's. Me 3-0075 . Call Radiator & Body Shop Colorado at 3.99 a.m. PT .
 Two men closest to Sellitto in ground gaining were Pete Pleasant, halfback, and Scott Tippin, senior fullback . Pete Pleasant was the most successful player to gain ground gained in the game .
 He suffered a broken ankle a short time before the halftime gun in the fifth game of the season, against Colorado State College, and spent the rest of the year on crutches . He suffered the injury in the game .
 He scored four touchdowns and kicked seven out of eight attempts for PAT conversions for a total of 31 points . He also scored seven of eight PAT conversions . He kicked seven of his eight attempts to score 31 points.
 Finishing right behind Pleasant was Tippin, who played 30 minutes more than Pleasant .
 Tippin caught the opening kickoff in the sixth game of the season, against Idaho State College, and suffered a severe back injury . He suffered the injury as he returned the ball 10 yards with a return 10 yards .
 We are completely stocked with the Finest Ski Equipment . New Boots, Skis and Poles for $2.75 BUCK Sporting Goods Co.
 Wisgerhof punted 31 times, had one blocked, and kicked for a total of 1,154 yards . The punker punted 1,000 yards, punting 31 times and one blocked .
 He scored four touchdowns, all on pass catches, for 24 points, and passed twice for 68 yards and one touchdown . He also passed twice, passing twice, and scored 68 yards for 68 and one for 68 .
 The Tigers ran a total of plays for a total net gain of yards . Total statistics show that main offensive weapon of the gers over the season was the running of plays .
 I960 Colorado College Friend' Gives Viewpoints In Non-Violence to Peace . Tuesday morning at 11m. in Perkins Hall . Peace Education Secretary of the North Central Reon of the American Friends Service Committee .
 Three ballets will be presented by the Colorado College Dance Theatre under the direction of Norman and Dorothea Corniek . The full Colorado Springs Symphony Orchestra will perform .
 Two performances of the ballets will be presented tonight at 8:30m. ;md tomorrow nfl-aceY"" Mr Hinshaw is particuired in the life and oughts of Mohandi Ghandi .
 Hinshaw is a teacher, ister, author and former presiint of William Penn College . He is also a former president and is a former teacher and ister .
 He is traveled in major areas of the arid and brings to his current leaking the knowledge and int of his talks with leaders and iacemakers in various parts of the world .
 Mr Witte is both a source < information on and a recruiter r AFSC work and study projects, th here and abroad . He is both an AFSC recruiter and a recruiter .
 On Tuesday niiing there will be descriptive ■ature available and Mr Witte 11 have lunch at Rastall Center persons interested in such '""ftojects" will be available .
 Such persons should conlet either Mr Carleton Gamer of Music Department or Mr v Booth of the Religion Detriment . Such persons would be either Mr. Carleton gamer of Music Dept. or Mr. v Booth .
 Features icrease in Pages new concept in yearbooks 11 be apparent in the 1961 NUG5T .
 More of the campus and its acities will be featured in the 25 ditional pages . The 25 pages will feature the campus's acities .
 Anne Wilson serves as astant editor, Linda Haneborg as iss editor, Sue Igelsrud is l in ai'ge of campus life . Sue Igelrud also serves as business manager and Paul Kileath is business manager . Anne Wilson is astrant editor
 The last in a series of three related sermons, ""The Gists of Christianity,"" by Mr Harry Booth, will be given Sunday in Shove Chapel .
 This message will be especially meaningful in preparation for the Christmas season . This message is especially meaningful for the children of the world .
 The sermon will discuss the difference between being a Christian in words and living as a Christian . The sermon is on the topic of being Christian in terms of living as Christian .
 Those who think ethics is at the heart of Christianity are those who believe in theological doctrine as the defining characteristic . Those who believe devotion and piety is the essence of Christianity .
 Blue Key will usher and members of Cap and Gown will hostess at the coffee hour following the services . Blue Key is ushering at the services and will usher at coffee hour .
 Readings from Isaiah, caroles, the poetry of Shakespeare, Milton, Auden and Eliot . Mass by Marc Anton Charpentier will be featured in CC vesper program this Sunday evening .
 Mr Wallace Caldwell will open and close the service with readings from the Messianic sections of the book of Isaiah .
 The chapel choir under direction of Mr Donald Jenkins and assisted by Harris Sherman, Jackie Ives and Barbara Morgan on violins and the cello will perform sections of the Charpentier mass . Lewis Knapp will read selection from the great poets relevant to the Christmas season .
 Poetry Workshop will hold its second meeting on Tuesday, December 6, at 7:30 Pin the ASCC Room in Hastall Center . Poetry workshop will be held in the Hastall center .
 Copies of Poems to be discussed will be available at Rastall desk, Saturday, December 3 . Poems will be discussed at the desk of the poet's poetry collection .
 Next Thursdav, December 8, DER DEUTSCHE KLUB will have its Christmas party .
 There will be plenty of entertaininment including caroling, and refreshments . The event will take place at the end of the year .
 The first issue of this year's KINNIK1NNIK, the campus literary and art magazine, will be distributed sometime next week . The magazine's first issue is due out next Wednesday .
 This issue consists of over 40 pages of prose, poetry, art work and photography . This issue of this week's edition includes over 40 pieces of prose and poetry .
 The cover was designed by Frank Banihiira, who presently has an art show in Rastall Center . Frank has a show at the center of his art collection .
 The second issue of the KINNIKinNIK is scheduled to be released sometime in April .
 Members of the Colorado College Debate club will participate in two forensic meets before the Christmas holidays . College Debators Head for Contests .
 Jack Walker and Dave Furgason; Max Taylor and Dave Bitters; and Robert"" Thrasher and James Spenser. Jack Walker . Dave Bitter and Dave Walker are the co-hosts of the show . The show is set to air on PBS stations throughout the U
 Mr Robin Rudoff of the history department will be coaching the team . Accompanying them as coach will be Mr Mr Rudoff from the History Department .
 These teams will participate in two rounds of discussion, one round of extemporaneous speaking and two debates . The teams will take part in a round of debate and discussion .
 All topics in the tournament will be directly related to the general debate topic of compulsory health insurance in the U.S. All topics will be addressed in the debate .
 Members of the CC group will participate in extemporaneous speaking and debate . The CC group is invited to take part in the debate .
 The topics for extemporaneous division will be drawn from world events of the past six months . The topics are drawn from the world events that have taken place in the last six months.
 The teams in the six-round debate event will debate the national topic relating to compulsory health insurance . The debate event takes place in a bid to raise awareness of compulsory health care .
 Professor Richard Pearl elected secretary-treasurer of the Southwest Section of the National Association of Geology Teachers for the year 1960-61 .
 Southwest section embraces 28 colleges and universities . Includes retired professors and members of the National Park Service . Southwest section includes some retired professors .
 Dr. A J Budding of New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology, vice-president, and Dr. Dr. M. A. A . Budding, of the Institute of Mining and Technology in New Mexico, says the project was a success . Dr. Budding:
 There are many skaters — some amateurs, some experts, and some lovers . There are also amateurs and experts, but also lovers and entertainers .
 The narrator for "Peter and the Wolf" will be Mr William McMillen, head of the drama department at Colorado College . The narrator of the play will be head of Colorado College drama department .
 Based on old minstrel tunes by Louis Gottsulialk, Hershey Kay has arranged a .ballet in the style of Old New Orleans .
 The dancing is reminiscent of the days of ""end men,"" minstrel entertainers, top hats and the Cakewalk .
 Costumes for the three ballets have been designed and executed by Dorothea Corniek who has also choreographed all the dances . The costumes have also been designed by the costume designer . The ballet is set to take place in New York City on Sunday .
 Mr Favre will be assisted on stage production by the members of the Arena Players and the Wasson High School stage crew . The show is set to be held in Wasson .
 Mr Larry Heller is responsible for the set for ""Peter and the Wolf"" and will play the role of Grandfather . Mr Heller will play a Grandfather in the film . He will be the Grandfather of the Wolf .
 CAKEWALK, a ballet by Hershey Kay to be held December 2 and 3 . Cynthia Lamb as the Queen of the Swamp Lily and Norman Cornicle .
 The applicant must meet the requirements for admission to the Law School . Applicants are required to meet requirements to attend Law School in New York .
 This cholarship will provide full tuition for one year and will be renewable upon satisfactory completion of the year's work for the next two years . The scholarship will also be renewable at the end of each year .
 iastall Presents Faulkner Movie ""Intruder in the Dust" is the next movie sponsored by Rastall Center . Applications should be made to Professor J Douglas Mertz, Political Science Department .
 This film is taken from the book by William Faulkner and features David Brian and Claude Jarman, Jr. in the leading roles . The film is based on the book, "Fahkner"
 It concerns a Negro blamed for the murder of a man and shows how his innocence was proven after many exciting incidents . The film follows the story of a Negro who was wrongly accused of the murder .
 Due to the large crowd at last Sunday's movie, this month's showing will be in Perkins Hall . This month's show will be at Perkins Hall instead of Perkins .
 Kintz and Ullman are correct in that they were not informed the letter would not be printed . They were not told they would not have been allowed to print the letter .
 I replied that after speaking with Deans Moon and Reid I had changed my mind about the manner in which the incident should be handled . I replied: "I replied that . After speaking with . Deans moon and Reid, I said that after . speaking with them I had . changed
 Facts had emerged which were evidently not known by the writers of the letters . Further, facts had emerged that were apparently not known, the writers said .
 The administration has always reserved the right to review two types of cases rather than release them to the Student Conduct Committee . An example of these is the fact that the administration has . always reserved . the right not to release two types off cases .
 One type is concerned with psychoneurotic students . The other is concerned about moral standards . Violators of similar standards have been equally punished when the administration is aware of the transgressions .
 "The decision was my own and I take full and sole responsibility for it. The decision is my own," she said . "I take full responsibility for that decision," she added .
 It has been the past policy of the TIGER to print all letters, regardless of the controversial topic of the letter .
 The Editor has the power of the Editor to change this policy, subject to the approval of the Publications Board which felt that I was right in refusing to publish the letters .
 I will not under any circumstances print letters in bad taste, nor will I permit subjects to be undertaken by this newspaper which I feel have no business in a newspaper or which can be better handled in another fashion . I will also not print any subjects which can't be undertaken in this newspaper
 It is my feeling that the letters submitted for publication were guilty of both of the above errors . It is also a feeling that some of the letters sent to the paper were misconstrued .
 Ullman, Kintz and Gappert would care to submit an article or a series of articles on the larger concept of what denotes a gentleman or a gentlewoman . They are more than welcome to submit .
 Such articles should be welcomed by the administration which in the past has shown a reluctance to accept the reports of the students as to the manner of conduct inherent on campus .
 "Such articles will, however, conform to the standards of good taste as determined by me and the Publications Board," he says .
 The new Editor and Business Manager of the TIGER will be announced in the December 9th issue of this paper .
 For the first time that can be remembered there is a rather pleasing number of applications for the two positions for the positions . The first time it has been remembered that there are rather pleasing applications for both positions .
 At last count we had almost four per cent of the student body working on the paper at one time or another . Almost four of the students at the University of Cambridge worked on a paper at the time .
 If we should include the number of students who work on the NUGGET, the KINNIKTNNIK, or any of the other numerous organizations on the campus, the percentage of the student body which is participating in extracurriculars reaches rather astounding proportions .
 This from a campus where apathy is supposed to be rampant, where complaints and criticisms about student government circulate freely . This is not the case of apathy or apathy, but it's a sign of frustration .
 It is the comment from this column that if the readers think this campus is bad, they should try some others . It is a comment from the comment that if you think it's bad, try some other campuses .
 I had an occasion to talk to several students from other schools during the summer while at Fort Riley . I had a chance to talk with several other students from different schools .
 One boy referred to his school as ""suitcase U"" because so many students went home over the weekends . One boy called his school 'suitcase' because of his school's weekend schedule .
 Participation and interest in extracurricular affairs was so poor the administration was forced to cancel many planned programs . Another student said participation and interest was so low that many programs were canceled . Another said participation was so bad the administration had to cancel programs .
 Several institutions are considering disbanding student government completely . A glance at the editorial columns of the exchange papers from other schools reveals that there are several institutions which are considering disbandsing .
 Students from CC sent to regional conventions have reported on occasion that other schools were amazed at the amount of power wielded by the people on this campus . CC students have reported that other colleges have been amazed by the power of the campus .
 This is merely to point out that conditions may not be as bad as we would sometimes believe . This is simply to say that conditions are not as severe as they may sometimes be .
 There can be improvement, and a great deal of it will come from the students in one form or another . Certainly there can be improved, and the students must improve .
 It behooves this complacent fraternity man to have his say too . However, we have quite a start on other schools, writes JHC .
 This fact has been long lamented by many, but gripers come and gripers go, but the cultural sins stay on forever . This is a fact that many of America's cultural sins are long-lasting .
 Because you very people who creatively and glibly attack our cultural lag, or gap, do not follow through with any action . Because they do, they don't follow through to any action. Because you can't be creative and gliffy, you can be creative .
 The democratic senator from Pennsylvania, Joseph Clark, professes that ""in America sometimes a lot of talk is a prelude to action""; but here at CC it seems that this is not the case of action .
 No, we of fraternity alley have not come here to learn to walk into a room properly, to make floats, to pour tea and smile, etc. We have come to learn how to walk in a room, make floats and smile .
 We are here though though to have fun . Academic fun, social fun, cultural fun and cultural fun, athletic fun . We're here to have FUN .
 'The world is .basically a 'fun place' you know, with the above kinds of fun being important, and we intend to experience all these kinds of . fun before we make a decision as to which is best . The world is a 'Fun place' and the world
 When the majority of the delegattatt •e liberal, we are going to 1 When they are conservative and culture, culture still has given more access to more culture to more people .
 We also think a few other things, like if the world, nation and school needs reform, still have to be accomplished through people . It may behoove us to acquire social techniques along with our intellectual stimulations, we say .
 It is its members that are either good or bad, and they are good or good according to their enviroment, which they never made, but now can, and are, changing . It is the group that is either good, bad, or good, according to its env
 Fraternities have decided to stay in the fraternities and change their ""evilness"" into ""goodness" rather than to stay outside the Greek system, and watch a potentially good force falter .
 We also feel that in our heterogeneous Greek groups, we have, for our own cosmopolitan benefit, access to a greater range of thought than if we remained content with the security of the fellowship of others just like ourselves .
 Edward Kintz and Donald Ullman accused of 'near-slanderous' accusations . It is wondered whether or not you have evidence with which to back up your accusations . The pair appeared at the bottom of the published letter .
 As a leader of a major publication on this campus, you have shown gross inadequacy in your ability to arrive at a rational conclusion concerning ""a group"" of which you know absolutely nothing," says the editor .
 We hope that your egregiously asinine statement is no reflection upon ies1 <et b tli 'dents I'iim.im. We hope . that your .egegesively asininine statements are no reflection on ies 1 <et
 Coloraij College in relation to the United States National Student Associate . It is unfortunate that these questions about the Association were n , asked by the Executive Committee .
 It is important to note that USNSA is neither liberal nor conser tive by conception nor by structure attending our legislative Congres liberal resolutions and liberal offii will have the opposite .
 The HUAC resolution is based upon the same premise as a bj soon to be considered by the U.S. Congress .
 Vice-President, the President-Elect and the Secretary of Health, Edi cation and Welfare. Vice-president, the . President-elect and the . Secretary of . Health, . EdiCation and . Welfare . Vice-Vice-President and the. President-
 This is not to say that all the positions taken by the Congress at ones that you would agree with . The Congress has taken some of the most unpopular positions in the world .
 No membei is in any way committed or bound by any resolution passed by th Congress . The resolution was passed by the U.S. House of Representatives .
 If you are not, if your point of view is heard, then you have only yourself to blame . If you want to be heard in the world, you are only yourself .
 Students are freely chosen by their own governments and they come to the Congress to debate and vote according to the rules of parliamentary procedure . Students are chosen by the students' own governments .
 I have no sympatl with anyone who complains that the USNSA does not represent the position when they have made no effort to have their opinions heard within the Association . I'm not sympathetic to those who complain that the U.S. does not .
 Democracy is based upon the premise that people who have a t of view will offer it in the open market-place with all the rest of the rest being tested and either accepted or rejected . Democracy is about people offering their views and accepting them .
 It does not feel that you should have to spi your time on matters that have already been solved when there are others that need attention . On the other hand it does not . feel that . you should not have to have to focus on matters already solved .
 Report by Harry H Lunn Jr., Jr. for the American Council on Education .
 I merely quote Lunn in regard to the statements y made in the editorial. I merely quotes Lunn's statements .
 "In this day we need to develop students to provide leadership things that matter. In this day they need to provide students with leadership things to matter. We need to learn leadership things matter," she said .
 This does not mean that problems on your camp are not important and should not be dealt with by student governme . It means that it should deal more with problems that are important the education of students . I submit that solving problems that have already been solved elsewhi does not do that
 At no time during his presentati to the Executive Council did I state that one of USNSA's major fui tions is to criticize the State Department. "At no time," he said, referring to the NSA, "one of its major fior tions"
 I don't know of ariyoi else in the Association that holds such a view . Nor do I know of other members of the Association who hold such views .
 I sp of USNSA moving to make a contribution in the increase of Ameri prestige internationally . On the contrary, I sp . of US NSA moving to . make a . contribution in . the increase in the . increase of America's prestige internationally. I sp. on the contrary .
 Perhaps you would like to clear this matter up in tl interests of responsible journalism . Perhaps this is in the interests of the responsible journalism community .
 Your student government could be an active member for than $200 a year . You can be active member of your student government for $200 per year .
 He said dues would be in the neighborhood of $100 a year and to send a representative to a national convention would cost around $70 . Yet he stated that dues would not be as high as $100 .
 For $170 we can send one representative to a convention and receive NSA publications . The cost of the convention is $170 .
 I feel that the money could be better spent on the Colorado College campus . The money could instead be spent on Colorado College .
 The students of the t lege have a larger responsibility fulfill on this campus . Finally, the students of this campus should be responsible for their actions .
 So long such problems as now exist on t campus are still in evidence, tl to become members in NSA wo be to take on an additional sponsibility when we are not fulfilling those we already have .
 Colorado College Tiger December 2, I960 [l[3; Letters to the Editor . it not my intention to infer the fact that NSA had as one of its major functions the criticism of the Detriment of State. of State .
 Mr Johnston Mentioned that one view of NSA :as concerned with the Algerian question and was different from that of the Department of State. Mr Johnston .
 I had mentioned that the organization did take exceptions to policy set by the Department and did so in the interest of people and students abroad . The organization took exception to policy .
 Sandy Ballard — Tom Rhoades Anne Wentland — Dick Dugdale Engaged : Hazel Haigh — Gary Mertz Linda Robeson — Dave Baker AsCC Notes By Betsy Gaskill Publications The KINNIKINNik will be givi out next week .
 There will be a traffic hearing Tuesday, December G at 7m. in ■ ai fhe ASCC room . Traffic hearing will be held at 7 p.m.
 The name of the Freshmen Hen's Club has been changed to the Bengals . Constitution Constitution was changed to Bengals in 2008 . Constitution is changing to Bengals .
 The film was apparently rather elderly, but the sound came through reasonably well considering the halt in which it was struggling to make itself audible .
 The photography was good too, and the photography was obviously so, when one had the opportunity to view it . The photographer was obviously good, and when one could view it, it was good .
 The picture was pointed out by a faculty member at the end of the performance, and I noticed myself . A much more suitable place could have been found in which to show the picture .
 Shove Chapel lecture room or Perkins Hall seem, to me, to be eminently more suited to this type of presentation . Perkins Hall seems to be more suited for such a presentation .
 The Rastall Center Program Council is responsible for the selection and showing of the monthly movies . The council has been in charge of the selection of movies .
 We felt that since the movies are a Rastall Center event they should be shown in Rastalls Center . The movies are an event at the center, and we wanted them to be shown there .
 Peter von Putamer is a Fulbright scholar from Freiburg, a charming city in the Black Forest . We have already considered CC's Fulbright Scholar Looks at American Life .
 Students generally live either in a small private room or in an apartment, or even with their parents if possible . Students often live in small private rooms or in apartments .
 It is cheaper for a student to live in a dorm, which makes a dorm system advantageous in that respect . The dorm system is advantageous for students in the UK .
 There are no restrictions whatsoever for inhabitants of this ""Island of Hope"" or for any other dormitory—men's or women's— in Germany . There are also no restrictions on inhabitants of the island .
 All that Peter heard about America stimulated his interest to the point of wanting to come to the U.S. with an open mind and experience it for himself . Peter wanted to go to America with a 'open mind'
 Peter replied that it is very difficult to judge fairly two such different types of environment . To the question of how he would compare CC with German Universities, Peter replied .
 The atmosphere is more conducive to studying here than at a large university . There is also a greater personal contact between a student and his professor and likewise among the students themselves .
 In Germany, a student knows his professor through little more than his classroom lectures . Students in Germany can only communicate with their professor through their classroom lectures.
 Peter has been impressed by one of the CC faculty members who even plays a clarinet in a local dance band . Peter says he's impressed by a member of the faculty at the University of Cambridge .
 Favorable in Peter's opinion is the fact that all buildings of the college are close together . Peter says the college is a good location for students and students .
 The main university building often is located in the city while the chemistry, physics and other institutes are frequently on the outskirts of the city .
 Peter observes in our college system that have not grown up with this tradition as the Germans have . One big drawback is that we don't have the same tradition as Germans have, he says . Peter observes that the college system is lacking in its tradition .
 Peter briefly mentioned other points concerning student life in Germany . Peter briefly discussed other points about student life .
 It is entirely up to the individual whether or not he attends classes, he said . He can do most of his studying at home as long as he prepares himself for the final examinations .
 Students in Germany learn to manage on much less money than Americans usually have . Peter says students learn to deal with less money and manage on less .
 Peter brought the interview to a close with his observation that in Germany students are more independent . In Germany students possess more individuality as a result of their freedom .
 On Monday, December G, nine records will go on sale at the Rastall Desk for fifty cents apiece .
 There is only one copy of each and the sales will be on a ""first come, first served"" basis .
 There will be a tea for the Rastall Board members and the Program Council at 3:30 in the WES Lounge Friday, December 2 . The tea will be for the Board and Program Council members .
 The movie, "Intruder in the Dust" will be shown on Sunday, December 4, at 7:30 in Perkins .
 Jazz Concert Rocks Staid Old Perkins Hall at Perkins Hall . There will be no charge, jazz concert will be free .
 The Falconaires, a jazz band from the ""hundred million dollar toy" north of town, proved the hundred million was well spent .
 Wally Caldwell introduced the leader of the band, Mr Al Tronti, who in turn introduced Mr Ken Shaw, of KRDO who acted as master of ceremonies . Wally Caldwell was introduced by Mr Shaw, Mr Shaw and Wally Caldwell .
 Despite Mr Shaw's rather feeble humor, the band's numbers were announced with a minimum of useless chatter . The show was held in New York City, New York .
 The numbers ranged from Basic to Blues, ""Stardust"" to ""Mack the Knife,"" with each selection done masterfully .
 It would be less than useless to say any one member of the group stood above the other . It's not a matter of whether any one of the groups stood above each other .
 The band remained behind a solo performer, never overshadowing him, but never letting him down . 1 think it should be mentioned that Mr Wallace Caldwell is fairly well responsible for the band .
 Dr. Cap & Gown recommends two unusual books this month . Cap and Gown is a collection of unusual books . Dr. Gown suggests two unusual novels .
 Albert Einstein and Leopold Infeld wrote the first book, "The Evolution of Physics" Albert Einstein wrote the book about the evolution of physics .
 This book combines academic respectability with lay accessibility . This book's outstanding feature is that it combines academics and lay people's needs .
 Too often scientifically respectable books are incomprehensive to laymen, too often . Those books which are comprehensible are not totally respectable scientifically . Those which are not comprehensible will not be totally respectable .
 This is a common occurrence in books utilizing gimmickry, which in an attempt to elucidate concepts only obscures them . The book's author uses gimmickry to try to clarify concepts, but it does not clarify them .
 The Rise of the Mechanical View; The Decline of the Mechanism View; Field Relativity, and Quanta. Quanta . The Declines of the View; Fields Relativity; Quanta; Fieldrelativity . Quanta: The rise and decline in the view of the
 Wright considers the first three sections of the book excellent, but he feels that the discussion of quanta does not measure up to the other sections . Wright feels that Einstein was not an adherent of this theory, probably because he was not a fan of it .
 This is ""The Strange Story of Quantum"" bv Banesh Hoffman, Dover Publishing, Inc., 1959. This is "The Strange story of Quantum"
 This book is unusual from the standpoint of its literary nature, noted in the book's divisions and chapter headings . It is unusual for the book to be written in a book that is divided and divided .
 Such headings as ""Tweedledum and Tweedledee,"" ""The Exploits of the Revolutionary Prince,"" and ""The Asceticism of Paul"" are strange .
 This book was designed as a guide to those interested in exploring the theories behind which the scientist seeks to comprehend the mysterious world of the atom .
 The mass of the student body is composed of separate groups who go separate ways because of common interests . Student body is made up of students who go to different groups .
 The activities of many of these groups are stepping stones in communicating the Colorado College way of life, but are only too often unheard of . Colorado College is proud of the diversity of its students .
 The interest of many groups is appealing to other students and faculty members . The interest is often not publicized until the last minute if publicized at all .
 The mass of this college is composed of these groups such as the athletes, art students and musicians . The art students joined together for a coming exhibition, the musicians for a concert or simply for their love of music .
 Colorado College is a well rounded college with active groups of students . Put all of these active groups together with other groups and you have the well rounded Colorado College .
 There are many benefits to a liberal arts education, says John Sutter . Sutter: It's important to learn about the liberal arts in a liberal state .
 Communication is an important medium to all of us for without it we stand to lose the benefits of the talents and ideas of others . We lose our sense of knowing what is going on. Communication is a vital part of our lives .
 Dance Concert scheduled for this evening will be held at the end of the evening .
 The concert has been in the preparatory stage for some four months . After talking with many people, it is apparent that very few knew of the concert .
 Exactly who is at fault is not the issue, the' issue is how can we prevent this from happening again . The issue is not who's at fault, it's how we can prevent it happening again.
 The Dance Department is just such a separate group whose talents are wasted because they are unknown . It seems a waste that more people do not know about it and more people should be given it .
 "We all agree that our purpose for being in college, this college, is to learn about all things or as many as time permits," says LZ Granderson . Granderson: "We are going to learn as much as possible as possible"
 Don't you feel that if an important event is being prepared and you are aware of it, you can plan your time so that these things can be taken into consideration . Don't be afraid to get in touch with your friends and family .
 Many of you miss out because you would have attended had you been notified . Because this is such a late date, it is within reason that other plans have been made for the evening .
 This goes for athletic programs, field trips, as well as activities from the Committee on Assemblies . This is the first time the committee has been in charge of the committee .
 Like most gripes, they are put in a fashion of what can we do about it? What do we do? What can we change? We ask .
 Perhaps a new section in the TIGER apart from ""On The Town,"" which deals with these events in data and character . Perhaps a . new section of the Tiger apart from . ""On the Town"
 This section could be removed and placed on bulletin boards as reference would be in such an abundance that each student would have one . This section, which could be . removed from bulletin boards, could be placed on . bulletin boards .
 It would not only list the events, but give their characteristics and purposes . It would also give the characteristics of those events .
 Another suggestion would be to have an events display case in Rastall solely for the purpose of displaying material for forthcoming events . Another suggestion is to have a display case for the future of events .
 This could be made a point of interest by working on display principles, using photographs and other eye catching materials .
 I do not feel that this is something that can't be tossed aside as another gripe, for here are bases for a beginning improvement . I don't think that this can be thrown aside as a gripe .
 I would like to hear your comments on the situation, both student and faculty . Maybe we can improve our campus relationships simply by knowing what each other is doing .
 "I cannot help feeling that we would still gain just by knowing what is going on. Whether we are interested in other activities or not, we can still gain," she says .
 When It's Mudc It's Miller, Miller Music Co. Co. hosts a series of live shows at the Miller Music Festival in New York City . Miller Music Company has a history of producing music videos .
 LA JUNTA COLORADO SPRINSS College Liaison BONNIE WHITELEATHER MEIrose 4-7744. The College of Arts & Design is located in Los Angeles .
 Q U1CK UALITY 'ERV1CE BY 9:00 DIRTY -OUT CLEAN BY 4:30"" -I BOTH LAUNDRY AND DRY CLEANING Bring Your Laundry with Your Dry Cleaning .
 Gamma Phi Beta gives their annual Thanksgiving party for cerebral palsied children of the region . Gamma Phis gave their annual party for the cerebral palsies children .
 This year's party was organized by Miss Johanna Waller, Philanthropic Chairman, and supervised by Miss Waller and Miss Karen Williamson .
 Gamma Phis are having a bridge benefit to raise money for Hope House . Tomorrow afternoon they will be raising money for the Hope House charity .
 This Sunday a dinner will be given for the actives by the pledges at the Kappa house . Kappa Kappa Gamma pledges will give a dinner for the pledges . The pledges will also give a meal to the pledges on Sunday .
 The Hackney House is the setting for the Theta Christmas formal which will be held from 9-12 m.m. tomorrow night . Kappa Alpha Theta Theta will hold a formal at the Hackney house tomorrow night.
 Tomorrow night the Alpha Phis will have their Christmas formal at the Valley Hi Country Club from 9-12m. Next Thursday the Thetas go to the Beta house for din Alpha Phi . Next Thursday, the Theta Theta and Phi Phi Theta will be at the Beta
 A tree trimming party will be held at the house next Thursday afternoon for the member their guests .
 Tonight the Phi Delts will hold their annual Christmas dance the Hackney House from 9 p.m. to 1m. tonight .
 Next Tuesday the Sigma 01 Mothers Club will serve a dinnt for the pledges at the fraternitj house . Sigma Chi will serve the pledges next Tuesday . Sigma 01 is Sigma 01 Sigma 01 .
 Tonight the Kappa Sigs wi] have their annual Christmas din ner-dance at the Red Cloud . Miller and Roberts will provide music .
 Because of bad weather, the toilet bowl game has been postponed and will be played at a late date . It will take place at a later date due to bad weather .
 This week-end the Pershing Rifles pledges will be initiated into D-9 .
 The plebes started their initiation with an extensive physical hazing program in Monument Park and by guarding the women's dorms .
 On Friday evening they will have a dance at the Fort Carson Officer's Club where they will receive their P/R cords . Friday evening will be the first time they've been given the cords .
 MOHL's Book Home 10% CASH AND CARRY M7l/i East ach. East East East is the largest selection of books in town .
 Kappa Sigs took first place jis year winning four, losing none (id tying one) and losing one (id tie one)
 Kappa Sig 4 1 Beta 4 10 Sigma Chi 3 1 1 Phi Delt 2 3 Zeta 14 Phi Gam 5 On December 0, the annual baseball tournament will begin . Kappa Sig, Beta, Sigma Chi, Phi Gam, Phi Phi Gam and Phi Delta Sigma Chi will compete in the
 Exchange tickets, in addition to the presentation of the activity card, are required for admission to ice hockey games . Exchange tickets are required to attend the games .
 These exchange tickets must be secured at the Athletic Department office not later than one day prior to the date of the contest .
 Tickets for the Varsity-Freshnan game, December 3, will be available at the Athletic Department office until 4:30 today . Tickets are available for the December 3 game .
 :ing, the art or sport of fighting with a foil, sabre or epee, originated from the word meaning to protect or defend . The office is closed on Saturdays . :ing is a form of fighting known as foil or sabre .
 Today we know it as a game of out-witting the opponent, as well as one of skill and precision . It is now known as the game of chess, not just chess, but it is a skill-based strategy .
 The challenge comes in ""feeling out"" your opponent, determining how fast and what wav he will react . The challenge is to feel out your opponent .
 There is also the everpresent challenge of perfection — perfection in hand movement, point control and footwork . There are also the challenges of perfection .
 The many attacks and combinations of attacks have just as many parries to go with them . The many combinations of attack have just a few parries going with them.
 A bout is made up of a series of such actions, both offensive and defensive . A bout can be made of a number of actions, such as both offensive or defensive actions .
 The bout is scored by the number of successful touches made on the opponent . The bout was scored by a successful touch score of the opponent's successful touches .
 Each bout is a new learning experience — psychologically, physically and mentally . But each point, won or lost, represents the experience of facing a new personality on the sti-ip .
 There are many puzzles in fencing left unsolved in each fencer's life-time — and each different for the individual fencer . Fencing is a form of mystery in fencing, with many unsolved puzzles left unsolved .
 The added beauty, grace and poise, and smoothness of lines and strokes make fencing truly an art . But the added beauty and grace of fencing is also added to the artistry .
 For the first time, fencing has been added to the Physical Education Department . Fence fencing is being used in the physical education department for first time .
 CC women arc fencing at the YMCA and using their equipment . Some people ask if fencing is dangerous. Presently CC women are arc fencing in the community .
 It meets on Thursday afternoons at 4:00 in front of Rastall Center and from there to the ""Y"" to fence to fence . The group meets on Thursdays at 4-00 at Rastell Center .
 There will also be the chance to see the more advanced fencers in bouts . The event will be the first time the event has been hosted by the Olympic Games .
 There is now preparation for competition as well as the coaching of beginners who look forward to the day .
 The hours spent on the strip are filled with thrills and excitement for the spectator as well as the fencer . There is gratification of success and the drive towards improvement with each failure .
 Physical RALLY FOR THE KEG winners, Jir their new-found refreshment . For more information, contact Miss Mary Jane Brown at ME 2-9845 or Miss Roberts in the Physical Rally for the KEG .
 At the Air Force Academy last Sunday, CC was represented in the Fencing Competition . CC was competing in the competition .
 Al Peterson and his navigator, Jim Dyson, are the closest to the official time and mileage . Al Peterson was the driver and navigator of the race .
 Hats olf in congratulations to Cordon Allott, Cinny Hampton, Warren Fordyce and Jim Spencer who made this year's event possible .
 The Rastall Center Board plans to make the Rally an annual affair . Gary Gappert, chairman of the board, says the Rally will continue to be an annual event .
 Colorado College Tiger Prospects Good as Tigers Open ' 60 Basketball Season . Prospects for the coming basketball season look good at Colorado College .
 Last year, the CC Tigers were invited to participate in the small college NCAA playoffs (they lost both games) Coach Leon Red Eastlack hopes to get his team back in the playoffs this year .
 Colorado College hockey season opens tomorrow night in the World Arena at the Broadmoor . Coach Tony Frasca expects to start four sophomores and two seniors when the season begins .
 Last year the freshman team skated to a last minute tie with the varsity by outspeeding them and refusing to admit defeat . Last year they outspeeded them and refused to give up on the results .
 Eastlack expects his crew to be scramblingagain for the Rocky Mountain Conference crown . Saturday night, 10 of those players will be in action for the team .
 He figures he may be a little weaker in the back court than last year, but hopes that extra strength up front will compensate for that . He hopes to be stronger up front with extra strength .
 Dave Parker, captain and guard, is likely to be missed from last year's team . Parker is expected to lead the team in the NBA for the first time this season . Parker's leadership will be missing from last season's squad .
 Eastlack admits he does not know if the team will have a good floor leader this year . The team is looking for a new floor leader at the start of the new season .
 Jim Hanks, Jim Wexels, Paul Mott, Art Ackerman and Tony Sellitto are returning lettermen . Three of them are expected to be starters for the next year's team . Art Ackerm at center is Art Sellitto at guard .
 Howell is up from the freshman squad, and Thompson came to CC after completing his junior college studies . Howell and Thompson are up from freshman squad to freshman squad .
 Hanks and Wexels were starters on last year's team and were the two scoring leaders as well . Hanks, Wexel and Hanks were starters last year .
 Hanks shot at a .430 average, while Wexels hit on only .376 of his shots . Hanks had more shots but hit on more than .376 .
 Tony Sellitto, first string quarterback, and Dan Wright, third string quarterback and deep man on defense . Dan Wright was a deep man in defense . Sellitto was a first-string quarterback .
 Wright suffered a broken wrist in the eighth game of the football season . He may not be ready for much action when the season opens . Wright has the extra handicap of having to play for the club in the summer .
 Dave Krell a junior who came to CC from Pueblo Junior College is counted on to be the reserve man at center . Krell is a junior at the University of Colorado Springs .
 Mott and John Reid, another sophomore, are the reserve forward strength of the team .
 The two football players, Wright and Sellitto, are the only two who do not reach 6 feet . The two men do not play football and are only two of them are 6 feet tall .
 It will be preceded by a preliminary game with the CC freshmen playing Lowry Air Force Base . The game will take place at the same time as the freshmen game against Lowry .
 Dave Krell will start as center and Eastlack is undecided as to which two guards will start at guard . Krell is expected to start as a center and the other two will play guard .
 Tony Sellitto, Dan Wright and Farrell Thompson are the three he lists as possible starters . Dan Wright, Farrell Thompson and Dan Sellitto are also possible starters in the starting XI .
 One of the three scrapping freshmen will be members of the varsity squad . One of these three will be eliminated from the team .
 The sophomores do not figure to let this year's greenies pull the same trick they pulled off last year . This year's team is looking to win a repeat of last year's victory .
 Three freshman men are still shooting for a spot on the traveling team . While the varsity will be out to put the freshmen in their place, the freshmen will get some help from the first year .
 The three were members of the squad during early practice, but were cut when Frasca had to trim the squad down to 18 men . The three players were cut from the squad when it was reduced to 18 players .
 All three have indicated they do not like playing in the ""minor league"" competition . All three intend to place themselves on the varsity list if possible .
 Laurence Laurence has been in a tight fight with Pete Doyle this fall for the starting call in the nets this fall . Laurence and Doyle have been battling for the top spot in the net .
 These two hard checking men have earned their starting job by outplaying a defense unit that was put together late last season . The defense unit has been put together since late last year .
 Those two were formed into a unit in the second semester of the season last year and saw their share of play .
 Bill Goodacre and Danny McGill will skate together for the first time this season . Goodacre, McGill, McGill and Goodacre will also play for the team .
 Ed Boychuck and Brian Dutkowski will skate together for the U.S. Hockey League champions . The team will play in a friendly on Saturday night .
 Ken Cairns will center with Doug Hill at right wing and Alex Yankovich at left wing . Doug Hill will play left wing for the remainder of the season . Alex will play right wing, left wing, and left wing.
 Varsity • CAMERA SHOP* 30 NORTH TEION STREET . The COMPLETE Camera Store IGonnon %\}ap FOR MEM .
 Mufflers i, i, „ Wo oi 1 -~| With Cotton Leather Gloves K “it Bocks Gant Dress Shirts In Button-Down Collors C QC And English Tobs J # J \j 5.95 MALTS ICE CREAM
 Edward Plummer is open evenings at 19 East Colorado Avenue Til 9.00 . No strings — just call and get your FREE MALT this week . Edward Plummer is the owner of the restaurant .
 This exclusive Artcarved ""Evening Star""-design dramatizes the diamond as other rings can't do . This exclusive artcarved diamond-shaped design dramathes the diamond .
 It is your assurance of a genuine ""Evening Star"" engagement ring by Artcarved . The ring is a genuine "evening star" engagement ring .
 Only with Arfcarved do you receive a written guarantee for diamond quality . And you receive the protection of the nationwide Permanent Permanent Vo L ■«* Plan . Only with the company you can get a guarantee for quality .
 Discove' more about this exciting ring and other valuable tips on diomond fing fing buying . Discove’s more about the exciting ring .
 Bob sher, Jack Walker, Jim SpenDave Furgason, Max Taylor and Max Taylor, ave Bitters . Robin Rudoff, sistant coach, is also in charge of the squad .
 The speakers each articipated in two rounds of dislssiorij and one round of extemporanipeaking . The speakers took part in a series of rounds of ebate . The winners will be announced at the end of the week .
 Dave Furgason received a iting of superior and Jim Spencer id Max Taylor received ratings f excellent . Coach James Johnson said he thought the club off to a fine start by placing lil'd at Fort Collins .
 Louis Benezet will fesent the keys of the radio staion to its student manager . Louis Beneet will be the student manager at the radio station .
 An open house for students will held Monday from 3 to 6m. ie purpose of this will be to orientate the students to the' ■ -W communication facilities of IRCC in Rastall .
 Students living off the c impus and in fraternity house s will be able to pick up the r copy at Rastall .
 Choir Presents Annual Xmas Concert, Sunday, December 11 at 4m. in Shove Chapel and Tuesday, December 13 at 11m. In Perkins Hall, the Colorado College Choir will sing Christmas songs at 4pm .
 The program is sponsored by the Music Department . It is the second concert in the Colorado College Winter Concert Series . The concert will be held at Colorado College in Colorado .
 The choir will be directed by Donald Jenkins, the new choral director and voice teacher at the college .
 The concert will open with an organ prelude and a candle-light procession by the choir singing two fourteenth century carols . The choir will sing the two carols sung by fourteenth-century singers .
 The third selection will be a longer work, the ""Magnificat for Double Chorus and Organ"" by Charles Theodore Pachelbel . The work will be selected from a longer piece, a work by Pachelbe .
 The choir will next sing the ""Gloria"" from the Schubert Mass in G and ""And There Were in the Same Country,"" by Miss Jean Miller .
 The choir will conclude the program with some traditional carols and a recessional . The choir concludes with a traditional carol performance .
 The Editor and Busings Manager of the TIGER for the year beginning February, 1961, will be announced in next week's paper following approval by the ASCC Executive Council . The Editor, Busings and Editor of the . year . will announce the results of the paper next week
 The magazine, consisting of 48 pages, received as many contributions as last year's 80 page magazine . The magazine was published in 2008 and 2009 .
 The expectation of a second edition, and financial inadequacies however limited the size of this fall edition . Financial inadequacies limited the number of bookmakers .
 Rejected contributions will be returned this week end to the contributors, along with a' tallv sheet of criticism by the KINNIK board of review .
 Students are urged to express their reactions to their literary and art magazine to the editors, Jim Scarboro and Gary Gappert .
 Students should also consider submitting manuscripts for publication in the second edition which will be published some time in April . The second edition of the first edition will also be published this month .
 KRCC began as a two room public address system in the basement of Bemis in the old Cogswell Theater . KRCC was the only local radio station at that time, with occasional interviews with KVOR .
 Tyree Tyree was able to build a radio station, bpth in a tangible, physical and in an intangible sense . Tyree's varied experience includes carpentry, college teaching and carpentry .
 CC acquired several GI buildings from Peterson Field, including South Hall, among them South Hall . CC acquired a number of buildings from the field .
 In 1947 KRCC was able to move into a remodeled South Hall and have their own studio . Thomas Rawles, at that time treasurer of the college, arranged to provide the station with some extra money .
 KRCC went on the air in 1951 when the station went on Ctly from its own studios and rely on transmitter, via telephone lines, to the stations downtown . This w the air with its own transmitter .
 Since 1951 KRCC has undergone many minor improvements aided by the time, efforts, and money of many others . KRCC was founded in 1951 .
 The last major innovation for KRCC came just recently with the transfer of the radio studios to the new Rastall Center .
 ASCC provided funds to extend broadcasting lines from Perkins to Rastall . Herbert Schubnrth, chief engineer for KRDO, provided invaluable technical assistance .
 "Everybody benefits from Benezet, and KRCC is no exception," says Tyree Tyree . The KRCC says it is "no exception"
 Now that the station has become full grown, it only needs to consolidate its position . The station is now a full-grown force in the world .
 Tyree suggests that with proper interest and co-operation, new and better programming and increased public knowledge of the KRCC potential could be achieved .
 He mentions the possible development of a fullfledged Communications Center that would be able to use to the fullest audiovisual techniques as devices to further education and culture .
 This Center, like KRCC does now, would attempt to further the cultural life of the college in the present . This Center would also serve as a laboratory for those who wunted to familiarize themselves with these ""cultural techniques"" for use elsewhere .
 Coburn Library announces that books Hint fall due during the Christmas vacation will be due the tirst day after vacation ends . Hint will be released during the holiday period .
 Pershing Rifles held their fi rst ann ual Silver Boll it the Port Carson Officer's Club . P /R Silver Ball Held As Inspection Ensues on Dece liber 2 .
 December 15 is the last meeting for Pershing Rifles in 1960 . Mike Cook handles the engineering . Woodson Tyree, somewhat changed, still looks over station material .
 Monday marks the official opening and reception of the new KRCC with studios in Rastall Center and transmitting facilities in South Hall .
 Two articles came across our desk recently which we felt were worth passing on . Colorado on the corner of the corner is a weekly feature on CNN iReport .
 A letter from the NSA closed with the comment that Mr Johnston had written the main office in Philadelphia about Colorado College . Colorado College is located at the foot of historic Pike's Peak .
 Letting Pikes Peak fall where it may, there can be little doubt in anyone's mind that the scenery is inspiring . The nearness of the ski slopes may not be an example of the scholastic inspiration .
 In fact, if the poll were as crass as those conducted by the tourist industry, one might even place a dollar value on it . The poll was conducted by CNN.com .
 If the meeting between the administration and the Greek powers-that-be were to be summarized in any way, it might be condensed to the point that the administration is concerned with making Colorado College, a school which has committed itself to being a fraternity school, the best of all possible worlds
 The administration has long made its desires known insofar as deferred rush is concerned . The White House has a long history of deferred rush .
 IFC and Panhel have long done everything possible but approach the problem realistically . Unfortunately, Panhel and IFC have long been doing everything possible to address the problem .
 The fraternities were unable to decide upon a plan workable and acceptable to all concerned . Fraternities have been unable to agree upon a solution to the situation .
 The sororities have claimed that the added financial burden will drive them into bankruptcy and hence off of the campus . The sorority has claimed that they will be forced to leave the campus in bankruptcy .
 The administration claimed that the financially hit houses would be covered by the school for a year during which time the plan would be tested . Of course, when this was mentioned at the meeting last week, the administration said that the school would cover the financial hit houses for the year .
 There has been some comment that if deferred rush is installed, certain houses will suffer . Certain houses are afraid that if the Freshman see them at their daily best, they will be disillusioned and go to another house or worse yet, remain unaffiliated .
 It is true that the installation of deferred rush is receiving its major impetus from the administration . A case can be made against the administration for telling a student body what it will do .
 There has been little concerted effort on their part to present views opposed to those of the administration, or even to define their own values . However, the case against the student government bodies is even stronger .
 President Benezet has seen fit to do some of their work for them in setting forth some principles and proposals . It is hoped that they will be able to agree among themselves to such an extent that they can come up with a deferred rush program for next year .
 IFC will have to work with IFC if anything approaching an effective rush program is to be inaugurated . However, they will need to work closely with the IFC .
 Ski Clothes Exhibition Presented by Panhel ""Schuss in Style,"" will be presented by the Panhellenic Council next Tuesday evening, December 13 .
 The equipment, courtesy of the Don Anderson Ski Shop, will be demonstrated by representatives of the Greek organizations . The equipment is courtesy of Don Anderson ski shop .
 Many of the events which could or should be of interest to the campus are unattended due to a lack of publication . This week's column was a response to a question about the lack of coverage of events on campus .
 I should like to point out something which is new, and therefore has perhaps escaped notice . However, I should also point out that this is not the first time I have seen a new thing .
 Alpha Lambda Delta, the freshman women's honorary fraternity, publishes a monthly listing of cultural events on campus .
 This list, ""Alpha Lambda Delta Recommends,"" can be read ir, all the freshman dorms and on the Rastall bulletin board . The list can be found on the bulletin board of all the dorms .
 The critic is the standard-bearer, tearing us down when we need building up, says the author . Criticism is a sign that we need to build up when building up .
 This is a horrible use of such an innocent word, for although academics may bring pleasure to some . Real study has always been hard work and always will be and you know it. In the first place, this is a terrible use of the word .
 They are inseparable, Mr Gappert, and I maintain they are very rotten . They are inextricable, he says. They're inseparable . They're very rotten, he adds. They are together, he writes .
 In America we struggle to get 10 students into a phone booth, and think it cute. In America, we struggle for 10 students to get into a booth. We think it's cute. We don't think it is cute. But it's not cute.
 Any organization invents four years of nonsense to entertain its idle members is not neutral but is as outdateda as the Racoon coat . Any organization which invents . invents such nonsense is not . neutral but as outdatea as . outdated .
 Mr Gappert, the world may be basically a 'fun place' for you and the gang, but it is not going to be for long unless we take an interest in the more serious and even crucial things on our shrinking fuseridden cannonball of a globe .
 Students without fraternities would have more time and more unbiased opportunity to make more serious, productive and meaningful lives for themselves, author says .
 In your comments to Mr Racey you criticized him as being a man of all talk and no action . You criticized him for being 'all talk, no action' in your comments . In the past, he has been accused of being a hypocrite .
 I sincerely hope to see you at the performances of Strindberg's, ""Miss Julie,"" Sunday night in the WES room .
 This reading is being sponsored by Mr Racey, who, in case you were not there, was the moderator of a panel on brainwashing .
 If our cultural events are so few and far between I feel that one hour or so of one's study time per week for attendance will not affect a grade average in the least . If our culture events are few, far between, we need to attend cultural events more often .
 The material to be reviewed for a test on Wednesday can be grasped by spending time on Friday, Saturday or Sunday studying instead of procrastinating .
 The fraternities will be represented by Rick Carroll and Don Ullman, Phi Gamma Delta . Charlie De Puy, Beta Theta Pi, and Bob Kendall, Kappa Sigma will represent Kappa Sigma .
 Entertainment will be provided by the Alpha Phi Singers, Pixie Campbell, Beth Kendall, Margann Parks, Sue Rowlette, Phyllis Setter and Donna Story .
 Admission to the show is a 50 cent donation which will go to the Scholarship Fund . Admission will be available at the show .
 Letters to the Editor: Cocktail diplomacy does r* main a potent force . Tom Absher Ushers: Blue Key Hostesses: Panhellenic .
 I am sorry but not all surprised, to sef the stereotype you hold of an in-dependent . I am not surprised, but not surprised to see that you are a 'in-dependent'
 I cannot comprehend why stu. dents would be more desirable, m shall I say individualistic, if thej are in a fraternity . I cannot understand why st.dents are more desirable if they are in fraternity .
 Some Principles and Proposals to Offset Declines and Spur Improvements are discussed . The Fraternity owes to itself: What does the Fraternity owe to itself .
 Constructive campus citizenship:g.e.g. encouragement in extracurricular activities . Constructive student citizenship: G.E. G.S. encourages students to take part in campus activities .
 Support of the fraternity idea; self determination within agreed bounds . Support of fraternity idea . Self determination within bounds . Self-determination within bounds.
 Physical support, maintenance and management services; financial credit; food services. Physical support; maintenance; management services . Financial credit; financial support, financial credit, food services .
 Annual Fraternity Leadership Conference, with Administrative and Faculty participation, is held at the University of North Carolina .
 A new Calendar of fraternity orientation, pledging, initiation, and other key activities . A new calendar of fraternity orientations .
 In the years that lie D head I hope that we shall have a opportunity to be associated o many occasions for a cause w both believe in. In the future I hope we shall be associated with many occasions .
 Forty children from the Chad bourn Spanish Mission will gathr around the Bemis Commons Chris' mas tree tomorrow afternoon . The children, ages three to l 1 will participate with the CC won en students in games and carol Santa is scheduled to arrive .
 I960 V Hack and Gold CC sweatshirts are now being old by Black and Gold for $3 . There will be a gathering of members of the French Club and students of French on Tuesday, December 13, at 7:15 .
 Cecil Hinshaw is Peace Secretary of the North Central District of the American Friends Service Committee . He spoke in an assembly presented by the Student Assembly Committee .
 He spoke on an aspect of pacifism as the possible solution to the current world problems . He said pacifism could be a solution to many of the world's problems .
 The Tigerettes held a meeting yesterday and tossed around ideas for the money-making project with the Bengals . The meeting will be held January 8 .
 Mr Hinshaw's theory is that a ""continental divide"" sometimes occurs in history .
 Today the developments of science have made our wo a con ipletelv different o le le . Today, science has made our lives more interesting than ever .
 With the cc ming of the atomic and hydrogei bomb the re has been a great increase m the amount of explo we power av ailable, and added to this pro Wen is the problem of radiation .
 Some people say that the deterrent power of these weapons is so great that there will never be another war . Some people believe that the weapons are so powerful they will never have another war.
 This is based on the belief that people are rational and assumes that no mistake that has been made in the past will ever be made again . It assumes no mistake in the future will be made ever again .
 A recent Rockefeller Report says that a large thermonuclear war is greater than the possibility of no war . The report says that the risk of a large nuclear war is more likely than the chance of no .
 People go on looking forward to a future that probably does not exist . Meanwhile, people look forward to the future that doesn't exist .
 The hard realities of our times must be realized and there must be a division in the intellectual and the emotional attitude toward war, says President Obama . "The hard realities must be . realized," he says .
 "One of the greatest fears now is that a small war will develop into something more," says President Obama . "The greatest fear is that it will become something more" says Obama .
 Considerable expansion will take place in the next few years in the number of nations that are capable of producing atomic weapons, experts say .
 There are even thoughts in the Pentagon of not retaliating in the event of a nuclear attack . The Pentagon is considering not responding to a nuclear strike .
 There is no absolute guarantee that we would retaliate and if there were it would mean an accident could cause the end . If there were an accident it could mean the end could be the end of the world .
 Non-violent resistance on an organized national level might be the answer to the problem . Non-violence is the key to non-violence in the United States .
 An English militarist, King Halle, advocates this since war can no longer be conducted as it was in the past . An English military leader, King . Halle advocates this .
 Psychological warfare, as a deterrent to occupation, should be prepared as carefully as nuclear warfare is being prepared now . Psychological warfare is a deterrent as well as a nuclear war, says Dr. David Cameron .
 Modem weaponry has brought us to the point where its use of it is no longer moral or practical . Modem weapons have brought us the point of moral and practical reasons for its use .
 If we could transfer the money 'spent on nuclear weapons to a world aid program through the United Nations the situation would be greatly improved. The money would be transferred to the U.N. It would be used to provide world aid through the UN .
 Drama Group Presents Reading of 'Miss Julie' Sunday at 7:30m. in the WES room of Rastall Center . The first i of student productior seated by CC .
 This student experimental dramatization will be presented as a style of productive reading in the round . Students will be able to read the play in a round .
 Following the first performance will be a discussion and coffee hour for those interested . Following this first performance, a discussion will be held on stage .
 This week Cap and Gown recommends a play by Lorraine Hanaberry . The Denver Auditorium Theater presents "A Raisin in the Sun" Thursday through Saturday, December 15, 16 and 17, at S:20m .
 Claudia McNeil plays the part of Lena Younger, a mountain of strength and a strict disciplinarian, who presides over the household .
 The Younger family believes that the receipt of an insurance legacy will provide the opportunity for them to escape the poverty and social restrictions under which they live . The family is hoping to receive the insurance legacy .
 Mail orders with a check or money order and a selfaddressed stamped envelope to Hugli Hooks Entertainments, P 0.0 .
 Pre-registration is not completed until each student lias returns his or her pre-regregistration card to the Registrar's office . Students must return the card to their registration card before registering for school .
 Students may complete pre-registration before noon, Saturday, December 10, without the payment of a fee . Students prc-registering during the last three days of the pre-registered period, December 12, 13 and 14 will be required to pay a fee of $3 .
 Students pre-registering after December 14 will be required to pay a fee of $10 . Students can also pay a $10 fee for pre-registration .
 During the period January 9-13, students should obtain their registration cards from the Registrar's office . Students should obtain the registration cards during the period .
 The number placed on each curd at the time it is picked up will be used to indicate priority of admission to the gymnasium on registration day . The curd will be picked up at the start of registration day at the gym .
 Students are requested to fill out their registration cards before appearing in the gymnasium to complete their registration . Students will be required to complete the registration .
 It'i Miuric It's Miller* Miller Music Co. MeIrose 3-1219 at Cache La Pc-udro Visit The PANCAKE HOUSE .
 Nancy Bowers, Kappa Alpha Theta; Diane Robertson, Alpha Phi; Mary Lou Spry, Delta Gamma; Kim Hall, Kappa Kappa Gamma, and Trish Adams, Gamma Phi Beta. They will be honored at the Kappa Phi Beta National Convention .
 Sue Bmckney, Mary B Tonakemper, Margaret Parka, Anne Wilson, Denny Prior. Anne Wilson: "I'm glad to be here for the first time"
 This list, "Alpha Lambda Delta Recommends,"" can be read in all the freshman dorms and on the Rastall bulletin board . This list can be found on the bulletin board of all the dorms .
 Any organization which invents four years of nonsense to entertain its idle members is not neutral but is as outdated as the Racoon coat . Any organization invents . invents such a nonsense is 'as outdated as a Racoon Coat'
 Mr Gappert, the world may be basically a fun place for you and the gang, but it is not going to be for long unless we take an interest in the more serious and even crucial things on our shrinking fuseI'idden globe .
 Some are innocent demies some, re hard wor you know lenge you in all hor nyt> ultu gentlemai are not d Some Pri InTROD A Wha 5.5.5 .
 Letters to the Editor: Cocktail diplomacy is a potent force . Tom Absher Ushers: Blue Key Hostesses .
 Too often, howevt social techniques tend to becoror animal instincts . Social skills tend to be lost when a casual beer beconi a six pack, and a cas and a keg .
 I am sorr but not all surprised, to si the stereotype you hold of an ii dependent . I am not surprised, but not at all surprised. I am sorry. I'm not surprised .
 I cannot comprehend why st dents would be more desirable, i shall I say individualistic, if tht are in a fraternity . I can't understand why stdents are more desirable if they are in fraternity .
 Cecil Hinshaw, Peace Secretary of the North Central District of the American Friends Service Committee, spoke in an assembly presented by the Student Assembly Committee Tuesday . Myles Hopper, Jack Walker, Myles Hinkler and Jack Walker were also present .
 Mr Hinshaw's theory is that a ""continental divide"" sometimes s in history . He says that a 'continental divide' sometimes happens in history.
 Today the developments of science have made our society a completely different one . Today's developments of technology have made it a far more complex one .
 Hack and Gold CC sweatshirts are now being old by Black and Gold for $3 . There will be a gathering of ambers of the French Club and ther students of French on Tuesday night .
 Tiger Club will go caroling caroling jnday at St. Mary Mary's church . Refreshments will be held at St Mary's .
 SKI RENTALS New Boots, Skis and Poles for $2.75 BLICK Sporting Goods Co. Co. is completely stocked with the Finest Ski Equipment .
 The Tigerettes held a meeting yesterday and tossed around ideas for the money-making project with the Bengals . The final idea has not yet been decided .
 The intra-mural swimming meet will be held today at 3:30m. at Palmer High School . WAA swimmers will compete in the competition .
 The state executive board of the Colorado League of College Young Republicans will be at CC Sunday . The state committee will meet at CC this weekend .
 The Spanish Club will hold a Christmas Fiesta Sunday at 6:30 m.m. Sunday . The Fiesta will be held at the Spanish Club .
 The coming of the atomic and hydrogen bomb there has been a great increase in the amount of explosive power available . Added to this problem is the problem of radiation . Transportation will be provided .
 There is not as much guarantee that a small nation will be as responsible as larger nations in handling these weapons . Small nations are not as good in handling weapons and their selection of leaders is good .
 Effective control of armaments should be achieved in three to five years, or there will be no need for it at alt alt alt. It is hoped that control will be achieved within 3 to 5 years or there may not be a need for arms control .
 As the probability of war increases, the likelihood of a preventative war increases even more . Another frightening prospect is that as the . probability of . war increases the risk of preventative . war .
 Every gift gets a gay wrap-up, mailing too, if you require it . Nuclear war cannot even be threatened .
 Modern weaponry has brought us to the point where its use is no longer moral or practical . Modern weaponry is now no longer morally or practical, says Dr. David Perry .
 If we could transfer the money 'spent on nuclear weapons to a world aid program through the United Nations the situation would he greatly improved. The money would be transferred to the U.N. It would be used to provide world aid to North Korea .
 Drama Group Presents Reading of 'Miss Julie' The first in a series of student productions will be presented bv CC, students .
 Cap and Gown recommends "A Raisin in the Sun," a play by Lorraine Hansberry . The play is to be presented Thursday through Saturday, December 15, 16 and 17 at the Denver Auditorium Theater .
 Pro-registration is not completed until each student has returned his or her pro-regregistration card to the Registrar's office .
 Students may complete pre-rogistration before mion, Saturday, December 10, without the payment of a fee . Students may also complete the pre-registration without payment of any fee .
 Students pre-registering during the last three days of the pre-registration period, December 12, 13 and 14 will be required to pay a fee of $3 . Students will also have to pay $3 to register during the final three days .
 The number placed on each card at the time it is picked up will be used to indicate priority of admission to the gymnasium on registration day . Each card will be placed on the back of the card to indicate who will be able to attend .
 THE PANCAKE HOUSE 16 South Walnut 40 VARIETIES OF PANCAKES AND WAFFLES . Steak Shrimp Sandwiches Steak . Shrimp . Sandwichedhes . Steaks .
 December 9, I960: Colorado Colleqe Tiger Ports . Don WOLFGANG, Sports Edltoi Jim HANKS drives through the St. Louis, Colorado . Jim Hankers drives through Colorado's Colleque Tiger Port .
 St. Mary's defense for a two point lay-up shot in the basketball game played alst Friday night . The game was played in the first half .
 Any member of last year's ■ _ ■ ■ choir who are not in choir this year — and who would be interested in going to California on the spring tour, please contact Bob Littell or Mr Donald Jenkins, before January 31, 1961 .
 CC basketball team got off to a good start to the season by winning their first two games of the season last Saturday . The CC men's basketball team won their first game at Cossitt Hall on Saturday .
 Tigers beat St. Mary's of the Plai Friday night in season opener . Tigers dumped St.Mary's of Plai in first game of season .
 The Tigers started off with a 6-0 lead in the first two minutes of the game . The Tigers never fell behind in Friday's game .
 The Tigers were still maintaining a comfortable lead with eight minutes gone in the game . St. Louis State University won the game 2-1 at the hands of the Tigers .
 The Tigers opened up the second half with six points . St. Louis had six points in the first half . The Tigers scored six in the second .
 In the first half the lead constantly see-sawed back-and-forth . The score was tied eight times . The first half ended in a tie-breaker .
 Jim Hanks was the leading scorer in both games . Hanks scored 21 points in the first game and 25 in the second game .
 For $180 a year a year the child is giv, $8 a month in cash plus food ai clothing . So begins the case history Chow Yin Ling, the nine year girl girl third floor Loomis has adopt, through the Foster Parents P| a Foster Parents .
 A certain amount is t lotted for medical expenses cliu neled through a local hospital . The amount is set to be used to pay for medical costs .
 Chessie Kemp, president of thii floor and originator of the proji hopes that it will become a tradi tion for third floor to continue i ^ care for the child . Chessie . Kemp hopes that the projji will be a tradition for the third floor .
 Whenever I think of Fort Lauderdale, I think about rye bread . There is no particular reason for making this point, except that whenever he thinks of it, it's a good thing .
 There is no particular reason for that either, but I have been thinking >f Fort Lauderdale. Fort Lauderdale, Florida, is a good place to go .
 Twenty thousand collegians descended on this peaceful community and tak< it apart, peace by peace . But, for two weeks twenty thousand . thousand . university students descended on the peaceful community .
 They capture Florida and throw the Keys away, but it's more like amateur night at Cape Canaveral . They cal it Spring Vacation, but the Florida Keys is more than a Florida vacation .
 If you look Jong enough, you reach an advanced stage of dizziness called aphrodizzier . If you're looking at a man's body, you're likely to be attracted to someone else .
 There are beaches and motels full of them, motels and hotels all over the world . They are everywhere you turn — beaches, hotels, cars, pools, pools and bathing suits all of them .
 When the man said, "It's the little things in life that count," he must have been thinking of bathinij, suits .
 Girls in love, girls in trouble, bright girls with a future, rich girls in the lap of luxury, poor girls in any lap that'll have them . Girls of every size and discretion are featured in the book .
 M-G-M calls it ""Where The Boys Are,"" starring Dolores Hart, George Hamilton, Yvette Mimieux, Jim Hutton, Barbara Nichols, Barbara Prentiss . Connie Francis introduces popular recording star Connie Francis in her first role .
 J$ based on the novel by Glendon Swarthout, Directed by Henry Levin . J$ is based on a novel written by George Wells . The film is set in New York, New York .
 Last year the Freshman team surprised the Varsity with a 6-6 after taking a 4-1 lead in the first period . Last year, the Freshmen team beat the team 6-4 after taking the lead .
 Eddie Boychuek slapped in two | s with five other varsity — (, (, adding one goal apiece) in the traditional season opener . The boys' varsity also scored two goals .
 Freshman scores were made Wayne McAlpine and Art Berglund . Both were ased by Art Berglund.
 L fter a slow starting opening opening, varsity finally added a tally t almost nine minutes had jsed in the period .
 This was one Boychuck's goals, and was asacled by Brian Dutkow'here was no more scoring in first period, but in the second period, play began to pick up .
 Boychuek and Dutkowski fain teamed up for a goal in the first half . Alex Yankovich eil a solo tally in the second half of the first-half . Boychuk, Dutkowski and Yankovic scored in the other half .
 Goodacre Gee once again teamed up, this time with Goodacre making the assist, and the score was 5-0 . Goodacre made the assist in the final minute of the game .
 Freshmen came right back and retaliated with a goal in the closing moments of the second period . The Freshmen scored in the last minute of the first period .
 The Freshmen added their other goal in the middle of the last period, but the Varsity came back with two more to assure themselves of a sewed up victory .
 One unassisted goal by Dutkowski, the other by Doug Hill . Doug Hill slapped in by Denny Cairns with Denny . Denny also assisted .
 Norm Laurence showed great promise in the game of replacing last year's top-notch goal keeper . Laurence shows great promise as a replacement for the last season's top keeper .
 Laurence was ably replaced in the last half of the period by Pete Doyle . Pete Doyle replaced Laurence in the latter half .
 The Tigers look somewhat better than some had expected . Along with an excellent goal keeping, a strong defense unit also makes the prospects for the Tigers look better .
 The defensemen, Paul Kilbreath and Bill Dixon, show great promise of being a hard-break unit . The team's defensemen will be a hard break unit .
 Kilbreath was plagued by three penalties which would be fatal in a crucial game . The unit may make the difference in future games for the Welsh side .
 The official season will open here next Friday and Saturday with games against Michigan State . Michigan State will be the first game of the season .
 Rastall Center Games Area promises to be the scene of a lot of fun activities as the winter season arrives . Center Activities TRY A HUB DE-ICER .
 Prior to Christmas, Eds and Coeds alike will be slipping down for a relaxing break . The University of Edinburgh students will be heading home for a break .
 A Giant Ladder Tournament in table tennis with a winners' play-off at a basketball halftime, moonlight bowling (this is great!), and many others to make this winter's recreation on campus really swinging .
 More and more girls are finding it fun to participate in the onetime man's sport of billiards . Billiards is now a popular form of play in the world .
 Now a nationally recognized women's recreation, it is gainging popularity steadily . It is now a nationally nationally recognized .
 Watch for announcements of special activities at the Rastall Center Games Area . Enjoy yourself regularly at the games area at the center .
 Siggi Hepp will show slides of Russia with her own narration . She will also give slides of her own wonderful narration .
 IMA is sponsoring a Christmas carol sing in the Loomis Hall parking lot at 9m. Wednesday, December 14 .
 This is planned as an all school function and it is hoped that everyone will attend . The event is hoped to be an all-school function and is planned for everyone .
 Mr Donald Jenkins will lead the songs and most of the members of the choir will attend . Mr Jenkins will be leading the songs .
 Rastall Center Christmas decorations . Special thanks to all those who helped decorate the center . Special Thanks to all the help from Rastalls Center .
 This meet is Sponsored by the Colorado College Debate Club and the local chapter of Tau Kappa Alpha, national forensic fraternity . This meet will be held at Colorado College, Colorado College .
 Try Our Fresh PIZZA (ACROSS FROM CAMPUSl ""Call Me Mr. "" Versus ""A Dr. Dinner"
 The TIGER decided to see what the professors on campus thought about the matter . The professor's views on the matter have been published in the past .
 "All our beloved professors are modest, retiring individuals who would be delighted to have a student call them, ything, anything at all," she says .
 If you are graduating this June, you may be eligible for admission to the new Air Force Officer Training Sch ol . Many professors on campus do not hold Thi ee-month course leads to a con mission as a Second Lieutenant .
 Successful completion of the thre e-month course wins you a commiss ion, and a head-start on a bright, rew arding future in the Aerospace Age . Successful entry to the course will earn a Commiss ion .
 The School is open to men and women college graduates with certain technological and administrative skills . College graduates are required to have certain technological skills .
 If selected for the School, you will receive Staff Sergeant pay while a trainee . If you are selected for staff sergeant pay will be Staff Sergeant .
 Graduates officers may later apply for advanced training and graduate study at government expense . Graduated officers may also apply to advanced training or graduate study .
 Male officers may also apply for flight training as pilots or navigators . Male officers can also apply as pilots and navigators.
 For the career-minded young officer, the Air Force way of life can be stimulating, exciting and full of meaning . The Air Force will be stimulating and exciting for the young Air Force officers .
 It is a time when a career in Air Force blue has so much to offer the young man or woman who qualifies . The Air Force has a lot to offer to young men or women who qualify .
 The Air Force is seeking only a select group of college graduates for admission into Officer Training School . Only a select college graduates will be allowed to attend the school . The school is based in Atlanta, Georgia .
 We'd be happy to send detailed information to any senior who is interested in the project . However, we'd rather rather rather than send the information to senior staff .
 I ^^ Air Force the Ph.D. degree, but are held in equal respect with those who do . Air Force members are held equal respect as those who don't have PhD. degrees .
 A flaw exists in that campus publications are issued by students, who are never any surer than anyone else of a title . One solution suggested is that . campus publications refer to the teacher by his appropriate title, but in conversation he be addressed as ""Mr ""
 One can refer to a teacher as ""Mr "" in publications too, but parents of students receive these works of art and so do other schools . One teacher can be referred to as 'Mr' in publications .
 The call is out to each and everyone of the CC student body for the Sophomore Winter Carnival . CC students are invited to take part in the event .
 This affair is one for spectators, participants and anyone who is out for a rousing time . This is one of the biggest ever sporting events in the world .
 Lynn Carmichael will spin and twirl the ice off the Ice Palace . This is to be followed by a CC skater in the form of Carmichael who will spin off the ice . The Ice Palace will be open to the public on Saturday night .
 CC's varsity team will demonstrate their Canadian ability in a skit on ice . Then the team will perform their Canadian skills on ice in an ice skit . CC's team will then demonstrate their ability in the skit.
 Spectators can now jump into their skates and stay in the palace for a skating free-forall . Spectators will be able to compete in a skating competition .
 CC'ers will then journey back to the campus for an open house at Rastall Center . The open house will also be held at the campus's Rastal Center .
 The Folk Singers Inc. will entertain for folk fans while others eat goodies, dai sport it up at cut prices games area . Folk singers will entertain folk fans at the event .
 After a night of rest, Satur ( ] a events will begin at 11m. The events will start at 11:30am .
 There will be ti dom skiing afterwards for those who want to give the sport a try .
 An inary trip to Alaska will follow"" racers don snow shoes for a wintery trip on the RanipRange . An Alaskan trip will follow.""
 At this gala climax, <Jj ner for two, a show for two A\ a car will be raffled off, to only a few . At the end of the gala, <jjn ner for 2. A\ will give a car to only
 The Golden Dragon is located at 1409 S EIGHTH STREET in Colorado Springs . Serving Family Sfyle Lunches and Dinners very . very . reasonable prices .
 Tutt Library A£2 C*. ol. ol. Washburn . Washburn Speaks On Human Evolution .
 Vance Packard is author and lecturer who has keen ability to analyze American fe will be the next speaker in . e annual Free Public Lecture eries at Colorado College .
 William Fischer, chairman f the Geology Department and | chairman of the 'lecture comlittee, announced that the lecturer uld be Mr Vance Packard .
 Mr Packard is a former newsaper man and author of three oolts, ""The Hidden Persuaders,""" Status Seekers,"" and ""The Waste lakers,""
 Mr Packard's books have sold iore than a million copies and ave been translated into at least ine languages . He has sold more than one million copies of his books .
 January 18 is the deadline for [gning the list in Rastall Center jr the ski trip to Aspen . The topic of Mr Packard's talk ill be ""Changes in the Character i American People."" January 26 is January 26 .
 The rain sponsored by the Colorado lollege Railroad Club, will leave lolorado Springs at 4 :20m. 'hursday, January 26 and will arive in Aspen late that night .
 The passengers will board the train at Glenwood Iprings, which will arrive in Coloado Springs at 10:40 a.m. Passengers will be able to see the train from Glenwood Springs, Colorado .
 The cost of $19.50 will include inner on the way to Aspen and veakfast on the return trip . The cost will also include the cost of a return trip from Aspen .
 Lrrangements for accommodations it Aspen should be made by the ndividual parties, says Aspen . Aspen is a ski resort resort .
 A meeting will >e held a week before departure or those who are interested .
 Competitive skiing will be featured at the all school Winter Carn'val sponsored by the sophomore 'lass on February 17 and 18 . Skiers Compete in 61 Winter Carnival competitions .
 The first will be intradural skiing with each Greek organization competing . Each Greek organization will be competing in the competition . The competition will take place in the early hours of Monday morning .
 The second iivision will be an open competition in which anyone may participate . The second will be open competition for iivisions .
 The skiing competition will take place Saturday afternoon at Ski Broadmoor and trophies will be awarded at the dance to be held that night . The dance will be held in the ballroom of the hotel's ballroom .
 Registration for the skiing competition will be at the first of next semester . Registration will begin at the beginning of the semester .
 There will be exhibitions by CC skaters and a skit featuring the varsity hockey team . There will also be skits by the CC team .
 There will be a cut-rate fee charge for both the skiing and the skating . Skiing and skating will be free to compete .
 Everyone is invited to take part in the competition whether they enter or not . The competition is open to anyone who enters it .
 There will be a meeting of al 1 members of the present TIGEK staff, including reporters, business staff and all people interested in working on the paper next semester .
 The meeting will be held in the TIGEK ofoffice in Rastall Center on Tuesday, January 17, at 4:15 and will last only a short time .
 Anyone who wishes to work in any capacity on the paper is encouraged to come . The paper will be open to anyone interested in it .
 John Fetler, Art Chronicle editor of the Gazette-Telegraph, is editor of Art Chronicle . The Art Chronicle is on the cover of the December 25 issue .
 Fetler devoted his entire column to favorable comment of the magazine in general and to the individual contributions . Fetler dedicated an entire column of his own to the magazine .
 Copies of the KINNIKinNIK are still available at Rastall desk to students and faculty who have not picked their copies up yet . Copies still available for those who haven't picked up their copies .
 Adele Addison, American sopi-ano, will be soloist with the orchestra on Tuesday, January 17 . The next star to appear will be Adele Adison, who will be a soloist .
 Miss Addison will be heard in Lukas Foss's ""Time Cycle"" for soprano and orchestra . The Ford Foundation commissioned her to sing only for two seasons . She will sing in the Ford Foundation's "Time Cycle"
 The concert on Tuesday, January 24, will spotlight ai-tists of the orchestra . The concert will be held in New York City .
 Russian piano talent will be presented on Tuesday, February 7, when Dimitri Bashkirov will be the guest artist . The guest artist will be a Russian pianist .
 Bach Aria Group will make a first Denver appearance with the orchestra on Tuesday, February 14 . It will be the first time they have played with the Bach Arias Group in Denver .
 The stellar group includes Eileen Farrell, soprano; Carol Smith, contralto; Jan Peerce, tenor, and Norman Farrow, bassbaritone . The stellar singing group also includes E. Farrell and Carol Smith .
 Lorin Hollander, teen-age pianist, will eappear with the orchestra in a concert on Tuesday, February 21 . Hollander will be a teen-aged pianist .
 Dr. Brown Receives NSF Research Grant of §12,800 to Dr. Robert Brown . The award is part of a research grant of $12,000 to Brown .
 The grant is to finance research on the effects of behavior changes in patterns of energy flow in populations of mice .
 The research is a combination of field and laboratory work and will extend over a period of approximately three years . The research will be conducted over the next three months .
 It is the most recent in a series of studies he has conducted over the past 12 years on the forces controlling populations of small animals .
 Charles Mierow recently collected a royalty check on a book he had published in 1915 . Charles is a professor of languages at Colorado College .
 Mierow translated the book into modern American-style English from the original Latin .
 The book is now being published in England by the English publisher, Speculum Historiale .
 Jordanes was a Goth who had a firm conviction in the greatness of the Goths . He saw a great future for his part of the world in a merger of Goth and Roman peoples . Jordanes is a Roman-born Goth who died in Rome .
 Mierow received his B.A. degree at Princeton in 1905 . He was awarded a Ph.D. in 1908, with all diplomas signed by Woodrow Wilson .
 He came to Colorado College in 1916 after teaching at Princeton for seven years . He was a teacher at Colorado College .
 It was published last year and was a climax to a life-time of study about St. Paul's life .
 Senior Class Sponsors A Flunker's Fun Nite held in Perkins Hall last night . The event afforded a quick refreshing study break for all students who attended .
 Cartoons, including ""Ballet Oops,"" ""Gerald McBoing's Symphony"" and ""Destination Magoo" were shown to entertain flunkers who donated 35 cents .
 Funker's Fun Nite was presented by the Seniors as a class money raising project . Seniors presented the event as a fundraiser for the class .
 The talk will concern implications of primate social life as it refers to human beings . It will be presented at 8.30pm ET on Monday .
 Admission is free and a reception will follow in the WES Room of Rastall Center . Admission to the event will be free .
 He has received the Viking Fund award, the highest award given in Anthropological circles . The award is given to Anthropologists in the world .
 Washburn received his Ph.D. at Harvard and received a Sheldon traveling fellowship to Oxford in 193<i-37. Washburn was awarded a traveling fellowship in 193 <i.37. He received his PhD. from Harvard . Washburn is the author of a book, "
 This school applies genetics and bio-chemistry to the field of anthropology . The school is based in New York City, New Jersey .
 From these techniques, more and more evidence of man's evolution from primates becomes available . The techniques are being used to study the evolution of man from primates .
 In the afternoon he will speak to the CC Delta Epsilon Society at 4:15 m.m. in Palmer 201 . Then in the afternoon, he will address a group of students at Palmer 201, Palmer 201 in Palmer .
 Father Ryan Speaks On Church and State . Father William J Ryan will speak at CCCC on Sunday, Monday and Tuesday .
 Father Ryan Ryan is president of Seton Hill College in Greensburg, Pennsylvania . Father Ryan: "Seton Hill is a great place to be a college president" Father Ryan says he's proud of his college experience .
 He has .been on many campuses across the country taking part in religious emphasis weeks .
 The Church's understanding of how to deal with civil society has grown over the centuries, he said . He explained that the Church has grown to understand civil society better .
 Work began at Colorado College Monday to clear the site for the new Charles Learning Tutt Library . The library is scheduled to be built on the campus during the next year and a half .
 A crew from the CC grounds staff began the job Monday morning by cutting down 12 trees that had to be cleared out before work could begin on the new library . The new library will be the first public library in the city .
 The library will be built at the southeast corner of the intersection of San Rafael Street and Cascade Avenue . It will be on a site now occupied by West Hall, which is located on the corner of West Hall .
 West and East Halls have been sold to the Boyce House Moving firm of Pueblo, which will move both from the campus by spring .
 East Hall is giving way to a new science building which is scheduled to go under construction this spring . East Hall will be replaced by a science building set to be completed in the spring .
 The library is a gift of the El Pomar Foundation which gave CC $1.25 million for the building . The library was designed by the architectural firm of Skidmore, Owings and Merrill .
 The new science building is a gift of the Olin Foundation which gave the college approximately $1. million last year . Oificial ground ceremonies were held at Homecoming in October .
 The library and the new science building are part of a $6 million improvement program on the campus . The library, the science building and the library are among the new buildings .
 Funds for the improvement program are being raised by the Colorado College Campaign . Colorado College is raising funds to improve its facilities .
 N nrro educator, many of whose s 3 participated in the Atlanta sit-in i, Dean Brazeal by reason t f bis . i m to the situation . A N n rro educator . Many of whose 3 participated In the Atlanta sat-in .
 PORTS Tiger Pucksters Clash with Foes In Thrilling WCHA Holiday Play . The Ports played in several Western Collegiate hockey games over the Christmas recess .
 Two of the games went into sudden death overtime, with the Tigers ending up on the top side of both encounters . The Tigers ended up on top of both games, with two games going into overtime .
 The first night CC fell 10-5 to the Wolverines, but the next night they came back to beat them 5-4 in overtime . The next night the team came back from a 10-4 loss to Michigan . The game went to an overtime thriller .
 Dixon pushing in the decisive goal, it was Doug Hill who pushed in the winning goal . Dixon pushes in the final goal of the match .
 After a brief holiday, the Tigers came back after Christmas to meet Michigan Tech December 29 and 30 . The Tigers played the Wolverines December 29-30 .
 As in their previous games, CC just didn't seem to have a defense comparable to that of their opponents . CC also had trouble setting up key plays in the game .
 The Tigers lost this game 6-4 after holding a 4-3 lead going into the final stanza . The Tigers held on to a 6-3 win over the Tigers in the game .
 The Tigers next opponents were the Gophers of Minnsota who whipped the Tigers 9-6 in their first outing . The Gophers were the Tigers' next opponents .
 Kenny Cairns pushed in three goals for the Tigers within three minutes . The Tigers took the lead in the first half with a quick start to the game .
 The next games will not be until after finals when we meet DU Friday, February 3 at DU arena . The next game will be after finals .
 Ask about our RENTAL PURCHASE PLAN RESERVE EARLY and AVOID DISAPPOINTMENT LUCAS SPORTING GOODS 1 20 N Tejon St. Ask about your use of the Renteral Purchasing Plan .
 SATURDAY-FEBRUARY 4 registration for Upperclassmen, graduates and specials . Upperclassen to 11:30m. to 11.30m.-Cossitt Hall. Saturday 1 to 4:30 m. Saturday .
 All grades due at noon . Baccalaureate sheroei MEiroa.-m. E del norte Sunday .
 All TYPES ALTERATIONS AND REPAIRS AND REHAIRS ""IN BY 9:00 DIRTY -OUT CLEAN BY 4:30"" on BOTH LAUNDRY AND DRY CLEANING fYPEWMTEIt 10% C
 Colorado College is once again in response to the concern of alive with learning . Two Vacations Colorado College will be open in 2015 .
 Religious Affairs Committee classes have resumed . Hockey games several students to participate are being played, dunces planned, social projects, plays rehearsed .
 Let's look over the 1%1 spring back on those singularly carefree vacation days of semester break . Let's take a look at the 1.1%1 holiday season .
 All-College Convocation Tuesday, February 7 . Julius Baird played an organ prelude, Shove pel filled even up to the balconies with students .
 Harry Booth opened the meeting with an invocation and choir sang the anthem . In traditional eonvocational style, Harry Booth opens the meeting in traditional style .
 Louis T Benezet, President of Colorado re. as the convocation speakguage . Louis T. Benezett, President . of Colorado, will speak at Colorado's convocation .
 AH these improvements go toward an overall physical improvement of the college and a rise in the standard of education as well . The improvements will go toward a larger physical improvement .
 President Benezet explains the values of a college sports program . He suggested that the actuality of reaching these goals diminishes as professionalism and high costs squeeze out enthusiasm for college games .
 CC takes in $40,000 less than is paid out for athletics, says coach . He further explained the high cost of athletics to CC by pointing out that the school takes in less than the amount paid out .
 Students pay 70 per cent of college expenses . How much should be spent on athletics needs to be considered by the students, says professor .
 In the new gymnasium, a final addition under the expansion program, the lack of physical fitness of which ""we are intellectually aware"" can be corrected . The gym is one of the final additions to the expansion of the program .
 A wide variety of indoor sports including a swimming pool will be offered . The event will be held in a bid to attract people from all over the world .
 The CC administration hopes to avoid making CC attendance available only to students from high income families . In this way, the CC administration wants to maintain its appeal to students in Colorado .
 This balance in the CC student body will become more important, and more difficult to maintain, as the cost gap between state-supported schools and private schools becomes greater . CC students will need to be able to maintain the balance between state and private school .
 President Benerelated forthcoming instrucal and campus improvements . He went on to speak of individual commitment to the life ruled by the intellect .
 Present Benezet explained the need Jth for an increase in the salary Jp faculty members, and for an Icrease in the number of faculty jembers .
 Faculty salaries will be raised, and additions will be Bade to the staffs of the mathematics, foreign language, and Engph departments .
 President Beneit said that he hoped that CC [pukl] have a full-time professor Russian next year . Beneit hopes to have a Russian professor at the university .
 CC hopes to ase support for co-curricular itivities such as drama, publicaB>ns, lectures, symposiums, confts, choir, debate and debate . Along with these acac stimulations, CC hopes for a support for other curricular activities such
 Every other year ASCC sponsors an All-College Conference for discussing campus solutions and problems . H^ges, such as a renovation of ;B""kins and further use of indi■dual teaching machines and IanAll-College conference .
 All-College Conference is being planned for this year . This year, unler the co-chairmanship of Mr Thomas Rivers and Miss Janet Fry will be in charge .
 This year's conference will take place at Star Ranch on the weekend of February 25 and 26 . The conference will be held at the Star Ranch Ranch .
 Buses will be provided Saturday afternoon for any students needing transportation . Students will be able to use the buses for transportation .
 ASCC sponsored program is arranged so that students spend Saturday night at the ranch . Students will spend the night at a ranch .
 The Saturday night meal, Sunday breakfast, and Sunday lunch will be rved there . It will be the first time people will be able to eat there .
 Five dollars, to be paid at Rastall Desk between the 13th and the 17th of February, will be the only cost of the confeience .
 As a general airing of problems and situations which in one way or another affect the whole campus and every student, this conference hopes to attract as many students as possible .
 The conference involves the faculty and administration as well as students and faculty . The conference will be held in conjunction with the University of Wisconsin .
 The program includes several discussion groups in which various faculty members have agreed to participate . The program also includes discussion groups with faculty members .
 Six discussion groups are planned for the weekend . Other activities will also be planned .
 The conference, in short, promises to be both valuable and entertaining for all participants . The conference will be held in New York City, New York, on November 28 .
 The conference officially opens at noon on Saturday, February 25 with an introduction stating its purposes and aims . The conference will be held in New York, New Jersey .
 Following this general introduction, students will break up into two discussion groups, each student attending that discussion which especially interests him . Each student will attend the discussion group which he attends .
 One group will take up questions concerning the effectiveness of the foreign student program . Another group will discuss whether Colorado College should be taking in more foreign students each year, or less .
 Folk Singers, Inc. will entertain at an informal party in the lodge after dinner . Folk singers will perform at the lodge . The lodge will be closed to guests .
 Mr Harry Booth will give the Sunday morning service after breakfast on the 26th . Mr Booth will be giving the service at the end of the service .
 Kinnikinnik contributions for the 1960-61 Spring issue are being accepted now, at Rastall Desk . Kinnikinik contributed to the Spring issue of this year's issue .
 The sport of skiing, which also has strict dating and drinking requirements, was most popular . Skiing was the most popular sport in the world, followed by skiing .
 Aspen, as always, had its economic standards justified by students . CC students spent as much as $200 in rive days . Aspen students spent $200 a day .
 These students will be seen carrying their plaster burdens about the campus for the next few weeks . Students will carry the plaster burdens around the campus .
 There were, too, those who stayed behind, whiling away the hours in the dorm .
 Loomis became a haven for potential housewives as the girls gathered to gossip at the laundromat or the ironing rooms . The housewives gathered at the laundry room or ironing room .
 Three bold young ladies reached the 4,000 mile mark on an auto trip . The trip took them through both San Francisco and Los Angeles .
 'Now we must end our wanderings. But now we are all once again curtailed by scholastic requirements and must end their wanderings'
 Everyone now able to relate tales of new adventure is pleased with how they spent their time . Those who did little will perhaps plan more carefully for the future .
 We suggest a contemplative look at the Indian Reservation Work Camp opportunities for this spring . To these people we suggest looking at the work camp opportunities for spring .
 Three of Sunday's topics will concern the lines of authority judicial, social, and governmental — in campus organizations . Students will be asked about the amount of authority students have in various areas of campus life .
 A fourth group will discuss the apathetic student, his role in the life of the campus, and more importantly his role as a student in the lift' of the nation . How common tins particular character is on campus and what the ratmifications of the attitude are .
 Louis T Benezet will conclude the conference with a summation Sunday afternoon . Louis T. Benezett will conclude with a summary of the conference .
 Registration for the conference (Vill conference) will be during the week ol February 13th . Registration will be in place during the conference .
 At registration the student will specify the one discussion group each day in which lie is mosl interested and which he will want to attend . The student will then choose which discussion group he wants to attend each day .
 The five dollar fee will pay for transportation to and from Star Ranch, three meals, an overnight stay, and attendance at all the weekend activities . The fee is in Hue with the Religious Affairs Committee's traditional policy of using the Shove Clmpel offerings in some constructive social work .
 This support does not replace, but extends, maintenance of a Korean child adopted through the Foster Parents Plan, Inc. Inc. This support is not intended to replace or replace the child adopted .
 For the period April 1 to April •.) two projects are currently being planned . Two projects are being planned for the next two weeks .
 Work camp will be held on Navajo reservation near Cnllup, New Mexico . The other, still tentative, would be a study project on Blackfoot reservations near Sheridan, Wyoming .
 Gallup work project will present ten to twelve students and faculty with an opportunity to become acquainted with the way in which Navajos live and with their problems . Students and faculty will be presented with a group of Navajo people .
 The Navajos will work with the Gallup Indian Community Center nnd on the nearby reservation . They will also work at the Gallup Community Center in Gallup, Gallup .
 During the wurlc camp week participants will visit neighboring reservations, attend council meetings and perhaps speak with Indian lenders . Participants will also be able to speak with Native American lenders .
 Those attending will stay at the Indian Community Center . They will be asked to cover ten dollars of their own expenses .
 The Sheridan project will be under the guidance of Miss Vivian Arviso, formerly a CC student, and currently Miss Indian America . The Sheridan Project will be part of the Miss Indian American pageant .
 A group of up to ten persons will visit several reservations in order to learn more of Indian culture and ways . More in the nature of a seminar than a seminar, this is a group of ten persons .
 The purpose of these projects is to give both .students and faculty an opportunity to express their social concerns in a constructive way, and to gain first-hand knowledge of the lives of American Indians .
 Interested students and faculty should contact Mr Carlton Gamer or Mr Grace . Students and faculty are encouraged to attend the event .
 All interested students are invited, whether or not they submit poems . English majors and Kinnikinnnik contributors are especially urged to attend .
 Poems to be discussed should be submitted to Rastall Desk by Wednesday, February 15. wherein one values beauty and order and realizes his responsibilities to his fellow man .
 This acceleration was made apparent this week with another tuition increase, this time of $200 . This time of the $200 increase, the increase was $200. This is the latest in a series of tuition increases .
 This is not oratory, or an excerpt from the catalog, or propaganda from a fund drive; it is a fact that anyone with four years experience on this campus must acknowledge . Anyone with four-years experience must acknowledge this fact .
 It presumes a knowledge of where one is now, what his capabilities are and what is the best way to achieve that goal . The best way of achieving that goal is to know where you are now and what your capabilities are .
 Movement ahead presumes a dissatisfaction with the present and a willingness towards sacrifice and just plain hard work . Movement ahead also presumes that the present is not the best .
 This is the attitude that it takes to move ahead or better to accelerate to accelerate. This is what it takes for the world to move forward or better .
 Old problems need more than old guesses; new approaches must not be feared if they set new precedents . New approaches to the world's problems need to be new approaches to solve .
 We feel the TIGER has the potential to put this attitude to work perhaps better than any other campus institution . We feel it could be a model for the future of the school as a whole .
 We of the TIGER recognize this potential and are willing to take the step that may or mav not fulfill it . We are prepared to take this step .
 By attending the All-College Conference, the students of Colorado College have an excellent opportunity to start exhibiting this attitude of growth . Colorado College students have a great opportunity to attend the conference .
 A .7-week study of East Asia will get underway at the beginning of the second semester . Lectures on East Asia Study will begin at the start of the semester .
 The study features lectures on seven areas of Chinese and Japanese life . It aims to help develop an understanding of their modern societies .
 Lecturers have been drawn from Colorado College and the Universities of Denver and Colorado and Colorado . Lecturers are from Colorado college and Denver University .
 The series begins February 8 with an explanation of the people and locations . Miss Dorothy Mierow, lecturer in geography and curator of the Colorado College Museum, will give an explanation .
 It is necessary to register in advance for the series at the Rastall leception desk . The series will be broadcast on BBC Radio 4 at 8.30pm.
 Tuition fee is three dollars and includes a bibliography of selected readings for students who wish to do further individual study . Tuition fees are $3.99 .
 Doctor Crofts was reared in China and later served on General Mac Arthur's staff in Korea and Japan . He served in Korea, Japan and Korea during his time in China .
 Professor Booth will lecture on Budhism and other religions, and Mr H Medill Sarkisian, who completed graduate studies on Asia after graduation from CC, will lectures on Oriental arts and crafts .
 Donald Jenkins English, in Philadelphia, is Professor of English at All-College Conference . Donald Jenkins is a professor of English in Philadelphia . He is also a member of the Philadelphia-area All College Conference .
 John H Lewis lege was signally honored for his role in Lewis' life . John Lewis was a member of the House of Representatives from Washington, DC .
 A boy, David, to Mr and Mrs. meet i n g of these three groups, and Hank van Arsdale have Douglas Freed . At the gang, Brad Chase, Julie Bohlke and Julie Bohrke meet .
 With equal enat the CC-DU hockey game, the Commisthusiasm, Jan Fry and Tom Riv to claim it .
 Perkins Hall is home to students at the University of Cambridge . Perkins Hall has been home to more than 1,000 students .
 In realizing the work and time Sophomores and to Jan and to English Associations are jointly that have gone into both the WinTom. and Jan's WinTom . WinTom will be available on the Internet for free.com .
 Let's replace criticism and seeki gmn ts totaling a half milter Carnival and the All-School disregard with praise and enthusimprove English Conference, we should be all the ,asm when such recognition is due .
 The earth has had more pressing problems to consider from time to time, and even now there is no great urgency about settling the question . To be sure, the earth .
 We doubt it is really going to be settled; a very dull world this might be if it were . Indeed, we doubt whetha it is going to settle; we doubt it's really settled .
 Colo. rado College returns to Colorado for three more months . This note of music greets all as we return to the Colorado way of life .
 Music is play ing an important part on the town this month as we find many workshops and organizations rehearsing for concerts asprings . Music is a big part in the community this month .
 OPERA ERA ""The Medium"" and ""La Serva Padrona" are being pn sented by the Colorado Springs Opera Association Februar 9, 10, and 11 .
 When first written, the official rote was that of an intermission note between the more serious Baroque operas . The official note was a note between serious and serious operas, but it has since become an official part of the opera series .
 People during this period of transition thought that the Baroque operas were much too serious and followed an almost stag. nate quality in growth; hence the Buffas became popular . The Buffas were popular .
 Tickets are $2.25 and are on sale at the music department in Perkins Hall . Tickets are available at Perkins Hall for the show .
 February 12 marks another Colorado College Winter Concert . Winter Concert will be held at the Colorado College .
 Martha Booth, soprano, Mr Harry Both, bar tone and Henry Margolinski, pianist, will be seen and heard at 4:00m. in Perkins Hall .
 The concert will center around German and French art songs and arias by Mozart and Verdi . It will be the first time the concert has been held in New York City .
 The concert is free to the public and presents itself as another achievement by CC music department . The concert will be held at the end of the month at CC Music Hall .
 Nathan Milstein, acclaimed the ""Reigning Master of the Bow,"" will appear with the Colorado Springs Symphony Orchestra, under the direction of Walter Eisenberg, Thursday, February 16, at Palmer High School .
 The violinist has chosen the Dvorak Violin Concerto in A Minor . She is Russian by birth and American by adoption, and has been adopted by the family .
 Another interesting performance to watch for is tin opera ""Dido and Aeneas,"" scheduled for February 23 and 21 . This opera is staged by Mr William McMillen, musically di rected by Mr Donald Jenkins .
 This is a full staged, costumed production an' has an overall cast of forty, dominated by CC students . CC students will be featured in the production .
 Tin opera was written by Henry Purcell in 1689 and accents I landmark in opera history . Tin opera is written by Purcell and is a work of 17th century composer and composer .
 More about the history, develop ments, casts, and production next week . More about this week's cast and crew .
 This week's final note for our month of music is the Jazi Jamboree, scheduled for February 26 . The two sessions on this day will feature such personalis as the Falconaires, Johnny Smith, Max Morath .
 Martha f DO th, soprano, and Mr Harry . Harry ,tli| baritone, on Sunday, Febrv 'l2, at 4m. in Perkins Hall .
 Booth majored in music at adcliffe College and the Harvard ■aduate School of Education . Booth was soloist in the Choral Society at Radcliffe . Booth also sang at Harvard and Adcliffe .
 After her masters degree she was supervisor of music in the jhools of Lincoln, Mass. She is now a director of music at Jhools .
 Ere conducted the Shove Chapel Choir iring 1958-59 when the services Ere first introduced on the ,mpus . This lent and training enabled her to conduct the services she first introduced . Ere was the first woman to conduct a church choir .
 This lecture is part of the annual public lecture series offered to Colorado Springs by Colorado College . The lecture is open to the public and is free to attend .
 The familiarity of the terms ""hidden persuader"" and ""status seeker"" in our society attests to the renown of Mr Packard . The familiarity . of the . terms ""Hidden persuader" and ""Status seeker"" is a reference to Packard's work . Packard was
 Best known for The Hidden Persuaders, The Status Seekers and The Wastemakers . Has written many articles for newspapers and magazines ranging from national to family problems .
 He is a reporter, in the best sense of the word, for he seeks to inform the public objectively and thoroughly with an aim to improvement .
 At forty-six Mr Packard spends much of his time near Martha's Vineyard, Mass., writing extensively. unusual pieces such as a Psalm setting by Heinrich Schutz .
 Beethoven, Richard Strauss, Brahms, Faure, Duparc, Mozart and Verdi are the other composers to be represented . Mozart, Mozell, Strauss and Brahms are among the composers represented .
 Bishop Stephen Neill was formerly bishop of what is now one of the dioceses of the Church of South India . Neill is a well-known author and preacher .
 Students must be able to distinguish trivial and important, and know enough about past writing to recognize the new and the notso-new . Such writing implies two prior requirements .
 Kinnikinnik does not show these requirements being met . With some notable exceptions, the writing does not appear to be met . Kinnikinik is the latest in a long line of events in the world .
 Probably the most disappointing feature of the current issue is the many snippets of two to eight lines; although they are fewer than those of the previous issue, the persistence of these frivolities signifies a continued domination .
 Both Alexander Pope and Ogden Nash can show us how difficult they are to do well . I am against neither humor nor epigrams .
 On the second point, that student writers ought to know something of past writing, 1 read only spent twenty years in India as a missionary, the latter six years being spent as Bishop of Tinimevelly .
 LA JUNTA COLORADO SPRINGS College Liaison BONNIE WHITELEATHER MElrose 4-7744, Exr. BONNI Whitehill 4-744 . Whitehill is a junior at L.A. Colleton County College .
 Cache La Poudr. All TYPES ALTERATIONS AND REPAIRS AND REHAIRS ""IN BY 9:00 DIRTY-OUT CLEAN BY 4:30"" on BOTH LAUNDRY AND DRY CLEANING 10% C
 Writers, especially of poetry, must be readers; if not, it is something like trying to write a foreign language using only a dictionary and a grammar . Poems must be read by people, especially poets, to be able to write poetry .
 To return to the problem of significant form, I see, particularly in the longer works, a constant wavering between prose and verse . The longer works are more like prose than verse, especially in the works .
 In general, the poems should be more poetic (condensed, allusive, rhythmatic, concrete) and the stories more developed in plot and character . The poems are more poetic and more developed .
 There are no real stories in the issue — they are fables or fragments (call them what you will) which lack plot, character, and social context . Perhaps I should not say ""stories,"" for there are no stories," for there is no real story .
 Colorado College has a reputation for producing bad light verse . Perhaps also the writers feel that their background has not given them enough material for realistic short stories .
 More and longer stories would both balance the magazine and eliminate the verse deadwood . I am sure that a devotion to writing and careful observation can cure both ills .
 The absence of short stories connects with the issue's prevailing lack of concern for the pressing issues of the day . With the exception of the slight ""Progress"" and the trite ""Berlin,"" there is little to show a participation in the growing social and political consciousness of American students
 To leave off general damns and faint praises, -I should mention other pieces which seem to have real merit, - I should mention . Other pieces seem to be genuine merit, he said .
 MElrose iL beginning of that seriousness . 3-7883 anu "" study which is the way for young writers to find significant form .
 Each week a different area of study concerning world affairs is taken up by the World Affairs Council . This week's focus is on the role of the Council of State .
 The method of study is to form small groups to meet once a week in someone's home, business, office or shop . Small groups meet in person's homes, businesses or shops .
 After each discussion the participants are provided with opinion ballots and are asked to cast their votes on these important topics . Participants are given an overview of the topics discussed during each discussion .
 The Great Decisions Statistical Center in Boulder tabulates the ballots and sends the results to congressmen and the Department of State . Colorado congressmen, the department of state, send the results .
 A person interested in starting such a group begins by inviting six to 10 other people to join Mm one evening a week for eight weeks . Mm is a group of people who meet weekly for an eight week period .
 Fact sheets, the only expense in a ""Great Decisions"" group, may be bought by students for 75 cents in room 301, Jackson House . Fact sheets are the only expenses in the group .
 These sheets come in a kit containing an introductory booklet, eight fact sheets, eight opinion ballots, reading lists, discussion questions, and discussion questions .
 A Fact Sheet Kit has been made available to all participants . A regular time and place has been arranged for meetings, the group runs itself .
 Newspaper features and radio and television programs will make additional information on the subjects available each week .
 Mr Peter Von Puttkramer will speak on ""Deadlock Over Germany,"" with Mrs. Mrs. Von Putkramer . Mr Von Puttkramer will also speak on "Deadlock over Germany"
 David E Fletcher, Assistant Director of Admissions at Colorado College since his graduation from CC in June 1957, will leave the school March 1 . Fletcher will take a job at the Colorado School of Mines in Golden as business manager of the athletic department and freshman football coach .
 A native of Denver, Mr Fletcher graduated from East Denver High School in 1949 . He played halfback for two years on the football team before enlisting in the Navy .
 He was in the Navy from 1951 to 1954, played football with Navy service teams . In 1953, he was all-Navy while playing fullback with Bainbridge Naval Training Station team .
 In the last game of his career, he set a modern-day CC record by running a kickoff back 83 yards against Adams State College to help CC to a 36 to 8 victory . In the final game, he ran a kickoff 83 yards .
 Directories of summer jobs in 1961, including international opportunities, are now available at the reserve desk in Coburn Library, Coburn .
 Students interested in hosteling may obtain a ""Hostelers' Manual" from Miss Joan Shinew at the deference desk . Miss Shinew can also be found at the Deference desk at University of Cambridge .
 Colorado College Winter Carnival, February 17. 18, is providing a weekend schedule of events with something for everyone . The biggest event of the weeeknd will be the climatic dance at the Broadmoor ballroom Saturday night .
 Door prizes include dinners for two for two and a chance to win door prizes . If you don't get your money's worth in fun you may be one of the lucky to win .
 Saturday afternoon at 1:00 rrt. on the Broadmoor ski slopes, there will be skiing for everyone at a 20% discount . Saturday afternoon will be at 1 a.m. Saturday afternoon .
 For the more talented. races will be held later in the afternoon . Prizes for the best five times per academic class will be given .
 Winter Carnival festivities will begin at 6:30 Friday evening, February 17, with a figure skating exhibition by Miss Lynn Carmichael . Miss Carmichael will be at the center of the festivities .
 During the evening a carnival queen will be crowned from nominees Miss Jane Alderson, Miss Lynn Ballard, Miss Martha Bretemitz, Miss Nadine Chang, Miss Julianne Rolfe, and Miss Joan Seelig . The carnival queens will also be crowned .
 Slocum Hall is starting off the second semester with some different activities . The Hall Council is the governing body of representatives from the different wings of the building . Place your vote for the queen of your choice .
 Slocum Basketball Tournament begins this Saturday afternoon in Cossitt Gymnasium . Four games will be played in the four-game tournament .
 Seven teams have entered involving sixty men or more and the team names have taken on an original tone . The Slocum Trotters, Fighting Five, Untouchables, Mountaineers, Spastics, Crosstown Betas, and the Wampies .
 These informal gatherings take place in the Slocum Lounge and exhibit you pick up your dance tickets from cither the representatives in the fraternity houses or at the Rastall Desk .
 Senior mathematics majors ar* automatically entered in the com petition, and other students m a j enter by making the necessary \ (""'enter")") at the Counsel areas of interest .
 The new punching bag, bar-bells, dumb-bell, matts, and other equipment should be ready for very soon .
 Tareyton's Dual Filter gives you you a unique inner filter of ACTIVATED CHARCOAL . The taste of a cigarette is mild and smooth .
 It works together with a pure white outer filter — to balance the flavor elements in the smoke . The filter is a combination of white filter and white filter to balance flavors .
 Six thirty tonight lines will queu up for the ice show . First event of the CC Winter Carnival taking place this weekend .
 Highlighting the entertainment will be the solo on skates by Lynn Carmichael and the crowning of the Carnival Queen . The Carnival Queen will be crowned on Saturday night .
 Lynn Ballard KKG, Joan Seeling Alpha Phi, Marty Breternitz Theta, Julie Rolfe Gamma Phi, Jane Alderson DG and Nadine Chang, IWA are the candidates for royal honors . Lynn Ballard will be the first woman to receive the honor .
 Also slated for tonight is a comedy skit by our limping hockey team and then everyone can glide onto the ice . The skit is scheduled for tonight at 8 p.m. ET .
 Rastall is holding Open House tonight from 8:00 to 11:30 featuring the Folk Singers, Inc. The Folk Singing Singers will perform at 8:30 p.m.
 Schushing the Broadmoor slopes begins tomorrow at 1:00 along with races . Schushing begins at 1.00 at the Broadsoor slopes .
 Amateur Stein Ericksons will compete for two trophys - one for fastest man and one for the fastest woman . Those who have signed up to be amateur Stein Erickson will be competing for two Trophys .
 A complete change of pace will come about in the evening when the rigors of outdoor sports are changed for the atmosphere of mood and music . The atmosphere of the evening will be changed to the atmosphere and music of the night .
 Bob Bishop's band will play from 9:00 to 12:00 in the Broadmoor Ballroom . Bob Bishop will perform at the event .
 Door prizes of dinners for two are to be given by many Colorado Springs restaurants . Door prizes for two will be offered by many restaurants .
 The price at the door is $2.50 . For the delinquents who have failed to buy tickets on campus, selling for $2 .00, the price is at least $3.00 . For those who have not bought tickets, the ticket price is $1.00
 Colorado Springs, Colorado, February 17, 1961 Colorado College VANCE PACKARD . Tuesday night in Shove Chapel Mr Vance Packard deed a lecture entitled ""The Changing Character of the merican People"" as part of the Colorado College Public LecSeries .
 Packard said we are undergoing an (tensive change in values, Mr Packard maintained that priarily these changes are the result of the impact of growing immericalization in our society .
 Since the child of mass prois of necessity mass adirtisiug is of necessity . The problem which arises how to persuade the public to insume at a rate proportional to nc leasing production .
 Advertisis promoting self-indulgence, :raving for newness, impulse lying, the desire for products ith strong status overtones, in lort, a ""thing-minded"" culture . Adirtising has left no stone unfiled in seeking out new markets
 Packard indicated that as a ssult of the high pressures of immercialism we are emphasizing importance of material possestins over the value of the human J i'it . Packard said as a sult of high pressures on immericalism, we are . emphasizing importance
 To cite two examples, he to that we spend three times 1 much money on chewing gum . We do on education and that e spend nine times as much on ]itor as we do on books, he says .
 Colorado College was exposed to a most beautifully articulate spokesman of Christianity . Bishop Stephen Neill is a bishop in the Anglican Church . The lectures were sponsored by the Religious Affairs and Assemblies Committees .
 The list of activities and accomplishments that appears in any thumbnail sketch of this man only serves as reinforcement to the less objective but more vivid impression with which he left his listeners . The list, however, only serves to reinforce to an objective but vivid impression of the man .
 Bishop Neill, the Irish Anglican, the missionary, the publisher, the author, the speaker, showed a charm and a humility which added interest and effectiveness .
 Bishop Neill lectured both formally and informally on various aspects of his Christian career . He dealt with questions of Christian and Anglican theology, missionary work, and the world church movement .
 Four lectures revealed a man, a bishop, who could talk effectively on Christian metaphysics, as he did Sunday at the Shove Chapel service . The bishop also spoke on the ecumenical movement, and on problems and approaches to missionary work in Africa .
 The unifying factor in the series of lectures was not so much in the subjects dealt with, but rather in the manner of presentation . The uniting factor was the presentation of the lectures .
 "Always without notes, he worked into this organization a few jokes, many specific examples of the points he was making marked by subtlety and precision," he said .
 Dido, Belinda, standing, and Aeneas, standing . Coach by William E McMillen. Dido .
 Mrs. Josephine Estill, a resident of Colorado Springs, and Mrs. Harry Booth of the college faculty, are among the winners of the award .
 The roles of the sorceress, first and second witches, Mercury and a sailor will be sung by students Miss Paulent Franklin, Miss Joan Bemau, Miss Maxine Barbre, Miss Jean Daniels, and Mr James Dabels . Arlene Kushnir. a resident of
 Musical direction is by Donald Jenkins, stage direction by William E McMillan, and choreography by Norman Comick . Musical direction and musical direction are by Mr Donald Jenkins and stage direction is .
 English Opera The opera ""Dido and Aeneas"" is the only English opera of any great merit in a period when many masterpieces were being written in Italy and France . Blow's "Venus and Adonis" is the first English opera to be written in England .
 Handel's operas were not found in England until nearly 60 years later . Not until nearly sixty years later with the operas of George Frederick Handel can anything else be found in English of comparable stature . Handel was the composer of the 18th century's most famous opera,
 26 voices for the Workshop production are drawn from the college madrigal group . The chorus of 26 voices is drawn from 26 voices in the chorus .
 Dance, for centuries an important aspect of opera, is being choreographed by Mr Norman Comick . Dance is an important part of opera and a vital jart of this production .
 The eight dancers assume at different times three identities as court people, witches and sailors . As does the chorus, the chorus must assume different identities as witches and court people .
 The two piano accompaniment will be provided by Mr Jenkins and Miss Jill Tyler .
 Dido, queen of Carthage, and Aeneas, a Trojan prince, destined to found Rome, full in love . Dido was the daughter of Dido and the son of the Trojan prince .
 Aeneas and Dido are both aware that fate has decreed responsibilities for them other than marrying Dido . The prince is confident he can defy his destiny .
 The sorceress and witches, jealous of anyone who might prove both prosperous and happy, know Aeneas' fate . They conspire to send him toward Rome before he and Dido can be married . The sorceresses and witches are jealous and send him to Rome before they can be
 Aeneas deceives him with a mandate to embark immediately for Italy . A spirit, conjured up by the sorceress is disguised as Mercury and appears to be Mercury . Mercury appears to appear to be a spirit, deceiving him to embark on a mission to Italy .
 Judgement and Love Dido's suicide, and ""unreasonable"" act in twentieth century eyes, was fully understood by the Elizabethan audience of Purcell's War . Motivation for the suicide lies partially in the suicide of Dido .
 A woman's disappointment in love was complicated by her pride as a queen who ruled majestically without mistake . Her disappointment was compounded by her desire to be a queen without mistake.
 Tickets, on sale at the Rastall desk, may be purchased for fifty cents plus an activity ticket . Tickets will be available for 50 cents plus a fifty cents .
 'Extra-curricular activities' plays a debatable role in college life . Mapper _ JfflW TORMBY uiMi printed Friday* by PEERLESS PRINTING .
 An education, a superior education, can be obtained by sitting in classrooms for a certain number of hours per week, per year, or per four years . An education can be achieved by a certain amount of hours a week or per year . The education, an education, is a superior
 It seems there is nothing specifically necessary or sacred about the time American students spend outside of class hours . It seems that there are no sacred places to spend time on campus .
 The CC student has had an opportunity to hear and meet two outsttanding members of this last category . CC students have had a chance to meet and meet members of the community .
 Bishop Stephen Ieill is a world leader of the ecumenical movement . Mr Vance Packard is a prolific meta-sociologist . Mr Packard was a prolific and prolific meta sociologist .
 Bishop Neill is a devoted member of the Anglican Church, the only church founded on a readiness to compromise itself out of existence in the event of the formation of a World Church .
 The frank and intelligent attitude of this gentleman inspired a realistic optimism in mankind that is as rare as the personality itself . The frank, intelligent attitude was the real optimism in humanity that is rare as a personality itself.
 Mr Packard, with the astuteness of a studied gadfly, projected an incipient social doom with, what seemed to us, a sad lack of the frank specifics of cause and correction . The other hand, on the other hand .
 We feel that CC is progressing well in maintaining its status as an educationally liberal institution, but as in all things, time is precious in its rarity, especially extra-curricular time .
 We feel it is sad but not surprising that students would be more attracted to a session on a public psychoanalist's couch than to talks on church union, the Christian life and Christianity in Indo-Africa .
 There are important value judgements which must be made carefully, whether speakers which are coming to the campus have enough to add to our educational process to balance the time and expense involved .
 The All-College Conference, the Science-Humanities Symposium, and the Colorado College Lecture Series are to the point . The Colorado College lecture series will be held at Colorado College in Colorado .
 All-College Conference will be held at Colorado College on Saturday, February 25 . The conference will discuss foreign students and their place on the Colorado College campus .
 Sunday's discussions will begin concerning governmental authority in college organizations and the student leader's position in this government . Sunday's discussion will begin with a discussion of governmental authority .
 There will be a discussion of the apathetic college student and hopefully some solution as to how to integrate him into campus activities . Also during the weekend will be the discussion of how to incorporate him into college activities .
 Faculty members invited free of charge if they will registetr at Rastall Desk . Faculty members are invited to register at the desk of the desk at the Rastal Desk .
 The five executive officers of the Associated Women Students and the class representatives the Advisory Council will be elected during the next two weeks for the coming year . AWS Elections will be held in the coming two weeks .
 Nominations have been made in the various council and dormitory meetings . The students have been nominated for this year's awards .
 Polls will be open on February 20 in Loomis Hall from 9 to 11 and from 2 to 5 and in Rastall Center from 11 to 2 . Run-offs are scheduled for February 23, 27, and March 2 at these same times .
 All women students, including those who do not live on campus, are urged to vote in this very important election .
 KRCC-FM, Radio Colorado College, announces a new lecture series beginning Wednesday evening at 7:45 . The series will be heard exclusively over this station .
 John M Morris will conduct a lecture series entitled ""The Great Religions" which will pertain to the different religions of the world, including their historical background and moral grounds .
 Among the religions to be discussed will be those of Hinduism and Buddhism . The panel will also discuss Hinduism, Buddhism and Hinduism .
 Editors Seek Material For Spring Kinnikinnik . Contributions are now being . sought for the spring edition of the college literary and art magazine .
 §15.00 cash awards will be made for the best contributions in the fields of prose, poetry, art, and photography, and for the cover design .
 David Van Becker of the English department is conducting a poetry workshop on Tuesday, February 21, in Rastall Center at 7:30m.
 This workshop is designed primarily for potential KINNIKinNIK contributors who want to polish their material before submitting it . It is designed for potential contributors .
 On March 7 a special prose workshop will be conducted by the KINNIKinNIK in order to prove the quality and quantity of work submitted . The workshop will take place in March .
 All the literary contributions will be reviewed by the 10 member student board of review . Their criticisms and opinions will be recorded and returned to the contributors .
 Duncan, Miss Barb Binns, and Miss Pat Swarthwood are the women members of the women . Duncan, Mrs. Binn and Miss Barbara Binn are the members . Duncan is the youngest member of the society .
 All contributions can be turned in to Mr Gary Gappert or Mr Jim Scarboro, co-editors .
 Sally Nichols-Brian Blakney was married to Donna Hampton-Fred Singleton . She had a boy, Gerald Kelley, born to Gerald Kelley . She died of a heart attack .
 The Film Society will present ""A Man Escaped" at 8:00 on February 17 . The film society will present the film at the Fine Arts Center .
 Phi Beta Kappa will hold its annual Invitational Discussion meeting on Tuesday, February 21 . The meeting will be held in the WES Room of Rastall Center at 7:30 a.m.
 Miss Lorinda Taylor and Miss Elizabeth Tucker will present papers on different phases of the topic to be followed by a general discussion . The discussion will be moderated by Dr. Dr. John Defterios of the University .
 Invitations have been mailed to students standing in the top ten per cent of their respective classes . Invitations are also mailed to members of Cap and Gown, Blue Key, and faculty members of the Society .
 Other students interested in attending the meeting are asked to call Miss Lorena A Berger, X204. Other students should also call Miss Berger .
 Professor Harry F Booth is president of the Coloi'ado College chapter of Phi Beta Kappa and Miss Berger is secretarytreasurer . At the next class meeting, the 21st of this month, we will vote for a new sec-treus .
 Candidates who ran at the beginning of the year and have made their grades will lie renominated . Those candidates who ran in the summer will be re-nominated for the first time .
 One of the most provocative art exhibitions to be seen in Denvei be opened to the public through February 26th at the Denver Museum of Art .
 One of the "Young French Painters" was ganized by the Arts Club of Chicago, the French Embassy and the Mi_^ d'Art Moderne in Paris .
 The second portion contains paintings by older anj more established artists whose works are included in many leading musc-ur^ galleries and private collections in the United States .
 All the paintings in the exhibition are non-figurative and are . originality, subtlety of color and rhythm of composition . Bazaine, Hartung, Manessier and Poliakoft .
 Plans for the Sophomore Winter Carnival are complete and the fe,rj v , air and spirit of an all-school holiday is here .
 Carnival accents skiiu; prizes, skats, dancing and a general fun filled weekend . The Carnival accents include prizes and skats .
 Winter Carnival will have £1,500 to £2,500 tickets . Games, queen candidates, open hi-is^ and full-fledged entertainers .
 Professor Richard M Pearl of the geology department at Colorado College has been elected an honorary member of the Canadian Gemmological Association . Professor Pearl is an expert in gemology and geology .
 The organization holds its meetings at the Royal Ontario Museum in Toronto . Incorporated in 1958, the organization was founded in 1958 .
 Pearl Pearl's writings and research on the subject of gems and precious stones . Pearl has published numerous books on gemstones and gemstones .
 Professor Pearl is the second Certified Gemmolog-ist of the Gemmological Institute of America . He is a Fellow with Distinction of Gemmology Association of Great Britain and honorary vice president of the Association of Austi-alia .
 He was elected the first American member of the gemmological association of Brazil . He is affiliated with the national groups of Norway and the Netherlands . He has also been affiliated with Brazil and Norway .
 Pacifism Discussed During Coffee Hour on Thursday, February 9 . Two aspects of pacifism discussed in the WES Lounge .
 Mr Grace started off the discussion by commenting on the religious bases for pacifism . Mr Grace said that pacifism is a form of religion .
 He said pacifism grows out of a way of life based upon love . Not a romantice love, but a love which respects the dignity of other human beings, he said .
 Love of this nature is a creative power which helps one to overcome fear and to lead a life eschewing not only the evil of war but all evil . Love can help one overcome fear, says the author of the book .
 Mr Grace pointed out the inextricable relationship between the New Testament message as found in ""The Sermon on the Mount"" and the idealism of pacifism .
 He implied that the pacifist's ideals are no different than those which form an essential core of Christianity . The pacifist said that pacifism is no different from Christianity .
 Mr Gamer spoke about what pacifists are like, and the various reasons which have motivated them to become pacifists . Mr Gamer also spoke about the reasons for pacifists to be pacifists.
 The religious or moral pacifist adheres to the pacifist ethic of non-violence in all human affairs . The pacifist is a pacifist who believes in non-violent action .
 The pragmatic or nuclear pacifist tolerates violence but does not wish to support a war involving nuclear power . Following the discussion several of the audience began a question and answer session .
 Delegates from 50 other Ameri College and Universities will present at this three day meet . The topic of discussion will bs ""Goals for Americans,"" basi the recent report of the President; Commission on this subject .
 I'm sure he has alienated more people than he has otten to rally behind him. I'm not sure how many people have been able to rally around him. He has alienated many more than he should have done .
 Mr Packard spares neither political party for their contributions to this burgeoning attitude of self first, last, and always . Packard: "Self-first, last" is a self-first attitude .
 In an interview on Tuesday he stated that ""We must preserve as much of capitalism as we can,"" that we must ""try to check the slide towards socialism,"" and rid the economy of ""make-believe work" that has been perpetuated by laborgovernment colusion .
 President Kennedy can not be criticized for his economic politics because they keep changing from press conference to press conference . He still feels that President Kennedy talks too much of economic groth without consideration for natural resources or the ability of the economy to absord further increases in production .
 He does definitely feel the need for and the . need for meeting ""unmet challenge for building up the nation's social capital"" and in so doing, absorbing at least ten per cent of the . nation's productive energy .
 Growth and employment could then be substained without glutting the market place with unneeded goods . Growth could be subbed into jobs and growth without over-stimulating the market .
 Mr Packard attributes chronic unemployment and poverty stricken areas, which are incongruities in the midst of the waste and gluttony he sees around us, to the part of people refusing to leave depressed areas .
 Mr Galbraith says there is a general laxity of unemployed people to seek jobs in the face of relatively high unemployment compensation checks . He also feels that there is also a laxity in the UK's unemployment compensation system .
 Mr Packard also portends the ""technological revolution"" and the ""baby booms"" as mixed blessings in lems of the American way of life .
 Scores from this duplicate bridge play will be submitted to the National Association of College Unions for final tallying from which prizes and awards will be given by this sponsoring organization . February 19 will be February 19 in the WES room, Bastall Center .
 Last year CC had some twenty participants in this program . "We ranked comparatively well in the national standings. Last year we had some 20 participants," she says . "Last year we ranked well in national standings"
 There will be a registration fee of one dollar but all the free coffee you can drink . There will also be a register fee for one dollar .
 Bridge fans need to use finesse they perfected during exam week . Bridge fans are encouraged to use the finesse you perfected during exams .
 Although the Intercollegiate Tournament is for students only, faculty and staff are urged to come and play with other non-entrants . contrast to the entrenched Republican philosophy that more products prosperity is needed .
 Authors suggest the creation of a federally administrated institution that will underwrite capitalistic ventures of Mr Man-in-the-street . Author says the new capitalist is more unneeded and im;es open to governand more unemployeeded .
 Mr Packard admits to reading profusely and regards works such as his own as being necessary to awaken latent American sensibility .
 Critics that call his works superficial and misleading because of out of context references he cites are just reacting to the truth of his subject matter and not his style, he says . He feels that critics that say his works are superficial are reacting only to the facts of his work .
 He mentioned a twelve page review in ""Printer's Ink", an advertising trade journal, that criticized the superficial handling of this subject but failed to include any examples of his work in it .
 Mr Packard's next book, to be published in about eighteen months, will deal with executives .
 Watch for ""the Pacesetters"", watch for "still a secret" Whatever the title, it seems likely that he will produce another best seller .
 His approach may not seem ideal to those accustomed to scholarly research, but he does attack pertinent problems and situations that are all too readily ignored by the average American . Although he may not be ideal, he attacks pertinent problems that are often overlooked .
 Members of the Nntionul Society of Pershing Rifles held their second yearly Smoker last night for new actives and pledges . Laiqait S.Jeciioo of Nancy Bowers Chosen As Regimental Sponsor . The Smoker's second annual Smoker
 Miss Bowers will become the official hostess for the CC chapter . She will travel with the company to assemblies, competitive events and banquets which will take her all over the country .
 Joan Carter, IWA; Nancy Schoi-ling, Delta Gamma; Sheila Watson, Kappa Kappa Gamma; Dorothy Lynch, Alpha Phi and Carol Wright, Gamma Phi Beta . Members of the court include Joan Carter and IWA .
 More than a dozen weapons and machines are to become part of the PR training .
 Colorado College students talked last Thursday with Madame Bailie from the Bureau of Student Travel . The bureau is a branch of the French Government Cultural Services . The students talked about touring France .
 Information was given on travel by air and sea to France and on tours or study, how students may live there cheaply . Students may also be able to live in France cheaply .
 This ceremony will take place on Tuesday, February 21, on the north lawn of Rastall Center .
 A mid-spring Music Festival, on the lawn, is being planned for the future, plus other programs to be announced in the near future . The festival will be held in the spring .
 The banquet was held in the Eastall Dining Hoom at the regular dinner hour . The event took place at the same time of the day .
 The banquet honored the scholastic achievement of the pledges, and because Panhellenic means ""all Greek also helped to unify the pledge classes . The banquet was held in honor of the students' scholastics achievement .
 This is the first year that a banquet of this type has been held and will now become an annual Junior Panhellenic event . The first year of this kind of event was held .
 Miss Sharon Russell, Jr. was among those at the pledge classes . The pledge classes were also held at the event .
 Panhell advisor; all sorority house mothers and pledge trainers . Miss Christine Moon, Dean of Women; and Dr. Dr. and Mrs. Mrs. Panhell .
 Pledges who received a 3.3. or better for the first semester were awarded roses . Students were given roses for their 3rd or better grades .
 Miss Elizabeth Coleman, Miss Pat Hay, Miss Seece Bovce, Miss Susan Graham, Miss Amanda Hamilton, Miss Nancv Parker, Miss Carolyn Pelly, Miss Penny Walhom, Miss Judy Clark, Miss Linda Foster, Miss Martha Jafiery, Miss Deirdre
 Additional awards were given to the individual pledge and the pledge class having the highest average . The pledge class showed the most improvement from the last grading period .
 Miss Carol Wright and her sorority, Gamma Phi Beta, received the first awards . Miss Marty Jaffery and Alpha Phi and Kappa Kappa Gamma received the award for most improvement . Miss Carol . Wright received the most improvement award .
 The weekend of February 11 and 12 terminated the pledgeship of 46 fraternity men . Fraternities Initiate terminated pledgeship over the weekend .
 These men were initiated into campus fraternal organizations after a very stimulating Help Week, Sigma Chi . Initiated into the Sigma Chi fraternity were Messrs. Messrs . Messrs.'s parents .
 Fred Luft, Peter Law, Bill Ward, Bill Hybl, Les Whittaker, Mike Schmidt . Fred . Law, Law, Ward, Hybl: "It's time to get back in the saddle" Fred .
 Ken Reeves, Pete Tmshel, Blake Ozias, Walt Bray and Walt Bray, Walt Hecox and Doug Shaw are on the air at 8 p.m. ET today .
 After the ceremony, a ceremony was held at the Hackney House in honor of the new active members .
 The Phi Gamma Delta fraternity gained as new brothers Messrs. Phi Comma Delta . The Phi Coma Delta fraternity was founded by Phi Phi Phi Kappa Kappa Kappa Phi .
 Brett Stearns and Dean Behse, Dean Behs and Mike Von Helms are featured in this week's edition of The Colorado Rockies . This week's episode is the latest in a series of high-profile events in the U.S. sports .
 Kappa Sigma fraternity was proud to greet as brothers Messrs. Kappa Sigma . Kappa Sigma is proud to welcome its members to the fraternity .
 Robert Antton, Richard Cholakian, John Collins, Arthur Daily, Edward DeGeorge, Mike Durfree, George Graham, George Klein, Dave Krell, George Mason, Steve Sabol and Steve Sorrieh .
 L Marie Barefield, ClerkStenographer for the Reserve Officers Training Corps of Colorado College, was recently awarded the Sustained Superior' Performance Award by Major General Thomas N Griffin, Commanding General, XV T United States Army Corps . Barefield is a Clerk of Stenographer
 At a ceremony on January 21, 1961, Lt. Lt. G. Gentry was honored with a medal of honor . She was the first female member of the ROTC Department to receive a medal .
 Colorado College's PMS of Colorado College, presented the certificate and monetary award of some $100.00 .
 The Medal of Honor was awarded to Mrs. Barefield in recognition of her superior performance of duty during the period of September 1959 through I960 . She was awarded the Medal of Honour for her performance .
 She came to CC in September 1959 and immediately began establishing herself as one of the finest Clerk-Stenographers for any branch in the country . She was established as a clerk-stenographer in 1959 .
 Phi Delta Theta Theta activated Sunday afternoon . It'll come m handy for my trip to California,"" Phi Delta theta Phi Theta .
 Jan Derrick, Charles Greening, Tom Simenson, Steve Frink, Steve Sabom, John Rowland and Hank Rose are featured in a special edition of this week's iReporters' weekly feature program .
 Applications for positions on an expanded Rastall Center Board are open today and will be due at 4:00, Wednes. day . Application applications for positions are open for the first time .
 Application forms can be both picked up anri turned in at Rastall Desk . Application forms are available at both the Rastalls Desk and the application forms can also be picked up .
 The Rastall Center Board is being expanded from it, present membership of five student members and two fac. ulty members to a membership of seven student members anri two faculty members . The board will also expand from it's present membership to seven .
 Center Board can better fulfill its responsibilities in ""providinga social, recreational, and cultural center"" for the members of the college community .
 Rastall Center Board members serve a term of one year, beginning and ending in March . The positions open for student membership involve the positions of chairman of the board, executive secretary, business manager, director of cultural affairs, and director of hospitality .
 They are selected by the outgoing Board on the basis of their application, a personal interview, and past experience . The outgoing Board selects candidates for the position based on the application, the personal interview and the work experience .
 Other students will have the opportunity to apply for sub-committee positions in the Rastall Center organization . Sub-committees include music, committee, publications, art exhibits, games committee .
 The outgoing board also has plans to conduct a Center Workshop in which they will orient the new board members and their committee members to the problems and responsibilities of the Rastall Center . The Center will also conduct an orientation to the new members of the board .
 Miss Sally Reeves, Colorado Co. lege art student, has an exhibit . Her paintings hanging in Sastall Cei ter this month .
 Her works are largely abstracts painted in earth colors . There is one cubist canvas in the same subtle colors .
 Miss Reevi composition is the mist exciting ch; acteristic of her work as seen in t red painting ; a rich red and white variation .
 Miss Reeves' exhibit beautifully ful fills the potential of astall Ccntei in publicizing student activities . The white painting of angular forms is another .
 Philip Evergood's painting is American and precise with light and delicatt lines and colors that are either li_ . and airy or almost ludicrously dart f ^ and bright . The retrospective exhibit at the Fine Arts Centi is quite different from previous exhibits .
 His women subjects are like the women of Deisler's light but yet somehow imposing . His subjects include women of the light but also imposing women .
 Mr Evergood lias been classified as a so. cial realist, imaginative realist and surrealist, surrealist and expressionist . In his versitility hi is all of these.
 Fine Arts Center also has a Twenty-Fifth Anniversary faculty exhibit . Fine Arts center also has 20th anniversary faculty exhibits .
 Besides the works of Messrs Arnest, Chenowith, and Darriau There are many representing Center resident artists .
 Mr Lew Tul ley, who painted the Hub mural, is represented, as are Mr Robert Moth erwell and Mr Emerson Woelffer' well known abstract paintings .
 Jim anks, second high scorer in the oeky Mountain Conference, was lid 'Friday night' He had only free throws to his credit when fouled out .
 Hanks, Thompson, Ackerman and Ackerman all fouled in the second half . They were hurt by fouls in the first half . Hanks and Thompson were hurt in the game .
 With less than two minutes to play, the Mountaineers took the lead and won the game . The game ended in a dramatic victory for the West Virginia Mountaineer .
 Hanks was back in form and had 16 points, Thompson and Sellitto had 12 each . Thompson, Sellitto and Hanks also had 12 points each .
 CC is still 8-4 in the conference, leaving them in second place . CC was beaten twice this weekend, but they are still in the top 10 .
 First place Idaho State is ineligible for the conference championship as they are not playing enough games to qualify . CC still has a chance to take the championship .
 CC plays at the Air Force Academy this Wednesday and is idle this weekend . The team is idle for the rest of the weekend before returning to campus .
 Adams State and CSC, the third and fourth place teams, play each other this weekend at Alamosa . Adams State will play CSC and Adams State this weekend .
 The Betas hold an undisputed lead in intramural basketball with a 4-0 record . I NTRAMURALJ: Betas are the only team to beat the Betas in the league .
 Phi Gams and Kappa Sigs are currently tied for second place with identical 2-1 records . The Phi and Kappa Gams are tied for the second place in the league . The Kappa Siggers are currently 2-2 in the Kappa Gamma standings .
 The season ends on Tuesday, February 28 with a game between the Betas and the Sigma Chis . The Betas will play their last game on February 28 .
 Betas lead in intramurals with 15 points . Kappa Sigs with 11 points . Sigma Chis with 5 points . Zetas 1-3 .
 Intramural wrestling will be held Feb.-24-25, with weigh-ins at 3:45 on the 22nd and matches to follow immediately .
 Becker's Radiator & Body Shop is located in Denver, Colorado . The shop is located at 3-0076 .
 Michigan wins over Injured CC in last Eastern road trip of the season . Michigan hockey team made last Eastern trip of season and met with disaster .
 Duke Dutkowski, CC's leading scorer, scored the only goal late in the third period . Friday's game saw the Tigers lose 5-1, with the Tigers' leading scorer scoring a late goal .
 Michigan scored three of their goals in the first period and two in the second . Michigan won the game 4-2 in the final two periods .
 Norm Laurence made 45 saves for CC while Norm Coyle only had to keep 1 4out of the net's for Michigan . Coyle made 1 4 saves for Michigan while Laurence kept 1 4 for CC .
 Unaffiliated people may enter by leaving their names and weights in the athletic office by 12:00 noon Tuesday, the 22nd. Tuesday . Saturday night the Tigers were plagued by injuries as they went down in the game .
 Ed Boychuck scored one goal in each period with the second goal coming on a breakaway . The single high spot of the game for CC was the hat trick, getting one goal each period .
 Injured in this game were Dan McGill, Don Stouffer, Ken Cairns, Archie Prestayko, and Duke Dutkowski . Injured from this game are Dan McGill and Don Stuffer .
 Monday night the Tigers played Michigan Tech at Houghton, Michigan, and were handed another defeat 10-0 . The Tigers lost to the Michigan Tech team in the first game of the season .
 Norm Laurence made 43 saves to the other end of the ice, making 43 to 10 . Laurence also made 10 saves in the other half of the game .
 CC now has a record of 4 wins and 13 losses in Western Collegiate Hockey Conference play . Only Michigan State is ahead of only Michigan State who has a 3-13 record .
 The Golden Dragon is the most beautiful Chinese-American restaurant in Colorado Springs . SfyU Lunches and Dinners are priced at $100 per person .
 Colorado College Tiger New Sergeants Added to ROTG Department . Sfc. SFC. Cpl. Cm. S. T. Tm. J. Pfc. Cp. Sfc Tm . J. Tn. Tl. Tr. T
 Lyle Penton has been added to the administrative and instructional staff of the ROTC Department . Penton is a member of the staff at the U.S. Military College .
 Petre is in his eighteenth year of service and has just returned from Korea . He served one year as an assistant operations sergeant in the S-3 office .
 His efforts will be combined in administration and instruction of the Sophomore and Senior Cadet classes at CC .
 He was the Operations and Intelligence Sergeant for the Special Subjects Department of the Infantry School at Ft. Benning, Georgia, where he served in the Army .
 Remote systems installed in Perkins Hall, Shove Chapel and the Rastall dining room . Remote systems are now able to broadcast live discussions and services .
 KRCC's new system is already in effect now and is a new stepping stone in the organization's communication system . This new system will be used to communicate with the public .
 All special events which take place in these buildings can be heard on any FM set . Now all special events can be broadcast on FM sets .
 Some thirty students have enrolled in the Radio production class . KRCC's new expansion of the radio production class is a result of the expansion .
 Chief Tyree has appointed Wally Caldwell and with the 82nd Airborne Division to channel the new material .
 New cadre members assigned to replace former Instructor Russell Johnson and Sgt. M/Sgt. Russell Johnson . The new cadre will replace Johnson and Johnson .
 Tryouts for The Enchanted, by Jean Paul Giraudoux, will be held in Perkins Hall auditorium on Wednesday afternoon, February 22, and Friday afternoon, Feb. 24 .
 The cast includes mayors, inspectors, executioners, ghosts, little girls and old maids . The cast is a large one, requiring mayors, . inspectors, . executioners and ghosts .
 It is hoped that the play can be cast and rehearsals begin by February 27 . Rehearsals are scheduled for February 27 and the play will be cast .
 The new staff consists of Mr Ed Boychuk and Mr Brian Dutkawski, publicity chairman, Mr Bernard Muehlbauer and Mr Larry Mingus . Dick Behke and Dick Behnke and Mr Crofton Diack are chief announcers .
 Members of the radio class are planning a live radio production around the show ""On the Scene,"" scheduled for mid-April . Live radio production is scheduled to be broadcast on April 15 .
 Students who have not picked up their copy of the fall edition of the KINNIKinNIK may obtain it from Miss Carol Coffman . Miss Coffman will be available to students at the end of the month .
 The Trotters 15, K K K's 24, The Fighting Five 41, The Spartans 26, The Untouchables 24, Wampies 46, The Crosstown Betas 29, The Mountaineers 17 . As this was the first week of play, the four winning
 AH new full-time and transfer students are reminded that they ure automatically enrolled in the college sponsored Health Insurance plan . Students are charged $12 for this coverage .
 Refund is made only if student signs a wavier card at the college infirmary by February 24 showing that he is already covered by other compurable insurance . Refund made only in case student signs wavier by February 25 .
 Those students who did not subscribe during the first semester must do so at the infirmary' by the same date and pay the $12 premium . Students who want to sign up for the next seven months must sign up by the end of the month .
 Tareyton delivers — and you enjoy — the best taste of the best tohaceos . Tareton delivers —  and you enjoy— the best .
 ACTIVATED CHARCOAL DUAL FILTER iGTCyiOTl ^m** Pure while outer filter has outer filter Vocal Selections .
 Harry Booth, ^ prano and baritone, with pianip Henry Margolinski accompanying presented the fourth Winter Co r r , cert series Sunday afternoon t full audience in Perkins Hall .
 Two French songs were sung by Gabriel Faure and Henri Daysari in 1095 . Mr Booth then sang a song from 1095, ""Chant D t Croises""
 Booth's ""Ave Maria,"" very difficult aria from ""Othello; by Verdi, was sung extremeli well . Booth's aria was sung very well by the composer .
 Especially delightful was tig f^ duet from ""Le Nozze Di Figaro" by Verdi . Tig f* duet was from "Le Nozze di Figaro by Verdi"
 The B of understanding and knowledge changed between these two groups of highly intelligent people is praeally non-existent . It's not a matter of understanding or knowledge that the two groups are intelligent people .
 As a result of this lack of ... ication, hostilities and mutual ■(inceptions have developed .
 Mr. # characterizes each of these cultures"" and breaks down nfair judgements each makes 2 other . Mr. Mr . characterizes the cultures and characterizes them .
 If dealing with the joblem, and especially understanda problem, important, is important . The ramifti Snow forsees as a result of the snowfall . If you want to know more about dealing with a problem, contact us on iReport.com .
 The irobk-m takes on its greatest signifi ance when considered in terms of he world distribution of wealth ■evolution of rising expecta . The »rld has, for the first time in his""ioth the desire and the capfor economic development nd
 And who is going to work i-nrd removing this gap depends who really understands that it an be done. And who will be going to do it?
 The scientists, Mr. J inousays, are really the only ones I vho have any comprehension of iese developmental necessities. The scientists are really, Mr J inououays .
 The other half of the highly educated West have not an inkling idea of the possibilities of sciand industry . The West has not yet seen the potential for sciand technology to develop .
 ihis essay, now available at the ikstore under the title of The Two Itires and the Scientific Revolution, has the several advantages of being clear, short and entertainingly written .
 The book will be the bases for a ""Science-Humanism Symposium"" to be held at Coolrado College March 14, 15 and 16 . Because of its interest for the educated on both sides of Mr Snow's ""cultural gulf"
 This symposium will present spokesmen of the scientific and humanistic viewpoints . It will try to clarify both positions, evaluate the extent of the problem and consider the possibilities for reconciliation in a liberal arts education .
 The winning team of Mr Jack Cashman and Mr Chris Griffiths was the only undefeated team at the meet . Mr Cashman was joined by Mr Griffiths, who was the winning team .
 Other entrants in debate from CC were Mr Jack Walker, Mr, David Bitters, Miss Linda Pierce and Mr Max Taylor . Mr Walker and Mr Bitters were also in the debate .
 These teams were moved up into the senior division and showed surprising strength in the Wyoming meet . The Wyoming meet was a surprise success for these teams .
 Harry Booth, minister of Shove Chapel, will deliver a series of two sermons, entitled ""The Christian Doctrine of Man,"" this Sunday, February 26, and next Sunday, March 5 . Mr Max Power and Mr Taylor were entered in extemporaneous .
 These sermons are of particular interest because of the approaching symposium on the two cultures, scientific and humanistic . These two sermons will be delivered at the end of the week .
 The first sermon is entitled ""The Life of Reason"" and deals with man's peculiar gifts and the demands made on him as a response to these gifts . The first sermons is entitled "Life of Reason" and is titled "The Life Of Reason"
 It is an analysis of existence in a world of which man is an integral part and to which he is related by many strands, capable of being understood and used by reason . The world of existence is capable of understanding and using reason .
 The second sermon, ""The Life of Faith,"" deals with man's existence in the presence of other personal beings to whom he is related, not so much by reason as by will, and whose relationships with him are therefore in the nature of encounters rather than ex* ploitations
 This same team was recently undefeated in the Colorado State College Invitational Tournament placing second to Georgetown College . Georgetown College placed second in the tournament . This team was undefeated in Colorado State .
 Team members entered are Mr Furgason, Miss Pierce, Mr Cashman and Mr Griffiths . Team members from the team will be entered into the competition .
 Mr James A Johnson is coaching the team and will accompany them to Arizona . Mr Johnson is also accompanying them on the trip .
 Colorado College will host a regional college forensic tournament on March 4 . On March 11 and 12 the team will journey to Alamosa for the ""Top of the Nation"" Speech Meet at Adams State College .
 ASCC sponsored All-College Conference will begin tomorrow noon at Star Ranch . Conference starts tomorrow at noon . Conference will be held in Ranch Ranch .
 This weekend symposium of speakers and discussion is for the purpose of airing views and forming opinions on important campus problems . This weekend's symposium will air views and form opinions about important campus issues .
 Those attending the full function have already registered . Any who wish to attend just the speeches and discussion periods may attend for a $1 registration fee .
 The Folk Singers, Inc., will provide entertainment . Reverend Patterson's speech will be followed by a discussion .
 Busses will be provided for students lacking transportation to the Star Ranch . Students will be able to use the buses to get to the ranch .
 Cutler Hall will leave Cutler Hall at 1:00 on Saturday and 12:00 noon on Sunday .
 They will return to the campus at 10:00 Saturday night and 4:00 Sunday afternoon . They will also return to campus on Sunday .
 A descriptive report of the Winter Carnival's activities will help indicate their results . The Winter Carnival will be held at the end of February .
 Kinnikinnik.com is the name of the best short stories that appeared in the fall Kinnikinik . This year's short stories featured the best of the year's featured stories from the university .
 Van Becker's institution of the poetry workshop further indicates his own concern for the improvements of student writing . His article tells us that we must be renders if we are to be writers . We most devote ourselves to seriousness and study if we arc to ever become writers of good poetry .
 Anyone who is writing poetry is urged to attend these bi-monthly sessions of poetry workshops . CC STUDENTS RODE the *oor chair lift as they turned 'tiers for weekend to participate the Winter Carnival .
 Mr Jeff Race and MrDon Oden captured the All Star Student and Faculty Awards . The award winners are students and faculty members at the University of Columbia .
 Miss Carmichael's skating solo was indeed a highlight of the evening, illustrating the grace and skill of performance which have been acquired by many years of training .
 The profit in monetary terms received bv the sophomore class was between $80 and $100 . The profits received from sophomore class were between $100 and $80 .
 The success of this past weekend, then, is almost overwhelming in comparison with past attempts of this nature . The success was almost overwhelming compared to past attempts .
 The most interesting factors in this achievement are how and why it came about . It is not the first time the world has seen such a feat in history .
 Almost 75 members of the sophomore class participated actively in supporting their project .
 These people had decided to make something of their Winter Carnival which they began planning last spring . They began planning the Winter Carnival last spring and decided to get involved .
 They worked with enthusiasm and perseverance in committees and individually, many giving far more time than they could actually spare . Many of them gave more time to work than they were able to spare .
 The point of this article, however, is not merely to make a wellearned eulogy . Conclusions: The point is to make it clear that this is not just a eulogary, but to clarify the point .
 Some useful conclusions can be drawn from the results and reasons behind this successful carnival . The carnival has been a success story for many of us .
 A group of students with an idea, getting behind it and working out the details carefully . Here are some of the students working on the details .
 We have enthusiasm and interest being generated thoroughly among the other students of CC by one class . The students' enthusiasm is being generated among other students, says the principal .
 All-campus activities sponsored by an interested group are appealing to students on this campus . Perhaps there is not as much lethargy within us as we would be led to beleive criticism . Perhaps events can be worthwhile, perhaps all-campus events .
 Perhaps of student writing is not only one of learning technique and form, perhaps it's one of attitude . But perhaps it is perhaps one of the most important lessons of writing .
 The suggestion has been presented that the reason our writers relied on dilettantism iu their writing is that they are dilcttants . That our student body is uncxeited, uncoimnftteed mid unconcentrntcd .
 It appears la la the more casual observer that we might . Well he dilating our lives with so many activities thai we have no time For serious loyalty. Well he might .
 To the question of why do our students over-engage their lives, tins writer would hnznrd Clint Clint would say . Clint perhaps we, like our society, prefer tu spread ourselves thinly than live in depth .
 Co-editors Gary Gappert and Jim Scarhoro expand the art and photography section of the magazine . Art and photography contributions will occupy much more apace in the spring edition of the KINNIKinNIK than ever before .
 The editors feel that the creative art and photographic endeavors of the members of the . college community deserve as much recognition as their literary endeavors . The editors of this article are happy to acknowledge the students' artistic endeavors .
 Students would like to see more students turning in more and better art and photography . They would like more students to turn in more art, photography .
 They especially would like submitted photographic studies of student sculpture .
 $15.00 cash awards will be made for the best contributions in the fields of art and photography . As with the fall edition uf the KINNIKinNIK, $15,000 cash awards are also made .
 Art and photography contributions can be left at the Rastall Desk or turned in to Mr Dave Dunlap .
 Final Performance of ""Dido"" Tonight #* p**/ OFFICIAL COLORADO COLLEGE 3 .
 We wish to take the position of the blind men. In opposition to the parable of the second paragraph, we wish to be blind men . The blind men were blind men in the Bible's parable .
 This is the more legitimate approach in so far as the elephant of ""football phenomenon"" is presented here . This we feel is the most legitimate approach to the 'elephant of football phenomenon'
 We want to explore some of the more specific parts Mr Carle has outlined . So. acknowledging ourselves self-imposed blindness of this wonderful whole, we .
 We cannot conceive how more than $40.000 is spent on ail such extra-curricular activities . Beyond finances if the value of ""as much a part"" is interpreted as student participation, this too we doubt .
 More interest is involved in the parade, dance, and alumni functions than is ever shown by the campus community on Washburn Field . If Homecoming is taken as an example, we feel that much more interest is . .
 The returning student and the freshman are confronted with many yearround activities, from social fraternities to student government which all demand early efforts . Aside from the fall football season, there are many yearlong activities, such as social frathes and student government .
 At any particular time of the year, football becomes an important activity to any but the relatively small number of students involved . Football is an important part of the life of a small group of students, says the FA .
 A college campus inevitably has its students whose enthusiasm is so overwhelming it seems to build up morale and to speak for a large portion of the campus . Students' enthusiasm seems to be so overwhelming that it builds up morale for a campus .
 In a small college like CC, such an attitude would be healthy onlv if it were so wide and so great that questioning it would seem ridiculous . The attitude is healthy in small colleges, but it would be more if the attitude were so great it would make it seem ridiculous to question
 CC's college morale is not obviously built around intercollegiate sports . CC's enthusiasm isn't obviously a by-product of sports, both illustrated again by the small number of participating students .
 This is true in that any part of campus life serves to identify the student, but the degree to which football does this is questionable . Football is a big part of the campus life, but it's not the only part of it .
 CC student government is a large organization, interest clubs incorporate almost every academic field . The social calendar is full, indicating legions of committee chairmen and functions for students to attend .
 Football is not, in relation to other factors, a large tool for the student's identification and association with football . Football is a large part of the reason why football is not a large factor in student identification and associations with football, according to the study .
 Intercolegiate sports has not been fulfilling these four criteria for extra-curricular activities . The important point to be made is that there are other ways which could do a more effective job .
 "The importance of growing closer to the source of truth or of training leaders is not to be slighted," says David Cameron .
 The fact must be faced that it is time to try another approach to the problem, says David Cameron . The fact is that it must take a new approach to solving the problem .
 An enlarged intramural program, the new gym, and more opportunity to participate in individual sports may lend themselves beter than the spectator sports have to the demands of a small college .
 There will be a meeting next Tuesday, February 28, in Rastall for men students interested in doing undergraduate work at the Netherlands Opleidings-Institute voor het Buitenland (N.O.I.B.B.)
 Donald Roll, Robert Selig, and Karel Leeflang will discuss N.O.I.B.B., answer questions, and pass out application material . Roll, Selig and Selig will also pass out applications for the job .
 N.O.l.B. is a small mi tial college of business of business a its which specializes particularly in foreign trade and commerce . The college is located in the United States and Canada .
 Any interested student who is unable to attend this meeting please call Janet Cosby, 396. 396 .
 The staff of the ""Kinnikinnik"" has been very concerned in the past few weeks over the success of a second issue of the magazine . The staff is very concerned about the success .
 We wanted to make the ""K" a more integral part of school publications . We also had faith in the amount of material that could be produced by the student body .
 We wanted two issues partially to induce students to write more consistently, but we need an immediate concern and response on the part of the students to have enough material . We need to have sufficient material for students, the school says .
 "Most of the students here are weekend poets," says one student . "The primary portion of contributions was a back-log of material from high school on," he says .
 We are all weekend poets, but this does not mean a serious effort cannot be made . We are not all over-the-top weekend poets but we need to make serious effort .
 We are infected with the notion that, with an invocation from the Muses and a few words madly scribbled on a page, a masterpiece is created . We are all infected with this notion, with the idea that with . an invocation . from the . Muses, a few
 You do not have to be serious or philosophical in tone, but the approach involves time carefully spent . You do have to have a serious tone in tone .
 The ""K"" is offering a px-ose workshop, with a tentative date of March 7 . The workshop will take place in March .
 "We need to know, before going ahead with our plans, just how many people are interested in having their work criticized and evaluated," says the government . But we need to be careful, he says, and that it's not just a good idea .
 If you are interested, please contact Mr Racey, Gary Gappert or Jim Scarboro as soon as possible .
 "We are trying to set a precedent of more than one issue of the ""Kinnikinnik"" per year. Let me repeat that we are . Trying to set . a precedent, more than once a year, per year, will be set up .
 The following letter is not directed at the Freshman class, but to the president and vice-president . The letter was written by the president of the university .
 The commissioners wasted another hour wasting another hour on Tuesday morning . Personalities excluded, the commissioners did a fine job of wasting the morning .
 The main point for discussion was the election of a new class officer due to the necessary resignation of Mancel Mitchell . The election was held in response to the resignation of Mitchell .
 The five nominees were the same people who were nominated near the start of the school year . The nominees are the same students who were nominally nominated .
 With all respect to these five people, the fact that there were no new nominations allowed, merits some concern, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 I arose and proceeded in nominating a sixth person to the list whom 1 felt was more suited for handling the job . I then nominated a sixth candidate to be nominated for the job, which he said was 'more suited' to handle the job.
 I was told, however, that I could not nominate my candidate because of the limiated amount of time and a restrictive clause in the ASCC constitution . The ASCC has a strict time limit in order to nominate a candidate .
 It states that no nominations be in order during an election for a vacancy of office . No nominations be made during such an election, it states .
 This is not only undemocratic, in the strict sense of the word, but is highly symbolic of apathy and apathy . Much complaining has arisen in the past on the poor attendance at these freshman class meetings .
 An apology is in order to those members of the class whom I may have offended . I have been doing much of the complaining and now feel that an apology is . in order .
 I can see now that the poor attendance is only partly due to the student. I can plainly see now . I can . plainly see . now that . poor attendance was only partly . due to student. attendance, I can now see .
 The larger and inexcusable blame is on the shoulders of the class commissioners . The class commissioners should be held accountable for their actions .
 "My beliefs regarding the sanctity, if you will, of human life are so basic that if I compromise them I have nothing left," he says .
 I deny the state the right to take human life, either through capital punishment or forcing its citizens into military participation . I deny state the . right to kill human life . I don't believe in capital punishment, or forcing citizens to join military .
 "I realize that in both these areas my beliefs are not supported by the laws of the United States," she says . "I'm not a believer in the law. I realize that ... I'm a believer, but I'm not an atheist," she said .
 In this letter, many of the problems faced by the conscientious objector are realized . Many of the issues faced by conscientious objectors are realized, the author says .
 No one has of yet accurately determined or legislated the grounds upon which one may legally become a conscientious objector for reasons other than religious . No laws have been passed so far regarding conscientious objections .
 It is morally wrong for one human being's ethic to be replaced by the ethic of an organization formed solely for the purpose of organized war . It's morally wrong to replace one human's ethic with that of the organization formed for war .
 This authoritarian ethic is unjust for it superimposes the will of a corps of legislators and armed service officials upon the free will of the individual . It is unjust, says the author .
 If objection were to be recognized on humanitarian grounds alone, many ""shams"" could claim exemptence from sertime"" for democratic and parliamentary procedure, then I can blame no one for a lack of interest . If objection was to be recognized on humanitarian grounds, then
 They should present the desired issues in such a manner conducive to constructive criticism and future planning . They should use their mental faculties and present the needed issues in a manner .
 A number of the eighty-eight people present, left. These people are in a leadership role, but so far, have been the classic example of the psychological ""follower phep"
 This letter should be accepted as a challenge by the Freshman class commissioners to prove their usefulness . This letter is a challenge to the Freshmen to prove themselves useful .
 The ASCC meetings are open to the student body . Class officers are not needed to give a running summary of the facts .
 Until the time comes that my class officers show some independent thinking, original ideas, genuine concern, and above all leadership, I can see no reason at all to attend further mettings. Until the . time comes, there will be no reason to go to further meetings.
 All things possible should be done to make the status that commissioners hold meaningful to them, and worthwhile to the class . Commissioner's status should be made more meaningful to students and teachers .
 With the coming of the All College Conference, the whole problem of student government should be allotted as much discussion time as possible . Students should also be allotted time to discuss their student government .
 The goven is required to grant all those seeking consei, tious objector status, whether religious grounds or not, the vk of appeal .
 The colk campus, a common area fo, exchange of ideas, can't be passed by no other place beginning for such action . The Colk campus can be a common place for ideas, says the author .
 Oi campus, where over fifty per.cp of the men are being trained i art of warfare, students hav. only an excellent meeting for discussions but also a . wo ful point of discussion .
 Students should observe analyze and then discuss the pose and usefulness of an ROT department . Students should also discuss the role of the ROT .
 Then they should suj. port it if our conscience and idej comply with theirs . Then they would sujj.port it if they complied with their conscience and . Idej. If they did it, they would have to comply with their own conscience .
 Taugf P v. there. They shot criticize it if our feelings are objection to the doctrine taugf there . They shot criticized it if we objected to it .
 ROlfr 1 * department has this relation — the rules requirements that one must fjy to become legally recognizi a ""CO."" can be altered even until they include humani' and philosophical grounds, only people question and challenge the adequacy of the :lt ^ adequ
 The role played b; ROTC department is not to presei these controversial points for di cussion but merely to inform dents of the necessity of ar conflict and train them for it .
 If students merely accej the doctrine taught in the MiliUif""^ Science classes, some of which objectionable to us, then they vi probably find themselves taki the next step— that of merely . cepting the regulations held by I government on the question of .
 We are not suggesting that i eryone should believe or hold tl philosophy of the consciei objector . However, this ver< portant matter can be given time and consideration by the pa pie whom these rulings di affect .
 All African territories have long maintained that their n pressing need is the expansion secondary education . Thai greatest obstacle to meeting need is a shortage of quuli teachers .
 Persons nominated for this I* gram must be academically first-rj' personally resourceful and resourceful . The I*gram is an I-gram .
 The future of our intercolathletic program (and more larly football) has come up discussion on our campus, I have asked by many students, facih( and interested friends what my .ction is to the problem .
 Let me |ar t this dissertation by quoting a of a speech given by Rev. wles L O'Donnell, president of the University of Notre Dame back in 1929 . Let me . quote a quote from Rev. L O’Donnell as a speech .
 Many of the critics of football tend to dwell only on the aspect of fiances . Football is not the only aspect of the game, it is the relationship between players and their families .
 There can't be no defense for juall college football in this regard . It's impossible for any small HeGC to finance the cost of its prothrough gate receipts .
 There are more tilings in heaven and earth than are dreamed of in the philosophy of foundations for the advancement of college statistics . The college is a combination of the two, the author says .
 Man is not all mind; he is a creature of flesh and blood; he has a heart, aud the heart, too, must be schooled . Life itself supplies life itself supplies in those four years crowded with wonder which make up college career .
 There arc intangible realities, there are imponderable values of which your carefullest statistician never in the nature of things can take account . There arc int intangible realities, which are difficult to explain, say experts .
 Two and two make four, and the college student will learn that lesson through whatever complexities the formula may be extended .
 There is another mathematics, a madder, wilder learning, more di■vine and nearer to the source of truth . But there is another math, madder and wilder .
 I further believe we share in the responsibility of providing leadership in our world today . I also believe we have responsibility to provide leadership in the world .
 "We take a firm stand in our pledge to produce the finest individuals in science, economics, and the arts," says President Obama .
 Is it not equally important that we strive to develop or color in football, nor is there a place for snobbery or contempt because of social position .
 A boy in football grows up knowing he will be evaluated strictly on his ability to perform well for his team . Football is an important part of a player's life, and it's important to keep his focus on the game .
 Top three men in ROTC Field Summer Camp were football players . Nine of the first 11 were athletes in the camp .
 Intercollegiate athletics (particularly football) produces leaders . This is evidence that intercolcolcollegeiate athletics produces leaders. This is proof that athletics (especially football) can produce great leaders .
 It is my sincere hope that all of die students, faculty, administrators, and friends of Colorado College will give serious thought to the problem at hand .
 I would further hope that deliberate and careful study be given to the benefits of and objections to an intercollegiate athletic program, and whedier it will bring good or harm to our college and our country . I would also hope that careful study of the benefits and objections be given
 I should hate to see even one small link in the chain of America's ""winning spirit" be weakened, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Registration for spring vacation Indian work and study projects, sponsored by the Religious Affairs Committee, ends tomorrow, February 25 . Registration for the spring vacation vacation ends tomorrow .
 Those interested should sign the sheet at Rastall Desk . Life as any other ricular activity as well as ricular activities .
 "Collegc is not merely a school; a life. These critics overlook or ignore the important, and I think, the most inportant aspect of the whole quesCc is the life of the college . The school is not just a school but a life, says
 Kirm, is, as i ludy. It is a school-life, of and die major emphasis, the leadership qualities in men will help them in giving direcdor impetus to the intellectual wc garner in our many yeai football plays .
 Numismatists 6 Philatelists Congregate at the Coin and Stamp Shop 1 16 stamps .
 The characteristics we look for in a leader loyalty, self confidence, self sacrifice, self discipline and self discipline are die very traits that the rigors of football demand . A willing cooperative spirit and a willing willing spirit are the traits that football demands .
 If it is fine for us to be able to see apathy, criticism is fine . Insight and analysis are wonderful dungs. It's fine to criticize apathy; it's fine for criticism . Insights and analysis of apathy and apathy should be welcome to criticism .
 A flurry of very impressive agitation stirred the campus, with everyone running around asking everyone else why diey didn't help give college life an injection of culture . Even a columnist of this paper, suggested that students make use of die cultural offerings proffered by Colorado Springs .
 Notliing. really, came out of nil this until a fusion took place in the mind of a freshman, Mr Jim Fox . Mr Fox, whose distaste for the dearth of culture combined with his lovo for the theatre formed an idea .
 The Bill Fisher Quintet will set the mood in music with the kind of tempo and color that has made them so popular . Special decorations will add to the atmosphere and the music will be special .
 Playboy rabbit baa been popping up all across the campus to remind men to get their dates for this semi-formal evening . The Playboy rabbit has been appearing on campus for the men to date .
 Tncidently, there will be no charge for the evening's entertainment; the rabbits picking up the tab . The rabbits will be responsible for the entertainment .
 Unnijmt £>§ap f°r men is happy to announce a sale of its stock in order to make our move to our new location easier .
 The outgoing Board, in the interest of better service and performance, has revised the Board's constitution along lines best suited to handle Rastall Center's new role in campus life . The outgoing board's constitution has been revised to handle the new role .
 The new positions include the office of Chairman, Executive Secretary, Music Student Edits Oratorio . Miss Jill Tyler, a Colorado College senior, deserves note for her contributions to musicology .
 Miss Tyler has recently completed work on the ""Mortali Apprendete"" by Giovani Legrenzi .
 Miss Tyler hopes to finish transcribing, translating, and editing the remainder of the oratorio this spring .
 Miss Tyler began this arduous work on the Legrenzi oratorio in her junior year in connection with a paper presented at the I960 regional meeting of the American Musicological Society in Fort Collins .
 Original manuscript is at the Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana in Rome . The original manuscript is now on display in the Vatican .
 This first piece is a practical appendix with the completion of the work in its entirety . The first piece of the book is an appendix to the book .
 Cecil Effinger invented the music-writer which is similar to a typewriter . Effinger is a CC graduate who now teaches music theory .
 Albert Seay has edited many of the works previously printed by the Music Press . Miss Tyler has contributed in many other ways to the college .
 Last year Miss Tyler gave a piano recital and she plans another for this April . Last year she gave a recital .
 Miss Tyler is busy with her duties as president of the KKG sorority and as secretary of Honor Council . She plans to continue her studies in music next year .
 Miss Gerri Gene Bartz and Miss Marcia Moses, both sophomores, will represent CC 'Mesdemoiselles CC this year . CC will be represented this year on '*Mademoiselle's"" national College Board .
 As a College Board member, each girl will complete an assignment that will help her explore her interests and abilities in writing, editing, fashion, advertising or art, in competition for the twenty Guest Editorships to be awarded .
 Chairman has the responsibility of conducting meetings, handling policy, and providing over-all leadership and direction . Executive Secretary will be more than a recording secretary .
 He will also be in charge of general publicity, of the general records of the various groups, and be responsible for the care of the display cases .
 The Director of Recreation will oversee the games area and the various activities in the crafts room, as well as promoting such special outing interests as skiing and cycling .
 Director of Cultural Affairs will handle films, coffee hours, art exhibits, and the various music activities . Director will handle coffee hours and art exhibits .
 The Director of Special Activities will run the annual fashion show, the new Rally for the Keg, dances, and the Playboy Reception . The Director will also be responsible for the Rally for The Keg .
 The newly initiated Greenwich Village Art Festival will also be under his direction . The festival will be held in Greenwich Village Village .
 Director of Hospitality will handle visitors to Rastall, oversee the publication of the brochure for new students, and the printing of Christmas cards .
 Application blanks are available at Rastall Desk and are due no later than March 8, at 4:00m. Applications are available for the next week's deadline . The deadline is March 8 .
 Center Director: Mr. Blackburn, Center Director; Mr Gary Gappert, Board Chairman; or . Gary Gaspert . Board Chairman: Mr . Blackburn, Mr . GAppert, . Blackburn; or from any present .member of the Board .
 The Betas are proud to announce the appointment of a new Beta Housemother . Mrs. Mrs. J. Barger has been appointed as the new housemother of the Betas .
 Wolf attended Missouri's Central College and upon graduation entered the teaching profession . Wolf is now a teacher in Missouri .
 Her daughter now resides in Colorado Springs, and her son is in the employment of the Alcoa Corporation . Her son is also employed by the company . Her daughter is also in the employ of the corporation .
 Wolf accepted the position of housemother for Beta Theta Pi, she made her home in Butler, Missouri . Wolf accepted her position as housemother of the Pi .
 Wolf's first attempt at fraternity housemothering and we trust it will prove a most enjoyable experience . Wolf is the first member of the fraternity to have a fraternity housewife .
 Rastall Center Board has changed its constitution to expand its membership to seven students . The board has dropped the provisions pertaining to the alumni member of the board .
 It has also changed the specification that the Program Chairman be a member of the ASCC, Social Committee, to specify that ""a"" member of Rastall Center Board will be a . member of ASCC Social Committee .
 Tejon MEIrose 2-0164 IIIUIIllllllLLllllIllllllliii, When It's Music It's Millers Miller Music Co. Tejon MeIrose is Tejon Tejon MEI rose 2-164 IIIuII
 The meeting will be open without charge to all interested students, faculty and administration .
 He served with the French Army and Resistance Forces during the Second World War . He was made an Officer of the Legion of Honor and received Croix de Guerre and the Resistance Medal .
 At the end of the war he entered the French Foreign Service . He has been stationed in various posts abroad and at the Foreign Ministry in Paris .
 His foreign duty has included tours of Bagdad, the United Nations General Assembly, Lisbon, and the United States .
 His positions in the Foreign Ministry have included duty with the office of German Affairs, the Press and Information Service, the Department of Economics and the External Relations Division .
 He brings a very broad background to his present post and to bis discussion of one of the world's most inflamablablc trouble spots .
 Controversy rages between House Committee on Un-American Activities and groups of San Francisco area college students and supporters . Students say the proper interpretation of demonstrations staged against the House Committee last year .
 Demonstration, disruption, and violence are said to be the result of carefully planned and provoked action by hard-core Communists . Hard-core Communist Party members operate both for and by themselves and through a large mob . Demonstration is said to have been carefully planned .
 Sunday Morning Worship Service Shove Chapel — 11 a.m. The objective of such action is to achieve the objectives of such an action .
 John Formby will discuss the situation in Algeria and alternative solutions to the problem of the relations between France and certain elements in North Africa . He will also discuss the French-Arab relations with Algeria .
 Following his talk there will be opportunity for questions and discussion from the floor . This is claimed to be a phase in a continuing Communist conspiracy to denude the U.S.
 Bay Area Shi. dents claim that their parts were independently organized; decently and lawfully, though noisily, conducted; and prompt by legitimate distaste for the Committee's past record . In rebuttal, others involved in the demonstrations claim that they were independent .
 Assembly periods will be devoted to a showing of the film, an analysis of the student rebuttal and a discussion of some of the basic issues involved .
 This disease may ' familiar to many of you, but mechanics and the results of may be vague . The results of this disease may not be clear .
 The purpose of this essay is to ■auaint prospective parents with disease and the factors in leading a child to be healthy .
 This disease consists of an m ja due to breakdown of the f tal blood and consequently reIts in jaundice . This disease is caused by breakdown of blood and re-birth of the blood .
 Rh-negative and Rh-positive fac^ in the blood play an imporu,t role in the development of [g disease] Rh-Negative and Rh -Negative fac^ play an important role in development of the disease . Rh negative and Rh negative play a role in
 When the foetus, the Id embryo, has inherited Rhfcjtive from the father and the |0 ther is Rh-negative, the chance i a harmful reaction between the |‚ther and the foetetile is very Sod. When the baby is born,
 An antibody is a protein with the capacity to neutralize or react with the antigen . Antibodies are antibodies that can react with or neutralize an antigen, such as an antibody .
 The antibodies produced by the mother pass through the placenta and enter the blood stream of the feotus . The antibodies from the mother and the baby are antibodies that enter the bloodstream of the baby .
 A reaction occurs between the antibodies and the antigens resulting in Erythroblastosis fetalis which, in turn, results in anemia and eventually jaundice . A reaction is caused by anemia, anemia .
 Because of the breakdown of the foetal blood, the red-blood cells are immature and consequently do not 'cany sufficient oxygen to the cells of the body'
 Rh-negative and Rh-positive foctors are inherited characteristics . This is an heriditary disease because the Rh negative and Rh positive foctors have inherited characteristics. Rh negative foctors can cause Rh negative or Rh negative characteristics .
 Marriage between two Rhnegative persons yields only Rh-negative children . A combination of Rhnegative people would not result in the disease . Rhnegative children would not be born with Rhnegative .
 The International Relations Club of Colorado College is sponsoring a series of discussions during the coming eight weeks through the Great Decisions study program . If marriage occurs between Rh-positive and Rh-negative or between two Rh-positives, two types of child may not be married .
 Faculty and students discuss world affairs and attempt to reach opinions on these problems . Students discuss the world affairs with faculty and students on campus .
 Opinion ballots are filled out, and the results are sent to the Department of State and members of Congress to be tabulated with others from the United States . Opinion ballots will be filled out and then tabulated in the U.S. with others .
 Only dangerous combination results when the foetus is Rh-positive and the mother is Rhnegative . The only dangerous combination is when the baby is Rhpositive .
 If the foetus is Rh-negative and the mother is . Rh-positive, reaction rarely occurs . If the mother and foetus are Rh-Negative, reaction will rarely occur .
 The first child of a marriage between Rh-positive father and an Rh-negative mother is usually not affected because the mother has not had a chance to develop a sufficient number of antibodies to seriously affect the foetus .
 In successive pregnancies there will have accumulated enough antibodies in her blood stream to affect the foetus . The antibodies can be accumulated in successive pregnancies .
 If the presence of antibodies in the mother's blood stream is detected during pregnancy, the child may be given a complete blood transfusion immediately after birth and may be saved .
 Parents should be aware of their blood factors so that they may be forewarned about the possibility of the disease occuring in their chililies .
 The remaining discussions will be held on succeeding Tuesday nights, in the Rastall Center, room 203, at 4:00, except for two discussions in March .
 Persons interested in joining the group may register at the Rastall Information Desk . Persons interested to join may register online at the information desk . The group will meet at the Information Desk in the morning .
 The cost is 75 cents for a study kit that includes eight fact sheets, eight opinion ballots, and reading lists . The cost of the study kit is $75 .
 If the mother is not aware that she is Rh-negative and is given a blood transfusion with Rh-positive blood she will develop the harmful antibodies . Also, if the mother . is not . aware that . she is . given a transfusion, she will . develop harmful antibodies
 There is still a chance for you to enter the national Intercollegiate Bridge Tournament . There is also a chance to win a place in the tournament .
 Slow mail made it necessary to cancel the tournament and re-schedule it for this coming Sunday, February 20, at <i:00m. in WES Room .
 Students' scores will be submitted for national rating . Duplicate bridge will be played .
 Some forty-four people have signed up at the Rastall Center Desk . Interest is high and interest is high .
 Anyone may participate, and those students who want their scores to be sent in for national consideration will be charged a dollar .
 This tournament will kick-off u regular Sunday afternoon co-ed bridge program which will be free to all interested players . Tournament will be the first of its kind and is free to play .
 Play will commence at 2m. each Sunday in Rastall Center; the room will be posted on the calandar .
 Prizes will be given weekly— bring your partner and come each Sunday after this tournament . Bring your partner to the tournament .
 Last Tuesday, February 14, the Tigers wound up a disastrous road trip with an u loss to Michigan Tech at Houghton . The Tigers lost their first game of the season to the Michigan Tech team .
 Still plagued with injuries, CC dropped its sixth strain game as it just couldn't muster the strength to fight off the strong Husky sextet . Still plagued by injuries, the team couldn't overcome the strength of the Husky .
 Ed Bo chuck, scoring leader of the Tigers on this road trip, scored CC's only goal . Mike Draj popped in 3 for the Huskies and Mike Angotti who had scored 4 the previous night got 4 the night before . Pete Doyle made 35 saves to 16 for Michigan Tech
 CC goalies had to make many more saves than their opponents . The CC goalie made more saves in the game than his opponents .
 This is due, in part, due to the lack of defensemen due to injuries and grades . The lack of a defenseman is due to injury and grades, according to reports .
 Michigan Tech scored 4 goals in the first period, 6 in the second, and only 1 in the third . The defense seemed to pick up some of the goals .
 Tigers were forced to play with their star five throughout most of the game . Tigers were hampered by a lack of bench strength in the second half .
 The score was tied with 1 min. sec. to play when the Falcons broke loose to pour in seven quick points . The Falcons break loose with one minute to play .
 Three teams now tied for first place in intramural basketball with four wins and one loss . NTRAMura tS Three teams are now tied with first place with four victories and one defeat .
 If none of these teams lose their last game, there will be a play-off during the first week of March to determine the first three places in the top three places . If the teams fail to lose their final game, they will go into the play-offs .
 Faculty couple or student married couple to run a Summer Camp . Phi Delts 1 4-1 2-3 want to run summer camp .
 Board play was almost even with the Academy taking off 43 and CC 40, This CC's third loss ndered them rd of 14-7 . Board play almost even .
 Adam's State Indians came to town to take on CC in a two-game series . Adam's state Indians are in town for a two game series against CC .
 The Tigers swept the series after suffering three straight loses, and won the series . The Tigers were back in stride after suffering from three straight losses .
 Both teams were hitting with amazing accuracy in this rapidly paced tilt . As evidenced, the score both teams hit with incredible accuracy .
 CC CC quickly got the lead and dominated play throughout most of the contest . CC quickly took the lead in the first half .
 Adam's State's fast break proved effective against CC's defense . CC was troubled shortly by Adam's press, but their fast break was effective against the defense .
 Adams State cut the lead to ten points but CC broke with another sustained scoring attack which carried them victoriously to the final buzzer . Adams State ended the game with a 10-point lead .
 Thompson lead the scoring for the Tiger's with 27 points, 21 of them coming in the first half . Thompson led the scoring with 27 of his 27 points .
 Jim Wexels with 26, Art Ackerman with 22, Art Sellitto with 17, and Captain Jim Hanks with 11 . Captain Hanks had 11 .
 Tigers beat Alamosa Indians 96-88 in another high scoring game . Tigers continue hot streak and win 96 to 88 in Alamosa .
 The game was marked by sparkling offensive play by both zzzzz. teams . Both teams scored more than 100 points .
 Five of the Alamosa regulars fouled out in the final period, thus allowing CC to maintain their lead with relative ease . The Alamosa team won the game 3-1 in the first period .
 This trouble would have hurt the Indians more if CC had been hotter on the free throw line . CC was hot on his free throws from the free throws .
 CC was paced by Jim Wexels who dumped in 27 points, giving him 78 for the last three games . Wexel scored 27 points in the game .
 Thompson and Hanks also scored high with 23 and 19 points respectively . Thompson, Hanks and Thompson scored high for the team .
 CC has a 10-4 record in RMC play and needs only one win from CSU in the pending series to clinch the conference title . CSU needs to win the series in order to claim the title .
 The dress is informal, r prizes will be given, and re will be no charge . The dress will be informal and r prizes are given .
 Colorado Coll&ge (asketball Team ieceives Bid [t was made public Wednesday at CC had gotten a bid to the juthwest Regional Tournament 'r the college division of the [CAA basketball championship] championship .
 Southeast Misstate College will play in a tie-tournament March and April tournament at Cape Girardeau, Missouri . The Tigers are out their season this week, with games against CSC tonight and fomoright .
 Art Ackerman, i Hanks, Jim Wexels, Tony Selo, and Paul Mott. This series marks the final home appearence of the seniors . This series is the final series of the series featuring the late stars .
 Betas will play the winner of Thursday night's Lappa Sig-Phi Gam game for the ntramural championship . The Betas varsity game will precede the game between the Betas and the winners of Thursday's game . The winner of the game will be the
 The campus community was saddened this week by the death of Professor John S Jordan . Jordan was chairman of the education department and one of the oldest of our campus citizens .
 Professor Jordan died Sunday night of a heart attack brought on by asthma . Professor Jordan had asthma and died of heart attack .
 Since he began teaching in 1923, Professor Jordan has expanded his interests to the college as a whole .
 Next week the TIGER plans a biography of this gentleman by one of his contemporaries and admirers . Next week plans a biographer's biography of him .
 Students and faculty at the conference had an opportunity to discuss and air out many of the problems that have appeared on our campus . Uncommitted Student Sunday afternoon was a chance to air out some of the issues that have been discussed .
 The AllCollege Conference devoted much time to the question of our foreign students and their place on the college campus . In a brief reading from a book by Philip Jacobs, which is concerned with the changes in the college h Foreign Students, Philip Jacobs read the book .
 The Foreign Student Committee was organized in 1954 under the direction of Dr. Dr. John Sutter . The committee was organized by Dr. Sutter in 1954 .
 Thomas Brandt was the founder of the Student Union at the beginning of the 1980s . The organization was founded by students at the University of Wisconsin . Brandt has since been an active student organization in the past .
 The committee yearly goes through the procof choosing the foreign students that will be able to give the most and to get the most out of CC life . Fred Sonderman and Mr Al Johnson, the committee yearly go through the pros and cons of foreign students .
 The committee is aided by the existing foreign students in choosing, by means of dossiers, to choose the next foreign students . The committee also chooses the next students .
 Dossiers are strictly impersonal and give the barest minimum of information concerning the person letics . Since dossiers . give a bare minimum of . information about the person they are .
 Patterson severely condemned the double morality prevalent in society today . Patterson condemned double itandard of morality prevalent today in society .
 His topic in speakwas ""Pre-martial Courtship,'' specially emphasizing its relation:hip to married life . His topic was ""pre-martrial Courtship''
 Father 'at stressed the areas of conflicts n marriage and the need to settle iffeiences and annoyances before . He also aid a girl who answers nisguided notions of lov>
 In order to insure the 'resence of this ego-booster, series compromises will be made,' says the author .
 The ^security evidenced here is the ;a me that shows the need for reigion. The ^ security evidenced here was the .a me . The .a .a ;a . me shows the . need to reigion .
 Personal morality is not a pri>te matter, continued Father at , because there is at least one Mher person involved and two immediate families who suffer with ^ young people in case of rouble . Personal morality not a matter, said Father at .
 One student in the audience >ked why a completely erotic experience could not be indulged in . Pat referred back to his lr >ticism of the double standard an d asked in return how a man 0u ld expect certain standards in wife that he himself could not fulfill .
 Reid gave a short history of athletics at CC dating from 1882 to 1882 when the first Colorado College Athletic Association was formed . Reid gave an account of the history of Colorado College Athletics .
 Subsidization has been in existence in one form or another since 1905 . Dean Reid stated that there has been a great change in athletics over this period .
 There were no decisions made or policies formed at this meeting, but several good points were raised .
 It was felt that everyone was in favor of athletics, and all but 2 or 3 of those in favor intercollegiate athletics . All but two or three of the students voted for intercollegeiate athletics.
 The question of spirit was raised and it was mentioned that an increased intramural program would probably be a poor substitute for intercollegiate athletics . The question was also raised and said that an increase in intramurals was probably not a good substitute .
 It was felt that the intramural program as it stands develops rivalries which, while good natured, would become intense if there were no college team to which to rally .
 The spirit would then be for the individual teams and perhaps detrimental to the spirit of the college as a whole . The spirit is important to the students and the students, says the author .
 Spirit was certainly in evidence Saturday afternoon at the ACC . Those interested enough to come to the ACC certainly wanted to maintain what spirit there is .
 If we are going to have intercollegiate athletics at CC as students wish, it seems almost unavoidable that we run a deficit .
 As Athletic Director Jerry Carle pointed out, all colleges of our size have this problem in order to compete . All colleges of this size have to compete, he said .
 Intercollegiate athletics at CC can become worthwhile and worth the financial loss received . We must then make athletics more meaningful to more students by developing an interest in them .
 How this can't be done remains to be seen, but approaching the problem with this type of a constructive attitude certainly seems to be a step in the right direction .
 Colorado College will host the thirteenth annual Invitational Debate Tournament on this campus tomorrow, March 4 .
 Twelve schools from Colorado and Kansas are expected to participate in this speech meet . The speech meet will include fourrounds of debate, extemporaneous speaking, oratory, and radio commentary .
 All competition will be judged and awards will be given to winning schools in each event . All competition is judged and an award is given to the winning schools .
 Members of the CC debate team will also participate, but will be ineligible for any awai'ds .
 Rounds of debate will take place in Palmer Hall at 11:00, 1:00 m.m., 2:15m., and 3:30m. Rounds will be held at Palmer Hall . The debate is set to take place at 11, 1,00 m., 1,
 Anyone wishing to attend should contact Mr Al Johnson in Palmer 105, prior to the start of any round to find out where the debates will be held . The debates will take place at the end of each round .
 Approximately 60 teams from 30 colleges and universities were entered in the Arizona tournament . The committee of the committee is the job of the tournament committee .
 For next year the committee is considering the possibility of bringing to CC a girl from Poland, if she can leave the country, a boy from Finland, and a girl in Sweden .
 The problems of foreign students were discussed and it was concluded that they should be warmly greeted, of course, but not overwhelmed .
 The first few weeks of school are hectic even for old hands, to a foreign student they are a complete loss . To an old hand, to an old student it is a loss .
 Without help from friendly individuals, the feel ings ings of homesickness and loneliness would be unbearable . Without help, the  feelings   would  be unbearable, says the author .
 The foreign students present said they enjoyed individual contact with their fellow students instead of the more formal teas and talks to large groups . Foreign students present pointed out that they enjoy individual contact .
 It was suggested that informal meetings, such as fraternity .sorority, dorm and wing meetings, invite a foreign student to talk to them .
 It was also suggested that committees on campus, and especially the language clubs, take advantage of the special talents of these students . Committee members should also help foreign students get more accustomed to campus life .
 Next year the administration will carry the two African students for the full four years . Next year they will be able to continue their studies in the United States .
 They give much of themselves to our way of life and in return absorb much to take back with them . They give us much to give back with us, and we have a long way to go back .
 The apparent apathy is not restricted to campus life and campus activities, but reaches out into the fields of politics and international problems that must be faced . The apathy does not stop from campus life, but from international problems .
 It is the college's responsibility to supply the student with the means lo develop tools with which he can build his principles which will remain with him throughout his life as an involved member of a community .
 Only in college is n person able to be wrong and not suffer the consequences of the consequences . Only college students can be wrong in college and suffer consequences, says author .
 If a student comes to college without the courage Oi"" the imagination to be wrong and to grow intellectually, there is nothing that the college can do to help this student . Oi """" is not a student who can't grow intellectually .
 If a student conies to CC with the motivation and the inspiration needed to seek knowledge, this campus has much to offer . CC has a reputation for being a great place to study .
 Coburn Library is located in Coburn, North Carolina, and Coburn University of North Carolina . Coburn is the largest library in the world, with more than 1,000 members of the U.S. Coburn's history of education .
 This power of thought should be directed at developing a sense of values . This is the power of thinking to develop your own values, says the author .
 This development should be continued through all the four years so that at the time of graduation the student will have amalgamated ideas, sifted these ideas and arrived at a new well grounded aet of valueB which will carry over into his life outside of the college community .
 If a professor has definite opinions on the subject that he is teaching, these opinions should be voiced in the clasBioom with the understanding that they are one person's opinions and need not, be adopted in their entirety by the student .
 "It is up to the student to look at what he is being taught and to formulate an opinion one way or another," says author .
 It is not his position to tell his students what to believe or how to formulate their ideas, he says . It's not his role to tell them what he believes or how they should think .
 There are many students on this campus who are not receptive to new ideas . When surrounded by a group of interested students, it is difficult to realize that there are many of them .
 There are students who are intellectually lost in a maze of courses and courses . Students who are "intellectually lost" in the maze .
 Colorado Springs, Colorado, student's health is the most wanton . Colorado College students enjoy their health basking in unexamined acceptance on the campus .
 All direction seems to be a projection into the future as most of the time and thought is spent on committees planning these wonderous days to come . Only part of time ill is ill a flurry of accomplishing tvhat must be done today and the rest in recuperating .
 There is an organization of other anti-organizations into which he will easily fit, and there help in their struggle to be properlv acknowledged a ""real campus organization. If he is comnlctelv anti-organizedizotionist there is an . organization of . other anti
 In these and more quaint ways, CC students find that wonderful security for which they've come to a small liberal arts college . CC students also find security in their dorms, the school says .
 Don't take a stand on anything definite; you might be proved wrong, then everybody will laugh . Don't try anything definite, then you might have been proved wrong wrong, he says .
 Don't try to force your opinions; again people might laugh, or, worse yet, ignore you . Don't force people to force their opinions, or they might laugh or ignore you.
 Don't say more than 'cool' about anything and ignore everytmng and everybody except when you are in a group and then be sure whether you are supposed to smile or sneer or you might be left out . Best yet don't say 'cool', 'cool,' 'cool
 In an age when everyone must be a 'specialist' to preserve his identity, the only way for one specialist to give advice to another is by analogy . In the age of 'specialists' in the world, experts must use analogy to advise others .
 Any such attempt to try the unusual, or merely different, will be branded 'neurotic' and then one would find himself spending the rest of his life in a padded cell . Second, any such attempt will be quickly branded 'nurotic', and then found himself in a
 Assemblies Committee's program for the dual assemblies on February 28 and March 7, the rationale for their decision, background material pertinent to the film and the committee's wishes regarding the frame of mind in which those present should view it .
 The film is extremely moving in its manner of presentation and its after-effect was witnessed by the burst of laughter, clapping of hands and periods of intense silence experienced by the audience .
 Excerpts chosen from a tape recording of the court proceedings prepared as a rebuttal to the film by some students of the Bay Area were heard afterwards . The Assemblies Committee chose excerpts from the tape recording from the proceedings .
 A major goal in this type of introduction is that each interested person can reach his own conclusion about the film and its significance . Purpose of this program is to help students understand the significance of the film .
 Several undisputed facts are relevant and will perhaps prove helpful to the viewers trying to draw their own conclusions . It would be ridiculous to attempt to describe the film for those readers who did not see it .
 The students were interested in attending the hearings because they disapproved of the activities in general and it was thought some of their professors might be involved . Some of the students were thought to be involved in the hearings .
 The article in last week's TIGER described very aptly the two general factions of opinion and the basic argument between them . Conclusions: The article described the two sides of opinion very aptly .
 So far, however, no clear path to the ""truth"" of the matter seems evident . So far it has been unclear what the truth is .
 The discussions will be led by well-informed members of the faculty next Tuesday at 11 o'clock . Perhaps this will be resolved through the discussions .
 If there is a real ""truth"" behind this seeming abundance of propaganda mixed with fact. That is, if there is there a real "truth" behind this . That is if there are a real 'truth'"
 The assembly will be held on March 7 . Students will be asked to make a decision about the film .
 Colorado College received the applelation of being in a class of snob schools . Student aid at a 'Snob School' is required at Colorado College .
 CC is often compared with the other schools of its immediate environment . The school is unique in its unique position in the world of education .
 In this analysis the fact that whether or not CC is providing a better education is not the question, rather it is enough to say that CC is going about it in a different way . The most immediately apparent difference is financial .
 This year with almost double the number of students, paying a tuition of $950, the total financial aid received by the students is slightly less than $400,000 . It is one of the largest programs supported by a small college in the United States .
 This large program is administrated by the Committee on Student Aid, composed of administrative officers and faculty members, and is a year-round business .
 Ninety-nine students, forty-seven men and fifty-two women have been granted loans totaling $56,000 for the year . The loans are made from funds allocated by the United States Office of Education .
 Just a little less than half of the names that appeared on the first semester's dean's list are receiving financial aid of some kind . It is interesting to note that just a little . less than . half of those students are getting financial aid, according to the list .
 This year's tuition raise has provoked a large degree of student interest, not only as to where this money is going but whether it is being spent for the right things . Students are concerned about whether the money will be spent on the best things .
 Thjl, s s s article was not by-lined, the credit, or the blame, for fg . g article goes to the Tiger as a whole, and, insofar as the Tig| ' represents the student body, to CC as a . whole .
 In order balance out the picture a little, then, another article, prese ing another point of view needs to be written . Another article is needed to balance the picture of the situation .
 ROTC students could be influential force in loosening requirements of Conscientious Objector status to include those who seek such a status on purely ""humanitarian"" or philosophical grounds .
 The bald and brief statements used as background material to support the idea of student interest in loosening the requirements for ""CO"" status made the article both objectionable and worth replying to . But the bald and . brief statements . used as . background material for the article made the . article
 The particular brand of pacifism represented in this article rested on the assumption that to give support to the U.S. military machine is to support war . To support the American military machine, give support for war, the pacifist said .
 The potential for war of such an ""organization"" is tremendous, and the results of such a war would be disastrous, but to say that the armed services exist solely for the purpose of conducting war is absurd, he says .
 The validity, the ""raison d'etre"" of the armed forces today lies not in its military strength per se, but in its potential value . The validity of the military is not in military strength, but potential value, says the author of the book .
 The armed forces, as potential military power, serve as witness to our willingness to support, with force if necessary, our beliefs . Armed forces are witness to the willingness to back our beliefs, writes David Cameron .
 "Without this power, our political maneuvers against Communism would be utterly ineffective," says President Obama .
 Our words need the support of the threat of our actions in order to mean anything . Our words must be supported by our actions, our actions must mean anything, says the author .
 "This threat, this constant military potential, is the chief purpose of the armed services," says President Obama . This threat is the constant potential of the military, he says .
 War will become most likely when the credibility of our threat to war weakens, says George W. Bush . War likely when credibility of the U.S. threat to the world weakens says Bush .
 On the scale of all-out war, the knowledge of our unwillingness or unpreparedness to retaliate under nuclear attack could encourage enemy attack .
 Russia could be in a position to effectively destroy a large percentage of the U.S. military bases . Russia could quite conceivably consider herself to be able to destroy some of the United States' bases .
 If she considered the U.S. to be either unwilling or unable to retaliate, she might find such a means of overtaking her most potent enemy quite the best possible alternative .
 Our military defense depends to a large extent on the credibility of our avowal to retaliate an all-out attack . The country's credibility of its defence depends on its credibility, he said . He added: "Our military defense is very important"
 "The chief source of strength our armed forces is individu committment to the suppoi American ideals," says President Obama . The nation's armed forces need to be committed to American ideals, he says .
 The second assumption made last week's article was that tl ""sanctity of human life 1 highest of all values" The assumption was made was that the sanctity of life was the highest value of life .
 From th point of view, perhaps no better alternative than to avo war at all costs through seeki to have the U.S. government g up all armed forces . From th view of the world, perhaps there are no better alternatives .
 A morifc able position, at least from American point of view, would be that human life b< valuable through certain otfa values such as respect for the dividual, tolerance for diffei points of view and human f dom .
 It is on these value assu tions that our military defena set up, and it's on these i; assumptions that we should commit ourselves to li support of our military system . The U.S. should commit itself to supporting our military, says President Obama .
 The recent airline strike was sponsible for an appearance by Professor Max Lanner, chain of the music department, with Ft. Outwits Snow .
 Collins Symphony Orchesti Nicole Henriot Schweitzer original pianist for the evento was grounded in Boston . Original pianist was grounded .
 There are 69 organizations on the Colorado College camfts serving approximately 1100 students . Colorado College Tiger March 3, 1961 CC Interest Clubs were formed .
 The Tiger is begineries of articles asking whether these clubs fulfill the for which they were originated, if student enthusiasm v,jgh enough to support and benefit from these organiza' on s, and if these clubs add to or detract from the college experience .
 Prench club, Spanish club, and ■a-man club appeal primarily to idents in these language deents, to other students who ire interested in these mages and to townspeople of , se nationalities .
 Wahsatch German club holds its activities down to three functions a semester including a Christmas party and two traditional picnics . The club holds three functions per semester including Christmas party .
 Spanish club members hold meetings bi-monthly where they hear lectures or view slides . Members of the Spanish club hold lectures and view slides from lectures .
 Interested persons can eat at the French table at 11:45 Fridays to converse in French . The French table is open at the end of every Friday at 11 a.m.
 Language clubs vary greatly in their selection of activities with the exception of always popular Christmas parties . Language clubs have a wide range of activities, such as language parties .
 In all these groups programing originates with the student executive councils . Programing originated with student councils .
 Later this spring Spanish club plans to have a gala Fiesta and in April three plays will be put on for a two night stand . Club plans to put on three plays in April .
 French club has formed no plans except for an evening of slides of France . So far French club have no plans to play in the game .
 One of the faculty sponsors has been known to say he feels the students of CC are too apathetic to support a language club as it could be run .
 College administrator heard to comment at the German Christmas party that this represented an organization as it should function . In contrast, college administrator said this represented a college as a function .
 The sixth free movie shown by Rastall Center will be shown this Sunday, March 5, in Perkins Hall at 7:30 . Eight academy awards ai e among the impressive list of honors .
 The drama is set in Pearl Harbor in 1941, immediately prior to the Japanese attack . It tells the story of two professional soldiers strangely joined in conflict and friendship .
 "Dido and Aenaes" was a success . Stars of this production are Bert Lancaster, Frank Sinatra, Montgomery Gift, Deborah Kei .
 rehearsals began two weeks before the performance . With great anticipation, rehearsals started two weeks ago .
 At this time, no one was quite sure what was to come, yet everyone was determined that this opera would be good . The opera was set to be performed in New York City .
 Within a week, things began to take shape and as parts were memorized a ""feeling"" for the opera took hold . As parts began to be memorized, a "feeling" began to build up .
 The harbor, countryside, and palace of Carthage was built by a busy stage crew . Carthage's harbor and palace were built by the stage crew in Carthage, Carthage .
 Dress rehearsal came and went unarrested and opening night was at hand . Dress rehearsal went off without arrest .
 There was not a full house the first night, but to the performers, the most important objective was a good production, not who saw it . The show is set in New York City, New York .
 There were low spots in the singing, but we must remember that CC is not a conservatory of music and cannot be expected to be professional . There were also some low spots, but the singing was good .
 With an almost full house and with more anticipation and excitment, the second and final night began . The second and third night of the show began .
 In the excitement they forgot their conductor, N Mr Donald Jenkins, and by the end of the second scene had increased the tempo and gotten a half tone sharp . By the end the tempo had increased dramatically .
 Intermission which followed was just enough for the chorus to collect itself and finish the performance in excellent style .
 Aeneas, sung by Mr Harry Booth, had but one aria which was done ■with grace and excellence . Mr Booth, who spent most of his time following Dido on and off stage, sang the aria with grace .
 The greatest achievement in the production of ""Dido and Aenaes"" was the amalgamation of the drama, dance, and music departments . Perhaps the greatest achievement was the amalgamation of the drama and dance departments .
 No one department overbalanced another— the three worked harmoniously to produce an overall feeling of unity . The team was united by a strong sense of unity, not overbalanced one department .
 Many thought the chorus detracted from the soloists when they were singing their arias . Many thought, for example, that the chorus was too distracting .
 It was felt that the lighting of the last scene was perhaps gaudy . Further, it was felt the lighting in the final scene of the play was perhaps too much . It was also felt that it was too much of a spectacle .
 Kappa Sigma, Phi Gamma Delta and Phi Delta Theta fraternities will move to new residences by the fall of 1961 . Kappa Sigma will move into new residences in fall of that year . Phi Delta Gamma Delta, Phi Kappa Sigma Phi Phi Phi Theta and Phi Phi Delta Sigma Phi
 Last week final contracts on the co-operative fraternity-college housing projects were let to Land Contractors, Ltd. of Colorado Springs, Colorado Springs .
 The three new houses will be financed by a loan of $308,000 obtained by the college from the Federal Housing and Home Finance Agency . Members of each fraternity will be handled in the $45,000 from each fraternity parmanner now used for Slocum Hall .
 The college will naturally hold the titles to the houses occupied by the three fraternities involved, so no major changes will be made . The college currently holds the title to the three houses .
 The easternmost location will be occupied by Phi Delta Theta house, the center by the Phi Gamma Deltas and the Kappa Sigmas will be on the west end of the row . The Phi Delta Sigma Sigma Sigma Kappa Kappa Sigma house will be in the east .
 The new plans call for identical interiors in the houses, but to keep the tradition of varied architecture alive on the college campus, the exteriors will differ in facing materials . Exteriors of the houses will also differ in materials .
 Each house will have a full basement with trunk room, laundry room, recreation room and chapter room . Each home will have trunk room and laundry room .
 Living quarters will house 25 men with a variety of singles, doubles and four-man suites . The living quarters will be located in a range of singles and doubles rooms .
 The bulk of the food eaten in the new houses will be rather similar to that eaten in Rastall Center . The kitchens will serve the food in portable tables from Rastalls to the houses .
 These new houses will have all of the advantages of college dormitory living . The new homes will be built in a dormitory style .
 There will be offered'by the college, linen service, ground service, and anything else needed for the upkeep of the houses . The college will also offer linen service .
 The collection of room and board fees from the fraternity is not as flexible as the system now used by most of the fraternities, but it is much more efficient . This system of collection is not flexible as well as the current system . The system is not more flexible than the system
 The Beta Theta Pis will be integrated completely into the college fraternity food and finance program . The new fraternity houses will be completed next fall .
 The Sigma Chis will remain the only fraternity on the CC campus which will remain independent of the college housing and feeding project . The project will be completed by the end of the year .
 MEJrose 3-1219 at Cache La Poudre Kachina Lounge . Alta Vista Hotel 1 18 N Cascade Ave. MeJrose is located in the hotel's lobby . Mejrose is a registered member of the MEjrose community .
 Both a prose and a poetry workshop will be held in the following ten days in an effort to improve the quality of the Spring edition of the Kii nkm . A prose workshop is held on Thursday, March 9, at 7:30 .
 The material submitted will be reviewed by Mr, Edgar F Racey of the English Department .
 All prose material should be turned in to Rastall Desk by Monday after . Poetry workshop will be held Tuesday, March 14 at 7:30 at the ASCC Room .
 Caicado I NTRAMURALJ took first place in wrestling last week as they had four finalists out of a possible six . The Betas have four finalists for wrestling this year - four out of the possible six - in their wrestling competition .
 The Phi Gams had two champions to the Betas' one but had to settle for second place . The Betas piled up points by pins and seconds place finishes . The Phi . Gams' two champions were two champions but were second .
 The Betas ended up with 27 points followed by the Phi Gams with 16, Zetas with 15, and the Kappa Sigs with 9 . The Phi Sigs had 16 points, followed by 16 points and 15 points .
 Intramural basketball comes to a close this week with two playoff games . Intramurial basketball ends this week . Two playoff games are scheduled for the week .
 As a preliminary to the Varsity game Friday night the Betas drew a bye . The Betas will play the winner of the Phi Gam-Kappa Sig game on Thursday .
 Thursday's loser will have a chance to play the Betas for second place if they should lose Friday . The Betas will play the loser in Friday's playoff game if they lose .
 Lunches and Dinners very REASONABLE PRICES OPEN . Prices open .
 Student set curriculum and content to just drift through college according to a pattern set up by the administration or an advisor who takes no interest in you as a person . Avo. z i i THE GOLDEN DRAGON ■ W Broolsido 'Uncommitted Student set . up to just
 Advisors can only be interested in students who are themselves concerned about their goals and desires . Advisors should only be . in students .
 The fact that some students come to CC without the slightest idea of a major or without the desire for knowledge is a distressing problem . Students should be able to learn more about their knowledge, the author says .
 It is for these people that a set curriculum exists in the under classes . It is a good thing for the children to have their own curriculum set up in schools .
 If a student exerts no effort to follow through on some definite field, he will go from year to year taking courses that do not particularly interest him . If you are interested in a certain field, you will not be interested in it, he says. If you want to be interested
 The feeling that the freshmen should enter into the real challenges of college life was expressed not only by the freshmen but by the upperclassmen as well . The feeling was expressed by the students as well as the upper class .
 Seminars for freshmen were discussed as a possibility to develop potentialities of students immediately upon their arrival at CC rather than waiting until they are upperclassmen . Seminars could be developed for freshmen rather than wait until they're upperclass members .
 The freshman is often frustrated because he has ideas but no chance to express these ideas and act with what he is learning . The freshman was frustrated by not being able to express his ideas and acting with them .
 The upperclasses also felt that there was not enough of an opportunity to apply what they were learning . The upperclass also felt there were not enough opportunities to apply .
 All that was discussed at the conference on the Uncommitted Student cannot be written down . The conference was held in New York City, New Jersey .
 "One of the greatest things to come out of this discussion was an intangible eagerness to move ahead and accomplish something," he said . "I'm looking forward to moving forward and accomplish," he added .
 There Tigers Drop to Cellar *j Last weekend the Minnesota Gophers under the tutelage of the controversial John Mariucci moved into town and twice took the hapless Tigers to task . The Gophers beat the Tigers twice on Saturday .
 These two defeats left the Tigers in the cellar of the Western Collegiate Hockey Association .
 Game one on Friday night found the Tigers suffering their worst loss on home ice this season . Game one was the Tigers' worst loss at home ice in a row this season.
 The CC pucksters were soundly drubbed by the Minnesota Gophers 12 to 2 . The Gophers won the game 12-2 . The game was the first time the Gophers had lost to the CC puckster .
 CC's only two goals came in the last five minutes of play when Danny McGill and Stan Moskal slapped in a pair to save the Tigers from a shutout . The Tigers were shut out for the first time this season .
 Jerry Norman led the Minnesota squad in scoring by turning in a neat hat trick . Norman scored a hat trick for the Minnesota team .
 Minnesota had the advantage of a well rounded bench; they employed three seperate units, all of them working effectively against the Tiger defense . Minnesota also employed three separate units; all three of them worked effectively .
 Jerry Norman's second consecutive hat trick led the Gophers to a 7-1 victory . Norman scored a hat trick in the second game of Saturday night's game .
 The Tigers came back gamely after their previous defeat to St. Louis . However the Tigers were not as easy as their opponents and proved to be no easy match for them .
 The rather lopsided score was not indicative of the true nature of the game with CC controlling the puck a fair share of the time . The game ended in a 2-1 victory for the New Jersey Devils .
 Gopher goalie, Larson, saved Minnesota from having several more goals scored against them with his brilliant play in the nets . Larson was the hero of the Gopher defense in Minnesota .
 Larson slapped out 24 shots as compared to Laurance's 42 saves . Laurance made 42 saves, Larson made 24 shots .
 The student body as a whole must act, must apply what it is learning, to turn out students who are individuals capable of adding to the world in which we must take an active part . Students must act and apply what they are learning, says student body .
 Nesota has now strengthens t second place standing in WCHA with a 12-6 league play .
 Mariu. ""refused to schedule any conj g| with the all powerful DTJ j] this season because of his on Canadian recruiting . Minnesota needs one win to clinch set w place which would alrr them of a tournament bid .
 Mjj, sota's second place positic WCHA may he contested by I it does seem that they ha' tually secured a birth for th. selves in the upcoming NC national hockey tournament .
 Rastall Center Board Seven Positions Open Deadline — Wednesday, 4::0 Moonlight Bowleu g For those who are interest* bowling, and would enjoy a angle to this sport, Rastal Q presents Moonlight Bowling, sb ing at 8:00, Marc the R
 Moonlight Bowling is bot ing in a mimimum of light for if tl maximum of pleasure . For those unfamiliar with Moonlight Bowling, it is a form of light bowling .
 For those adept in the dark, certificat be awarded at the end of the period .
 Moonlight Bowling has bt tried at other schools, and has p ven very successful . Moonlight Bowling is a very successful bowling program .
 The idea brought to CC by the Rastall Q ter Board from an intercollej conference . The idea was brought to the board by the board .
 The newly elected officers of AWS are willing and enUsiastic . Colorado Springs, Colorado, March 10, 1961 Colorado College AWS Elections Elections .
 The officers about whom she speaks are Miss Betsy Foote, 'ice President; Miss Ann Armstrong, Secretary; Miss Jane Sderson, Treasurer; Miss Sue Heidel, Social Chairman; Miss Kemp, senior representative Advisory Council; Miss Karen ;essen, Junior Representative; arid l
 Function AWS is divided into two branches, Ivisory Council and Judicial Board . Judicial Board also preside over activities of Advisory Council . AWS has two executive officers elected as executive officers .
 Jdicial Board concerns itself with discussing, revising and enforcing, enforcing, regulations pertaining to the residence halls . The board will discuss, revise and enforce the regulations .
 Their jurisiction extends to cover such matits as the dormitory honor code, punsellor selection, and the late uard .
 Advisory Council, on the other nd, is interested in the activities d social functions of the women udents . Advisory Council is also interested in activities of women in the community .
 In Advisory Council, school pirit, conduct, and various fund-rais>n projects are all dealt with . School pirit and conduct are discussed in the school prit and conduct .
 Future Plans officers hope to accompsh four major improvements in the situation in order to make it meaningful to the women tudents .
 It is hoped the women menoned will keep their enthusiasm nd he able to effect these desirable hanges .
 CC Winter Concert Series will present chamber music performed by ensembles from the U.S. Air Force Academy Band . Beguiling next year the women chosen in recent elections will assume duties .
 The concert will be held in Perkins Hall at 4:00m. and will be free to the public . The concert is scheduled to take place at Perkins Hall in London .
 The program will open with the ""Duo in E Flat Major for Two Violas"" by Karl Stamitz, played by Werner Siepenkothen and Gregory Rodgers .
 Stamitz was one of the foremost composers of the Mannheim school of the classical period . Stamitz took a great interest in the viola . He was a leading violist in Mannheim .
 His viola concerto is one of the most renowned works for the viola . It was one of his most famous works for this instrument .
 Following the Stamitz will be a performance of the ""Sextet for Wind Instruments in G Major, Opus 71"" by Beethoven . The performance will be followed by the Sextet for the Wind Instruments .
 This work was published in 1810, during Beethoven's richest period (that of the fifth and sixth symphonies), but it was composed much earlier . This work is published in the 1810 edition of the symphony .
 Beethoven's works of the 1810 period were more serious than his other works . This explains the contrast between his spontaneous and lighthearted mood and the seriousness of his works .
 Performers in this composition will be Mr James Hamlin and Mr Gary Scott, clarinets; Mr Deimas Howe and Mr Samuel Mood, bassoons; Mr Richard Van Sice and Mr Presley Wood, horns . Performers will also be Mr Hamlin, Mr Scott
 The second half of the program, consisting of two modern works, will contrast greatly with the first half . The program includes works from modern composers .
 The first of these will be a work for a quartet of saxophones, an ensemble rarely, if ever, heard in this country . It will be the first work for the quartet, rarely heard in the UK .
 Pierre Dubois was one of the numerous and prolific early twentieth century French composers who were encouraged by the high standards of writing for wind instruments of all types and combinations set by the Paris Conservatory .
 The saxophone is almost completely associated with the jazz idiom in America, but in France the ""legitimate" use of this instrument is widespread .
 Performers in the ""Quatuor pour Saxophones"" by Dubois will be Mr Richard Hubbard, soprano; Mr Wes Adams, alto; Mr Gary Scott, tenor; and Mr Donald Anderson, baritone .
 The program will end with a rendition of the ""Octette for Wind Instruments"" by Igor Stravinsky . The program is scheduled to include a performance of the "octette for wind Instruments"
 This work was completed in 1923, during the composer's change to his so-called ""neo-classical"" style . This work is completed during composer's changes to his style .
 The schedule of events for the Science-Humanism Symposium arc as follow; TUESDAY, MARCH 14 . Discussion will concern the nature of the science-humanism controversy .
 Dr. Frofessur Rucker moderating; discussion of relation of science-humanism conflict to Liberal Arts college . Dr. Snow's essay and the positions stated by Fiedler and Koch the day before .
 Sigmund Koch Fiedler Room . Discussion of the relation of the science-humanism controversy to the nature of man .
 The all female team from Trinidad was only one of three undefeated teams at the meet . The team was awarded first over Otero Junior College and CC on the basis of total points accumulated .
 The team of Mr James Spencer and Mr Robert Thrasher from CC was undefeated and took third place in the tournament . The team from CC won the tournament by beating the other teams .
 Adams State College took two firsts and a second in individual events . Mr Keith Michell won Oratory, Mr Greg Stevens won Radio Commentary and Miss Shari Montgomery took second in Impromptu Speaking .
 Mr Steve Leonard from Regis College was a one-man threat in individual entries . He won first in Impromptu and took second in the other two events .
 CC had the best overall record in debate with the three teams entered winning nine of twelve rounds . CC won nine of 12 rounds in debate debate . CC was the best team in debate .
 Eleven schools from Colorado, Kansas and New Mexico were entered in the tournament . A total of eleven schools were entered .
 In addition to Mr Thrasher and Mr Spencer, CC entered Mr Jack Walker, Mr David Fur gason and Mr Max Taylor in debate .
 This weekend CC is participating in the ""Top of the Nation"" speech festival at Adams State College in Alamosa . CC is taking part in the speech festival this weekend .
 Mr Jack Cashman, Mr Chris Griffiths, Mr Max Power, Mr Charles Puckett, Miss Nancy Dehlin, Miss Linda Pierce, Mr' James Spencer and Mr Robert Thrasher are entered in debate . Mr Wally Caldwell is entered in oral interpretation .
 Colorado College will host its first three-day symposium next week on March 14th, 15th, and 16th . Colorado College is hosting the symposium at the end of March .
 The symposium will examine the nature of the science-humanism controversy along witli its ramifications and possibilities for solution . Snow's essay will be presented at the symposium .
 Leslie Fiedler will present the positions of the scientist and the humanist, and will work from there to suggestions for solving the prolem of the science-humanism gulf . Fiedlers will present positions of scientists and humanists .
 Dr. Fiedler and Dr. L-espectively, both hold professorships in psychology and English . Dr. J. Fledler is both well-known in their fields .
 Koch takes the postion that although psychology is a science, its subject is the phenomena of the humanities . Koch argues that psychology is not a science but a study of the human phenomena .
 He received the Furioso prize for poetry in 1951, a Kenyon Review fellowship in literary criticism in 19567 . He also received a National Institute of Arts and Letters award in 1957 .
 Fiedler is the author of ""An American Novelist,"" and most recently, ""Love and Death in the American Novel,"" reviewed elsewhere in the TIGER this week .
 Fiedler's interest in psychology as well as his background in literature reflects itself in his writing . He will undoubtedly enter into the presentation of his position at the symposium .
 'His fiery personality and love of argument should make the tenor of the symposium 'especially entertaining' 'Fiery' personality and 'love of argument' should make it especially entertaining .
 The symposium will begin Tuesday morning, March 14 at 11:00 in Shove Chapel . The two guest participants will present their positions in the science-humanism controversy .
 19 CC students, 17 seniors and 2 juniors, were elected March 2 to Phi Beta Knppa . Discussion will be held Tuesday evening from 8:00 to 10:00 .
 The students to be initiated ;it ceremonies and a dinner in Rnstnll Center Thursday, April 20 are students .
 Tucker Secrist, a French major; Miss Ruth Snodgrass, a philosophy major; Mr John Starr, a chemistry major; and Miss Shelia Toinlin, a sociology major . Miss Cecelia Travis, a geology major, and Miss Ayshlyn Tyler,
 Election to Phi Beta Kappa requires a superior academic standing during the student's college life and is consequently considered the highest academic honor a student can achieve . Audrey Ward, an education major, was elected to the highest honor in college .
 Rucker, will deal with the possibilities and problems of educating people in the areas of both science and literature .
 The final discussion will take place Thursday afternoon from 3 :00 to 4 :00 . With Mr Harry Booth moderating, the discussion will involve the implications of the science-humanism controversy .
 The intent of this symposium is to present the problems involved in the science-humanism conflict, clarify the issues involved, and arouse interest in actively proaching a solution .
 The sciencehumanism controversy was selected for the first CC symposium . Because of the importance of this issue to the educated in all fields, the subject of the first symposium was selected .
 The quality of the speakers and the interest of the subject merit high student and faculty support, <A.0* Edltora-In-Chief .
 Undoubtedly the fact that CC is coed is responsible for why many students come here . CC is a coed school .
 The boundaries between male and female have certainly grown less acute . Many people don't seem to think it is anymore, at, at least the boundaries between men and women have diminished .
 Woman no longer ""stoops to conquer""; she shrieks President into the White Hous* ■ ■ and the childrt ut of school . Woman no longer "stoops to conquer"""; woman no longer stoops "to conquer"; woman shrieks "
 No matter how close the sexes tend there is one i a difference calmly but strongly encouraged from youth explained from youth . The difference is explained in the confusion of the bridal night .
 Obviously, this is the difference based on the malefemale views on sex, not romantic sex, but plain old functional, functional sex . "Wha|t any dog can do"" sex .
 The only thing that we know of that can he called sacred and dirty in the same breath is the only thing he can be said to be sacred and clean in same breath .
 One out of every 10 people in the U.S. has or has syphilis, gonorrhea, or both . One in 10 people have or has had syphilis .
 Federal courts cannot agree whether laws against promulgation of family planning literature infringes on freedom of speech or not . Federal courts can't agree on whether laws infringe on free speech .
 In Connecticut it is against the law to use contraceptives, even if pregnancy might mean death for the mother . In Connecticut, using contraceptives is illegal .
 Girls of college age don't even know ""where babies come from,"" boys covet misconceptions they gleaned from a grade school recess . Boys covet notions gleaned by grade-school recess . Girls of high school don't know where babies are born .
 Babies are bom out of wedlock because of a lack of even the knowledge that contraceptives exist . Babies bom in wedlock to families that cannot afford to support those, they have. Babies out ofwedlock due to lack of access to birth control .
 CC "seeks to graduate men and women of mature character and discriminating minds,"" or to prepare us ""for an effective role as family member and neighbor,"" is has cut out quite a job for itself . CC is has a job to do for itself.
 Lucie Loomis' job is a job that cannot, we believe, be accomplished by rules that offer just enough liberty to be tempting . We believe that sex, like eating, is basically an animal act . A conscientious effort is based on the realization that sex is essentially an animal
 If it is to be ""social"" or ""civilized,"" it must be treated with intelligence rather than innuendo . If it's to be "social" or "civilized," it needs to be treated intelligent rather intimidately .
 The last few years have seen the recurrence of venereal disease in this country . Jane Carolyn Hult: Venereal Disease has recurrence in recent years .
 For years the disease seemed to be on the decline due to the presence of penicillin and other wonder drugs . For years, the disease appeared to be going on decline .
 It now appears that the population is developing a resistance to drugs in combatting the infection. cause it works on the internal organs .
 If it can be detected in the first stages, the cure is relatively easy but the advanced stages are much more difficult to cure . The advanced stages of the disease are difficult to treat .
 Gonorrhea is equally as serious, causing arthritis, heart disease, liver and kidney problems, as well as arthritis and liver problems . It can also cause heart, liver, kidney problems and arthritis .
 Many people become sterile by this disease, many more than by syphilis . People become sterile more often by this type of disease .
 Evidence of this disease appears from one to several days after contact, according to experts .
 It moves internally in women and is difficult to detect until the woman is sterile . It is then difficult to find out if a woman has a baby . It can only be detected if she is sterile or not pregnant .
 Four-fifths of all women who have the disease are not aware of its existence . The disease is not uncommon in the United States, but is common in Europe .
 The frightening thing about these diseases is that they are not properly reported and treated properly . The scary thing is that these diseases are not being properly reported .
 Victims' contacts are not known, therefore preventing complete control of infection . In many cases the victims' contacts do not know, preventing control of the infection .
 The two most familiar venereal diseases are syphilis and gonorrhea, both of which are caused by bacteria which are transmitted directly from person to person . The only way to prevent wide spread venereals disease is to find CAUSES AND EFFECTS .
 Syphilis is not inherited but can be passed to the fetus in pregnant women who have the disease . Syphilis can also be passed on to the baby in the womb by pregnant women with the condition .
 Silver nitrate is usually put in a new-born baby's eyes to prevent blindness . It is usually used to be put in the eyes of a baby to prevent blindness .
 The primary syphilic leisons appear during the incubation period of six to ninety days . Primary syphilics leisons are incubated for six to 90 days .
 After this time the spirocites, bacteria, migrate into the body and the external infection disappears in about three weeks . The external infection appears in three weeks and the infection disappears .
 The editorials, among innumerable other things in the TIGER, have been especially good since you have taken over the paper . "The editorials and editorials are especially good," says editor John Sutter .
 They are clear, strong, and welldeveloped, and make a point without the use of cheap catchphrases and well-worn ideas . They make their point, most often controversial point, without using cheap catchphrase or well-known ideas .
 'Apparently what seemed to you and I as controversial issues were not so after all after all. But apparently what seemed . to be controversial issues are now after all . After all, it was not so controversial issues that seemed to be so controversial .
 The question of whether to have inter-collegiate sports or not does not really exist, the writer writes . All are in agreement with your position that they should be done away with, he writes .
 Bishop Neill was a far more worthwhile speaker than Vance Packard, according to CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Last week you produced an editorial which excelled only in being flashy and common . Apparently you decided the latter was the cause, because last week you decided to be flashy .
 The response is not to the point you made (I'm not quite sure what the point was), but to your approach . It's not to say what it was, but to say it's to say that it's not what you made .
 The quality paper you are beginning to produce is worthy of your previous quality editorials . The quality of the paper you produce will be worthy of having your previous editorials published .
 You have shown that responsible points can be made in an intelligent well-presented manner . You've shown responsible points have been made in a responsible manner .
 I hope that lack of response has not permanently deviated you from this approach . I hope it hasn't deviated from that approach. I hope you will continue to respond to the situation .
 Ruth Snodgrass writes to editors of the TIGER . Myles Hopper's letter was published in the February 24 issue of the magazine .
 His criticism of the manner in which the election of the replacement of the freshman class commissioner was run was directed towards freshman class commissioners .
 We would like to say first that the freshman commissioners were in no way connected or responsible for the election . We would also say that the commissioners were not directly involved in the election themselves .
 All elections concerning ASCC are conducted by the ASCC Election Committee . ASCC chairman is fully responsible for the elections .
 Second, he was criticizing the fact that he could not nominate a candidate from the floor because of a restrictive clause in the ASCC constitution which states that no nominations are in order during an election for a vacancy of an office .
 There is all of the contacts and to cure them so that they will not be able to continue spreading the disease . We have no idea where he got this information, but there is all the contacts .
 When it appeared as though doctors had VD under control, many of the health measures were discontinued such as the health clinics devoted entirely to the cure of VD and its detection . The health clinics are now dedicated to curing the disease .
 It is now centered in the age group of 14 to twenty-24 . Most commonly in teenagers 17 and 18 years old .
 It has been predicted that there are more cases among people under twenty then ever before in history . More people under 20 are thought to be at risk than ever before before .
 Thousands of cases are never reported, health department says . Health officials say only the reported cases are only the cases reported .
 Due to the presence of VD clinics in Colorado, the rate in this state has decreased in the last ten years . VD rates have also decreased in Colorado .
 Ann Armstrong: There are 21 states that have shut down all VD clinics . However, there were 21 states where VD was illegal .
 There is an increasing break between "theory and practice" concerning moral standards we apply to sex in the U.S. today .
 ASCC has no such clause in the ASCC constitution in the constitution . This break is evidenced by the fact that ASCC does not have such a clause in its constitution . The ASCC is not the only club in the world to have a constitution .
 If election committee had asked for new nominations it would have been necessary to have had petitions followed by a period of campaigning and posters .
 A special class meeting would have been necessary for campaign speeches and elections . Also a special meeting would be necessary for campaigning speeches and election .
 We are not sayir.g that the election was held in the only possible manner. We are happy to clarify that we are not saying that we did not think that the elections were held in such a manner .
 Next year's elections are to be held in less than two months . The election committee felt that it was the most practical since next year's election is set to take place in just over two months.
 If Mr Hopper was so opposed to the way the election was held, he should have come to the election committee or freshman commissioners before the time of the election .
 He as well as the rest of the freshman class, received letters from the class commissioners explaining the procedure that would be followed in the election .
 They need the backing of the whole class and welcome constructive criticism and suggestions . They need to back them up and welcome criticism from the public .
 Criticism of the type that was in the TIGER, however, suggests motives other than being constructive or helpful . Criticism suggests motives for criticism are not constructive, but helpful .
 Now that we've both stated our thoughts in the TIGER, let's work together. Let's work with each other, we need to work together .
 CC students are more interested in our ability to act than in our writing ability . CC students say they want to be able to act more than write . Students say they are interested in their ability to write more than in writing .
 Head Coach Carle's defense of intercollegiate football at CC was excellent indeed, yet one question nags nags . Jerry Osborne Chairman of Election Committee Susan Heidel Vice President of Freshman Class .
 Intramural sports such as golf, golf, bowling, tennis, handball, swimming, etc. would involve a greater portion of the student community . Unlike football, they are sports wherein the student can involve and consequently given rise to syphilis and gonorrhea .
 The health department has become alarmed at this rise and feels that certain things must be done to cut down on the disease . Conclusions: Health department is alarmed at the rise of the disease and wants to do more .
 More treatment stations must be established; young people should be educated to the dangers . More widespread blood testing should be required for more widespread blood tests . Young people should also be educated about the dangers of blood poisoning .
 "The struggle against VD will be a never ending one because of human weakness," says Dr. David Cameron . The struggle against the disease will be never ending, he says .
 If all cases were reported and all victims reached by medical assistance, the problem of VD would once again decline and many lives would be saved . The problem of sex abuse in the U.S. would also decline, says author .
 The youth find' ' ' self under the strain of perhaps ing to act freely and knowing -,$ ( ""ame time that society eondt im for even thinking this. ( ))" The youth often struggle to find their own identity under strain of living in society, he said
 One person feels that the moral actions of society has ^ almost entirely lost . Another person feels moral actions in society have been lost .
 Some feel that it ""destm elf-respect"" and even if society cepted such action ""the individu pain and anguish would still 1 present"" in the psychological effect of such action . Others feel that a resulting ""guilt fe also expressed by others. Some feel
 In answer to the question of P-' marital relations, one professor plied that ""whatever helps mar later is justifiable"" but aded th ^ he was not trying to allow fo indulgence .
 These relations be justifiable only if they ""cement the present relationship o tween the two persons"" and mate later marriage more feasible . These relations are justifiable only if they cement their relationship and mature marriage .
 General Consensus All but one person intervievjfelo agree that the answer to our pre* lliis day confusion can't be found only a private set of standards for & ina] individual .
 Please sign all matetrlaJ subm tted ao you can will bo returned if ao indicated . Submited will be returned to the page you signed .
 romantic c did not become the central jrtiis of literature until about the leventh century . Proeneal love lyrics initiated the seniment of courtly love and the age "" airy .
 Lewis is that rare phenomenon of ook which is both scholarly and utifully written . Lewis is a rare phenomenon that is both scholar and utiful written .
 Mr Lewis, a fellow of Magdalen College, Oxord, is one of the few dependable authorities on the Middle Vges . His analysis of the develnt of the courtly love tradiand the method of allegory the eleventh-century Languethrough
 Lewis is able to explain the lighly specialized courtly love, main commandments are courtesy, adultery, and ;ion of love, with a clarity vhich enables us to understand iow such a sudden development mid have taken place and to see as the beginning of the concept '
 His enjoyable and at the condensed that it is lifficult, at least on the first read-. ng, to fully appreciate the trenendous amount of information .
 The Allegory of is already a classic in me1 studies and is well worth nany readings . It is a classic classic in the works and well worth reading .
 Love and Death in the Amerii Novel"" by Leslie Fiedler is lically a Freudian interpretation if the distinctive manner in which f e and death are handled in nerican fiction . Love and death in the American novel is a Freud-inspired interpretation .
 American fiction has shown an unusual fascination ith the horrible and terrifying, says Fiedler . American fiction is incapable of dealing with the normal sexuality, he says .
 American fiction escaped from iexual maturity and responsibility fleeing to pre-adoleseent nature horror stories . American fiction before the twentieth century has escaped from usxxual maturity, says author .
 In the twentieth century Amercan writers have switched from 1 picture of innocence to one of >erversion which though opposite, the opposite, is incomprehensible to ' countries .
 Mr Fiedler de' e, ops his argument by numerous .lustrations from American and ■ui'opean literature and detailed Nyses of major American novies . His style is often complex but st moving and lends itself to complex . style . More than any other
 A very conservative body finds itself intrigued by the opportunity to side with a very non-conservative one, says one of the faculty .
 Another explanation would be of a less emotional and. more idealistic and rational nature . Another explanation is of an idealistic . nature .
 It may be that CC students feel the HUAC is not securing their rights as Americans but jeopardizing them instead, and their interest is because of their desire to see justice .
 On the first Tuesday students heard both the movie and the student-produced tape . Students heard the film and tape .
 Mr David Van Becker discussed the actual event, Mr Carlton Gamer presented a critique for judging it, and Dr. Carlton Gamer gave a critique . Dr. Dr. David van Becker also discussed the event .
 Students say assemblies slanted the viewpoint presented to the students . However, the most predominating student comment about the series was that the views presented to students .
 Students, Communists and Committee debated post facto . The issue involves three main groups which were present at the time, the students, the Cornwork .
 All three are attacked on many grounds, depending on the ideology of the critic, and with varying degrees of objectivity . All three have been attacked on various grounds, including the ideology and objectivity of the critics .
 The students have been evaluated for their actions in many different ways . The students were evaluated in a variety of ways for their behavior .
 Some say the picketing and demonstrating, although perhaps uncouth, is basically a sign that the students of the country are alert and aware of what is going on outside the academic ivory tower .
 Some students do not grant the students a legitimate motivation, and feel that they were just out for a good time and to make trouble . Some students feel that the students were out for fun .
 The Communists are charged with organizing and leading the students, bu; the degree of their participation is not easily established . The Communists have been charged with leading students .
 It may be said with some certainty that Communist agitators were present and mixing with the students, particularly inside the building where the upset was the greatest . It may also be said that Communists were present .
 Much of the orderly student action was instigated by the student leaders of the Civil Liberties Union . However, it may also be stated that the picket line and much of the . orderly . student action .
 The Committee is questioned, as it often has been, for the manner, it inquires into the lives of the American citizens . The committee is questioned for its manner of questioning .
 It is thought to have unjustly persecuted private lives more than it has investigated the extent of Communist infiltration or has proposed remedial legislation . The government has not investigated Communist infiltration of the country .
 If all organizers and participants presented a slanted view of an already slanted program, perhaps the true evaluation of the San Francisco incident for the CC campus is yet to appear, perhaps . The CC campus has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 These are the International Relations Club, Citizenship Club, the Young Democrats, and the Young Republicans . The Young Republicans and Young Democrats are at the center of the debate .
 It holds regular programs which generally feature speakers of some note who can speak authoritatively on one or more of the innumerable aspects of international affairs .
 The Y u n g Republicans and Young Democrats are branch organizations of the Citizenship Club . The Citizenship Club is endowed by the Rockv Mountain Citizenship Clearing House .
 The partisan clubs are autonomous in their own activities and arc related to statewide federations of similar clubs . Both the partisan clubs were formed in 1964 .
 The International Relations Club programs are consistently informative on vital issues . Many of these programs are of assembly caliber, but only a few per cent of CC students attend them .
 The Young Democrats and Young Republicans have somewhat smaller memberships than the Interational Relations Club . They are faced with a great deal of apathy and not a little aloofness .
 Students who were actively interested in the I960 campaign have put politics aside for another four years . Students who have been actively involved in the campaign have, for the most part, put their politics aside .
 Many in the college community, moreover, consider themselves above the cliches and practicalities oi partisan politics .
 The basis for these four interest clubs extends far beyond departmental lines . Obviously, the basis for the clubs extends beyond department lines .
 Students have the potential to provide valuable information and experience to nil students, says the author .
 Perhaps it is symptomatic of the American people to he largely ..pathetic and aloof toward their mundane politic aloof . The U.S. people are largely aloof to their mundane political processes and toward the vital issues which confront their society .
 TEJON GOOD SUNDAY MORNING ONLY ALL TYPES ALTERATIONS AND REPAIRS ONLY ALLTYPESALATION AND REPRIRS ""IK BY 9:00 DIRTY -OUT CLEAN BY 4:30"" ON BOTH LAUNDR
 College Cleaners ng Your Laundry with Your Dry Cleaning MElrose 3-7883 Report from Poverty Gulch .rliclop st in .
 Cripple Creek provides an inexpensive, quiet, and accessible retreat . William Rainey rented the retreat in ib* rawest, most immeHarper.
 Cripple Creek as an illustration of tough-mindedness as opposed to tendermindedness of Boston . William James, in the famous essay ""The Dilemma of Philosophy,"" in which he draws the distinction between the tough-hearted and the tender-minded .
 The philosophers I am concerned with were a tough-minded lot, though perhaps not perhaps entirely in the sense James meant . The philosophers were tough, but perhaps not entirely entirely in a sense of James meant.
 John Dewey, George H Mead, James H Tufts, and Addison W Moore were the chief figures in philosophy . James Rowland Angell in psychology; and Edward Scribner Ames in religion . Edward Scribners Ames in religious studies .
 In this stimulating' atmosphere, the first thoroughly American philosophy was developed . The first 'American philosophy' was developed.
 Pierce and James had begun it, but Peirce had a lot of Kant left in him . James simply refused to accept all the implications of his own ideas .
 MeIrose 2-6370 1608 S Nevada . New USED BOOKS are the largest selection in the town .
 The annual Selective Service College Qualification Test will be offered April 27 on the CC campus . Application materials are available at the local hoard office, and must be postmarked no later than April 6 .
 Gamma Phi Beta pin with the name ""Beaulah Hood"" and ""Theta"" engraved on the back . LOST— A Gamma Phi Gamma Beta pin .
 If found, please return to the house, any member, or call Mimi Jones, Ext. Mimi .
 Dewey was at Chicago ten years, from' 1894 until 1904, and it was there he worked out the basic philosophic position he devoted the rest of his long, productive life to developing . Dewey: "It was there that Dewey developed the basic philosophical position for the
 After Dewey left Chicago, Tufts Mead, Moore, and Ames carried on in the spirit born in that first decade . Tufts. Mead and Moore carried on with the spirit of Dewey .
 Dewey is the best known of the group, writing widely in psychology, logic, ethics, social theory, aesthetics, and the theory of nature .
 Tufts wrote largely in ethics and social theory . Mead in ethics, aesthetics, and social psychology . Moore in logic; Moore and Ames in logic . Ames in the psychology of religion. Ames in religion .
 "I hope to catch something of that excitement and something of the importance of a community of scholars," he says . "A community in the sinse of scholars in communication with each other," he writes .
 Such a community was more nearly realized at Chicago than at any other time or place in the U.S. Chicago . Chicago was the birthplace of the first African-American community in the United States .
 While Cripple Creek waits for gold to rise, part of the intellectual world waits for a renaissance of communicahility .
 "The caliber of faculty makes or breaks a school like this one. In this way, we would not only gain wider participation and benefits, but also an extra $40,000 to apply toward faculty salaries," the author says .
 The case against football is indeed imposing, and perhaps the time has come for Colorado College to reach a decision . Colorado College has done so many other comparable colleges and universities hava done in the past .
 Salinger's "Catcher in the Rye" is a novel about Holden Caulfield's search for something genuine, something free of phoniness, in the world and in himself . The novel is about Holden, a 16-year-old boy who is desperate to find something genuine
 The boy's search is an illuminating one, and this is a sermon about that search . The New Testament writers of the New Testament, maintaining he is indeed free of phoniness, call the Good Shepherd .
 The purpose and necessity of the armed services is to defend our ideals from Commu. nist forces . The purpose of the Armed Services is to protect our ideals, says the author of the book .
 "The primary strength of our military program lies in the commitment of the individual to defend these ideals," says President Obama . The nation's military program is the result of individual commitment to the nation's ideals .
 Individual pacifism is intolerable, even more so for it weakens our defenses and makes uv more susceptible to war . Thus, pacifism must be intolerable, says the author of the book .
 These assumptions are highly patriotic, but unfortunately, very narrow-minded . These assumptions, however, are not based on patriotism, they say .
 "One must not assume that a person who opposes organized war is unwilling to defend the ideals of our country," he says .
 The belief of pacifism and failure to defend American ideals do not go hand in hand, says President Obama . "We are not going to defend U.S. ideals," he says .
 We do not feel that the armed services loss of the amount of legal conscientious objectors, living now, will seriously affect our military potential, we say . We are concerned that the military potential of the military will be affected .
 In fact, many of these same CO's served during the past wars in a non-violent capacity . Many of the same COs served in the past .
 They defended them by fulfilling necessary jobs, but, understandably, they would not beat arms . They defended themselves by fulfilling jobs but not beating arms, they defended them .
 Patriotism and the defense of American ideals is not only acceptable, but rewarding . Patriotism is acceptable, and rewarding, in the U.S.
 For one patriot to say that a non-violent way of patriotism is ""intolerable"" is in itself more intolerable, he says . Nevertheless, for one patriot, it is more intolerable. Nevertheless, he said .
 Pacifist Speaks is one of the few knowing bridges between tough politics and beat mutiny . He will visit the campus next Friday, March 10 .
 He graduated from U.C.L. in 1953 with a B.A. in political science . He has been active in the pacifist movement since 1949 .
 He will meet with interested students and faculty at 2:15m. in the WES room . He will also meet with faculty members at 2.15m .
 The meeting will be informal, with Mr McReynolds leading off on topics of disarmament and social change through non-violence .
 Dean Mathias to see students receiving loans from Federal funds and applying for another loan before March 15 to insure availability of such loans . There will be ample opportunity for questions and discussion among the participants .
 The school is located on a beautiful place along one of the oldest of Holland . B range from economics and business adirounti to business and economics .
 The main buildId castle but very useful for 'ooms, all with modern equip,ent. The castle was built in the 1960s and 1970s .
 Iff TK> ministration to psychology, political science or foreign languages . TK: Iff Iff . ministration is required to study psychology, politics, languages .
 Outside lectures, excursions to business firms and special courses in banking, journalism, publicity and transport are offered .
 The Dutch language gives a lot of trouble in the beginning, but a special course in Dutch of five hours every week will give these students enough knowledge after two or three months to understand the Dutch people .
 Mr James Fox and his student cast of fifteen in the production of ""A Sunny Morning"" by Serafin and Quintero and ""The House of Bernarda Alba"" by Frederico Garcia Lorca .
 These actors were quite successful in creating an emotional experience of real value for their audiences, even for some of the reputedly critical members of our campus community . These actors created a real emotional experience for audiences .
 The failure to remember some important lines and the absence of a prompter at these times were rather disconcerting .
 Whether or not this effort was ""experimental" with its ordinary use of stage properties, recorded sounds, artificial lighting and appropriate costumes depends on one's definition of the word .
 The lengthy program explainingbiographical factors, the aisles through the audience used by the players are experimental . The use of blackouts to indicate the curtains, the live music and live music are also experimental .
 CC Summer Session from June 19 through August 11, 1961 . Summer Session is June 19 to August 11 . CC Summer School is held in the summer of 1961 .
 The departments include anthropology, art, botany, business administration, dance, drama, economics, education, English, French, general studies, geology, German, history, library science, music .
 If we are to have more of this "culture, theater and personal integration of students with many facets of theater work" at CC, perhaps a building in which to work and materials to work with, is helpful .
 DUAL FILTER 1 QTCytOTl »-, ACTIVATED CHARCOAL inner filler J£J» etical ) , philosophy, photography, physics, politics, psychology, sociology, Spanish, speech and communication .
 The music department will ask three outstanding string teachers for private and chamber music instruction . The department will also ask for a series of public concerts .
 Fine Arts School will offev courses and workshops in design, painting, graphic arts, and sculpture . Students will also be taught in design and graphic arts courses, as well as other courses .
 A new ""program in the Creative Arts"" is projected, which will attempt to tie together the courses olfered in art, dance, drama, literature and music . A new program in the creative arts is projected .
 Albert Seay is the founder of the American College of Ait forms . The college is based in New York City, New York . It includes a general studies course on the Creative Arts in America .
 New programs of Master of Arts in Teaching English and History/Government will attract students who wish to go on for advanced work in teaching, with emphasis on subject matter . For the first time next summer next summer the new programs will be offered in England and History .
 A ""Program in Continuing Education"" will feature three one week long Seminars (meeting during the afternoons) conducted by CC faculty members .
 The first of these seminars will deal with the topic ""Interpretations of Contemporary American Society"" and will be led by Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter will also lead the seminars .
 The second will have as its topic, ""Values in a World of Business and Science,"" under the direction of Dr. Dr. John Defterios of the University of Cambridge .
 Third will deal with the evolution of physics under the leadership of Dr. Darnell Rucker of the philosophy department .
 Any student who wishes to enroll in the 1961 Summer Session is invited to consult Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter's Summer Session will be held in 1961 .
 Fred A Sondermann is Director of the Summer School, room 201, Peabody House . Fred A. SONDermann was Director of Summer School in the summerhouse .
 The Tigers received a standing ovation as they scored in the three-figure column for the third time this year . The Tigers scored in three figures for the first time in three years .
 Hanks and Wexels led the CC attack with 22 points apiece, followed closely by Art Ackerman with 20 . Ackerman scored 20 points for the team .
 Early in the second half, Art hit for eight straight points to push the CC margin to G4-47 . The CC hit for 8 straight points in the first half .
 Farrell Thompson dumped in 18 and Sellitto hit for 13 while playing his usual good defensive game . Thompson dumped out 18 and hit for 18 in the game .
 Cossitt was packed to the rafters as CC, playing the role of conference champions for the first time since 1945 . CC put on a good show for the fans in their last home contest before the NCAA tournament .
 Hanks led the scoring with 27 points, followed by Thompson with 17, Wexels with 14 and Ackerman with 13 . Hanks leads the scoring, Thompson with . 17 points, Thompson .
 The Tigers begin play in Cape Girardeau, Missouri, by playing the host school of this Southwest Regional Tournament of the NCAA small college division championship . The Tigers are the defending champions .
 Trinity of Texas and Southern Illinois of Carbondale are also in the tournament . Trinity is currently ranked fifth in the nation among small colleges . Southern Illinois is ranked fifth among small college teams . Trinity, Southern Illinois and Trinity are the other teams in the competition .
 Friday night's hockey action at Denver saw the Tigers going down in defeat at the hands of the DU Pioneers . The Tigers were beaten by the Pioneers in the game .
 Jon Art scored in the first' thirteen seconds of the opening period . Denver got off to a quick lead with a goal from Jon Art . The game ended in a 1-1 victory for the Denver Broncos .
 DU dominated the play throughout with Yankovieh getting the lone goal in the middle of the second period . Denver took the contest 8 to 1, with the game going score-to-one .
 Hot pink, raspberry, red, mauve, violet, purple, yellow, orange, yellow and orange, greens, blues, beiges, all the browns .
 Gordon Aamoth has played the number one position on the team for the past two years . Heading the list of candidates for the role he has played in the team's number one spot .
 Aamoth has made an excellent record in intercollegiate golf . Last year he qualified for the United States Amateur Tournament, which was held in St. Louis .
 Mike Cudaliy, Ed Boychuck, Jim Wexels, Jeff Race, Chuck Beemer, and John Reid. The team is on the air at 8 p.m. ET .
 Bill Hyhl will be a candidate for the first time for the England squad . New men who will he he candidates for the squad for first time are; Bill HyHL . New players will be included in the squad at the start of the season .
 The Colorado College Invitational Golf Tournament is held annually at Broadmoor Golf Club in May . The tournament is held at the Colorado College campus .
 The Betas outscored the Kappa Sigs from the held but hit for fewer free throws . Betas scored more than 100 points in the first half .
 Kappa Sigs led all the way but had to suppress a Beta rally in the last few minutes to preserve the victory . Kappa's victory over Beta was the first time the Beta team had a victory in four years .
 Kappa pigs made nine out of their last ten charity tosses . Fouls played an important role in the final moments as the Betas lost two men on fouls . The Kappa pigs won nine of the last ten of their charity tosss .
 High man for the Kappa Sigs was Terry Wright with 17 followed by Kent Vick with 15 . Kent Vick was high man with 15. Terry Wright scored 17 points .
 The Betas were paced by Ned Lawrence, Jerry Osborne, and Tom Rivers with 20, 14, and 10 points respectively . Ned Lawrence led the Betas with 20 points .
 Betas play Phi Gams for second place in second place . Kirkwood saves 32 saves as compared to Kirkwood's 20. gers . Betas had been on the bench much of the season .
 CC lost their eleventh straight game, losing to DU 13 to 3 . The Tigers lost their final appearance of the year at the Broadmoor World Arena in the season finale .
 The game was marked by a pair of hat tricks by two DU icers, Munro and Walker . Munro scored a hat trick in the first half of the game . Walker and Munro both scored hat tricks .
 Dutch is not the most used language, although it is not i most used . It can heir studying other languages, suc r German, for example .
 One can learn al* economic problems of the sun country and about the EuroBJ trade unions . Also learn about the economic and political problems of sun .
 Stndjj is studying abroad for a year at the University of St. Andrews in Edinburgh, Scotland .
 It is the \i of meeting other people that is . that is £ [f|C portant, to see their way of . how they behave and what (t think)
 "To see other countries, ttj el over Western Europe and s the atmosphere of all these is invaluable," says tj el .
 Remember the one can't get accustomed will hi hard time and that he will h; have an open mind to get c this exchange program that avva jbni him . But remember the one . can't . get accustomed .
 A Marine Corps Officer selection Team will be stationed in Rastall Center March 23 and 24 from 9:00 until 3:00 m.m. to interview students for the Marine Corps Platoon Leaders Class . The team will interview students in the Marine Corp Platoon Leader Class .
 Alice Parsons-Tim Tuckee (U versity of Washington) Births: A boy, Stanley Larry H Jr., to Mr and Mrs. Linda Dunn-Jack Jones (U If. J. \ versity)
 Phi Gamma Delta Hostesses: lama Department will present Enchanted by Jean Grandoux . Be admitted with , general adn ■l*n. u dents win W activity ( is $1-25 .
 The Enchanted was adopted by Valency and first proiced on Broadway on January 8, was an immediate flop . Valency came to the conclusion the play had too much sexual siveness .
 Using this as a guide the CC ama Department hopes to make a version of The Enchanted which sidered one of Grandoux's orks .
 The play expresses the ,vetnent of a girl into womanmoeence breaking through :o reality with the aid of human . Mr Valency says of the play; . [ is iot a forceful play. The play express the .vetnents of a . girl into
 Rather, is gentle and lyrical, and it conys as close to music as one can me with words . Rather, it is gentle, lyrical and is as close as music can be .
 The cast iucludes Mr John ReyIds, the mayor; Mr Nick Nicholl, tor; Miss Jean Nelson, Isa1; Miss Holly Menkel, Miss Jo allei, Miss Ann Armstrong, Miss Lee Turtle, Miss Terry Kidlittle girls; Mr William *, the
 Miss Sandra Laizari, Miss Becky Dunbar, Miss Ann Bender and Miss Ann Frey will be the Honorary Cadet Colonel . Miss Ann Willumsen and Miss Nancy Bowers are the six queen candidates for the honorary cadet position .
 Colorado College Reserve Officers Training Corps holds 9th Annual Military Ball . Colorado College ROTC will hold ball tomorrow night . Ball is sponsored by Colorado College's Reserve Officer Training Corps .
 The time is 9m. and the place, appropriately enough, is the General Palmer Ballroom in the Antlers Hotel . The show will take place at 9m .
 Military Ball is for members of the ROTC Department and special guests . The Military Ball will be held at the University of Charleston .
 This is the biggest formal seen during the year at CC, and has been marked by an overwhelming success in previous years . The biggest formal formal seen at CC has been seen during this year's events .
 The formal attire for men is the ROTC uniform with a white shirt and black bow tie . Men wear the uniform for the school's military service .
 Crossroads is a prodesigned to bring a selected roup of foreign students, about to include their studies in the Uniti States, to an American comlunity for discussions of their experiences and their jews of the United States .
 Committee of local citizens, with ssistance of Institute of Irternational Education; and CC, r 'll sponsor this program . Any foreign student, graduate undergraduate, who has studd in the United States for a year ' more and will return to his puntry within the current year
 A trip to the Cripple, an Intemation>' Pot-luck Supper, an afternoon ^spection of a community at (pile— all this in addition to home T°spitality and brainstorming disjussions .
 Summer Crossroads wants and [Ms American students] American students to participate in this program . The program will be offered to students in the U.S. and around the world .
 Persons are ie eded to act as recorders for the 'arious discussions and act as 'ides' Persons are said to be recording and 'ideats'
 Colorado College Gamma Delta chapter of Beta Theta Pi distributed a thousand cannisters for the Easter Seal Society in their annual campaign for crippled children . The program promises to rewarding for all concerned .
 After Easter the Betas will pick up the cannisters and return them to the Rehabilitation Center . After Easter they will pick them up and return to the rehab center .
 Betas received well-earned publicity for their work both in the Free Press and over KRDO television . The Betas were awarded a national Emmy Award for their efforts .
 Betas are collecting old clothes and belongings for a chapter rummage sale to be held in the Izaak Walton League Building on March 24 . The Betas will raise money for their Mother's Club .
 Ervin Hinds, a sophomore from Denver, is president of his class . Joseph Moore, Joseph Moore and Gerald Dorsey are students from Grants Pass, Oregon and Hunters, Pennsylvania .
 As soon as the ground is completely thawed the Betas will begin construction on a 30 by 40 foot basketball volleyball court . The Betas are hoping to build a volleyball court on the ground .
 Court will be equipped with a removable plastic cover so that the court can be flooded and frozen for skating . The court will be fitted with removable plastic covers so that it can be frozen and flooded .
 The Academy would appreciate it if those who attend would plan to be seated five minutes prior to the starting time . Since the time schedule for seating cadets is very close, the Academy would like to ask people to sit five minutes before they ate .
 Cadets and dates will dance to the music of the 179th Army Corps Orchestra . The band will play the music at the end of the month .
 This orchestra is composed of fifteen' professional players who have played all over the country . This orchestra was composed of 15' professional musicians .
 The highlight of the evening will be the presentation of the six queen candidates for Honorary Cadet Colonel . Six queen candidates will be presented at the end of the night .
 This year's candidates are Misses Sandra Lazzari, Gamma Phi Beta; Becky Dunbar, Delta Gamma; Ann Bender, Alpha Phi; Ann Frey, Independent Women; Ann Willumsen, Kappa Kappa Gamma; Nancy Bowers, Kappa Alpha Theta . These young ladies will
 The Cadet Corps will vote for the Honorary Cadet Colonel this following week . The Honorary cadet Colonel will be Honorary Officer of the Cadet .
 Lieutenant Colonel Decker permitted all Cadecs to attend drill in civilian clothes last Thursday . This allowed uniforms to be cleaned and in perfect order for the Ball .
 The Military Ball is paid for by the Cadet Corps, and this year promises to be greater than ever . This year's Military Ball will be the biggest ever since .
 Colorado College Chess Team was defeated 5% to 2% by the Air Force Academy in a match held at Rastall Center . The team was defeated in the match by 5% .
 CC's points were made by Mr Paul Szilagyi, who won his game at first board, Mr Jim Costin, and Mr Holm Kieser, whose game ended in a draw .
 Members of the CC team losing to AFA strength were Mr Joe Wilcox, Mr Arthur Dana, Mr Bob Williams, Mr Wann Rawles, and Mr Bill Lange . The CC team were defeated by the AFA .
 Perkins Hali will take mi the qualities of an actual radio st nil in-auditorium . The new remote control will be controlled by a remote controlled device .
 Station breaks, spots, time signals as well as top talent will be integrated into a 90 minute production . Station breaks and spots, spots and time signals are also integrated into the production .
 KRCC announcers will appear as guest announcers and will take part in the management of the show . Miss Laurie Perry, Mr Ed Boychuck and others will also take part .
 This is the first in a series of live broadcasts presented from the CC campus . This is a radio class production and is a live broadcast from the campus of the University of Charleston .
 All interested people are encouraged to audition, keeping in mind that no dancing or skits may be used in the show .
 The talent will be carefully screened to ensure a good variety and cross sections of CC's finest entertainers . CC will host a selection of talent from around the world .
 The program will be broadcast to Colorado Springs and the surrounding area .
 Colorado College Symposiums will be held at the Broadn at the Colorado College campus . A number of noted professional radio personnel and students of college radio departments will be visiting CC that weekend for the conference .
 The topic chosen for the first symposium was the Science-Humanism Controversy . The topic of the symposium will be the science-humanism controversy .
 The TIGER has wondered just how much of a controversy this topic is on the CC campus, and whether the Symposium has awakened additional curiosity and interest in the students and faculty . CC students, faculty and faculty will discuss the topic at a Symposium .
 Both faculty members and students were interviewed and many opinions given . Both faculty and students are interviewed .
 One girl pointed to the origin of the gap between science and the humanities as being in high schools . One girl said science and humanities are often taught in high school .
 There the sciences are predominant with little or no study of ethics and only a practical side of English . There are no ethics in English .
 She continued about the nature of the conflict saying a balance is necessary . An adjustment of the inner life with an ethical standing is not being made to the technological advances of science, she said .
 A science major said that the emphasis should be equal, with special importance given to foreign languages for communication . The emphasis should also be equal with special emphasis given to the foreign languages .
 In college this equal emphasis is maintained with the choice of specialization left to the student . In college, this means an equal emphasis must be maintained in college .
 The trend may be towards specialization, but only a broad knowledge of many things makes this complete . The trend of specialization is not to be followed by a complete knowledge of all things .
 The emphasis should be upon science with a correlation of the humanities, says author . Science should be based on science with the correlation of humanities, he says .
 In the modem world, a universal, Da Vinci-like man is no longer possible, making the communication of these opposing disciplines more necessary . In the modern world, this is making communication between the two disciplines more important .
 Now theorists, technologists and social scientists share the field of scientific inquiry . Now theorists and technologists are sharing the field .
 In high schools the sciences are more teachable because of their objectivity and the younger students' awakened need of certitude with an unquestionable fnundation . In high school the sciences . are more taughtable .
 In later schooling, philosophy and English and art are necessary to an education . However, in later schooling it is necessary to learn about art and philosophy .
 Another professor questioned the necessity of possibility of communication . Another professor even questioned the need to communicate .
 Perhaps the two cultures are of men of two alien temperaments between which there is little possibility of contact . Perhaps there are two cultures of men with little chance of contact between them .
 The problem of two cultures on the CC campus is for the main part an important one . Judging by these interviews, these interviews and then the enthusiastic turnouts for the programs, the problem is important .
 Opinions have varied from the ones stated here of the necessity for some kind of a balance between them . They doubt the controversy is important in the United States or even as another said, exists at all .
 Those who have thought about it or did attend the speeches and discussions feel that the symposium was both stimulating and worthwhile .
 AngelB Absbe.-, Tom Abshcr, Ann Armstrong, Alice Brooks and Alice Brooks . Alice Brooks, Wally CaJdwell, Doug Cowles, James Dyson, Myles Hopper, Jane Hult, Sandy Litchfield, Fred Luft .
 Kothy Pavlia, Steve Porter, Max Power, Ruth SnodgrasB, John Trotter, Jack Walker, Ted Worcester. Ted Worcester . Ted Worcester: "Ted Worcester" is Ted Worcester, who won't be able to return to the show .
 Last week the TIGER presented a format of three articles on sex . Last week on this page was a format for three articles about sex .
 This was done with somequalms on the part of the editors, not because we felt that there might be retribution, but rather because there might not be any response whatsoever . This is not the first time this has happened, but the last time we have seen this story .
 We did get response; granted most of it was vocal but a few did realize that a paper exists not on words spoken but on words printed . We did not get response to the comments .
 In going through the various letters, the following points seemed to predominate, so it is to these points we shall answer . The following points were the following: The point of the question: What do you think?
 The first and most important item was that our TIGER has not been representing the students, that is, providing full news coverage . The first thing is that the students have been represented is that they have not been represented .
 Second, that last week's paper showed up this lack in the most blatant manner in devoting most of page two to three articles on sex, to the privation of other newsworthy items .
 We would like to answer these three points by taking the last one first . We would rather focus on the first question: 'What do you think? Take it first'
 We feel that the TIGER has the potential to be the one campus institution which could provide full communication . We feel it has the ability to be one of the one institutions which could . provide . full communication, we said .
 By ""full communication"" we don't mean just reporting and pictures; we mean much more . By "full communication" we mean full communication, not just reporting .
 We feel that any student should be able to find himself and the issues in which he is interested within the TIGER each week . For example, any student can find himself in the magazine each week to discuss his interests .
 The TIGER should be a mirror of the whole individual, not just in "Greek News,"" or "Slocum Intra murals,"" not in anything specific but rather the whole . Not just in ""Greek News" or ""Three Little Words,""" or
 We firmly believe that each of these articles was legitimate, otherwise we would not have printed them all . We are happy to clarify that each article was legitimate .
 There were three articles, all in one week, all on one page . Rather it was the fact that there was three articles . All three articles were published in the same week .
 Last week's TIGER would seem to be overwhelmingly devoted to this specific subject . Second, that last week's cover story was about this topic .
 If the TIGER is to fulfill this potential of ""full communication"" and thus represent the student body, this must be done from the bottom up, that is from the students to the paper . As we said above above, we said, the Tiger must not be a fabric
 With a very few notable exceptions, the burden of the TIGER is carried by a staff of a dozen dependables . If this is not a faction in anyone's sense of the word, we don't know what is. We don't see what is .
 We do not think of the TIGER calendar as a run-of-the-mill, entertaining calendar . We think tliis is not in any way representative of the Colorado College Student .
 If the TIGER has been unbalanced, the responsibility is ours; but the cure is up to you . It's up to the people to decide if they want to change their attitude .
 The next all-star] meeting is today from about five o'clock till supper; the TIGEB challenges CC students to put their pens where their mouths are . CC students will be challenged to be on top .
 Plei U-rrial iibmi be contacted for further irma . All ma erial will be eration with the abo ve will cation in each issue .
 One of the objects of a liberal education, it is said, is to prepare the student for a more mature later life .
 It would seem that constant warning to college students is hardly a compliment to their intelligence, to say nothing of the quality of the average student at Colorado College . Colorado College has a reputation for its quality of students .
 This attitude is at between boy and girl seems to be realistic and the Cornell adchildish or immature . This attitude seems not to be i east realistic and it's realistic .
 Students can express any form of love during their stay at college . However, let us examine the opportunity afforded the average student on the campus to express love during his or her stay .
 If no car is owned by one of the couple in question, there are a variety of romantic places . There are a number of romantic locations for the couple .
 The park behind the Fine Arts Center offers all the advantages of outdoor loving . It is rather cold in the winter, and the raosquitos and dog walkers create some hazards .
 If one's tastes run to more domestic accomodations, the observatory or Shove Chapel afford cozy nooks if one is willing to wait for the facilities .
 Any comfortable place is immediately turned into an obstacle course when its whereabouts become known . "Any comfortable place can be turned into a maze of obstacles when it's found out"
 In an effort to find the general attitude of the students, the TIGER took a random sampling . Some of the results follow from the results .
 If these three quotes are representative at all of the majority of students at CC it would seem mandatory that some changes be investigated .
 Although student life shouldn't be cloistered we shouldn't have to escape to the back seat of a car to leave a blaring TV set or just to be alone with another . Students shouldn't escape to escape from a car or leave a TV set .
 Our honor system is based upon intellectual responsibility demanded by its occasion; perhaps the same might be sought socially . Hear Editors, I have been withholding judgement on the unique, to say the least, style of your newspaper .
 Articles such as Venereal Disease and Report from Poverty Gulch have no place in a college newspaper to my way of thinking, or at least not as much of a place as you gave them .
 A second disagreement is with the allotment of space to different articles . A third disagreement is over the amount of space in each article .
 "Dido & Aeneas" completely overshadows such an event as the Winter Carnival . "I feel that it is a sad day when ""Dido and aeneas"" completely over-shadows" Winter Carnival. "Aeneas:" is a classic form of
 It would be hypocritical to say that ""Dido & Aeneas"" should be left out, but the Winter Carnival was an occurrence much closer to the students, and the TIGER is a student newspaper .
 The victory of the Trinidad debate team is another article given an undue amount of space, as the Winter Conceit article, I believe . The victory was given an unfair amount of time to give to the debate team, as a result .
 It appears that you are sacrificing the space for articles of a more general interest in order to leave space for subjects that you're interested in . The space is left out for articles that are of a general interest .
 Remember that there are many different people with many different interests among your readers . Remember that many people are different people from all backgrounds .
 We are paying a very capable photographer to supply you with pictures, and I am sure that it is not his fault that they do not appear . We are also paying him to provide us with pictures of his work .
 I find myself in serious disagreement with you again on the subject of sports coverage . "I find myself ... in serious disagreeing ... again," he writes .
 The city newspapers give our athletic teams a hard enough time as it is, and I see no reason for the mouthpiece of our student body to carry on the practice . The city newspaper is a mouthpiece for the student body .
 If your readers really wanted to work a puzzle that badly I'm sure they would go and buy one . If you wanted to do it, you could buy a puzzle for your readers .
 It becomes a chore to have to search for the second, third, and fourth sections of every article . It is a struggle to find the right sections of each article in every article.
 Mr Cashman and I never got along greatly when it came to the TIGER, but now I must congratulate him on his past job and entreat him to give you two some lessons in newspaper publication .
 You may wonder where I can muster the gall to write such a letter as this. I'm not ashamed of my actions, but I'm proud of my work .
 These ideas are not only my own, but those of many people who have discussed this subject with me . These ideas were not only his own, they are those of others who have also discussed it with him .
 "Every student is paying for this paper and they are not getting their money's worth right now," says President Obama . "They are paying their money and they're not getting it right now"
 "I found this last issue to be enlightening reading from cover to cover," says author . "This last issue of this year's edition of this issue was an enlightening experience"
 "I like the higher standards of style and subject that yon have been attaining," says author . I like the 'higher standards' of style, he says .
 Steve Kushnir writes to the editors of this article . He praises the frank presentation of anamolies that exist within the American social milieu . Kushnir looks forward to the same candor, vigor, and responsibility in your treatment of other important issues .
 "Under your direction the TIGER is fast becoming a serious and carefully developed organ of campus expression," says the editor .
 "I have been pleased with the trend being set and sincerely hope you will keep up the good work. Personally, I have . personally hope to keep up with the . good work," says the author .
 There may be a need for a word of caution in view of the editorial page in your March 10 issue . The editorial page of this week's issue will feature a piece of caution .
 It seems to me that as editors of a campus paper, you have a peculiar responsibility to make the paper reflect topics of immediate concern to the campus community . Editor: "It seems to be that as Editors of a . campus paper you have to make . the paper reflects topics of concern
 Of course, tlu's concern can, and should, be broadly construed and may well be controversial in nature . Tlu's concerns should be broad construed .
 Logically, sex is a topic of interest among young adults of college age . It is one that quite properly ought to be discussed rationally and intelligently by the students, says author .
 The editorial was a legitimate one, and the same holds true for the article on campus morality . For this reason, the subject of your editorial last Friday was legitimate one . The article was about campus morality, and it was legitimate .
 The third article on VD is quite pertinent to the audience to whom it was addressed . One wonders, however, if the third article is quite so pertinent to that audience .
 I have the very uneasy feeling that the impact of all three on the same page was a bit overdone— that it might well fail in the purpose of arousing interest in an important subject' on a rational level but could rather appear too dramatic .
 There is nothing seriously objectionable in any of the three articles taken separately . I would question the necessity of taking up so much space on one page of one issue .
 Perhaps you are going just a bit too fast in your laudable efforts to make the TIGER a prompter of campus discussion on live issues . Perhaps you're going too fast .
 A pinch of caution mixed with a dash of refllection might possibly lead to some second thoughts on the means of gaining your ends . The game will be played in a bid to win the title for the first time .
 I wonder if there are not some students who have sufficient interest in the TIGER and the kind of paper they want to express some opinions in the columns of that paper . I wonder . There are not enough students to express their opinions in columns of the paper .
 Several of the recent editorials have covered topics of some hot interest not too many weeks ago . It certainly seems to me that several of these editorials covered hot topics of hot interest in recent weeks .
 I feel sure many ""Letters to the Editor"" would be welcome to those responsible for the TIGER and others interested in things that concern Colorado College . Colorado College is a college of higher education .
 I feel that it is time that the students express themselves concerning the TIGER, and I know that I am speaking for a great deal of the student body . I feel . that it was time for the students to express themselves about the Tiger, and that I know I am
 I believe that this phrase is no longer valid, for recent issues of the TIGER no longer represent the CC students . I believe this phrase no longer represents the students at the University of Columbia .
 In fact, while reading the TIGER, one can't help but get the feeling that he is being talked down to, that his own newspaper is mocking him .
 The TIGER is a newspaper (with a heavy accent on news); we already have an excellent literary and cultural publication for expounding one's talent in such fields . We already have a great cultural publication .
 The weekly standard columns, although admittedly often run-of-the-mill, were read and enjoyed by students . The weekly column was often written by students, but it was often read by students and enjoyed .
 The Wolfenden Report divided into four major sectio introductory, homosexual offei prostitution and recommendation . Also in Cnbiim is the book ""Live and Let Live" which provides an enlightening, ening comment on the above men tinned report .
 The investigation was carried o^ judging from the report, in a spfrjt of open-minded willingness to see the facts as they are and to treat them as such .
 Committee: Homosexual havior between consenting adults should be no longer a criminal fence . Committee: "Homosexual l lr .. haviors between consented adults should not be a criminal nf fence"
 The Wolfenden Report has beer introduced into Parliament twice sine, its publication and been twice re jetted, however, with a smaller innjority the second time . Beer has been published twice and jetted into Parliament .
 The moral situation in the U.S. in general in the United States. It is this specific relevance io those of us concerned with the moral situation .
 Patterns of American sexual be. havior pretty much have been to go along publicly and follow own standards privately . Patterns of U.S. sexual beauchery have been public and private, but private .
 It would be far more re- sponsible to try to bring about I change in the laws than try to re-sponsor .
 True sex is of utmost interest t every CC student and there is n reason it cannot be maturely discussed, but it is not the purpose ol the TIGER to provide education along these lines . If so, wha appears to be near-sensation alism is a poor
 The purpose of the TIGER is to print news and to be an expression of all the students . Colorado College has been called an apathetic campus all too often . I hope that many parents who read that editorial page didn't think it was an expression .
 The hands into which the control of the TIGER falls have a great influence on the campus . The hands in which the hands of the . control of . the Tiger falls have great influence . on the . campus .
 The TIGER is now in capable hands and there is no reason that if everyone's interests are served, the current TIGer cannot be the best ever put out . But remember, this paper *< ours, Colorado College .
 Petitions for ASCC president, vice-president, secretary a “d (reasurer) are due March ■jg by 4:00m. Petitions are due by March ■Jg by April .
 Leigh Rainey-Brett Stearns Engaged Judy Gibson-Dave Cavlstrom ,AFA) Married: "" Linda Rork-Bill Berry . Births: girl, Laura Ann, to Donna Bll d Steve Bellstrom .
 Two important purposes of college or of a liberal arts education are clarity of thinking and articulate expression . Tejon MEIrose 2-0164 Cap & Gown by Betty Burgoon .
 These are obvious and are simply means, instruments in attaining higher goals, they often obscured . Since these are obvious, they are often obscured, they can be used to achieve higher goals . This is especially true in the United States .
 I am often stricken with how effectiveness and impact of communication are not always a function of the quality of ideas, but of the speaker's fluency . I'm often struck with how effective communication is often a result of fluency, not quality of the ideas .
 It becomes frightening to realize that even if one has a great wealth of knowledge he can still be ineffectual without the ability to articulate his ideas . It becomes somewhat frightening to . realize that . even if . one had a great . wealth of . knowledge, he said .
 Many people are unable to express their ideas clearly and precisely . This is extreme, of course, but no one is so poor of expression that he is completely incapable of communicating himself to others, he says .
 It could be said that this can often be attributed to foggy thinking, and that of logical and orderly thinking . This can be said to be the second point of logical thinking .
 Logical and orderly thinking is a skill that necessarily develops with practice . Logical thinking is one of the most important skills in the world .
 There are many academic practices which aid in developing academic skills, but I would like to confine myself to two specifically, writing papers and participating in discussions .
 Dinner Try Our Presh PIZZA ACross from campus . Alta Vista Hotel I IB N Cascade Ave.
 The film ""Communism on the Map" will be shown in Shove Chapel . The film is a documentary on the progress of world communism .
 Anyone interested in the film ""Operation Abolition"" will find much of similar controversial interest in this new film . The film is based on the controversial film, Operation Abolition, which was released in 2003 .
 Time permitting, discussion will follow. ideas and to communicate themselves to others. ideas .
 Students generally have to read somewhat hurriedly through many assignments and hence formulate vaguely the essence of the material and their evaluation of such . Students must also formulate their assessment of such assignments and evaluate them .
 When a more critical analysis becomes necessary, as in paper writing, the student organizes the material in a systematic and orderly fashion . The student begins to sharpen his critical abilities when analyzing material .
 For this reason, I feel papers are an excellent exercise, perhaps much more so than tests because of the time element involved . For example, papers are perhaps more so important than tests as they are time-consuming and therefore difficult to read .
 Tests can precipitate muddled expression when in an attempt to get all ideas down and all of the questions answered, the student scribbles the answers with little opportunity to consider the various possibilities of presentation and expression .
 Oral expression can be improved not only through classroom discussion, but through extracurricular discussion groups . Oral expression should be improved through discussion groups, many of which are organized on campus recently .
 The problem of communication becomes more acute when one has to express himself to people outside his discipline . In these discussion groups various disciplines are usually represented . Topics of discussion require integration and synthesis of ideas from several areas of study .
 The student can develop clarity of thinking and articulate expression through many means, but I have offered these two for particular consideration . The students are encouraged to use these two methods to develop clarity .
 Too often the value of writing papers is overlooked, says author . Too often, too often, discussions are underestimated, he says .
 If college students are to be influential members of society, they must be concerned with the development of these skills . College students must consider the various means of doing such .
 The girls on the third floor of Loomis Hall deserve recognition for a project which they undertook last November . Chow Yin Ling and Chow Yong Yin Ling are a foster child at the centre of the project .
 The girls decided to financially adopt a ten year old Chinese girl in Hong Kong . Through the efforts of the floor president, the girls adopted a ten-year-old Chinese girl .
 The Foster Parents' Plan, founded in 1937, has helped more than (500,000 young people . More than 500,000 people have been helped by the plan since then .
 This organization is non-profit, non-propaganda, non sectarian, providing financial aid for orphaned or distressed children .
 She receives $8 in cash and the rest goes into food, clothing packages, translations of letters, medical services and education . The rest of the money goes into clothing packages and medical services .
 Her family is one of the hundreds of thousands of refugee families living in extreme poverty in tiny huts in one of Hong Kong's areas . The refugees are living in poverty in a remote area surrounding Hong Kong .
 Pershing Rifle Maneuvers held a field problem at Fort Carson Sunday, March 12 . The family's monthly income is $31.50, because of the income .
 After leaving at 7:00m. the group split into two groups, aggressors and defenders . The group left at 7 a.m. and left the stadium at 7.30m.
 The plan of the day was for the defenders to re-take ground lost to the aggressors through four obsticles to the final objective, Machine-Gun Hill . The final objective was to take control of the final part of the battle .
 These practices are for members and interested MS-III cadets to help them when they go to summer camp for basic training . These practices will help them prepare for summer camp .
 Chow Yin Ling cannot pay the sixty cents a month for her education . Own.i of the insufficient funds, Chow . Yin Ling . Ling cannot afford to pay for the 60 cents per month .
 She is a bright student and deserves the help she is now receiving from the CC students . She is also receiving help from the students at the school .
 Her ""foster parents"" send her gifts and letters to make her feel that there is someone who is taking an active interest in her future . Her 'parents' send her presents, letters and gifts .
 Next year the whole hall will take over the support of Yin Ling, because it is a financial burden for a small group of girls . Yin Ling will be supported by the whole of the hall next year .
 The hall will continue to send money to Yin Ling only for another year . Yin Ling will receive the money from the hall only for the next two years .
 Loomis Hall hopes to have this project continued even after the initial instigatnr.s have graduated . The initial instigators of the project have all graduated .
 The Golden Dragon I4OT S EIGHTH STREET CHINESE-AMERICAN RESTAURANT . Colorado Springs' most beautiful S.rvlng Family Styl.
 Letter to the Editor items of current interest . Tige Wahsatch March 17, 1961 Colorado College .
 The TIGER is neither a textbook nor a Salvation Army bandstand— it is a college newspaper . It is neither . Neither .i textbook nor .a Salvation Army . bandstand .
 If I wish to read about decaying morals and decaying flesh I can go to any city newspaper or any medical magazine in die country. I can read about decay of morals and decay of flesh, I can . I can't go to see decaying morals or decaying flesh .
 When the activities of this college are first encountered in die FREE Press or the GAZETTE -TELEGRAPH, then the TIGER is not functioning well, perhaps not functioning at all .
 At the discussion concerning athletics at Star Ranch, we felt that the dissenting opinion was not adequately expressed . Charles E Puckett writes to the editors of the Star Ranch Review .
 In this letter, we would like to suggest some ideas and solutions to the athletic problem . In this article, we highlight some of the ideas we have received from the public .
 It was pointed out at the conference that spirit and winning teams are directly related . It was also pointed out that spirit is directly related to winning teams .
 What was not pointed out was the fact that winning teams take a great deal of money . Winning teams win a lot of money, but that's not always the case .
 "We question the validity of losing $50,000 alone, much less the cost of the entire athletic program," says the school . "The cost of losing the entire program is unknown," the school says .
 We condemn the solutions to this problem which we offered at the All College Conference . We condemn them as the solutions we offered to this issue .
 The only value we can see in this suggestion is the decrease in attendance taking . We can only see the value of this suggestion if attendance drops .
 Written applications are to be turned in to Mr Al Johnson's office, room 102, Palmer Hall .
 Deadline for application is March 17 . All applicants will be interviewed by the Foreign Student Committee . A mid-April decision will be made .
 It was almost pointed out at the conference that spirit was more important than academics . The conference was held in New York City, New York, last week .
 It is important to realize that spirit is the sum total of many things of which football is just one . Spirit is a part of the spirit of life, not just football, but spirit is a whole thing .
 Spirit may also be achieved through plays, concerts, intramurals, and other such activities which cost far less than the intercollegiate program . Spirit can be achieved by playing, concerts and other activities .
 We feel that the $50,000 could be used in a more beneficial way by broadening of the intramural program and by creating a physical education program which would benefit the entire campus .
 It is our contention that if this happens it will only be due to a failure on the part of the stu.lent body to adjust to a new environment and to create new ideas .
 The choir will leave on the morning of March 29th, return the afternoon of April 10th, and will sing eleven concerts during that time . They will sing 11 concerts during the time .
 The program includes a fifteen-minute portion of the Bach motet, ""Jesu, Priceless Treasure,"" Some early church music of the Renaissance, some Easter carols and spirituals . The program will be heard on campus later this spring .
 Program of reading of poetry is being sponsored by the Departments of English and Foreign Languages .
 These readings will be held on Wednesdays at 4:00m. in the WES room f Rastall Center .
 The emphasis is to be on the readings themselves, with little or no commentary . Ur translation is based on those readings .
 Community Congregational Church. March 22— EE Cummings, Mr Van Becker . April 12 — Spanish Poetry, Miss Perry . April 19 — Middle English Poetry . April 3 — German Poetry. May 10 — Gerard Manly Hopkine, Mr Racey . May 17
 Camera Store rtio Latftl Selection of Photographic Equlpa*mt I Rocky 'Mountain Atoa Jm Doall orce nOJBcers Jame o TvmgsV Decidedly not. March 30 .
 In your working lifetime, there will be piloted spacecraft— piloted and navigated by Air Force officers . And it is foreseeable that in your working . lifetime, the U.S. Air Force will be flying spacecraft .
 There is also a big future for collegetrained Air Force officers on the ground . But right now, it's not all about the future of the Air Force .
 Important administrative positions must be filled as World War II officers move into retirement . Important positions must also be filled in the final stages of the war .
 For college graduates, men and women in certain fields, there is Officer Training School . Then for college graduates and men, men, women, there are Officer Training Schools .
 The graduate of the three-month course wins a commission as a second lieutenant . The graduate is a graduate of its three months course .
 Other ways are Navigator Training program, and the Air Force Academy . Navigator training program .
 Starting salary plus allowances compare with the average in equivalent civilian jobs . Starting salary and allowances are based on the salary of an equivalent civilian job .
 The Air Force offers free medical and dental care, thirty-day vacation, and a chance to win graduate degrees at Air Force expense . Then there's free medical care, dental care and thirty days' vacation . The military also offers free retirement provisions .
 March 17, 1961 Today is the Last Day to Turn In Kinnikinnik Contributions . Slocum Intra murals Friday David McReynolds before a small crowd .
 Ufons came fast and furious with a contingent of ColoF Springs folks who had scatty themselves throughout the iience » .
 McReynolds' father is an er in the United States Army and his dfather an officer in the Air e . He implied that despite his lilitavy"" background, his family was proud of him for showing inriduality and non-conformity .
 Lher or not they are proud of jt was clear that he stands Uy, and w e might add admirlv on his convictions . It is untie 1 1"" portant to give recognition to the manner in which he handled himself .
 The speaker, tired from a day of travel, spoke clearly and logically and in a meaningful context . The speaker was tired from travel, but spoke clearly .
 He was admired both for his devotion and his penetrating comments . Whether anyone agreed with his doctrine of socialism or that of pacifism, he was admired for his .
 McReynolds displayed true pacifism when confronted by a group of . shallow, provincial, and disgustingly patriotic citizens of this city . The mayor's actions were met with a wave of support .
 "The people of Colorado Springs were so afraid that members of our faculty and administration received approximately fifteen calls to stop McReynolds from speaking here," the school says .
 They said it wasn't fair to subject young students to the trash of a socialist-pacifist . They said that it was not fair .
 There were only 13 students present at the event, and there were only thirteen at all .
 M Buck's other paintings are too contrived, both in color and subject matter . However, Buck's paintings are not as contrived as his other paintings .
 This is unfortunate because with such control, more inventiveness and greater awareness would make his work very good . This would make him more inventive and more aware of his work .
 Fine Arts Center is now displaying the musical instruments of the Pueblos, Apaches, and Navajos of the Southwest .
 One rattle rattle is a large square of leather with pieces of hoof and tin bells placed along the bottom . Another is a leather square with bits of hooves and bells placed on the bottom of it .
 The drums are made of clay and wood; one is an enromous clay pot and another a tree trunk . One is a clay pot, another is a wooded clay trunk .
 Conch shells were imported from the west coast and trumpets were made of them, with clay mouthpieces . The trumpet was made of conch shells, with a clay mouthpiece .
 The musical bow was the first string instrument; next were wooden fiddles with deer sinew for strings . The instrument was made from wooded wooded fiddles made from deer sinews .
 Also at the Fine Arts Center is the Contemporary Artists Show, with a few unusual paintings .
 W Colorado Ave. Springs' Homo of Whooli. Springs, Colorado, is located at 4I0 W.0 W Colorado Avenue .
 Some twenty-four men participated in the competition . The competition got difficult as the semi-finals and finals approached . Some 24 men participated .
 This competition should bring together the best from the Intramural League and others on campus that have shown good ability with the paddle and ball .
 Tiger baseball season got under way Tuesday afternoon with the first workout of the spring . Tiger baseball team has first practice of the season for the first time .
 Pitching seems to be the real trouble spot for the Royals this season . The team's pitching has been a problem problem this year . This year's pitching seems to have been a big problem for the team .
 About sixteen showed up for the initial workouts with several lettermen returning . About 16 showed up with several returning to the program .
 A couple of positions on the infield and outfield have been vacated since last year . Pitching warrants the most improvement, but pitching warrants most improvement . A few positions have been left vacant since last season .
 The Tigers will be handicapped somewhat with their pending schedule from a rather late start with training . The Tigers are expected to play in the first two weeks of spring training .
 Spring vacation will interrupt the practice schedule . First game is with Mines on April 12th, just two days after the spring break .
 There is also a series with State, the conference power, on April 14th and 15th .
 Too much height and poor hitting from the floor were the Tigers' downfall . The Tigers were beaten by a combination of height and bad hitting from floor .
 SEMO had a big team and SEMO only hit for 34 per cent of their shots as achievement to win the conference against a hot 45 per cent for the seachampionship and get the Tournason.
 Riller of SEM had 22 points and Gray and Cressing, both 6' 7"", had 19 and 18 . The pair of players ended one of their most successful seasons .
 Thompson had 17 points again to lead the Tigers in scoring, Hanks had 12 and Sellitto had 10 . Thompson also scored 17 points for the Tigers .
 CC didn't fare too well in thi nt, ial much to be proud of in addition to the tourney and the championship . CC had a strong showing in the tournament, but the team didn't win .
 The intramural track meet will be held this weekend with preliminaries this afternoon and final events tomorrow . There is no shame in taking fourth tournament such as this one .
 The Tigers lost to DU 10-5 in a hockei game at the Broadmoor World Arena . Alumni Play Hockey For Charitable Fund . Saturday night the Tigers lost .
 The familiar faces Gee, Dutkowski, Boychuck and Moskal weren't there how ever . Gee was there for the first time in the last week .
 Charity game nets out $507.78 for nett&i the Heart Fund . Alumni from all over the world take part in charity game .
 Some of the great hockey names of the area were in th( lineup, such as Ikola in the goal, and lines featuring nani^ like Frasca, Love, Whitworth, Yalich, and the famous ""warv of the flashing blades, Jerry Carle"
 Jack Smith and Jim S\v were the big guns for the Pioneers as they each pumped a hat trick in a game that was entertaining as anything we've seen at the Broadmoor for a long time .
 MOHL'S BOOK HOMI ULKIewa Ben Lustyk Tuxedo Rental Complete Accessories 3 1 8 East Pikes Peak ME 2-7215 When It's Murfc If. Since 1899 .
 London Shop's single purpose is to gratify your taste for traditional elegance . MeIroie 3-1219 at Cache La Poudre .
 Our policy is to 'imperfectly groom every customer to his own total satisfaction' Our policy to impeccably groom each customer is to be impeccable, we say .
 Our interest is in your final appearance and not in the size of the order you wish to place with us . We are happy to answer questions about your appearance in our weekly Newsquiz .
 Buyers are instructed to place quality uppermost, and to obtain from the finest sources, anywhere in the world, the styles and fashions of good taste and excellence .
 London Shop, to serve you, must insist on your own interest in your own appearance . The London Shop must insist that your appearance is your own .
 "Our best advertisement is the man we serve whose appearance tells the story," says CNN.com editor-in-chief John Sutter .
 ASCC Executive Elections to be held lus spring . Colorado College Tiger . Colorado college Tiger .
 The President of the ASCC has the power to appoint the members and chair,f the standing committees . He has the right to appoint, with the advice of the Executive .
 The resident also serves on the Honor jouhcil and is an ex-officio memier of the Student Conduct Comnittee . The resident is also a member of the Honor Committee .
 He must be willing to derote time to his duties and act in iuch a way as to create enthusimong members of the comnittees and among the student iody as a whole .
 It is his extra [uty to unite the campus continuity and give spirit to its memlers . It is the president of the University of Cambridge University .
 The vice-president is responsible for all communications binding the student body, the ;ive Council, the administraid the faculty and the administration .
 He traditionally heads the enthusiasm commite which is responsible for freshan orientation week . He is traditionally the chairman of the enthusiasm committee .
 Tiger Club entertained Sixty students from the Colorado School for the deaf and blind . Tiger Club Hostess o Deaf Students .
 Miss Carol Swartz, as chairman of the afternoon, was assisted by members of the Tiger Club, and Black and Gold . Miss Swartz was also assisted by . members of . the Tiger . Club, Black and . Gold, and Tiger Club members also attended the event .
 The party given Sunday was preceded by a party in November also given for the deaf and blind school students .
 The games area was [open for free bowling, pool, and pingpong, so that every student had a chance to do something which was of interest to him . The games were also open for free bowls, pool and ping-pong .
 The students invited Tiger Club members to roller skating partv in April .
 The Tiger Club deserves recognition for the efforts they have shown to give these students a chance to leave their school campus and meet new people . The club deserves recognition .
 Before Tiger Club, deaf and blind students had never been entertained off their campus . Tiger Club provides entertainment for deaf, blind students at the school .
 Tiger Club has led campus tours, participated in freshman orientation, assisted at registration, helped with National Defense Week, and ushering for the Variety Show . Other service projects have been performed this year are leading campus tours and assisting at registration .
 On Wednesday, April 12, right after vacation, the Tiger Club will be tapping new members . New members will be tapped at the club's headquarters .
 New members will be chosen from Tigerettes on the basis of interest, enthusiasm, and cooperation . The new members of the group will be made up of women and men from across the globe .
 New members will be' required to wear 1'ellow ribbons for one week . New members are required to help form new groups .
 He is also an ex-otficio member of all ASCC committees to help them in all fields . He has also been a member of the ASCC committee .
 The vice-president of ASCC must be an enthusiastic person devoted to the college because he spends on an average the most hours per week furthering the successful college atmosphere . ASCC Vice-President must be passionate about ASCC .
 The secretary of ASCC maintains the office, writes all thankyou notes and invitations for the council .
 The secretary spends on the average of 3 hours a week taking care of these duties .
 The treasurer submits a proposed budget to the Executive Council concerning the allocation of ASCC funds . The treasurer is chairman of the Finance Committee of the Executive council .
 At the first of the year he holds hearings with the campus organizations concerning their financial needs . The hearings are held on campus organizations .
 PETITIONS are DUE FOR president, vice-president, secretary and treasurer at Rastall Center desk by 4:00 on March 28 . PETITION is DUE for president, VP, secretary, treasurer and treasurer .
 Candidates for president will give speeches at an all-school assembly on April 11 . Candidates will give their speeches at a school assembly in April .
 ASCC Executive Council has invited all interested students to a coffee hour in the WES lounge which will be held in April . The coffee hour will take place in April at the end of the semester .
 ASCC Executive Council is urged to attend meetings on Monday afternoons . Also any student who wishes to know more about ASCC executive council is encouraged to attend the meetings . The meetings will take place at the end of the week .
 Students interested in serving on the Assemblies Committee during the school year 196162 are requested to complete the standard extra-curricular activities application form . Students want to serve on the committee .
 The form is available at the Rastall Desk and must be turned in no later than April 24 .
 GG Students Speak For Red Gross Drive . Two Colorado College men are serving as volunteers on the Speakers Bureau of the Red Cross . GG Students speak for Red Cross during the present Red Cross fund drive .
 Max Powers, sophomore, has already been called upon to make several speeches in behalf of the Red Cross .
 Mr Power is from Denver, a resident of Slocum Hall, is president of the student's Young Republican Club and an honor student .
 Mr Chris Griffith of Pueblo is the other member of the Speakers Bureau . Mr Griffith is also a member of The Colorado State Assembly .
 Mr Griffith is a junior, a member of the debate team and affiliated with Beta Theta Pi fraternity . He is affiliated with the fraternity .
 The Rer Cross Speakers Bureau is composed of several community leaders, radio personalities and long-time Red Cross volunteers in addition to the students .
 The Bureau is headed by the Reverend William Tatum of the First Presbyterian Church . The bureau is based in Washington, DC .
 The fourth annual Parents' Weekend of Colorado College will be held on April 28, 29 and 30 . Colorado College is Colorado State University .
 Miss Betsy Foote and Miss Joan Jilka, student directors, have done a great deal in coordinating the activities and seeing that everything runs smoothly . Miss Foote: "Miss Foote has done a lot of the work for the students."
 Committee chairmen for this year's Weekend consist of Miss Patricia Adams, parent-faculty dinner, Miss Ann Armstrong and Mr Glen Clark, chuckwagon breakfast, Miss Eleanor Jones, registration, Mr Dave Furgason, publicity, Miss Nadine Chang, open houses, Miss Sylvia St
 Mr William Barton, instructor in economics and business, is this year's faculty advisor . He has given much valuable aid to the students at the University of Cambridge .
 All parents of CC students were sent invitations and RSVP cards by March 25 . The event will be held at the end of April .
 It is hoped that students will encourage their parents to come, and if the decision to come is made after March 25, the committee co-chairmen ask the students to tell them of the change in plans .
 Parents' Weekend promises to be the best thus far for both parents and students . Parents and students are encouraged to get together for the weekend . This year's weekend will be the first time since 2008 .
 The book was written by Paul Szilagyi, a senior chemistry major at Colorado College, and Dr. Dr. Paul Szileagyi .
 Mr Szilagyi spent a year and a half doing research and writing the book . He spent that time doing research for the book and writing a book .
 He is planning to spend next summer at Reed College, Portland, Oregon, with a research grant .
 Kolonits, prior to 1966, was the head of the Hungarian Pharmaceutical Institute . He was also known for his work in the Hungarian pharmaceutical industry .
 IMA Las Vegas Night will be held tomorrow night at Rastall Center . Miss Barbara Wadell, Miss Ann Ruth, Miss Jo Ann Wallis, Miss Ruby Haslam, Miss Bobbie Tolley and Miss Margie Taylor all have a chance to become 'Miss Lady Luck'
 The annual ""Las Vegas Night"" will begin tomorrow night, March 25, at 8:30m. in Rastall Center's dining room .
 The admission price will be $1.50, for which you will receive gambling money, a chance on the door prize and the chance to vote for your Miss Lady Luck candidate . The admission will cost $1 .50, with a chance to win a door prize .
 In the past this evening has been most successful in terms of fun for the many participants . The event has been held in honour of those who have been involved in it .
 Winners at the end of the evening will have a chance to bid for prizes at auction with the money they accumulated during the evening .
 The side attractions of refreshments, the green 1952 Pontiac which is the door prize, and Miss Lady Luck should make this return to the old West an enjoyable affair for everyone .
 The candidates for Miss Lady Luck are Miss Jo Ann Wallis Alpha Phi; Miss Bobbie Tolley, Delta Gamma; Miss Barbara Wadell, Gamma Phi Beta; Miss Ruby Haslam Ind* pendent Women; Miss Margie Taylor, Kappa Alpha Theta, and Miss Ann Ruth
 The play, complete with ghost and executioner, is considered elusive but forceful . The play is said to be the most powerful in the world .
 The Colorado College Religious Affairs and Assemblies Committees are jointly sponsoring the three day visit of Dr. Dr. Rabbi to speak . Dr. Rick Perry will speak at Colorado College .
 The Rabbi will speak at the Shove Chapel Sunday morning service on the theme ""Robots Don't Pray" Sunday, March 20 at 11:00 a.m. Sunday . The Rabbi is scheduled to speak at 11 p.m., March 20 .
 Rabbi Silverman lectures on college campuses under the auspices of the Jewish Chautauqua Society . The society creates better understanding of Jews and Judaism through education .
 After spending the symposium week sandwiching classes in between 'gladitorial combats,' it is apparent that the symposposposy, per se, is a good thing .
 It started students and faculty thinking and talking about an important issue . Students and faculty members from the University of California say it's important to talk about .
 It drew large crowds of people, with a balanced student-faculty ratio, who came to the programs to listen and perhaps participate .
 Most important, it proved that this sort of thing can be done at CC and be well supported . Most important is that it proved it can't be done and is well supported by the community .
 Any criticism of this event must be taken in view of the fact that the program was somewhat of the nature of an experiment . Any criticism should be taken into account that the event was an experiment, he says .
 Many of the symposium's deficiencies were apparent through the audience . The symposium was held in New York City, New York .
 First, the audience, save a few who knew the symposium was coming, was not orientated to the problem . The audience did not seem to be interested in the symposia .
 During the five different sessions, most but not quite all of the audience seemed to ignore the subjects selected by the symposium committee and ask those it pleased . Also, during the five sessions, the audience ignored the subjects chosen by the committee .
 This resulted in harrying the speakers and making the whole schedule of the symposium seem disjointed . The symposium was held in New York City, New York .
 There was no opportunity to follow up any of the ideas raised during the week because of the scheduling of exams . Finally, there were no opportunities for follow-up to the ideas discussed .
 The program itself has been under more local fire than any one part of the symposium . The program has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 Committee had to sacrifice ideas on personnel because of time being short . Fiedler were the best choices, and if time was short, they would be the best .
 Perhaps the best way to get speakers who would work out is to start selecting, interviewing if possible, and deciding early .
 It would seem more fruitful to find some way of informing the campus so as to create the issue chosen for the symposium before the outside speakers arrive . Also, it would seem that it would be more productive to find out what an issue is chosen before the speakers arrive.
 This should help the audience to cooperate with the committee as it plans the themes of each session . The audience will be able to help the committee plan the themes .
 A follow-up program, perhaps based on a synopsis of what was said, could be arranged for beforehand .
 The whole program should be put at a time of year when there is time for students to participate in this follow-up, the author says .
 The symposium is potentially a good thing, contributing more to the campus than any 'Vance Packard' of the past few years . It will be the first time the campus has hosted a symposium in a decade .
 The only way to accomplish even more for next year would be to start organizing now, say organizers . Organizing now would be the best way to get ahead of next year's events .
 Girls Dorm Positions open in girls dorms . Students receive very little recognition for the difficult job that they have .
 At this time of year, when new dorm presidents and counselors must be chosen, it seems necessary to inform the campus of the requirements and responsibilities of these positions . The position is required to be a dorm president .
 This GPA must be maintained throughout the term of office, one year, or the girl is replaced . The girl must maintain the GPA for one year or she will be replaced .
 If her grades fall below this mark at the semester she has until mid-semester to bring them back up . If she falls below the mark, she will be given until midsemesters .
 Usually the sophomores are counselors because they are not as busy as the upperclassmen and therefore have more time to devote to their office . Sophomores will be counselors at the school .
 The dorm presidents also have a 2.2. and are usually taken from the incoming junior class . dorm presidents are usually chosen from incoming freshmen class .
 Girls who are chosen to be counselors and dorm presidents have a very important job . They are counselors, dorm presidents and dorm leaders .
 "It is their duty to help the freshmen women get settled and feel at home here on this campus," says Loyoy .
 Many of the freshman women have never lived in a dormitory and it is a new and often bewildering experience . The dormitory is the largest dormitory dormitory in the U.S.
 In an address by Miss Russell at the conference for new counselors and dorm presidents, Miss Russell said the qualifications and requirements for these positions were stated .
 If a counselor has good study habits and conscientiously does her work, she will encourage her counselees to do likewise . If she has a good study habit, she can be a good counseller .
 A good example does much more toward gaining order out of a chaotic situation than many lectures given at wing meetings . A 'good example' does more to gain order than lectures given to wing meetings.
 By not placing an emphasis on expensive clothing or dating the counselor can relieve pressure in these areas . Don't put too much emphasis on dating or expensive clothing .
 The honor system, an important aspect in dorm life, must be upheld by the counselor . The counselor must also emphasize the honor system in a subtle way in her everyday life .
 The counselor must be able to convey a feeling of individual concern to each member of her wing . Each girl will feel that she has someone to go to when she has a problem . Counselor must convey a . feeling of . individual concern .
 A counselor must be able to give good advice; advice stemming from her own persona] experience . Counseling must be based on her own experience, she says . A counselor can't give advice based on previous experience .
 If her experience does not cover the situation she should direct the girl to someone who can help her, she should tell her to seek help .
 A GIRL MAY be NOMINATED by her resident, her wing, or the dorm council for the position of counselor .
 A girl may apply independently of these means by securing an application blank from one of the dorm presidents . Also a girl can obtain a blank from a dorm president . The application blank can be secured by the dorm president of a girl .
 For beat reiiQlls please submit all material in written form to the boiea in Rastall or CDtler. For beatre-rezzzzlls, please submit your material to the Boiea .
 Please sign all material submitted bo ybe contacted for further information if need be . Please sign your material and contact us if you have any suggestions .
 The Science-Humanism controversy pointed up the problem which lies at the basis of a philosophy of liberal education, namely the reconciliation of an enormous mass of facts and a limited amount of time to understand them . Your cooperation with the above will assure you of your cooperation .
 Leading physicist proposed that an individual should study two subjects, far removed, gaining a deep knowledge in each of these two, as well as an acquaintance with other fields .
 A similar program would be advantageous to some students at CC, humanists as well as scientists . Perhaps a similar program could be beneficial to some of the students .
 One prevalent danger of a somewhat superficial knowledge in fields outside the major subject is the tendency to disbelieve the validity of the study o fthe other fields . One of the dangers of superficial knowledge is that it can be applied to other subjects .
 Some chemists dismiss sociologists as being too broad in their subject matter, while dramatists regard the mathematician as trifling, and so on, ad absurdum . Some socologists are too broad, some chemists are too trifling .
 This disbelief is certainly a closing of a young person's mind to the problemsi of the world, ""a mortal sin, in all the horrible connotations of the word,"" to quote Dr. Dr. John Sutter .
 A deep knowledge of widely diversified fields would help form a bridge for the communication of ideas between fields, for it is only through higher level courses that one finally begins to understand what a subject is really about, and learns to be proficient in its language and concepts .
 This letter is written in regard to the policies of the Nugget staff for this year . The Student Curriculum Committee has a letter to the editor .
 A fee was imposed on the fraternities for the amount of S75 for their pictures that are to appear in the Nugget . The fee is for the pictures that will feature in the newspaper .
 This fee may or . may not be reasonable — no one seems to know for sure . The fee may . or .may not be a reasonable fee . No one knows what the fee is .
 The amount was not so objectionable to the fraternities as was the way of handling the bUling of the costs . The amount of costs was not as objectionable to fratilies as was how they handled it .
 In previous years we have not had to pay for our pictures or were not billed for them . This year we were not charged for the pictures we took in .
 Most people were under the impression that the cost of the yearbook was taken from the amount of tuition charged each student . Most people thought it was taken out of tuition . The yearbook costs are based on student tuition .
 This year all fraternities and sororities had to pay the fee . This year's fee was waived . This is apparently not so for this year's events .
 This year is over and done with but not without a lot of ill feeling on the part of die fraternities toward the Nugget staff . This year's Nugget is the first year of college football season in a row .
 This staff's failure to notify these organizations concerning this fee caused a lot of heated argument on both sides . This staff failed to notify the organizations that this fee was necessary .
 It is hoped the Nugget staff for next year will try to have a better sense of direction . The Nugget will be looking to improve their communicatioris .
 If they were to give a full account of their costs and what they have to receive in order to presidents and executive board consisting of old and new members, they would have to give an account of what they receive to presidents .
 Any girl who would like to be a counselor should secure an application form nov; because the deadline is March 29 . The application form is available for girls who want to be counselors .
 The duties of a counselor are many but it is a rewarding experience . It is an opportunity to get to know the freshman girls . The duties are many .
 Students and faculty attended the symposium . Snow's exposition of fl problem, students and faculty at symposium, )\ l} . ing f or ' ■-■ fight, a resolution, a definition, or a further exposition — or something .
 Tuesday morning at the first scheduled meeting none of these expectations were fulfilled . But Tuesday morning, at least, the expectations were not fulfilled .
 "No fight, no resolution, no definition, no further exposition, because Dr. Dr. John Sutter is dead," he says .
 Koch was alone (his antagonistto-be was stuck in Salt Lake City at the time) Koch was "frightfully,"" as he put it, ""long-winded,"" and relatively incomprehensible . Koch was left alone (and his antagonist to be)
 Tuesday night the audience came armed with the same expectations plus one more . Tuesday night's performance was the first time the audience had a chance to see the show .
 They hoped to clarify the problems involved in the science-humanism controversy . They hoped not only to clarify some of the issues involved, but also clarify the controversy itself .
 English department on campus is in part to be blamed for this failing, student says . English department is to blame for this failure, student writes .
 Speaking as a freshman, I have been bothered by the lack of enthusiasm in creative work . I have a lot of enthusiasm for creative work, I said . I'm not sure how much I will be able to do my creative work in college .
 I have heard complaints from other students who enjoy writing; some of whom were thinking seriously of majoring in English . Some of those students were considering a major in English at the university .
 Students have been discouraged to the point of changing their major because of the lack of inspiration which exists in classrooms where English is professed to be taught . These students are discouraged to change their major .
 When restricted to writing analytical papers on the Greek poets, the creative student cannot, is not, allowed, allowed to develop his creative talents . The creative student is not allowed to write analytical papers about the Greek poet .
 Many freshmen come from schools where they are asked to write original themes every week . Many freshmen have been asked to come up with original themes .
 "They developed their minds, quickened their wits and turned out very good writing," says the author .
 These people expected to come to college and continue in this manner to improve with superior guidance that is supposed to be found in the English departments of colleges .
 A friend at Pomona could not get her writing graded because it was said to be too radical or too original . A friend of mine could not be graded because of her writing . She was a student at Pomilla, California .
 Progress in writing as well as in any other field, comes when someone dares to turn away from the ""accepted" methods and venture on their own. Progress in any field, as well .
 Freshmen and upper class students must continue to develop their talents immediately upon entering college and not be forced to regress two, three or four years . Freshmen as well as the upper class must continue developing their talent immediately, not being forced to .
 Students are having trouble finding printable material, but it is also the fault of the English department . English is not only the students fault that you're having trouble printing material, he says .
 Those dissatisfied did not, hV ever, give up but continued to aj tend symposium meetings, perW to heckle, perhaps to back the h* men off their stated positions . Fiedh . Those dissatisfied didn't give up and continued to attend meetings .
 Many came to get look at that ""wild man"" Koci who, for all his so-called mean Eur fount f^eii prehensibility, was fascinating . Koch was fascinating and to compare Koch with tb deft and witty Feidler .
 The writer refused to make generalizations on whal considered to be a very comply subject . He was refusing to adaj himself to the familiar clichés of the science-humanism dispute .
 The subtleties involved breaking down the continuum knowledge and knowledge-seek require a sensitivity and a pre sion to which no generalizaii< can adequately contribute to . No generalizai< can . adequately contribute .
 Feidler was more generally accepted as a representative of the humanities that Koch of the ences. Koch was a member of the arts and culture .
 Feidler more or less up to the expectations of those attending the symposium . Feidlers was articulate, relatively telegraphic, witty, witty and gracious . The symposium was held in New York .
 He left little concrete by waf of creative suggestions toward defining and solving the problems whatever they may be, in the science-humanism dispute .
 Dr. a,t ; ch er plans to escort a 56-day nittman Grand Circle Tour to Sope, leaving Ne» York City August 15 and returning about October 9, 1961 .
 The tour will begin in London n A visit to nineteen countries, with Sels as far north as Bergen, Norway, east to Vienna, and south to Naples and Barcelona .
 The mode of travel will vary from olane to Ireland, by ship to Norway, via train from Copenhagen to Cologne and some forty clays bv a luxurious touring bus on the j Continent .
 The Colorado College Science-Humanism Symposium came to a close March 16th . Symposium Reinterpretations were reinterpreted for the first time .
 The following day, Wednesday the 15th of March, two more sessions, in which faculty and students as well as students participated, took place . Students and faculty from all over the world took part .
 Society of Friends Sponsors Discussions by Ruth Snodgrass . The topics at this time were C P. ment of chairs to the topic of discussion, spoke of an unusual Snow's essay concerning the conflict .
 Rachel DuBois, sponsored bv the Society of Friends, presented a program last Sunday in the WES Room . She presented the program .
 DuBois, through leading a discussion based on the time sense, on the relation of past, present and future to the life of the individual, showed that viable conversation could be generated in a group of apparently disparate people . The time sense is a form of time sense .
 Although the answers in themselves were interesting, the ferment of ideas that this one question raised, ideas of where you were and what you were feeling when you were 12 .
 DuBois led the conversation into memories of friendships, friendship in general, and the problems to friendship that the present offers, and approaches to the future . He also led the discussion into the problems of friendship in the present and future relationships .
 The contributions of the participants were usually simple, often entertaining, sometimes profound, but always of interest . The contributions were often simple and often entertaining .
 The discussion ended with a period of silence, traditional in Quaker meetings . The discussion ends with a silence .
 DuBois is on a speaking tour sponsored by the Advanced Committee of the Friends' General Conference meeting . He discusses the relation of the conflict to a liberal arts college, the relation to the college .
 Formal meetings ended on the 16th with a discussion of the relation of the science-humanism conflict to the nature of man, but informal discussions have not yet ended .
 These informal discussions are of greater value now than before the symposium . Students are well informed and have firm grounds on which to base their arguments and opinions .
 Col. Owa WAGER, Owa Watch and Jewelry Repairing, repairs a watch and jewelry repair job . Col. WAGer is the owner of the Owa watch and jewelery repair shop .
 Suddenly there is overpopulation; there is the threat of mutation by radiation . The threat of 'A' bomb' is the result of overpopulation and over-production .
 Perhaps the ""serve humanity"" angle seems too high flown and idealistic . Perhaps the idea of serving humanity is too high-flikik and idealism .
 "without regard to ""humanity,"" went his own way to discover one of nature's secrets . Let us say simply he had a natural curiosity which he sought to satisfy .
 If he does not care about ""humanity"" and wants to keep his discovery to hansel., he will gi.e it to keep society from p rse. tiling him and skinning him alive . If he doesn't care about "humanity," he will
 "He has no choice, and yet when his ideas are spread by society and the harm from them finally comes, the world cries out, ""It was you. It was you," he writes .
 Out of the good, but selfish desire to live, the members of society took the scientist's ideas from him, says the author .
 They wished medical discoveries to prolong life; they have caubed overpopulation . Bedover overpopulation is overpopulation. Bedover is over-population of the world's largest population .
 They wished the secret of the 'A' bomb to keep other people from endangering their way of life, but they have endangered all peoples with sudden death, radiation, and perhaps extinction . The 'A-bomb' bomb is the most powerful weapon in the world .
 Joan Manly: We the society are in part responsible for this dilemma . We should employ once again the knowledge of the scientist and with his help take it on ourselves to realistically solve this problem .
 A humanist, then, strives to understand the human situation; to this end he may employ a variety of methods . Humanists may employ various methods to understand a human situation, such as understanding .
 In the movement toward this goal, the humanist employs the vigorous use of rationality, a faculty in which he has much faith . He recognizes its limitations in finite man .
 The humanist is much concerned with interpretations relative to the many problems with which Inworks is concerned . He attempts to make distinctions and sensitive, intelligent choices between good and evil, .
 The humanist cannot restrict himself to experimentation within the confines of a laboratory, he says . As a result of the multiplicity of humanistic problems and methods, the humanist is not limited to experimentation .
 Humanist is likely to he a mcliorist, rather than an optimist or a pessimist . Humanist attempts to ""report"" on man as he sees him .
 I suspect that most humanists believe that the goal of man is the attainment of "", . . continuous, supreme, and unending happiness;"" that realization of this goal muy well be beyond the reach of men is a tragedy humanists acknowledge .
 Humanists Ijelicve Unit says the goal is approachable through the seeking of diversified knowledge . The goal is to achieve the somewhat malleable relationship between oneself and one's world, he says .
 Humanists are of the opinion that were the humanistic traditions to become impotent, the wind might soon whistle through the ruins of civilization . Perhaps most humanists think that if humanism were impotent they might soon be gone .
 The political science department has recommended a series of three pamphlets on the problem of war in nuclear age .
 Not only are the pamphlets on a topic of current interest and controversy, but they are also briefer and more concise than the books on the subject .
 The first of the series, ""Community of Fear"" by Harrison Brown and James Real makes a prediction . The first series of "Fears of Fear" is a prediction of the future of the world .
 The continuation of the war system with its ""explosive technology"" and ""encrusted political and moral concepts"" will result in thermonuclear .catastrophe or fearful retreat at the expense of democratic values .
 The second, ""A World Without War"" by Walter Millis, states that, if the war system were abolished, we could find a pi-acticable international forder for the continued existence of a civilized world .
 The final pamphlet, ""Permanent Peace"" by Walter Millis attempts to examine the questions of power in order to formulate a better theory of national and international power .
 Such a theory might help us make the transition from the world of today to the desired warless world of the future, says the author .
 In this third pamphlet he suggests two solutions to the problem of transition . In this pamphlet he proposes two solutions for the future .
 The relations of the American states might be used as an example of how international power could be organized in the absence of an organized war system . First, the relations of U.S. states should be seen as a model for international power in absence of war .
 These states operate among themselves without war and without a ""world"" government . They operate among each other without war or without a "world" government .
 Second is the realization by the states of the world that the power struggle can be carried on by .means other than military force . The power struggle is carried out by means of other means .
 For example, there are economic pressures, ideological appeals, and subversion . For instance, subversion is a form of subversion in the U.S. and abroad .
 Millis is correct in saying that the Soviet Union really does want disarmament . The Soviet Union may be sincere in its proposals, Millis says .
 The U.S. is just as interested in preventing thermonuclear devastation of the world and redirecting the economic resources committed to the military structure to more productive uses .
 The Soviet Union is also better prepared than the United States for indirect aggression . The United States is better prepared to deal with indirect aggression than the U.S. The U.N. is also prepared for direct aggression .
 The vague concept of Russian ""control"" of the world or of any area needs clarification . He is also correct in saying that the concept of 'control' needs clarification.
 Religious Affairs Committee sponsoring work-camp over Spring Vacation in Gallup, New Mexico . Colorado College students and faculty will attend the work camp in Gallup .
 The group plans to leave on Saturday, April 1st and spend the week at the Gallup Indian Community Center .
 Participants will work with the Indians in a community project . Like most student work-camps, the participants will be involved in a project .
 Students will help the Indians at the community center build a patio and recreation area . Students will also possibly help with a project on the Navajo reservation .
 There will also be time to visit one or two of the other reservations in the area, as well as partake in the social activities .
 The first aspect is to allow the students to gain a better understanding and a first hand knowledge of the problems and livelihood of the Navajos .
 It is felt that by sharing physical work there can be more communication . It was felt by sharing work with each other to improve communication .
 The second thing is that such a project allows a person to actively express his social concerns in a simple yet rewarding way . Such a project can be a way of expressing your social concerns, says author .
 Miss Margaret Neuman, Miss Susan Holmes, Miss Hadley Taylor, Mr Paul Szilagyi, Mr John Stickney, Mr James Fox, Mr Henry English, Miss Kari Dunn, Mr Bruce Grace, Professor and Mrs. Bruce Grace are also going .
 All of this is fine as long as thermonuclear weapons neutralize military power . The existence and devastating power of nuclear weapons neutralizes military power is fine, but that's not true .
 Millis does not have the answers or does not feel that he can attack the problem . Here it would appear that Millis doesn't know what to do to fix the problems .
 The "" Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions has published, besides the above three pamphlets, other studies on the problems of religion in society, of the rise of corporations, and of the rule of law in world affairs .
 The National Planning Association has published some excellent pamphlets on the problems of security through arms control . Then too, the NPP has published an excellent pamphlet on the problem .
 All publications mentioned in this article are available in Cobuin Library . The Cobuin library provides access to all of the publications mentioned .
 Pharmacy] PAINT SUPPLY COMPANY PAINT — GLASS — WALLPAPER 1 13-1 15 E Bijou St. 15 E. Bijo St.
 The morning panel will consist of three discussions, led respectively by Dr. Dr. and Dr. J. E. M. Lister . The panel will be led by Dr Lister, Dr. Maira, and Dr . Lister's sister-in-law, Dr
 Dr. Fred W Neal of the Claremont Graduate School, whose topic is ""The Theory of 'Core Interests' and U.S. Soviet Cold War Rivalry""; and Dr. Dr. Neal . Dr. N. Neal is the author of the book, "The
 A discussion by Dr. Raoul NaroII, Anthropologist at San Fernando State College, on ""A Cross-Cultural Survey of Deterrence Policies""; a discussion by an anthropologist . Dr. Naro II, an Anthropologist, will discuss the topic .
 Dr. Hervert S Dinerstein of the RAND Corporation of Santa Monica, California, will speak on ""Soviet Use of Military Strength in NonWar Situations" The event will conclude with a discussion by Dr. Dinersstein of RAND Corporation . Dr. S . Hervert
 The first in a series of poetry readings sponsored by the Departments of English, Romance Languages and German was held Wednesday, March 22 .
 Five Colorado College students may have the opportunity to go to Africa in order to teach next year . Five CC students apply to Africa to be able to teach in Africa .
 Miss Jean Manly, Miss Joanne Wiegel, Miss Carla Sperling, Miss Niki Ganns, and Mr Gary Gappert, all of whom were officially recommended by the Colorado Cnllegi; 1 selection committee .
 If chosen, these students will become working employees of the overseas systems in which they are placed . The students will be able to apply for jobs in overseas systems .
 Any and all CC students who wish to attend this Symposium are cordially invited to do so . CC students are invited to attend the Symposium .
 Old Letter With New Idea - This letter was fouy in a back issue of the TIGER ; H thought to be of current interest .
 I have decided to ask you, in turn, for help. Remembering our discussions [ your football men who are having troubles in English, I have asked you to help. Football men who have trouble in English are having help. Please help us.
 We feel that Paul Spindles, one f our promising scholars, has a chancv for a Rhodes Scholarship, which would be a great thing for him and for our college . We are looking forward to a Rhodes scholarship for him .
 Paul has had tlv> academic record for this award . We find that the aspirant is also required to have other excellences, and ideally should have a good record i n athletics .
 We propose that you give some special consideration to Paul as s varsity player, putting him in the backfield of the football team . Bui he does try hard, we say .
 In this way, we can show a better college record to the cr>ni.ee deciding on the Rhodes Scholarships. We can show that we have better college records, we hope to do so .
 We realize that Paul will be a problem on the field, but — as you have often said — cooperation between our department and yours is highly desirable . We do expect Paul to try hard, of course, and we do expect him to try . We also expect Paul will try hard .
 His work in English Club and on the debate team will force him to miss many practices . We intend to see that he carries an old football to bounce (or whatever one does with a football) during intervals in work .
 We expect Paul to show good will in his work for you, and though be will not be able to begin football practice till late in the season, be will finish the season with good :i(tendancc)
 TEJON GOOD SUNDAY MORNING MORNING ONLY ALL TYPES ALTERATIONS AND REPAIRS ONLY . "IN BY 9.-00 DIRTY — OUT CLEAN BY 4.-30"" on BOTH LAUNDRY AND DRY CLEANING .
 International RelaClub in cooperation with the Rlorado College ' Public Lectures 11 present Professor John Gange . Club Sponsors Speaker: "Overseas Administration"
 In 1948-49, he served as the Executive Secretary in the Economic Cooperation Administration . He was Secretary of State of State; and in 1948-50, he was Executive Secretary of the ECCA .
 The Rastall Center Board announces subcommittee positions are open for the special activities committee, the recreation committee, and the cultural affairs committee . The committee includes dances, rallies, and fashion shows .
 Applications may be obtained at Rastall Desk and are due by March 27. egy Board . Applications are available at the Rastal Desk and due to be submitted by March 28 .
 One of the greatest deterrents to the fulfillment of an embroyo talent is for the professor of that talent to be lauded for an inept performance . Presenting Culture is a form of self-expression .
 Thoughtless praise for poor workmanship is prone falsely to feed the ego and kill the germ of artistic progress . Whether sculptor, vocalist, instrumentalist, actor or dancer, thoughtless praise should be avoided .
 Another deterrent to talent fulfillment is for the talent to receive inept training . The talent will not be able to receive adequate training, experts say .
 Much can be said for ""learning by doing,"" but LEARNING by doing presupposes couth, cogent and trained guidance . Much can't be said to be "learned by doing"
 Many are the voices never heard in the concert hall as a result of ill-advised training ruining the instrument that nature provided .
 When a Stradivari or Cremona produces agonizing squeaks and wails, it is not the fault of the instrument, but of the untutored fingers that abuse it . The instrument is not a problem, but a problem of the hands that play it .
 Investing in advanced ROTC ... two years of classroom time and outside study . Invest in advanced training . Invest two years in advanced education and two years outside study. Investing is a good investment .
 Graduation Week is the proud moment when the gold bars of a Second Lieutenant are pinned on your Army uniform . The proud moment is when you pin your gold bars on your uniform and feel proud at having made it .
 There'slmmediatehelpinmeetingexpenses a subsistence allowance of $535 for the two-year advanced ROTC course .
 $117 for your six-week summer camp training, plus travel allowance . Uniforms and military textbooks paid for .
 You discharge your military obligation with the traditional rank, pay, privileges and responsibilities of an officer in the United States Army . You discharge with the standard rank and privileges of an official .
 Advanced ROTC will still be paying off when you start your climb up the civilian ladder . And later, when you're starting your career ladder, it will still pay off .
 Success in the executive areas of business and industry comes earlier and more substantially to the man who can lead . Success in an executive area of business comes earlier than it comes in business, industry and business .
 Ask about the ROTC course in Leadership, with its practical axperience in command responsibilities . Ask particularly about the course in leadership .
 In this light, that which is experimental or that which which is pretentiously amateur would seem at best to have dubious claim or culture or the presentation thereof . In the light of this, we should be wary of experimental or pretentially amateur art .
 If the course of our current ""experimental theater"" represents the flaming pudding of culture, there must be a singular revival of faith in the Phoenix . If indeed, indeed, our current . experimentary theater represents the . flaming pudding .
 Some years ago a sprightly coed registered for a Philosophy of Literature course with an English professor of considerable fame . She registered for the course with a professor of English literature .
 The professor spoke, early in the course, of the part played by sheer un-functional intellectual curiosity in plumbing the breadth and depth of literature .
 Bali and other isles id the south seas give us the beauty of batik . Ca Pu i [be s eral ; BATIK takes a walk to Bali .
 The skipper of this shop suggests you steal a march on this new fashion by an immediate stroll in hU batik walk shorts .
 KKK's 36 Spartans 27 Trotters 2£ Crosstown Betas 24 Fighting Five 16 Untouchables Mountaineers Wainpies . MElrose 2-6370 1608 S Nevada 22 .
 Activity in the Rastall Cent« Games Area lately . Details gladly supplied .
 The unusual team names have been added to the color of the league . The league is made up of re sentatives from our food sei department, secretaries, etc., very much a part of the college family .
 Such team names include The Odd-Balls, APC's (infirmary nurses), Sellei , Ras Rookies, Bemis Dreamers (head residents and secretaries)
 Next Monday and Tuesday, April 17 and 18, when CC students vote ASCC president, they will also vote for new members to serve on [{"" student Conduct Committee] Students will also be able to vote for members of the committee .
 The current Student Conduct Committ,ie has nominated twelve sophomores whom it feels qualified for the ■t . The students at large will now elect four of these nominees, two ^° ,'<g and two girls, who will serve their junior and senior years .
 The Student Conduct Committee is ane of about three disciplinary ■ ■ ea on the campus which is controlled by the students rather than 'administration' The committee is a group of three disciplinary committees on campus .
 The school handles non-academic honor violations and gen1 student misconduct . It handles both on and off the campus . The school also deals with gen1 misconduct .
 Students S ' n g before the committee are having the opportunity of being reu by their own peers for their misconduct . The committee will decide whether to re-evaluate students for misconduct .
 Colorado College ASCC Presidential Nominees have two reasons for existence in addition to the obvious JJ,e that of giving students an ffibortunity to appeal to other goents . Colorado Springs, Colorado, April 14, is April 14 .
 'Consistent with the idea of a liberal education is the privilege that a student has to be judged by his peers in matters of honor and conduct,' says Sarah Gruen .
 Perceptive, impartial, responsible people are the strength of our judicial groups . Perceptive and impartial judges are strength of the judicial groups, says the judge .
 Ervin Hinds: 'The Student Conduct Committee should have a powerful influence on the disciplinary policy of Colorado College . feel it important for the accused to face students who have sensed similar ings; students who are understanding but who can make deciwhich are a credit to a high standard
 "It is extremely important for the committee to work with discretion for the protection of the accused," says the committee . The committee is working with discretion .
 David Hite: "Serving judgment upon your peers isn't an easy task—it requires a sense of responsibility and ubjectiveness" Hite says serving judgment on your peers requires a "sense of responsibility"
 I would see my responsibility as being held accountable to all for rational decisions . I would be held accountable for all rational decisions, she says .
 Equally important is a recognition of justice and impartiality . Equally crucial is the recognition of impartiality, impartiality and justice .
 Rachel Jensen was nominated for the Student Conduct Committee . She said she considers it an honor and a privilege to be nominated . The committee plays an important role in maintaining a high standard of conduct .
 Ben Lewis was nominated for a position on the Student Conduct Committee . Ben Lewis: "I consider it an honor to be nominated" Ben Lewis said .
 I belj eve this committee to be one of the most important on campus and am very much interested in its w ork. "I am very proud of the committee," says President Obama .
 A person accused of illegal behavior can have as judges a group of his peers or equals . If elected I would do my best to judge with an open mind and without prejudice," he says .
 The Student Conduct Committee gives any student accused of improper conduct this privilege . The committee also gives students accused of inappropriate conduct the privilege of standing on campus .
 The Student Conduct Committee is an important constituent to Colorado College student government . Henry Rase described the committee as a "important constituent" of the college's student government. The committee is based at Colorado College, Colorado .
 A committee such a committee such as this increases, indeed, the prestige of students on campus, showing their ability of self-government . Students on campus should be proud of their ability to self-govern themselves .
 The Presidential elections will be held April 17 and 18, next Monday and Tuesday .
 Activity cards will not be needed to vote . Palmer Hall -9-11 Rastall Center -11-2 Rastell Center 11-2 .
 If run-off elections are necessary for the presidential election they will be held April 20 and 21 during the same hours . If they are necessary, the elections will take place in the same time as the presidential elections .
 Discussion groups that were cancelled due to snow at the AllCollege Conference will be held during the next two weeks . The discussion groups will continue to be held in the coming weeks .
 Social policy — Alpha Phi House — 2:30, April 16, discussion led by Tim Moe . Discussion led by Mr Tim Moe. Social policy .
 Governing Organizations — Kappa Kappa Gamma House —2:30, April 1(5, discussion led by Mr Chris Griffiths. Governing organizations — Kappa Phi Gamma House .
 Kappa Alpha Theta House will discuss Judicial Organizations at 2:30, April 23 . Discussion led by Mr Stew Richie .
 All candidates for ASCC offices are urged to attend the discussion on Governing Organizations, as well as present and past officers of any school organization . The ASCC will host a discussion on governing organizations .
 All social chairmen of the Greek organizations are requested to be at the discussion on the Social Policy . Anyone who is interested in the formation of a CC social policy is requested to attend .
 All students, faculty, and administration members of Judicial Organizations are urged to attend the discussion on Judicial Organizations . The discussion will be held at the University of Columbia .
 Seniors may now pick up their announcements at the bookstore . Seniors can also pick up the announcements from the bookstore.
 I am assuming that before you will make a decision on whom you will be voting for, you will want to know what each candidate thinks ASCC's position is on this campus is . I'm assuming that . before you decide whether to vote for ASCC, you should know what candidates
 I will explain what I feel is the purpose, function and obligation of ASCC and what the president must do in order that these things are carried out . Therefore in this article I will give an insight into ASCC's purpose and obligation .
 I feel that ASCC is the strongest student body organization on this campus . I feel it is a strong student body body organization . ASCC has been described as the 'strongest student body' on campus .
 "In the past year I have seen the foundations of the committees handling these items laid down," says minister . "I have seen a lot of the things I want to do in the next few years," he says .
 There is much building to be done on each one of the foundations . However, there is much more to do to the foundations of each one .
 In the academic field, I would like to see the possibility of having a three term system, percentage grades, and a foreign language requirement looked into .
 I'm not saying that all these things are suited for this college but let's at least look and see . Let's not say that all the things are not suited for the college, but we should look at it .
 Pre-registration will take place Monday, April 17, through Saturday, May 6 . April 1 7-May 3 is April 1, May 3 . April 17 is April 17 .
 During this time all students are to make appointments with their faculty advisors to obtain semester grades and plan the first semester of the 1961-62 academic year . Students should also make appointments to obtain grades .
 The schedule of courses and pre-registration forms may be obtained by faculty from the Registrar's Office on Friday, April 14 . The schedule will be available for faculty and students .
 Students who pre-register from May 4 until noon, May 6, must pay $3.00 to register . Pre-registration is required for students to register online .
 Those who pre-register after this date will be required to pay a fee of $10.00 . Pre-registration is required for those who want to register .
 I have no unique answer, for this question, but can only say that I am interested in the job . I am confident that I can do a good job. I'm not sure if I'll be in charge of the job, but that I'm interested in it, he says
 I have had two years experience on the Executive Council, once as Sophomore Commissioner and once as Vice-President . I have also had two . years experience as a Sophomore commissioner and once . as vice-president .
 With these two years experience as my guide, I want to see the students' wishes carried out as an incentive, I build that confidence . I hope to see them carried out, as a way to build confidence, I said .
 I would like to be able to set down point by point exactly what I would do as President of your student government . I'm not afraid to say yes, but I'm going to do it, it's a good idea .
 This, unfortunately, is an impossibility, Sineit is impos sible, I can only tell you what I will try to do and what I would like to see happen . This is not the only thing I can do, it is to try and see what I want to
 First — I believe that any student government should 'represent' the students . First, I believe students should be represented by their peers . I also believe that students should have a representative body .
 At present, I do not believe that the ASCC represents you to the extent that it should. I do believe that you should be represented by ASCC. The ASCC should be in charge of the Australian Football Association.
 I would like to see a program set up that insured your desires are fulfilled— a program of true representation . The program is set up to ensure you have the best representation possible, says the author .
 I feel that this apathy is not an inherent quality in students but that it rather reflects a lack of anything to be interested in . It is in this area that the ASCC has failed, and that it is in that area that it has failed .
 The ASCC's failure is the organization's complete neglect of one of the basic responsibilities of a student government . The reason for this failure of the ASCC is that it is a complete neglect, the author says .
 A student government has two major responsibilities, first, to supply student services, and second, to represent the student body in the making of school policy . The student government is tasked with supplying student services and representing student body .
 The ASCC is, for the most part, efficient and effective . The supplying of student services is an example of the ASCC's efficiency .
 The Nugget supplies the TIGER, the Nugget, and weekly assemblies, and many other services .
 The ASCC has in the past concerned itself exclusively with the operation of the bureaucracy . Unfortunately, it has completely neglected its equally important function of expressing a student position in the making of campus policy .
 Colorado College will host the 1961 Conference of the Association of College Unions . The conference will be held at the Broadmoor Hotel April 10 through April 19 . Student opinion is absolutely essential at Colorado College .
 The conference will include tours of Colorado Springs and the Air Force Academy, several banquets and program sessions . Mr Richard Blackburn, Director of Rastall Center, is conference director .
 The final banquet, April 19, will be entertained by the CC Dance Theater and the Colorado Springs Opera Association . The last banquet will be held in Colorado Springs .
 Applications for editor and business man ager of the Kinnikinnik are due Monday, April 17 at 4 m . Application blanks may be picked up at the Rastall Desk . Application blank blank blankes are due to be submitted on April 17 .
 In the ""democracy"" we Americans bold dear there is a weird but healthy paradox. Griffiths Griffiths says . Griffiths: "In the democracy"" we are bold dear. In the democracy" we bold dear .
 Since The Articles of Confederation we have recognized the real need of at least a minimal central power . The need is not so strong that it jeopardizes individual rights, it must not be so strong .
 It seems to us that while unmistakably this form of government has aided the United States in offering the possibility of adaptation to growth and change . But rather in one sense it might now be construed as hindering. It has not been our representative government solely which has ""made"" the
 Until recently what was responsible for the direction and growth of our country was almost more natural than social . It seems that until recently what is responsible for our country's growth was almost natural rather than social. It seems to be that until until recently it was almost social .
 The individual American had available a ""frontier" from which he could gain a real sense of individuality, mentally and physically, where individual ""rights" could flourish . Individual rights could flourish, not at statues, but in the more rewarding manner of striving for and then protecting these rights with
 Since the diminishing of this frontier, wars, social crises, and economic lapses have offered clarion call for the individual to step forward and provide direction to his fellow-men . The individual must step forward to provide direction for the future .
 Recently here is an arbitrary term, meaning that many tendencies have grown to a proportion to show us a trend . Recently is a term used to show a trend, but here is a reflection of that trend .
 There has grown up a well-oiled bureaucracy, a horde of relatively ineffectual, uninterested nine-to-fivers . Possibly because of the natural fear of our citizens to entrust complete power to an individual, there has grown-up a well oiled bureaucracy .
 This ""government"" has, despite its cumbersome nature, rather well supplied the populace with its needed governmental services . This "government" has provided the people with needed services .
 In our first editorial we said that we felt the student body of Colorado College lacked a definite direction corresponding to that of its administration and faculty . Colorado College is a college with a student body that needs direction, not direction .
 It seems ASCC is the organ through which such direction might come, IF ASCC itself has leadership . ASCC seems to be the organ for such direction .
 We think that from our experiences in attending the present ASCC executive meetings, from the speeches given in Perkins on Tuesday and the letter on page one, Mr Chris Griffiths has the qualities that will provide this leadership, we say . We think from our . experiences in . attending the .
 For this reason the TIGER endorses Mr Griffiths for the position of student body president . Griffiths is the current president of the University of Columbia University's students .
 "We are perfectly cognizant of the fact that this endorsement might well be no favor to Mr Griffiths," says Griffiths . We are also aware that we are not in a favor to Griffiths.
 "It seems we have managed to gain quite a group of opponents in one-half a semester," she says .
 All we ask is for you to consider carefully what we have said above and try to judge objectively . All that we ask for is for us to be honest about our views .
 TIGER DEADLINES needing public in Raetall or Cutler, ntacted for fnrt indicated . TIGer DEADLINEES need to be made public .
 We, the undersigned members of ASCC Executive Council, are placing our vote in the ASCC Presidential election for Chris Griffiths . The undersigned are placing their vote for Griffiths in the presidential election .
 "Chris is not the type of person who will ignore the opinion of others," he says . Chris is a strong believer in his ideas, but he says he will not ignore others' opinions .
 AWS, the Choir, the Enthusiasm Committee, the Foreign Student Committee, International Relations Club, the Publications, the Religious Affairs and Assembly Committees . The Women's Athletic Association, KRCC and the Debate Team are also involved .
 Chris wants to use the power which the Executive Council has been given . Chris would like to see the interest of these organizations ex4) Chris would also want to see an increase in interest in these organizations .
 He plans to do this by presenting campus issues and problems to the Council for discussion . The Council can take and present a stand to the members of the student body .
 In other words, he wants the Council to become an active pressure group on campus . He wants the council to be an effective pressure group .
 Chris is a man of action, and a person who understands the problems that exist, but who wants to and will do something about them . Chris is not only can understand the problems, but also wants to help them, he says .
 After having observed ASCC meetings for three and a half years in one capacity or another, I feel compelled to make a few comments pertinent to the pending ASCC elections .
 The constitution was written five years ago by Carl Pitts, and has been revised in the interim by such people as Keith Argow, Sally Jameson, and now Jack Real .
 It now has become a quite efficient and quite well-ordered organization, performing many behind-the-scenes services for the students .
 ASCC in the future must create and initiate new activities to serve student interests . ASCC must create new activities that serve the student interests. ASCC will be in the forefront of its efforts to create and serve students .
 ASCC has the potential to be the most powerful group on campus, second only to the Board of Trustees . ASCC's constitution, both implicitly and explicitly, gives ASCC the power to be a powerful group .
 ASCC exists potentially as an effective student tool with which the student body could manipulate and influence Administration policy . ASCC is a tool that could be used by students to influence the Administration .
 ASCC has never availed itself of the opportunity it possesses to present the Administration with student opinions and desires . ASCC should have been given the opportunity to present student opinions to the Administration .
 The deferred rush mess and the girls dormitory situation are two examples of the situation in the dormitory . Witness the deferred rush situation as two examples .
 ASCC has never asked for and never ventured to volunteer student opinion and ideas . In these and other issues, ASCC does not ask for student opinions or opinions . ASCC is proud to support students in the community .
 Unless ASCC becomes an effective policy making and pressure group and exercises its potential 'student morale,' it will continue its decline into oblivion . ASCC's activities and services will be supplemented by a series of lesser organizations .
 The students' opportunity to have a ""union" working for them will be lost . The students will not be able to have the ""union' working for them," says the author of the book .
 ASCC must now assert the responsibility and power that it has been endowed with, and which it has never tried to use . If the students are interested in having their interests protected and furthered, ASCC should now assert its power . ASCC has never been able to use this power
 The effectiveness of ASCC as a student pressure group rests with the office of the president . ASCC's effectiveness of the organization rests with its president .
 Only he can use to full advantage the forces that ASCC has at its disposal . Only he must use the forces he has at his disposal .
 If the students with the ASCC wish to protect their interests and voice their opinions, they must elect an ASCC president that can and WILL use the full power of his office in such a role .
 All three candidates have served on ASCC this past year and have had a chance to display their ability . The candidates will be representing the ASCC in 2015 .
 His ability has been ably displayed and he also seems to have the personal qualities necessary for the job . His ability was ably shown and he has personal qualities needed to succeed .
 "He will be able to take the long range view and the all school perspective necessary for service as president and spokesman for all the students," he says .
 Griffiths is especially qualified to make ASCC and the office of the president more than just a rubber stamp . All three candidates could serve ably as ASCC president as the job exists now .
 To an editor of any paper this should appear as a high form of flattery, it should appear to be as high as flattery . To be honest, this is a form of praise for the editor of a paper .
 A four page answer to a small town scandal sheet has been published . However, I recommend that you bend ear a bit more and listen to the utterances against your four page answers .
 You have, for the past few issues stressed the topic of morality, its ayes and nays on the college campus . You have also stressed the issue of morality .
 "I fear every young virgin at CC would have been rid of purity at one of our Bacchanalian orgies in the past few weeks," says CC student .
 Every facility in the men's room of Loomis hall thanks you night after night at closing hours . "Loomis Hall's men room thanks you for the way you go," says author .
 An astounding facts and articles written in the periodicals for the lay-mind . I'm sure not, as that's where you have chosen to obtain your astounding facts along with a few astounding articles .
 Maybe from findings he'll re-invent penicillin as well as have you rewritten a few widely known facts . Maybe from his findings he will re-Invent Penicillin .
 Between your efforts, high school hygiene classes and the fire and brimstone of such men as Elmer Gantry we might all be saved . Between your literary efforts and your high-school hygiene classes, we might be saved.
 Thank you, TIGER, you pillar of the medical world, you second hand Kinsey report, thank you .
 Former full-time, present half-time member of the Department of English at Colorado College responds to Jane Hult's letter .
 Miss Hult is, I am afraid, making a confusion, which I thought had died out among young people. She is making a confused point, I thought she was making a mistake, I said .
 The study of literature should not be mixed up with high-school ""creative writing"" courses in which, each week, students turn in a ""theme"" on my pet dog or on what I did last vacation .
 A college student is supposed to have left this kind of juvenile exercise behind him, and most of our students surely have . A college college student should have left it behind him and most surely have.
 A college English department provides an opportunity to study literature; to write about it and to talk it over with teachers and fellow-students . English literature is a basis for thinking — and writing — for students .
 To suppose that the average teen-age freshman, fresh from Miss Schmaltz's Finishing School, has much to say that is original, is hoping for too much . "To suppose that . the average . teen-aged freshman ... is hoping that that is too much,
 "Most beginning students in colleges have a great deal to say that is rather stale," says author . "In order to realize that it is stale, they must read and write about works of the past," she says .
 Students should have to re-^ Milton and Keats, making same assumptions and the 5, mistakes, says Mis s j> . Tt would ghastly to wish — as well as each generatim; students should . have to . re-* Keats .
 All of us in the English partment are willing and eager to have students turn creative work to us. We are eager to see creative work done by students .
 Heaven kr> we receive plenty of it, and are happy to let students ]rj. what we think, for whatever kind of opinion is worth .
 Let student writer also turn in his t terial to the Kinnikinnik; and him send it to Poetry Maga/int if he prefers, to Playboy .
 Any time we squeeze in between the skiing bridge in attempting to rec that heritage — and the heiita of Latin literature, of the Midi Ages, the Renaissance, and modern period — is, I think, proper function of a departm which is supposed to deal works of literature
 I've had some blueboo in what appeared to be a stre of-consciousness style, but were never very successful . I've never had a very successful career, but have had some very successful ones .
 Students have asked .me to fa at plays, poetry, short stori parodies, and vignettes . In the last y students have asked me to write a play .
 The TIGER is a spokesman for the University of Columbia University . He says the campus life can obviously be improved .
 Bill Bentley: "The Student Conduct CommitB is a vital part of the college community. Bill Bentley is a member of the College of Technology .
 The role of this committee can greatly affect the lives f every one of us . The committee's role is important to the lives of all of us, says Dr. Andrew Keen .
 It is self evident that this committee be composed of well-informed, unbiased people . It therefore see ms self-identicality as self- evident that it is self-defensible .
 I feel the committee could be improved by increased communication with the student body . I feel this committee could benefit from increased communication between students and their peers .
 With increased reports from the committee I feel the student body would gain more confidence in this organization and thereby strengthen its function . I feel increased reports would increase confidence in the committee .
 I feel that the policies of the committee should be known and understood by all students, I feel . Therefore, I . feel that . all students should be aware of all students' policies, I. feel .
 NEW RASTALL CENTER BOARD members standing from left to right; Mr Clay Sorrick, Mr David Sher, Mr Ben Lewis, Mr Skip Meece .
 Miss Julianne Rolfe, Mr Ervin Hinds, Miss Leilani Markinsen and Miss Leiilani . Sitting from left to right, Miss Rolfes and Mr Hinds sat with Miss Markinsens .
 Newly Organized Rastall Board Provides New Center Services . New board positions were recently approved and projects are already being planned .
 The usiness manager will be responsible for the budget, ticket sales, special promotion and house development .
 Clay Sorrick, the new executive secretary, is in charge of correspondence, display cases, records and files . Mr Sorrick is also responsible for display cases and records .
 Coffee hours, music and exhibits will be under the management of Miss Julia Rolfe . Equipment is bePerkins Hall, coffee hours and music are expected to be provided .
 Visitor service, decorations and publications will be handled by Miss Leilani Markinsen . Visitor services, decorations, publications and publications are also handled . Miss Markinsensen will be responsible for visitor service .
 A fashion show to be held in Taylor dining hall on April 21 is being organized by the new special activities chairman, Mr Charles Meece .
 All students are urged to make use of the crafts because it is offered as a stimulant for personal creativity . The crafts are offered as an opportunity to stimulate creativity .
 The newly organized outings program hopes to coordinate the activities of the skiers, cyclers, photographers, mountain climbers, pistolers, and mountain climbers . Oskacita, the girls riding club, also hopes to organize the activities .
 Many advantages will grow out of this program such as an outing calendar and brochures put out by each group in the fall .
 Programs of special interest to the sportsman will be offered by the outin-gs program . Movies and lectures will also be available for the sportsmen .
 The cyclers are active this spring in organizing a rally to the Garden of the Gods . Cyclists are also planning to organize a rally in the Garden .
 Mr Blackburn and Mr Don Oden are non-voting members of the board . Mr Ormes and Mr Tyree are voting faculty members . Completing the board are Mr Blackburn, Mr Oden and Mr Blackburn .
 KRCC-FM Colorado College will present a live production of the radio show ""On the Scene,"" tonight, April 14, from R:30 to 10:00m. Live tonight .
 Staged live from Perkins Hall auditorium, the production will he carried over KRCC's remote system and channeled throughout Colorado Springs on FM dial 01.3 .
 Miss Mary Elizabeth Bradley, classical pianist, plays two short preludes by Debussy and Scrinbine . Miss Bradley will be seen and heard at the event .
 Polk singer Pete Cheney along with the Kappa Sigma Barber Shop Quartet will help carry the audience through a distinct variety of music . Polk singer will be joined by Kappa Sigma Barbershop Quartet to sing .
 Miss Joan Rernenu will sing and play the piano tn an original composition making its debut on the show . Miss Joan will sing, play, play and play an original song .
 The Folk Singers Inc. and Mr Henry English and Mr Dick Brigham will give n new dimension to folk songs and drum suites . They will sing folk songs, drum suites, and will sing at home .
 Mr Wally Caldwell, the director of the show, will serve as Master of Ceremonies and entertain with contemporary poetry . Wally Caldwell will be the Master of the Ceremony .
 This variety of talent will be integrated with spot announcements, station breaks and musical hacking by the Scene combo . The Scene combo will be joined by a host of local DJs and DJs .
 Perkins Hall will be the scene of a remote broadcasting system complete with four channel microphone systems, spot announcers for campus activities, public service, station breaks and time signals . Perkins Hall is set to be the site of the system .
 The entire audience will be a distinct part of the show for the first time . The response to acts will lie heard over the air over the show .
 The admission charge is 50c which will go towards the purchase of a new tape recorder for the studio in Rastall . The admission will be 50c .
 All students are urged to see this production not only for flue student talent, but to understand the production of a live radio show . All students should see the production for themselves .
 KRCC guest announcers will include Mr Harry Diaek, Miss Lawrie Perry and Mr John Bluck . KRCC Guest announcers include Mr Diaek and Miss Perry .
 Station breaks and spot announcements will be controlled by Mr Evan Evans and Mr Eddie Boychuck .
 Mr Mike Cook, chief engineer has set up all the broadcasting equipment and recorders . Chief engineer Mike Cook set up the equipment for the broadcast .
 Chief Woodson Tyree is the faculty director of KRCC-FM and the station is managed by students . The station has a history of controversy .
 Petition lor class commissionarc due April 17 at 4:00 0.0 0., at Hastall Desk . Petition for commissionarc is due to be filed at 4 p.m. April 17, at Hastalls Desk .
 Campus problems should not be discussed once a year at an All School Conference, they should be the constant concern of the ASCC and should be constantly discussed . Campus issues should be a constant concern for the conference, and not just once in a year .
 For this reason, I propose that emphasis be placed on the ASCC's responsibility to represent the student body in the making of school policy . The ASCC is responsible for representing students in school policy making decisions .
 I feel that this new emphasis can be accomplished in a three step process . I feel it can be achieved in three steps, including a new emphasis .
 First, to investigate problem areas such as curriculum, intra-mural athletics, and the moral code of the college . Second, to look at curriculum, inter-campus athletics and morals .
 Third, to make definite statements to the administration of what we feel to be problems and of the best solutions for these problems . In so doing represent the student body in the forming of school policy .
 The ASCC has failed to give the student body anything to be interested in . CC has an apathetic student body due to the lack of interest in the ASCC .
 The ASCC has not given the student body anything to be interested in is that it has concerned itself exclusively with the totally uninteresting administrative details of supplying student services . It has neglected the more interesting and important function of representing student body in the forming school policy .
 I have proposed not a deemphasis of the services function but rather an added emphasis on the policy function . feel that this emphasis is necessary before CC can ever have an effective student government . feel this is necessary to have a successful student government.
 I have found that the Executive Council does less and less as the year progresses . The Executive Council is less powerful and less powerful than the White House .
 "The members of that organization are elected for all year, not just part of it," she says . "I believe that they should act for the whole year," she adds .
 By taking an active part in all campus issues all year long, the Council will have to act all year . The Council will also have to take an active role in all university issues .
 The Council must keep in mind that all its actions should be in the best interests of the student body as a whole . In addition to these three broad objectives I can only say that the Council must also keep an eye out of the students' interests .
 In summary, I would like to see better representation, better communication and continual action, says the mayor . "In summary, let me repeat, let's see better represented, better representation," he says .
 "With your help and backing, I truly believe that all these objectives can be effectively reached. With your help, we can't achieve our objectives without the help of the U.S. government. We are committed to achieving the highest level of success in the world. We need to
 Last, I entreat you to vote on Monday and Tuesday, and in the elections to follow, follow and most important, back those you elect .
 I was quite disappointed to learn that it has been suggested that the athletic committee be dropped. feel that there are a great many things such a committee could do. I was disappointed to hear that there were suggestions that the committee should be dropped .
 It could help develop more student interest in intercollegiate athletics . It could strengthen the intramural program and help develop interest in intramurals .
 ASCC could and should look into some of the things that ASCC should and should do . ASCC needs to look into the future of ASCC's future plans .
 I think that the president has three main roles that he should be responsible for, including the role of the U.S. President Barack Obama . The president is responsible for the country's national security, according to Obama .
 First he must run all of his meetings in such a manner that they become effective sessions, he says . He must also run meetings that are effective sessions. He says .
 He must be alert for ideas to be dealt with in committees so that they do not waste the council's time . He must also be alert to ideas that waste time in committees .
 The Colorado College Choir under the direction of Mr Donald Jenkins, will present its annual spring concert on April 16 .
 The program will feature sacred music of the Easter season and will be given at 4m. in Shove Chapel . The program is expected to be given on Easter Sunday .
 The 59 voice choir has just returned from a 4,000 mile tour of California, Arizona, Nevada, Utah and Colorado . The choir sang eleven concerts in that many days .
 Their performance was enthusiastically received everywhere . Most places invited to return next year .
 Sunday's spring program will open with works by Allessandro Scarlatti and Palestrina . Sunday's program will include works by Palestrina and Scaratti . Sunday will be the opening day of the program .
 Three Easter carols and two Negro spirituals will conclude the concert . The Easter concert will be held on Sunday at 8 p.m. EST .
 This performance will represent the April event of the college's monthly concert series . The performance will be open to the public free . improving their committees .
 The president is an ex-officio member of many committees and must keep in constant connection with them to leam the pros and cons of issues so that he can formulate an opinion . Thirdly one of the president's powers is that he is .
 In closing I would like to remind you that your student government is only as good as the people you elect . In closing, please remind us that you can't expect your government to be perfect .
 It is for this reason I hope you give a great deal of consideration to your vote . Vote for the U.S. House of Representatives in New Hampshire will be held on November 8 .
 Remember it is not words and wishes which will put him in office but votes . Remember it will not be words but votes. Remember it's not words or wishes that will help put him into office .
 The ""TOURNAMENT OF CYCLES"" a 4 kilometer or a two and a half mile bicycle race is to be run in the Garden of the Gods on Saturday, April 22nd at 2m. The race should hold all the same thrills and excitement that
 Both men and women may enter this event which will make a single loop through the beautiful Gardens area . The spectators will be able to catch glimpses of the riders as they make the loop .
 A map of the race course a general information is available the Rastall Center Desk . A general information about the race can be found at the center .
 This means it meets rigid standards of excellence in cut, carat weight, color and clarity . This is the first time a diamond has been struck by a diamond carat .
 Artcarved's written guarantee explains how the exclusive Permanent Value Plan lets you apply the full current retail price toward the purchase of a larger . The plan is available at any ArtCarved jeweler throughout the country .
 Artcarved is proud of its award-winning styling, like the Evening Star shown here . You will be proud, too, of Artcarving's award winning styling .
 Look for the name inside the ring, and ask for your written Artcarved guarantee .
 L pel pulpit will be occupied by . ^ /oungr men embarking on caBrs as college .ministers .
 After Leiving a Masters Degree he is hoping to return to a campus as a full-time Uister to students .
 The following Sunday Mr Kener h W Burton, minister of the Manor Community Church, Chicago Illinois, will be in the pulpit .
 Next fall, he'll enter next fall into ull-time student religious work . He'll be a major student in religious studies .
 We ore happy to have both of he gentlemen visit for two to hree days each and to preach at he Sunday morning service . Both men will be able to preach for two days each .
 The ""Senior Playday"" will begin at 2m. on Sunday, April 16, when the senior class will paint the home bleachers at Washburn Field . Seniors to Paint Weather Permitting the bleachers .
 This project was originally scheduled in the fall, but had to be canceled because of weather conditions . This project had been originally scheduled for the fall .
 All members of the Faculty and friends of the college are urged to lend their paint brushes for the afternoon . The event will be held at the College of Art and Design in London .
 They may be turned in to Mr Richard Kendrick's office or the Athletic Department .
 The painting of the bleachers will be canceled if the weather is not good enough for the rest of this week .
 Tickets may be purchased for $2.25 at 519"" N Tejon, ME 4-6820, or through Mrs. Mrs. Tejon . Tickets may also be purchased at the same location .
 Josephine Estill, who sang Dido in the CC Opera Workshop production of ""Dido and Aneas,"" will sing Turridu . Estill will sing Dido for the company .
 Regimental officers from Colorado Unniversity inspected P/R Co. Last night the Regimental Officers from Colorado University inspected the facility in Colorado .
 D-9 reviewed all the members of the company, of all the company's records, and a review of the marching . This included a close personal inspection of all of the members, of . all the . company records .
 They will leave the College on Saturday noon and return about Sunday noon . They will return to the College about Sunday afternoon .
 MS II Cadets will conduct at least one night patrol against the encamped defensive unit . MS I Cndets conduct the operations of Squad Tactics . Saturday afternoon, and Sunday morning, the MS I Cadets conduct Squad Tactics operations .
 D-9 will conduct the annual Regimental Assembly for all the P/R Companies in the 9th Regiment at Fort Carson . The 9th regiment is based in Fort Carson, California .
 On Saturday night the Regiment will have a dinner and dance at the Officer's Club . The BEST COMPANY AWARD will be presented to the Company that has done the moat worth-while things and had the beat Inspection Ratings .
 TIGER: Letters to the Editors are one article that could qualify either way . TEJON GOOD SUNDAY MORNING ONLY • Letters to The Editor is the best way to express your opinion .
 The TIGER's treatment of athletics constitutes the hare minimum necessary to relate the activities which take place . The Tiger's treatment of the athletics is the minimum required to relate to the activities .
 No effort is made to arouse any interest in forthcoming events and very little ink is wasted in praising or applauding any victorious athletic organizations . No effort was made to raise interest in any events .
 "I am indeed sorry that this is the sort of campus where little or no interest exists in athletics outside of those individuals directly concerned," says coach . "I'm sorry," he says .
 This subject has been rehashed dozens of times and no true conclusions have . been reached . No true conclusion has been reached. This subject of rehashing dozens of . times . No conclusions have been reached, and no conclusion should be reached .
 "I am forced to admit that I have found the literary equivalent of Galileo's Physical Laws of Motion," says author .
 I have found this weekly publication utterly devoid of anything appealing to the average student . It is a weekly publication that is devoid of any appealing to students .
 1 find your articles on morals a bit of a drag . Deing well versed on morals and having listened to several VD discussions 1 find it hard to read .
 Your ridiculous references to athletics in last weeks edition particularly upset me. Your ridiculous reference to athletics was particularly upsetting me. I'm not happy with your ridiculous references .
 To have all these pages devoted to track and baseball instead of baseball is without n doubt squandering valuable newspaper space which could have been better afforded .
 In my opinion such columns as ""Three Little Words"" — ""Intramurals" could better be included on posters in the fO'U Dei Micks . In his opinion, such columns should be included in posters .
 Shirbot MEIrwo 5-2740 PAINT SUPPLY COMPANY PAINT — GLASS — WALLPAPER I 13-1 15 E Bijou St. Shirbot MeIrwo is located in Shirbot, France .
 Since 1899 me; Q UICK UALITY ERVICE ""IN BY 9:00 DIRTY -OUT CLEAN BY 4:30"" on BOTH LAUNDRY AND DRY CLEANINGING 10% CASH AND CARRY 1171/t Cocho
 Ed Loosli came within Y"" of the high jump record with a leap of Bruce Boyd launches Sputnik VIII . The Golden Dragon is located on 140° S EIGHTH STREET .
 Cholakian or ""Little Slovak"" is from Valley College in California and Loosli is a freshman from South Pasadena, Calif. Cholaksi is a junior at Valley College . Loaksi was born in the Czech Republic .
 Rice is a freshman from Grand Forks, North Dakota, and was state champion in this event last year . Rice was a freshman in this year's state championship event .
 Jeff Clark, another freshman, is running the mile for the Tigers . He should be pushing a respectable 4:40 by season's end .
 Returning distance man and letterman Don Kintz is also looking for his all time best in the two mile with something under 10:00. He is looking to his all-time best in his two mile .
 The sprints are run by Broyles, a returning lettermari LeRoyal King, a sophomore from Bakersfield, California .
 Ed Loosli <„ hurdles hurdles running a 15. in the and 26:5 in the lows. We also find Ed Looosli running a . 15.5 in a 15 . in the low .
 The heij these hurdles is 3"" above those dies he ran in high school and this is adjusted should mean a record in Ed's pocket . Ed ran high school hurdles 3" above those heij heijs he runs high school . Ed's high school record is in his pocket
 Barker, a freshman from B.irrii 111., will be pushing Ed all tl lt this season . Barker is expected to be a freshman at the University of North Carolina .
 Farrel Thompson and Ed Loosli high pumping for the Tig doing quite well . Farrel Hot in d
 Letterman Jim I returns this year after placing ond in the conference last year, vaulted 12' in the meet F ; Thompson, a transfer from a college in Idaho, will also be ing this year . Thompson is also a transfer .
 The meet was a triangular between CC and the Inch Adams State and the Mounl from Western State . Thompson, guard the basketball team this year, 11' 6"" the first meet of the season .
 The Tigers beat the Indians with 79 in the final . The Indians with 49 and We<* trailed with 15 in the game .
 The Rocky Mountain Rel; follow on the 22nd of April at Colorado School of Mines oval . The event will take place at Colorado's School of Mining oval .
 The Colorado College will meet CC and May squad will travel to Mines . CC and Mines will meet at the same time on 29th .
 Adams State College of Ah will host this year's edition o Rocky Mountain Conference C pionships on May 12 and 13 . Adams State will host the event .
 These jven Mr Ervin Hinds, Mr Steve Lamb, Miss Jean Daniels nd Miss Leigh Rainey. These jens are Mr Hinds and Mr Lamb, Mr Lamb .
 Mr Ervin 3inds, 3(19) and Mr Steve Lamb, 277; Ben Lewis, 275; Mr Bill Bent174; Mr Hank Rase, 156; Mr . Hank . Rase also scored 156 . Mr Hite, 129.
 Miss Jean Daniels, Miss Leigh Rainey, Miss Mar[ia Moses, Miss Rae-ael Jenen, Miss Lynne Vincent, and Miss Sarah Gruen, are the most successful Misses in the world .
 Members of the SCC will not be active members of the fomnuttee until next year . The »e\v members of SCC rill not be members of an SCC .
 More than two thirds of the Colorado College student body turned out to try to see their candidate for the Presidency of ASCC into office .
 Chris Griffiths elected to office without a run-off election . Mr Griffiths was thought to be a close race between three candidates .
 A run-off election would have been held on Thursday and Friday of this week if one candidate had not received a majority if the ballots of the students who voted were not enough votes . If one candidate did not receive a majority, the school would have had to hold a second run-
 This election is unique in that there was such a great deal of participation by the students, students . Students showed interest in the campaign and, what is more apparent, the large number of students came to the polls .
 April 21, 1961 Colorado College Executive Council Candidates Torn left to right are secretary candidates Julie Bohlke and Kathie g Norberg and Hank Rase, and standing are treasurer candidates Bruce, vice-president candidates Jim Dunlop and Bill Stafford .
 The office of Secretary of ASCC olves the responsibilities basically Ntlogous to those of the secretary of ;impus organization . Julie Bohlke .
 It is the jeretary's job to keep an accurate ord of the minutes of ASCC and take care of the despondence of the Executive Council .
 "To me, the job in 1961-62 would, of course, begin with an effective freshman orientation program," says Bob Greene .
 This program should be a co-ordinated effort of the s t u d e d e n t s of CC, their organizations, and the administration . CC should be an effort to co-ordinate the program, CC says .
 As orientation proceeds the vice president's most important job, although not so obvious, should be Hank Rase . The most important function of the Vice-President is in the field of communications, he says .
 For student government to be effective there must be informative communication between the student body, the committee members of ASCC, the administration, the faculty, and the faculty . ASCC is the largest university university in the country .
 President Griffiths voted. If this is done properly, a smoothness of operation can be obtained that will Two-Thirds of Student Body Vote .
 This is only half as many as this year's high total of twothirds of the students and probably good three-fourths of the a c t i v v v e, full-time students on campus . This is probably good for a good part of a good portion of
 Activity cards did not have to be presented in order to vote . Voters only had to give their names, which were then marked off on a master list . One factor in this extra large turn-out was undoubtedly that activity cards not having to be shown .
 Colorado College Debate Club took all the honors at the Colorado Women's College Annual Forensic Tournament held in Denver, April 8 . This new pro debate club Captures Cups .
 The CC team won the Sweepstakes Trophy for the best overall showing by an entering school . CC team also won first place in debate, oral interpretation of poetry, debate and poetry .
 Colorado College's second entry of Mr Max Power and Mr Dave Furgason were undefeated at the meet but were edged out in total points . Colorado College won the meet by two points .
 Jim Uunlop is a candidate for the ASCC treasurer . He has been asked to state a few brief reasons as to why he chose to run for the post . Jim Ulop was asked to explain his reasons for running for the position .
 My main reason for running is that I have a sincere interest in the ASCC as the representative and functioning organ of the student body . My main goal is to be the representative of student body, not just the students, but to represent them .
 Many CC students are quick to criticize the Executive Council of ASCC and the various committees and organizations on campus . ASCC is the largest university university in North America .
 The treasurer of ASCC does not take on the general aspects of a common club treasurer . Everyone will agree Bill Stafford should be the treasurer of a club .
 This position is not just an exercise in accounting, for the school handles the ASCC accounts . It's not just accounting, but it's a role in handling ASCC finances .
 "I feel it is one of the most important positions on the Executive Board," says the former secretary of state .
 He is responsible for directing the ASCC funds to organizations in such a way that this money will be of benefit to the greatest number of students . The ASCC is the largest college organization in the country .
 Sweepstakes Trophy is awarded to the school accumulating the greatest number of points in the combined events . The school accumulated the most points in both combined events and the most in all combined events in the world .
 The CC Debate Team will close out the season with a public formal debate against the Air Force Academy here and the National Forensic Tournaments in Louisville, Kentucky .
 During the season Mr Chris Griffiths and Mr Jack Cashman met the AFA twice and were defeated once . Mr Griffiths was defeated once during the season .
 The formal debate will consist of one round with the team meeting a team from the Academy . The debate will take place at the end of each round .
 The debate will be held April 25, in Perkins Hall, and the public is encouraged to attend . The public is invited to attend the debate .
 The last event of this year will enter three teams consisting of Mr Griffiths and Mr Cashman, Miss Nancy Dehlin and Mr Dave Furgason, and Max Power and Mr Charles Puckett .
 Johnson, the team's coach, will accompany the six participants on the trip . Johnson, who is also the coach of the team, will travel with the team .
 Spring Style Show featuring bridal, trouseau, and the newest spring fashions from the Gray Rose dress shop of Colorado Springs will be presented by the Special Events Committee of Rastall Center today .
 Eight CC girls, Misses Nancy Heitz, Heather Kirk, Nancy Schorling, Mary Lou Spry, Shelia Watsou and Margie Taylor will act as models for the show . Four boys will be escorted by four boys who act as ushers .
 The door prize, a two piece dress with matching accessories, is now being displayed in the first of Rastall Center's showcases . The dress will be displayed at the first showcase of the centre .
 Show is one of the first events of the Special Events Committee . There is no charge for the show and refreshments will be served .
 Paul Bechtol is chairman of the Colorado Springs Chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union . He is professor of Business Administration at University of Colorado Springs .
 Other members of the local board include Mr Donald King, head of C.U.'s local extension center, vice-chairman and secretary-treasurer .
 The ACLU was organized forty years ago as an agency for the defense of the central constitutional safeguards of citizen's rights . The ACLU is now an advocacy group for civil liberties in America .
 The Union works in courts, legislative bodies, executive agencies, and the wide field of public opinion in its fight to maintain freedom of inquiry and communication, due process, equal protection of the laws .
 It is a private organization of people who wish to join actively in the continual struggle for each man's right to be free, within the democratic framework of government .
 PlOBM sik"" n"" material aubni be contacted (or (urlher informalion) if need be) PlOBm sik "" n "" material aubsni be contact (or be contacted)
 Chris Griffiths has won what we feel to be an unusual election at Colorado College . Your cooperation with the above will ossur noon on Monro to the TIGER will be returned .
 In an unpresidented turnout of about three-quarters of the electorate who might have a vital interest in CC's politics. In an . unpresidential turnout, about three . quarters of the . electorate might have an interest in the . election .
 First, our new president has a real majority of students behind him and his avowed platform . First, we need to focus on his platform, he says . We need to make sure we don't have to wait for him to be elected .
 Most of these students have made a thoughtful choice and will want to be duly represented in the innovations Mr Griffiths built his platform . Second, most of them are made by students who want to represent them, he says .
 New president will have to exert some powerful change to gain his ends . Student body will also have to make sure its opinions and 'ideas are heard .
 We think the spirit of last week s elections is maintained, both for the rest of this year (let s not relax for the remaining elections), and what is more impora "" Our congratulations to both Mr Griffiths and the student body of Colorado College; they both made a fine showing
 AWS Shows New Directions by Ann Armstrong . TIGER article informing students of the newly elected AWS executive officers .
 The end of this article suggested that the new members of AWS wanted to make some changes and hoped that they would be able to do so .
 Until this year, all cases of dorm residents staying 'out over night were handled quietly and consistently by the administration . This year, the administration handled the cases of students staying over night .
 The standard policy has been that such a dorm infraction means dismissal from school for a period of time . Students are not allowed to leave the school for dorm infractions .
 If there have been any cases where this policy has not been followed, the administration, not the Judicial Board, has been called upon to use its discretion . The administration has been asked to use their discretion in the past .
 The result was a minimum of discussion about the cases and confusion about policy . The result of the policy is that there is no confusion about the policy .
 This year, the burden of the decision was thrown to a group of 20 students on Judicial Board . This year's decision was made by students on the Judicial Board, instead of the students .
 Judicial Board has a definite function and efficacy which has never been really seriously questioned . Judicial Board's effectiveness has never really been seriously questioned, it has been said .
 It has been quite effective in handling minor dorm infractions, milking decision on dorm policy and setting hours . It has also been used to handle minor infractions .
 Judicial Board's responsibility did not extend into the areas of extreme dormitory infra tions . Judicial Board did not feel slighted because it did not have responsibility .
 Most areas of student life should, even at the expense of efficiency and consistency, be handled by the students . Students should be responsible for student life, even if it's not the most efficient and consistent .
 Questions which concern dorm violations should be handled by the school administration . Students involved in dorm violations traditionally punished by dismissal from school .
 Ruth Snodgrass is a full-time student of English at Colorado College, with a rather uncertain future . She writes to the editors of this article .
 Dr, Ross seems to imply that high school ""creative writing"" classes have little or no merit . The study of literature in college offers a panacea for creative writers, Ross says .
 A study of literature is essential for creative writing but so is the actual attempt at being creative with the ideas aroused by this study . The study is an attempt to be creative with these ideas .
 This attempt is far better made in high school than on a first college term paper . This is a far better attempt than a term paper made in college . This attempt was far better .
 Themes on my pet dog or past vacations may not be original, or they may be juvenile fiction material . They may be subject to criticism or criticism .
 These classes provide a chance for a student so inclined to express himself, usually lost in the pressures of the college cosmos . Whatever, these classes .
 I too would be horrified at students forever rewriting Milton and Keats, although I've no doubt they could improve them . I'm equally horrified that students have to write critical term papers on Eliot or Faulkner with no other background than college literature class .
 No one will argue that "creative writers do not spring from the brow of Jove" but neither do they spring from freshmen college classes in Greek Literature or even Twentieth Century Literature .
 Boss paradoxically deplores in students and praises in Eliot, do not belong in a critical paper, which is probably why most critical papers are pendantically insufferable . Boss deplores students in students but praises Eliot in Eliot .
 TOM ABSher Absher, Alice Brooks, James Dyson, Sandy Litchfield and Alice Brooks will appear in the new series .
 The minutes of the Advisory Council will be posted in Rastall for all of those interested in finding out what happens there .
 The immediate concerns of the council are three of its annua) projects and a newly initiated one . The council is concerned about three of the projects and one new one .
 The Senior Honors dinner is given each year for all senior women who are graduating in June . The dinner is held for seniors graduating from high school .
 This year on May 11 in Bemis dining room some of the senior women will receive certificates of recognition for outstanding contributions to Colorado College . Colorado College's senior women are among many other honors to iced at this time .
 The Welcomer-Welcomee Program is also provided by AWS . It involves assigning those girls who volunteer the names of several incoming freshmen with whom to correspond this summer .
 The third annual project of AWS in the planning stage is the Tradein which holds a sale of articles for the dorm rooms like lamps and bedspreads in the fall .
 These articles are collected in the spring from any girl who wishes to sell them after she marks the price at which she wants to sell the article . The article is collected from girls who wish to sell it in spring .
 The new project is a handbook which will contain information of interest to women students only . The handbook will be sent only to the entering freshmen women .
 Suggestions under consideration include campus fashion, ideas of decorating rooms and laundry facilities . Suggestions include a detailed report on laundry facilities, to mention only a few .
 There are two major items of interest in this area right at the moment . The area is in the midst of a major redevelopment .
 The beginning of the counselor and dorm president selections for next year are being made . The dorm president and counselor president are also being selected .
 The Counselor's Workshop will be held on May 13 and one day in the fall . It will be one day before freshmen women arrive .
 There have been several innovations in these policies under the new AWS officers . There have also been innovations in the policy of the new officers .
 Instead of having an over-all president of Loomis and then a president and counselors for each floor, there will be one hall council consisting of one president and seven counselors . The new hall council will have one president, seven counselors and one president each .
 The other item is an investigation of the dorm honor system and the rules it should be upholding . The investigation will look at the dorm's honor system . The dorm's rules should be upheld .
 This is in preparation for a statement of policy and of rules which have been unclear at times in the past . This is being prepared for the first time in a long history .
 Miss Betsy Foote, who is heading this committee, would appreciate any constructive suggestions, because these are two areas which concern men students as well .
 Any group of new officers has ideas and plans for improvement, and enthusiasm is quite high at the beginning of the start of the new career .
 Both men and women students need the support and contributions of both students to achieve as much as they can . However, they will also need to support each other if they are to begin to accomplish .
 Two extra sessions of the All-Coll^ Conference were held in two sorority houses . Lines of Authority and Social Policy Discussed were discussed Sunday, April 16 .
 The last of the All-College Conference discussions will be heid at the Kappa Alpha Theta Lodge, Sunday, April 23, at 2:3|j The topic, judicial organizations and lines of authority] will be led by Mr Stew Ritchie .
 Everyone interested or con nected with judicial organizations of any kind is invited to attend . The event will be held in New York City .
 Discussion held on social policy led by Mr Tim Moe led by Tim Moe . It was decided that a definite but flexible social policy should be adapted to the UK .
 ASCC social chairman will take charge of organizing and trying to pass a new social policy before the end of this semester . The social chairman for ASCC will try to pass the new policy before end of semester .
 Working under him will be S3ven committees dealing with major social problems on the campus . The committee will be dealing with social problems .
 Sunday afternoon from 2:30 until 4:45 Mr Chris Girffiths led a group of about twenty students in an enthusiastic discussion on the lines of authority .
 The object of the meeting was to arouse the student's interest in college regulation and to define, more or less, the limits between student government and college administration .
 It was agreed that the amount of discipline necessary and good for maturing college students is hard to establish because of the variation in maturity of students, the expectations of different parents and the standards of Colorado Springs in relation to other areas .
 Policies must be explicit, yet they must be flexible; and must be understood by all . Policies should be explicit yet flexible, yet not always clear, but flexible .
 Government by administrators would practically eliminate social life, student says . Administrators would probably create a very dissatisfied student body, he says .
 Students alone would be undemocratic to have government by students alone . However, it would be equally underelict to have student government alone . Students should not be students alone, says student leader David Cameron .
 Students lack the experience necessary for such a job and would most iikely concentrate on the present and immediate future, forgeting to or not bothering to take into consideration the after-effects of their acts .
 A combination of the two, student and administrative power, offers mutual aid consideration . A combination creates a sense of responsibility in each for the interests of the other and for the interest of the college community .
 The college assumes responsibility for its student body, its administration should make the policies . Students should be recognized as having the right to have a final word on the acceptability of these policies .
 The students' opportunity to initiate lies in the social aspect of college life, such as assemblies, newspaper and student services, it was decided . It was decided that the students' role in initiating themselves lies in assemblies, newspapers and services .
 Two books of poetry have been published recently by Coloradt College faculty members . Hotfc. unique in that they represent nior than single efforts of the respective publishers .
 Charles Mierow, head of CC's Classics Department, published for his brother, the late Dr. Charles . Dr. Mierowe's book was published by his brother . The book is published by the late CC's head of the Classics Department .
 Herbert Mierow, past head of CC's Classics Department, is a lection of poetry . He is a former head of the Classics Department .
 The volum. dedicated to the Princeton Class of 1914 and warmly conveys sense of genuine ""school spirit"" The several poems dipicting Dt, Mierow's undergraduate and graduate life at that institution .
 The subject matter of the poetry range; from the dogwoods of Princeton's campus to the Aspens of C< "" do's mountains . Poems range from dogwoods to mountains .
 The poetic insight of a man well travelled both phy sically and mentally is well por traye'd . Many of the poems depict' the direct value of a classical education to a poet .
 The second book, again one of poetry, is unique in that it represents the combined talents of Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter's second book is also a book of poetry .
 The Brandt's book, beautifully printed in Denmark, contains some fifty poem . About a third of which are in English, the rest in German . Neither the English nor the German are translations but were written in these languages originally .
 Many of the poems are illustrated by cuts executed by Mj> Brandt . Brandt is well known for her artistic abilities .
 The cuts printed from linoleum blocks ii black and white, add immensely to the format of the book . The cuts are printed from . linolesum blocks . The book is printed in black and black .
 The book ""Gedichte-Poems"" '* is available at the bookstore roi $1.60 .
 The Collejp Conference series was the end of the Collep Conference series . The students' role was established in the regulation of the daily social routine of the college CO* munity .
 Colorado College Tiger . April 21, 1961 fl La ^ssffl is often noted that here has i a definate need for an up-tofL publication on the history of usic .
 For the most *V books dealing with this field 1 either too theoretical, too genCap & Gown by Jill Tyle ■ too detailed. For most of the books dealing in this field, they are either theoretical, or too detailed .
 Instead of being a detailed lC count of composers and their .orks, it looks at music in relato its social, aesthetic, reli,i 0U s, and historical backgrounds .
 Each uthot depicts the story of music [ continuous history, not as a  ip of distinct periods . Each thot depicts a continuous history of music, not a period of periods .
 As a re.. one of the strongest and most ntei-esting aspects of this volume is the explanation of the relationhips and influences of different i and countries on one anither .
 The book also furnishes inforiation about instruments and leir development, the changing tatus of the musician, the dance, lusical practice and notation .
 Perhaps the most interesting hapter is the one dealing with i-western music . The i-Western hapter has been used in the U.S. since 2001 .
 The author, „t e r Crossley-Howard, begins ith the culture of Mesopotamia . The author takes the reader through the is developments of Eastern up to the present .
 In this ss he is careful to point out YAHNS AND ACCESSORIES FOR EVERY NEED . Help Aavailable During Your Knitting Projects .
 Tradition has it here at Colorado College that the individual should be given the greatest possible liberty in developing his capacity for self-mastery and self-direction . Honor System — Points to Ponder .
 Each student is expected to do all his academic work independently . In accordance with this tradition, the Honor System has evolved . The Honor System is based on the tradition of academic excellence .
 It is in this type of approach that a person gains confidence in himself, in his ability to reach intelligent conclusions and develop sound ideas without leaning on someone else .
 The rules of the Honor System have come from the members of the student community . It is a mature system and assumes an adult attitude, the author says .
 Each of us when admitted to Colorado College signed a pledge stating that he understood the Honor System and pledging himself to uphold it . The pledge is a pledge to uphold the honor system .
 KECC held a live radio show, ""On the Scene,"" which provided excellent entertainment for a moderately large audience . A working Honor System can make possible the fulfillment of the potential of a liberal education .
 Miss Mary Elizabeth Bradley, well known from previous performances, once again exhibited her exceptional talent at the piano .
 The Annual Blue Key Dance will be held April 29 at the Chanticleer from 0:00 'til 12:00 .
 Music will be furnished by the Bob Bishop Orchestra, with tickets priced at $2.00 per couple .
 Highlights of the evening will be the tapping of new members into Blue Key . The coronation of this year's Blue Key Queen will be held on Saturday .
 Tickets may be purchased from any Blue Key member or throughout next week at the Rastall Desk . The result is a fascinating and illuminating survey of influences of Eastern and Western music .
 The Folksingers were in excellent form and as usual the audience wanted more . As usual, the audience was left wanting more .
 KRCC faculty adviser was presented with a commemorative certificate from the staff .
 MC; Mr Harry Diack, Mr John Bluck and Miss Lawrie Perrv, guest announcers; and Mr Eddie Boychuk and Mr Even Evans, technical assistants. MC .
 The staging was elaborate, with colored lights flashing and loudspeakers blaring . Effects were created by a team of engineers and technicians .
 The entrtainment, which deserves most of the credit, was counter-balanced by KRCCs presentation . KRCC’s presentation of the show was counterbalanced by the performance of the band .
 A light flashing ""On the Air"" blinkwl throughout the performance . Mr Caldwell did not neglect to tell us each time he appeared . The light flashing light could have been a mistake .
 The listener began to wonder just how far it was from Rastall Center to Perkins Hall . The listener was asked to ask if it was far enough to make it to Perkins .
 KRCC has been .expanding by leaps and bounds, becoming far more effective than ever before . This seems quite unfortunate when KRCC is expanding by leaps . bounds .
 The announcers themselves recommended KRDO and KVOR as stations in Colorado Springs . The stations offer a variety of music and frequent interviews .
 KRCC, which plays largely classical music, presented the show as KYSN might have done . KRCC is known for its classical music .
 The performers were hardly representative of rock and roll or characteristic of the method of presentation . The performer's performance was hardly characteristic of rock .
 KRCC is not all commercial. Even more strange is the fact that in its daily presentation KRCC does not . KRCC's daily presentation is not ;it all commercial .
 Interviews and comparatively straight-forward announcing have been their policy . Interviews have been relatively straightforward with the team .
 It seems that a less-flashy presentation would have been more effective, it seems . On the contrary, in view of their policies in the past and the nature of their performers, the presentation was more effective .
 The Teatro Espanol of Colorado College will present three plays in the original Spanish Friday and Saturday nights, April 21 and 22 at Perkins Hall .
 The first play, ""El Paso de Las Aceitunas"" by Lope de Rueda, concerns the confusion that can arise over a useless dispute, and the simplicity with which such confusion can be resolved .
 In this play Cervantes presents the problem of the confusion of appearance and reality . The play is set in a battle between reality and reality in the play .
 The last of this series of short plays is ""La Presumida Burladora"" by Ramon de la Cruz . The last series of this short plays will be ""LaPresumida Burladora.""
 Miss Ruth Snodgrass, Miss Lorua Bates, Miss Renata Appel, Mr Carlos Morales, Mr Drane Wilkinson, Mr Luis Arrieta, Miss Martha Lockhart, Mr John Gaubntz, Mr Jerry Northern, and Miss Nancy Duncan . The winners will be Miss
 James Prohens, Mr Herving Madruga, Mr Tom Biery of Wassou High School, and Miss Laurie M Perry, who is in charge of the production . Miss Prohens and Miss Perry are among the performers .
 Ms Morales is assisted by Mr Carlos Morales and Mr William MeMilleti who is technical director .
 The directors do not believe thai ;i ki.owl:dge of Spanish is necessary to enjoy the enjoyment of these plays .
 T believe that next years prestige of the council by taking on secretary will be able to increase the range of her job and add to the some added responsibility in the field of communication .
 By distributing copies of ASCC minutes more students would be informed about the current issues discussed in weekly meetings . For example, by distributing copies, more students could learn more about ASCC meetings .
 Tins communication could be extended to include correspondence with other colleges on subjects such as the quarter system, dorm hours, social policy and dorm hours .
 ASCC can get new ideas, find out how dioy have worked for other schools, and possibly employ them here . I think this year's presidential campaign has shown that CC students can be interested in their student government, but only if the student government communicates with the students .
 The -secretary should be responsible for seeing that comments are presented at Monday afternoon meetings . Further, he should also see that those comments should be presented at meetings .
 "Enthusiasm for CC must certainly mean athletic enthusiasm, and an over all pride for our CC and what it stands for as a liberal arts institution," says student .
 The most important aspect of creating this enthusiasm is an informed student body . Students should be informed as to athletics, student government, and academic activities .
 "Such is the job of our service organizations, the ASCC, the social organizations, and the Rastall Center," says the author of the book, "such is such a job of such things"
 "I would feel it my responsibility as vice president to execute this program. Through organizations, co-ordination, and communication," he said .
 This ""field"" is the item that has disturbed me most about the workings of ASCC and is primarily the reason I chose to run for this office . This is the "field" that I have been disturbed most by ASCC .
 Some students do not even realize the aspects of ASCC that make it so important . Not only are the students not informed as to the many things that concern them, but some don't even realize that ASCC is important .
 I would stand by the president in motivating interest among the members to present effective, worthwhile programs to be decided upon . In turn, I would be standing by him, he said .
 "You, the voters, can ask for no more than devotion and ability which I think I can provide," says the candidate . "I think you can provide. You, the voter, must be faithful to your devotion," she says .
 Dunlop says constructive criticism is the best means for any improvement . Dunlops: "The best means of improvement is to be constructive criticism"
 Most CC students aren't enough interested in campus activities to criticize intelligently . But let's face it, most CC students don't have enough interest to criticize the campus activities .
 I am running for treasurer because I think I could do my best for the school at this job . I am a student at the University of Cambridge, Massachusetts, who is a junior at the age of 16 .
 Stafford hax the consent of the ASCC before spending any funds, but he does determine the financial needs of the organizations . Stafford recommends the amounts to be allocated .
 Counselor openings available for single J men as Hiking Counselor, Western Riding Instructor, Arts and Crafts Instructor, .22 Rifle Instructor, Archery Instructor, and .22 rifle Instructor . MElrose 2-3946 ~~ Counselor    MElrose
 Single woman as Arts and Crafts Help Instructor in our camp for girls. Also have opening for single woman as arts and crafts instructor .
 Spring vacation proved to be a period of hard work and hard thought for 11 CC students and a professor and his wife . Spring vacation was a time for the students and the professor .
 Group spends week in Gallup, New Mexico at the Indian Community Center . Staying at the center, this group discovers much of the Navajo's way of life and problems .
 The work, as well as being an end in itself, afforded an introduction into Navajo culture and personality .
 When the group first arrived at the rural elementary school it was quite evident that the Indian children, like their parents, were extremely shy . The group was able to reach out to the children in a rural school .
 The executive board will be free to channel their attention in other areas of concern . But, while laying a patio for their convenience in wet weather, and playing games with members of the executive board, they will be able to channel attention to other issues .
 New leaders and new conditions will create new financial problems, he says . I cannot advocate any financial policies at this time, he adds .
 Through this contact and attendance, I have discussed financial difficulties with many of these in relation to the paying of my bills . I have been able to talk to many of the people I have spoken to about my financial difficulties .
 "My knowledge is not confined to just one or two organizations. My knowledge is thus general," he said. "I know more than a lot of the world's most famous organizations."
 "I discovered that the children had a huge capacity for fun and laughter. Also in this regard I have met, and know, most of the administration and students on this campus.""
 This basic conflict of values was soon discovered by the students to be an amazingly complex problem . The students found it to be a complex problem that they had to solve .
 Students learn of a desire on the part of some of die Navajos to establish the reservation as a judicial entity in which many of the traditional values could be preserved . In a session with one well educated and articulate Navajo (that lasted about three hours)
 The guest minister featured a t the Shove Chapel Sunday Morning Service, 11:00m., April 23, is Mr Kenneth W Burton; A native of England, he has spent all but the past three years in that country .
 He has been preparing himself at Chicago for the position of minister to students . He wants to combine such a position with teaching on a college campus this September .
 Navajo art and crafts, Navajo culture, philosophy, philosophy . American tradition and seeks higher education in science and technology .
 Dittman Tour Escorted by Paul E Boucher 55 days in Europe ... 19 countries . Tejon MElrose 2-0164 SEE EUROPE THIS SUMMER . See EUROPE this summer .
 Arts and Peoples of the South is a collection of about objects from museums throughit the country . The collection includes items from museums throughout the South .
 Samoa and Fiji Isnds are two examples of large Kava bowls — one in the a turtle . Zealand are represented, with Samoa, Fiji and Samoa also represented . Fiji is represented in the largest Kava bowl bowl .
 The clothing of some of the islanders is made from the mulberry tree and lied tapa . Kava is a bever"",e from the root of the pepper ; ail ail ail .
 Prehead from New Zealand is preserved from love 1( ] hate . Prehead is a prehead from NZ .
 The Japanese exhibit is a selecof Japanese design in textiles, ceramics, metal, china and isware . The exhibit is an exhibition of Japanese design .
 Final arrangements for 1961 Song Fest are being made . Song Fest Committee is composed of all the song leaders of the entering organizations .
 The song selections for this year's performance have been selected b ythe groups from an open category . This year's song selections were selected from a category of open categories .
 A smatl group competition has been added to the annual Song Fest performance . The group competition is designed for groups of eight or less singers . The event will be held in New York City .
 This classification was set up in order to take pressure off the larger groups having to force the majority of their members to learn and sing two songs .
 Large groups will sing only one song, and the smaller group will sing the other song . With this year's program, the large groups will only sing one song . The smaller groups will also sing the second song .
 Winners of the large group mens and wornens choruses will be awarded to the small group . Small group winners will also receive traveling trophies .
 All orders for records will have to be placed in advance or on the evening of Song Fest . No orders will be taken afterwards .
 This is to facilitate the handling of the records and to get the earliest possible delivery to the students . The school records will be delivered to students as soon as possible possible .
 Mr Boyd Boyd, organist and choirmaster for the Air Force Academy; Mr Peter Tyree, son of Mr Woodson Tyree and Qualified Judge of National Barbershop Singers; and Mr Donald Jenkins, CC choir director . Mr Tyree is son of Woodson
 Along with the singing there will be a drawing for two stereo record players with AM-FM radio . The drawing will also be a draw for two stereol record players .
 Tickets will be available next week in Rastall and from various members of the class . This raffle is being sponsored by the Junior Class . Tickets are available for the raffle .
 Following the Song Fest performance refreshments will be served in the Slocum Hall lounge . The Song Fest will be held on Saturday, November 11 .
 The Beta Theta Pis and the Kappa Kappa Gammas gave a picnic in Boulder Park for the orphans of the Christian Home for Children .
 Betas picked up the cannisters for the Easter Seal campaign and returned them to the Rehabilitation Center with S4.00 collected . The Betas have collected S4,000 in total .
 Another tape entitled ""Man's Greatest Challenge"" will be presented at 9:00m. Sunday morning . Sunday morning, another tape will also be presented . Another tape will be shown at 9 a.m.
 Talk is a tape of a speech originally given to the City Club Forum of Cleveland, Ohio, Sunday evening, at 8:00m. ET .
 The format consists of attractive, lively and entertaining taped interviews with outstanding authorities and representative spokesmen . The format of the interviews is largely attractive and entertaining .
 Mountain Club Invades LA for Climbs and Fun . Eight members of the Colorado College 'Mountain Club' left Rnstiill Center parking lot in Mexico .
 The climbers had a great deal of fun, meeting several interesting people and exchanging club insignia .
 It had been very dry and the snow had receded to an altitude of about 16,000 feet, baring some nasty slopes of volcanic ash and dust . It was very dry .
 Two of the party attained the summit of ""Popo,"" Professor J Ball and Mr, Gary Zeigler . The others reached various altitudes before turning back .
 Upon returning to Aniceameea they found that it was Easter Sunday and succeeded in ""aceing out"" about one hundred locals . Some locals became rather irate .
 The group left Amecamcca and returned to Mexico City . Amid some confusion and a few curses, the group left the town and headed for the airport .
 El Pico de Orizaba is the highest mountain in Mexio, Mexico . Five people drove to the highest peak mountain in the region .
 They had intended to take ;i combination of dirt roads, jeeps, and pack burros to the north face of the mountain, which promised some interesting ice work . But they could not find the town due to conflicting reports from the na .
 Mountain Club atop Shove lives in Italy . The town of Sordini gives access to the south of the peak .
 I'mfcsxor Hull mid Mr Ceorge English. Mr English. English . English .
 They arrived back in the camp about noon and started back for Cuidad Sordnn. The group returned to the camp and headed back to the beach .
 Workshop designed to improve inner workings of Rastall Center Board and its various sub-committees . Workshop is being conducted for all the new members of the new board members .
 Freshmen especially are urged to attend, particularly if they think they might be interested in some future service in Rastall Center activities . Freshmen should attend, especially if they are interested in future service .
 The workshop will begin at 2:00 m.m. with a general welcome from Mr Erv Hinds .
 Mr Gary Gappert, outgoing chairman, will discuss the Center's relation to the rest of the campus . He will be followed by Mr Gary . Mr Gary will discuss how the Center is connected to the other parts of campus .
 Mr Richard Blackburn, Center director, will then discuss the relation of the Center to his position and to the rest of the administration . Mr Blackburn will also discuss how the Center is connected to his role as director .
 The Colorado College golf team was to have opened the 1961 season with a match against Colorado School of Mines in Denver on April 14 . The match was postponed by bad weather .
 The Tigers have a nine-match season scheduled, plus the Colorado College Invitational Golf Tournament in May . The team has nine matches scheduled for the season .
 Rastall's opening match was a triangular affair played this Wednesday against the Air Force Academy and Colorado schools .
 The afternoon will be concluded with a general tour of the building and its facilities .
 Workshop information and preparatory material will be available at Rastall desk, Monday, April 17 . The workshop will be held at the Rastal desk on April 17, 2015 .
 The ""TOURNAMENT OF CYCLES"" a 4 kilometer or a two and a half mile bicycle race is to be run in the Garden of the Gods on Saturday, April 22nd at 2m. The race should hold all the same thrills and excitement that
 Bengal B-ball Offense Outruns Team Defense . Tigers started the '61 baseball season last week . Tigers won three conference games last week.
 Mines only outhit the Tigers 15 to 12 . The team committed eight errors on the field . CC pitchy fT< yielded 26 walks, seven wild pitches, and four balks .
 Olsen was the winning pitcher for Mines and also had a perfect day at the plate . Olsen was also a perfect hitter for Mines .
 Norm Laurence's three-run homer in the 4th was the high spot in the Tiger offensive . Norm's three run homer was the highlight of the Tigers' win .
 CSC, the perennial conference power, had whipped Mines 39-1 over Spring Vacation . CSC is the perennial Conference power, having beaten Mines 391 .
 He allowed 12 hits ""a i^ 01 19 walks while going the distant as his teammates committed fli errors . His teammates committed errors .
 Jerry Maglie, the stinting pitcher, was quite tive and had a no-hitter going a til Ron Strasburger slapped double in the seventh .
 Julie Yearling can be singled a of the hitting barrage as the o standing Bear batsman, as picked up four hits including three run homer and a grand -I; mer . John Trr, ter went in to run for him scooted home on two infield .
 In the nightcap, Don Jorgenss handled all the pitching chors the Tigers . The Tigers won the game 2-2 .
 The Tiger's scoring thre came in the second inning three successive singles by Du kowski, Carraway, and Moi kowski and Carraways . The Tiger scored two more hits in the seventh is, but their teammates couldn't help .
 Mroch, a native of Texas, will speak in a general way on foreign aid and domestic Communism .
 Mr Koch graduated from the Massachusetts Institute f Technology in 1922 . He was a chemical engineer at the time of his death .
 His work in oil refineries carried him to England, France, Germany, Rumania, Russia, Italy, Portugal, the Middle East, Burma, South Africa, an d Canada .
 The South Saskatchewan Pipe Line Company and The Great Northern Oil Purchasing Company of Regina, Saskatchewan, are among the three companies involved in the project .
 This speaker's presence on the Colorado College campus is timely in the light of current national controversies and certainly merits high student interest . Colorado College students should be aware of the speaker's message .
 Parents Arrive Today for Parents' Week-end at Colorado College . Colorado College's annual Parents' Weekend Activities open Friday through Sunday . Parents' week-end activities open Friday and Saturday .
 The student directors of this event, Miss Betsy Foote and Miss Joan Jilka, have .pent much time in planning their activities, . in getting good teople to head their committees and in generating enthusiasm among the faculty and students .
 CC students selected three more leaders to aid Mr Chris Griffiths, ASCC president-elect, in guiding next year's Executive Council . The $5.00 registration fee paid by lateHank Rase was paid for this week .
 These were Mr Hank Rase, vice president, Miss Julie Bohke, secretary, and Mr Bill Stafford, treasurer . Mr Rase was vice-president, Miss Bohke was secretary and Mr Stafford was treasurer .
 Although campaign posters were used in this election, general campus excitement was not as evident as is was in the President's election . It was surprising that as many voters turned out as many students turned out in the election .
 Bill Stafford election committee placing the polls ;ii convenient times and places . Perhaps, again, this is due to the organization of the Bill Stafford Election Committee .
 On Friday afternoon there ill be campus tours conducted by he Tiger Club . All sorority and fraternity iouses and the dormitories are having open houses 3:00 to 5:30, during Inch refreshments will be served .
 At 7:15m. the annual Song 'est will be held in Shove Chapel, tfter which President Benezet will lave open house in Slocum lounge .
 An innovation for SongJest this year is a raffle held by :he Junior Class during the time ■hat the judges are deliberating, 'wo stereo AM-FM radio and reci'd players will be raffled off, and ickets may be purchased for $.
 After visiting classes and faculty offices, parents are invited to an assembly in Perkins Hall . The assembly will be open Saturday morning .
 This will be a Campus Planning Committee conducted by Miss Gretehen Feroe and Mr Jim Dychairmen of the assembly son, co Vol. Jim Dy. Feroe .
 Mr Albu was educated at the Imperial College of Science and Technology . He worked for many years as a Works Manager before becoming an engineer .
 In 1946 and 1947 he held a senior position in the Control Commission for Germany, and in 1948, prior to his clot, he was Deputy Director of the British Institute of Management .
 He has been o mem l)c-r of the Select Committee on Nationalized Industries since its formation . He is Deputy Chairman of the Parliamentary and Scientific Committee .
 He has been a tfelegatc to the Assemblies of the Council of Europe and the European Union .
 Albu has lectured in the United States in 1953, 1957 and 1959 . He has written extensively about economic, industrial, scientific and political problems .
 Applications ai e now out for those wishing to be welcomcrs for next year's fi eshmen . Applications are now open for the 2014 edition of the World Series of Welcomers .
 Any girls who have not received forms may pick them up at Rastall desk . Girls who haven't received forms can pick up them from Rastell desk at the end of the day .
 The SIX CANDIDATES for Senior Class Commis' to right Mr Dave Furgason, Miss Sue Hoyt, M Mr Bob Kendall, Miss Jane Grothaus, and Mrs Rod Peck was not available for the photograph .
 Tickets may still be purchased for the raffle to be held at Song Fest tonight by the junior class for two AM-FM radio and record player sets . The junior class will be using the proceeds to win two sets .
 Tom ABSher, Alice Brooka, James Dyson, Sandy Litchfield and Vicky Morey are among the stars of this week's show .
 Let's All Vote, Cha, Cha . Another election and another proportionately high student turnout . Print Fridays by PEERLESS PRINTING CO., Colorado Springs, Colorado .
 We wonder if this is a trend or if the energy inspired by the presidential election is just slowly dissipating back to lethargy . The energy of the election has been dissipating in recent weeks .
 This year's sopomores and juniors have ""decided"" not to have public speeches outlining their platforms . We wonder because last Monday at the weekly ASCC meeting, the fact came out that this year's students have "decided" not to speak .
 It seems that almost nobody turned out for the speeches given this last week by the candidates for ASCC vice-president .
 Miss Cogswell pointed out a fact we would have thought gratuitous, but was, nonetheless, accepted by most of those at the meeting as important .
 Each candidate must spend a good amount of time thinking, thinking about why he is running and what he wants to accomplish by gaining the office .
 Most seemed to agree that this would be a good thing, but after all, three days would not be enough time to prepare and publicize the speeches this year, would they; better wait til next year .
 Freshmen and upperclassmen left out of the discussion since they still plan to have their speeches . Upperclassmen don't seem to realize that an honest decision to vote for a candidate rests on the fact of the voter's having some idea of why he is voting for a certain candidate
 We admit there can be an election where one votes for a certain candidate because he knows that candidate's personally or belongs to the same fraternity, sorority, or clique . We admit it can be difficult to say yes or no, but it's a good idea to vote for a
 "We think there are better ways to show this kind of friendship, and these ways have nothing to do with politics," says CNN.com .
 As far as there not being ""enough time,"" we feel that most of the interest in the presidential election was generated in the last couple of days . We feel that there is not enough time to prepare for the election .
 We thought that it was a trite rale of politics that if the candidate wanted the votes, he reached out toward the voter and did not wait for the voter to come to him . We thought it was that it would be trite of politics .
 So, admire the clever posters, learn from a ""brother"" or ""sister"" which candidate is ""our kind of people" and next week let's all vote, cha, cha .
 Mr Griffiths promised a dynamic leadership for ASCC during his term . He has promised to lead ASCC through the next five years .
 In view of what we said, we wonder if Mr Griffiths is not being too optimistic in so far as what he thinks of the group he is to lead next year .
 It seems that much of the trouble with past and present councils is that they are largely comprised of jaded deadwood, students who ran for and gained office with an attitude based on ego .
 If Mr Griffiths hopes to put his policies into effect, it would seem to us that it would be wise if the incoming president reviewed the candidates for the different class positions .
 TIGER ...-.-.- in Raatull or Culler . For best results please submit all material in written form to the TIGer ... in Ra at least .
 Please sign all matetriai submitted bo yoa can contacted for further information if need be . Please sign the sign of support for the charity .
 Your cooperation with the above will assure you of publicu.u.iuii in each issue . Your cooperation is assured by the above .
 Austin, Texas, is ready for further integration of public facilities and business establishments . Austin is ready to further integration with public facilities, businesses . Austin will be the first major city to integrate public facilities with businesses .
 Many restaurants are open to Negroes, as are predominantly white churches and civic organizations . White churches are also open to African-American citizens .
 Hundreds of Austin residents have asked for more than two years to be removed from their homes . Mayor Goldenson has refused to comply with the requests .
 Since last November as many as 'i(>00 students and citizens in a single day have stood in protest lines in front of theaters three times a week .
 Inform Mr Goldenson of ABC Paramount at the above address of your decision to patronize only theaters which belong to intergrated chains . Inform him of your plans for the future of the future .
 Students for Direct Action, 2844 Shoal Crest, Austin, Texas. Send your contributions to students for direct action at 2844 Shallow Crest, Texas .
 T want to take this opportunity to write you and let you know that the students in the choir are a credit to your school . The choir is a credit for your school, your school and your choir students .
 'They acted like ladies and gentlemen on the whole tour and it was a pleasure to be their driver. They acted like lady and gentlemen,' says driver .
 "They were alto goodwill embassadors for our state, Everywhere we went, the local people had nothing but praise for their behavior," the author says . "The local people praised them," he says .
 In this letter, I want to thank your school, Mr Jenkins, and the students for a very pleasant trip . In this article, I also thank Mr Jenkins for his "very pleasant trip"
 Junior year in Paris, visions of the Lido and Maxim's surrounded by rich and charming French admirers . But not quite .
 Dior dresses are for Jacqueline Kennedy and German philosophy students don't come to Paris . Great was my disillusion when I realized pink poodles aren't practical, Dior .
 "We had expected crowds of French people flocking around us, asking questions about America, our government policies, college life, etc. etc. We had expected people to ask questions, but we had expected them to ask about America's policies, government policies .
 Parisians have learned to accept as a necessary evil . Now all of us are just one of the 30,000 other American whom the Parisians accept .
 The student's Paris is a Paris of smelly crowded metros, of rainy days and rushing people, of long waits in the lunchline at Restaurant Universitaire .
 Spare time is spent at the Louvre, in the library or at the park, depending on the weather . Spent most of his time at the library and the park .
 The schedule of courses and pre-registration forms may be obtained from the Registrar's Office or from the student's faculty advisor . The schedule is available to students from around the world .
 Late registration between May 4 afternoon and Mav 6 will be penalized by a $3.00 fine . Late registration will cost you a fine if you register late .
 After May 6 the fine will be $10.00 after May 6 . The fine will increase to $20.00 .
 Out of fifty students which compose our group, some study constantly, others play constantly, but everyone has time to cultivate his own interests and taste to the fullest . Some study constantly. Others play constantly .
 There are two teenage twins in my family, so life is lively and American rock and roll records are the order of the day . There are also two teenagers in the family who live in New York .
 The bigger the collection the higher status so its not too easy to get homesick, not in the realm of rock and roll anyway anyway .
 "We eat dinner at 8:30 or 9:00 at night and usually spend over an hour at the table," says mother-of-one .
 This drove us nearly crazy at first (having been used to the ""ten minute system"" prevalent in college dining rooms), but now we are quite used to it . This gives us a chance to discuss interesting topics like ""Bobbup"" and ""Bennur"" with the twins
 Rather than going on a date from nine til twelve, you go from one til eight, usually dancing . This is the favorite pastime of all Europeans and they are shocked to find Americans don't go in for it much .
 Sunday is family day and the Paris population migrates to the grand boulevards and strolls from three to five . The Parisians finish the day with a movie .
 This is standard procedure and if the Parisians are in a rut they don't know it . Parisians don't need to be in a 'rut' and Parisians know it, it's standard procedure, says the mayor .
 "They are doing what they want to do and you can't condemn them for that," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Tf Maxim's and the Lido are way out of the student's class . They have replaced them well with ""Chat Qui Peche,"" ""Caveau des Oublittes"" and other numerous ""boites"" in the Latin Quarter .
 Montmartre overflows with artists and prostitutes in true Toulouse Lautrec style, and Les Halles are the mornes .
 From Notre Dame beauty to UNESCO super achievement of modern architecture, Paris satisfys every taste . Paris is home to the world's most famous landmarks .
 I think the biggest advantage a year in Europe offers is to get to know yourself, to develop your tastes, to look at things more objectively, to become more aware of the problems posed by modern day society and especially to take a better look at America, at college life .
 Graduating seniors are requj^ to take the Area Test and i Advanced Test in their major fi e . except for those majoring in Q t man, Art, and Business there is not an Advanced % presently available . Penny Davidson ability at the graduate lev .
 Area Tf counts 10% in determining hono but not otherwise pertinent graduation graduation . Area tf counts . 10% of hono is considered in determining graduation .
 Advanced T^ however, is used as part of Comprehensive Examination; essary for graduation . The Advanced T* is used only for the Comprehensive Examination, not the Advanced T ^ .
 Stude^ may take the Aptitude Test which is required by many grad schools, but it is not required by the college . Stude ^ may also take the test .
 These tests ar fered at various times during [\. year for the benefit of those sfc dents who must take them in the year to meet school deadlines . These tests will be held at the end of the year .
 The questions on the GRE's aj very carefully selected and constantly being examined and ii>. proved by the Educational Testis Service . The questions are very carefully carefully selected .
 The results of the are reported both as a numeric; score and as a percentile ratira Seniors can obtain their score from the department chairman i their major field . The results are reported as a result of a student's performance .
 Dean Worner explainn that this plan was intended to a courage knowledge of a wide nut ber of disciplines in accoidain with the goals of a liberal art college . Results indicate that very few would have been denie graduation as a result of the GEE scores .
 Dean Worner would like to hai students' opinion of the tests an would give their opinions conside . ation in evaluating the testing pit gram . Worner wants to hear students' opinions on the tests .
 Russia announced April 12 that it had won the race to put a man space . The United States had coned defeat long before the Russia announced on April 12 .
 Awe can scientists have long felt tr the goal in no way justifies tlie 1 forts anyhow .
 Monday, May 1, at 4:00m., is the deadline set for applications for three positions on Publications Board . The Russiless adept at H-bomb miniatur .
 Editor of the Student Handbook, Writers' yorkshop Chairman, and Photographic Editor, is editor of the Writer's Handbook .
 To qualify “r each of these positions, a student must have had a 2. ra de average last semester last semester . To qualify for each of the positions, students must also have a 2 . ra de . average .
 The Editr of the Student Handbook is responsible for Wishing the Handbook sent to mus t be done before the end of the tudents .
 A full report has been written to clarify these and other responsibilities . A full version of the report has now been published .
 This year was the first time the Writers' Workshop was set up, and it turned out to be very successful . This year's event was a very successful year for the Writers’ Workshop .
 The position of Photographic Editor is a more time-consuming job which requires some knowledge of photography . Photographic editor is a photographer who needs to know about photography .
 He is expected to keep his own books — all transactions are made through the CC business office .
 This year, all film processing has been done professionally by Stewart's . This year's film processing is the first time Stewart's has done professionally .
 Photographic Editor is responsible for delivering and picking up the film downtown . Photo Editor is also responsible for delivery of the film .
 Publications Board is now in the process of buying a second camera, perhaps a Rolliflex . The school presently owns a Crown Graphic camera with a strobe unit .
 Photographic Editor selects a staff to work with him . It is up to him to select a staff of his own .
 A student applying for this job must be able to work well with both faculty and students, and must also have extra time to dedicate to his work . The job is a part-time teaching assistant at the University of Cambridge .
 Applications for each of these three positions may be picked up and returned to the Rastall Reception desk no later than 4:00 m.m., Monday, May 1 .
 Mr Robert Brossman gave details on individual projects . The library, science building, fraternity houses and the Sports Center are the largest projects for the immediate future .
 Blue Key Hostesses: Gamma Phi Beta Worship Leader: Miss Burgoon IVttv and SPORT CARS school than the students . The students were at the school rather than the school .
 It seems that more students would have been interested, as the plans are as varied as the interests and needs of the student body . The plans for the students are as diverse as the needs of students .
 The assembly was quite impressive and indicates a far-reaching interest by some in CC advantages . The assembly is quite impressive, and indicates that some in the CC are interested .
 Mr Bernard Arnest, head of the Aesthetics sub-committee, began the discussion with a statement of artistic purpose . Mr Arnest: "I am happy to have the opportunity to be part of the project in the UK"
 The nature of the building program, he hoped, would preserve and forward individual character through diversity . He hoped it would preserve individual character .
 Each building will be distinctive, capturing, it is hoped, a functional and spiritual invitation to use . It is hoped that each building will capture, it's hoped, an invitation, to use. Each building is distinctive .
 Ellsworth Mason spoke on the plans for the new library, built on four levels, including seminar rooms, listening rooms, typing rooms, individual studying booths, smoking lounges for studying and relaxation, and outdoor studying areas . Mason: "The library will be a model for the future
 Dean Juan Reid, head of the sub-committee for the new fraternity buildings, spoke of the immediate plans for three new houses north of Palmer . Reid: 'The immediate plans are to build three new buildings north of the Palmer campus'
 They will be nearly identical in construction, achieving a certain amount of individuality through different color schemes . Different color schemes will be used in different colors . They will have a different color scheme .
 One third of the necessai-y funds has been raised by the fraternities . The other two thirds will be gotten from government loans .
 Wilbur Wright gave some details about the new science building . Ground-breaking of the building is to come around May 16 .
 The building will occupy 67,000 square feet, with four levels . Two thirds of the space is usable, the other third involved in overhead overhead . Two-thirds of the building will be usable .
 The basement will have dark rooms, supply rooms and special laboratory facilities . It will be the first phase of the project to build on the ground floor .
 The first floor belongs to the physicists, with classrooms at one end of the floor and laboratories at the other . The second floor is the first floor of the building .
 The chemists will occupy the second floor, the biological sciences, the third floor . The biological sciences will take the third and the second floors .
 The work by the local chapter consisted of general maintance and clean up work in three different locations . One at the Hope House for mentally retarded children, one at the rehabilitation center for handicraft training of the handicapped, and the other at the center for therapy for the physically handic
 A glass-enclosed balcony stands out from the west face of the building . It is connected to the building proper by a glassed walkway . A glassed balcony is attached to a balcony .
 This section of the library will be used for administration, seminars, displays and one large lecture room . This section will compliment, the design of the new library .
 The Sports Center will include a gymnasium, pool, handball courts, rifle range and locker rooms . It will also include a rifle range .
 Cossitt's first floor, financed by the Women's Educational Society, will be modernized and used for women's physical education and dance . The first floor will be used to modernize and use for physical education .
 On completion of all this Colorado College will certainly be an impressive architectural sight . Colorado College is being built in Colorado, Colorado .
 CC plans to eventually maintain a constant enrollment of about 1500 students . Mr Brossman emphasized that CC is a small, liberal arts college .
 Sunday Sermon At Shove Tilled Tilled 'Fathers and Sons' This Sunday's Shove Chapel service will be bold in conjunction with Parent's Week-end .
 Mr Booth will deliver a sermon dealing with ""Fathers and Sons"" which he hopes will illuminate the relationships between the students and their college and their families . Mr Booth hopes to illuminate the relationship between the college and students .
 The customary coffee hour will be held as an outdoor reception on the lawn . The traditional coffee hour is held at the end of the day .
 They're tho pants with Velcro-adjustable waist; fly-front and side-pocket . Velcro adjustable waist, fly front, side pocket and fly front pocket .
 The idea of such a performance had been brewing for four years, the plays got their real start in November . Professor Laurie Perry of the Spanish department and Carlos Morales, the foreign student from Mexico, created the play .
 Mr Morales and Miss Perry immediately began rehearsals . They selected three plays on the basis of their actability and positions of importance .
 The Spanish Theater found its actors among CC language students, foreign students, townspeople, and faculty members . Some actors have only one or two years of Spanish study in Spanish .
 This group, despite its disparate origins, showed remarkable interest in working together toward the production of good plays . "This group of people, despite their disparate origins," said the director .
 Costume making was an amazing feature in the production of the plays . Costumes were created with the aim of the low-cost creation of 16th century dress .
 With contributions from the Salvation Army, the GoodWill Industry, Church rummage sale material and friends, plus imaginative use of old bed-spreads and curtains, Mrs. J. Smith made the bed-spread and curtains . Mrs. Smith used bed-sheets and curtains to decorate
 Felisa Llorente outfitted the whole troup with costumes appropriate to each part of each part . The costumes included costumes appropriate for each of the characters .
 The group used only the bare minimum of decoration for the stage, including only those things essential to the sense of the plays .
 The plays, then, were produced with a minimum of expense and a high degree of enthusiasm . The plays were produced in a low-cost production, but with a low degree of expense .
 All these preparations, enjoyable in -themselves, resulted in two highly entertaining evenings last Friday and Saturday . The preparations were made to ensure the best possible preparation for the event .
 Even those who understood not a word of Spanish enjoyed the plays . With the help of the very well-written program notes and the general action on stage, even those who understand not a bit of Spanish .
 Each night's audience was sprinkled with a goodly number of Spanish-speaking people who were able to appreciate the plays . The audience also included a good number of people who spoke Spanish .
 The time-lapse between each play was filled by the Madrigal Chorus singing Spanish Madrigals of the 15th and Kith centuries, sort of activity .
 HEN'S CLOTHUiQ — FT7RN1SHDMGS AND GIFTS BROADMOOR HOTEL MfimiitYs • CAMERA SHOP* 30 HOBTH TEJOH STREET The COMPLETE Camera Store 7b« L
 A girl must make a 3. her first semester or an overall average of 3. for her entire freshman year to be a member of this group . A girl has to make a 4.5-5 . her first year to become a member .
 Miss Jean Daniels is the president of Alpha Lambda Delta . The organization lias become more meaningful to the campus this year .
 Sor WAA Holds Annual Initiation Banquet . Women's Athletic Association held its annual initiation banquet Thursday night .
 The celebration included an hilarious entry of the outgoing, officers, followed with individual skits relating to the office concerned .
 Miss Pixie Cambell proudly bestowed upon Miss Jean Albrecht the remains of the president's manual . Vice-president Miss Mimi Meek left Miss Portia Van Meter in charge of the ""Emergency Squad" Miss Gwen Salisbury presented secretary Miss Jean Torcomb, with the bundle
 At the first meeting of the new board, the basketball honor teams were chosen . Basketball honor teams are chosen .
 The first team includes Pixie Cambell, Jean Torcom, Mimi Meek, Nancy Delhin, Sue Evans and Sue Evans . Portia Van Meter also makes the list .
 Misses Jean Albrecht., Phyllis Setter, Carol Wright, Donna Story, and Jan Sartor are also on the second team . The second team is Misses Jan SARTOR .
 Father Bartolome, a Spanish priest from Denver, was delighted with the performances . He invited the group to come to Denver some week-end in May to present them again .
 These plays are a most felicitous example of what good results an interested group can achieve . The plays are an example of how good results can be achieved .
 Members of the group have continued from the past have been the tea in the fall for freshmen women, the letter of information about their group to freshmen women in the summer before their arrival at CC and the individual encouragement in their academic work .
 Alpha Lambda Delta has also introduced new activities, recommending a monthly list of cultural activities on campus and in the Colorado Springs area, and posting it on bulletin boards .
 A tutoring system was set up earlier this year which the new members of Alpha Lambda Delta hope to continue in a more organized manner next year .
 A list of subjects offered and times -hey would be available to freshmen women was posted in each of the girls' dormitories . This year's system did prove helpful to some students .
 If you look at the natui'e of each of the major projects of this organization, you will see that they all serve the school in a serious and important way .
 The present out-going active class, the sophomores, has tried to keep in mind the service goals of Alpha Lambda Delta in choosing their activities as a group .
 Miss Susan Areritz is president, Miss Stephanie Kow is vice president; Miss Mary Bardone is treasurer . Miss Sue Hile is secretary; Miss Linda Harrison is historian; Miss Maria Bullock is in charge of special projects .
 Miss Judy Clark, Miss Jeanette Moore, Miss Carol Wright and Miss Jo Anne Gray were also in the class . Miss Judy and Miss Carol were all in the same class as Miss Judy .
 The concert will be free arnj open to the public . Daniels, Orin Flint, Charles Gibson, Miss Judy & Mr Michal Oren, Miss K a Simms, and Miss Karen Will^
 JtF PEAK AVENUE will 'ork I'nUUl tills . ZECHA & ADAMS CONOCO SERVICE STATION Nevada Ave. 4 will be open in Spring Springs .
 MeIro' 3-781 Colorado College Tiger . Bring Your Laundry with Your Dry Cleaning .
 There will be some skilled 'vorkevs without college degrees who will be in working roles of jbout a two to three years duralion .
 Most of the newly developing countries are in great need of skilled manpower . Most of these countries are developing countries need skilled manpower to cope with the challenges .
 If this shortnot filled from the outside, j°any development programs would nd to a halt, much to the disss of the inhabitants . The short not filled by the outside would halt development programs in the country .
 Peace Corps is the placid of Americans in working and instructive roles in underdeveloped and newly developing countries of the world . The Peace Corps has a long history of working in the Peace Corps .
 Peace Corps members will teach, build, and work in the to which they are sent . They will also work in other health projects; working in agricultural projects and rural programs; working on largescale construction .
 Its major role will be to reinforce private and public means of assistance and, where possible, initiate new methods requiring PC volunteers . PC volunteers will be needed in the future to help people in need of assistance .
 Peace Corps would become the ""basic component"" of our entire foreign aid program . Peace Corps, therefore, would be the "basic component" of foreign aid programs . The Peace Corps is currently being used to train Americans in Afghanistan .
 There have been some questions concerning the procedures for reporting a suspected honor system violation and for conducting the subsequent hearing . April 28, 1961 "" Colorado Colle ge Tiger Honor System Procedure .
 Dr. Ross Renders Middle English Poetry Last Wednesday in the WES room of Rastall Center .
 Ross read segments of Middle English poetry including Chaucer, Dunbar and Tangland . Ross read parts of the poetry from Chaucer and Dunbar .
 He translated in part the more difficult terms which did not correspond with present day English . He translated some of the terms which didn't correspond with modern English .
 With the reading lie explained the language, theme and structure of the selection .
 Teachers Wanted Teachers Wanted $5,000 and up. The latter, for instance, was about two large women complaining about the length of Lent .
 If this first step, that of warning the student, is taken, the individual may find, in some cases, that his suspicions have been allayed by. information acquired in the process, and that it is no longer feasible to report the case to the honor council .
 If the student does wish to report the case, he must contact a member of the council within two school weeks after the observation .
 This honor council member is responsible for submitting a written report to the entire council concerning the details of the case . The honor council is a member of the honor council .
 The student accused is notified of the accusation by a registered letter . If he thinks the accusation is not valid, he must notify the chairman or the secretary of the council within forty-eight hours of the notification . The accusation is automatically recorded as a formal warning .
 When an accusation is contested, a formal hearing of the council is held to determine whether or not it believes the accusation to be valid . A formal hearing will be held to decide if or not the accusation is valid .
 Accused and accuser appear individually before the council to present their testimonies . The accused and accuser are accused and accused of sexual assault .
 The honor council may call as many witnesses as they want . They, as well as the honor council, may call witnesses as many as they desire .
 The proceedings of this hearing are kept secret . The names of those involved in a case of discipline and the evidence in connection with it are never divulged by the members of the honor council .
 At least nine members of the council of 13 members must be present for the hearing . At least a majority vote of those present is necessary in order to issue a warning .
 The procedure for reporting a suspected second violation and the subsequent hearing are the same as that required for a first violation . A 9/13 vote of the council members is necessary to issue a second warning .
 In the event that a verdict of guilty is returned against the accused, the honor council recommends dismissal to the president of the college . The honor council also recommends dismissal of the accused .
 The council also recommends that if a person so dismissed requests a transcript of his college record to be forwarded to another institution that the administrative office take into consideration the L-ecommendations of the honor council .
 An appeal hearing is then conducted in which there is a disinterested presiding officer, a counsel for the accused and for the prosecution, and a jury of students chosen by lot . A jury is then selected by lot of students .
 A description of the proceedings of such a hearing may he found in the constitution of the honor system . The honor system is supposed to be a system of honor system, not a court system .
 Tire jury's penalty is final, but any recommendation the jury chooses to make as to the penalty affixed tn ;< verdict of guilty is advisory in nature only and forwarded to tincouncil for duo consideration .
 Since 1899 ME 2-6635 Good Grief VOTE EOR KAY MATHEWS Junior Commissioner . Voted Junior Commissioner for the Peace Corps .
 Once the PC is a moving concern the training program should be integrated with the regular college curriculum . Training program should also be integrated into the regular College curriculum .
 Standards for PC would be intensive study of languages, history, economics, and especially the culture of particular areas . PC would study languages, . history, . economics, . and especially . culture of . particular areas, . .
 If a student wants to go into the Peace Corps, he should take available education courses in instructional methods . The Peace Corps is a volunteer program that teaches people how to serve in the Peace Corp.
 From this training period through his term of office, the volunteer would be subject to immediate dismissal and a return trip home . The volunteer would have to return home .
 Those who don't adjust to new challenges must be relieved of their duties promptly . Those who do not adjust to a new challenge must adjust to it, he says .
 The Peace Corps will not be an exemption from the draft, but will in most cases be grounds for deferment . Peace Corps is not exempt from draft . It will be used as a way to get around the country .
 Volunteers will not be paid comparable salaries to the ones they might receive at home for doing the same job . Volunteers won't be paid similar salaries to those who do it at home .
 Workers will not be paid what their counterparts ji-oad are now being paid . Nor will they be paid as they would be paid for their counterparts .
 Volunteers would receive enough pay to maintain a decent standard of living . Volunteers would be volunteers who would be able to provide a decent living . The volunteers would be paid enough to maintain their living conditions .
 At the end of one's term a separation allowance will be given, depending on the length of the term . The separation allowance is given to one of the longest serving MPs .
 The critics of the PC have a fairly strong opposition rolling; it runs the line from GOP in Congress who desire a ""go slow"" attitude all the way to the abolition of the plan entirely .
 To the last group belongs Mr LeFevre, editor of the Colorado Springs GazetteTelegraph .
 In an editorial dated March 28, 1961, "Kennedy's Kiddie Kar Krew" implied that boys should not be sent to do a man's job . The editorial was published in March 1961 .
 Peace Corps, besides spending tax money, would again lower U.S. prestige . The Peace Corps would also lower American prestige, says President Obama .
 Mr LeFevre's reply seems fitting to critics of the Peace Corps . However, to the critics, it seems fitting .
 It seems a better idea to have this harbinger of world peace carried on by the youth than leave it in the hands of mature elders who appear once every so often on campus .
 Racial prejudices, rigid attack against Socialist-Pacifist speakers and a general mistrust of any form of intolerance for ideas which are called ""un-American"" are qualities which would immediately eliminate these people from the Peace Corps .
 If maturity is to be a deciding factor for membership on any Peace Corps-type program, it will be achieved by the training of eager and for the large part ""openminded"" youths, not dogmatic elders .
 Tiger Swatters Split With Regis 33-7, 6-3 . Tigers turned in their best performance of the year in split doubleheader .
 Syl Carrawy collected 5 and Duke Dutkowski rapped a grand slam home run . Graboski, Hanks, and Frolick also got 4 hits as Syl. Graboskopf got 4 .
 Strasburger allowed only 10 hits while walking 1 and striking out 5 in the winning effort . The pitcher struck out 5 while allowing only 10 of 10 hits .
 Regis Regis tied it up in the top of the 6th, but CC went ahead in the bottom of the inning 3-2 . CC went on to win the game 3-1 .
 Regis . added 4 in the seventh to put the :&. . game on ice as CC failed to score in the remainder of that frame . The :& . . game went into the game 9-6 .
 Jorgy's homer was the first of his career as he turned a fine per||& formance . Jorgey's homer is the first time he has hit a homer in his career .
 Dittman Tour Escorted by Paul E Boucher . 55 days in Europe ... 19 countries . 55 countries . 19 countries. See Europe this summer .
 Artcarved ring makes it more wonderful than ever -fo refer/ Ar_tc a rye .
 Am enclosing 10* to cover handling and postage . Also name of nearest (or homei town) Artcarved Jeweler. am enclosing ] 10*
 Jeweler for your Artcarved Diamonds 1 26 North Tejon St. See CECIL HOWELL Jeweler in Colorado Springs .
 I96I I 1 COLORADO COLLEGE PED-Powered-powered cylists Invaded the Garden 1 (he Gods) last weekend for the Rastall Tourney . The Garden 1 will be the first time the two teams have met .
 Two entjnts make the corner, still upright, to speed on to the finish . Shown here, two entjnnts made the corner still upright .
 Officials took their places on the rugged course and necessary measures were taken ialt all traffic .
 Visitors and sightseers joined Colorado College students and faculty that were on hand to watch the competition . Colorado College is home to students, faculty and faculty at Colorado College .
 A cai'avan of cars carried riders over the course to acquaint them with specific hazards . A briefing of the race rules was followed by a safety briefing .
 All bicycles were checked for proper brakes and steering while the racers had their numbers pinned on their backs . All bicycles had their number pinned on back .
 The race referee, Mr Dick Oldakowski, a local bicycle enthusiast, called the racers to their starting position .
 The Golden Dragon is the most beautiful Sarrlng Family Stylo Lunches and Dinners in Colorado Springs . The best Chinese-American cuisine in the world .
 KRCC Presents Power ""'»« in KRCC-FM 91. Ave. z > 1 THE GOLDEN DRAGON ■ W Brookiida Don't Let This Happen to Vs ■ 1 SUPPORT SOULE SENIOR COMMISSIONER .
 The talk is a tape of a speech originally given to the City Club Forum of Cleveland, Ohio . The talk was recorded at the Forum's Cleveland City Club in Cleveland .
 As the gun sounded they all leaped forward and off they went down the hill and around the sharp curves . The gun sounded and they leaped into the air as they went around the hill .
 A pre-running car kept a safe distance ahead of cyclists to insure a clear course and a first aid car driven by Mr Dan Bern . Three women were included in the stein followed at a proper distance .
 As riders disappeared around the first curve the spectators scrambled up the rocks to secure a position for the backstretch .
 Max Power, two term chairman of the Colorado College Young Republican's Club and rising young political figure, Saturday was elected Chairman of the College Young Republicans League of Colorado . Max Power is a rising political figure .
 Mr Power had attended the two-day convention of that organization at Boulder as a candidate for vice-chairman . Mr Power was drafted by the six schools represented to fill the higher post .
 Mr Power was instrumental in bringing Walter Judd (RMinn.) to CC last fall . He has been active in Colorado Republican affairs for many years .
 He is a graduate of South High of Denver, where he worked closely with the Republican officials . He graduated from South High School .
 Mr Power is well known on campus as a 4.00 student and a member of the CC debate team . He is also known as Mr Power on the debate team at the university .
 The wind was from the southeast and made riding very difficult . The course road, on spreading out, conveyed the difference in conditioning of the riders .
 Mr Mark Stetson pushed over the finish line to become the first winner and record holder for the Tournament . Mr Mark was the first person to win the tournament .
 Mr Cassius Defiori finished with a time of 7:30.3; Mr Cassio finished with 7:24.3 . Third place went to Mr John Stickney with 8:13.3, and third place was Mr Stickney, who finished with an 8:
 Miss Evan Heckel, Miss Kathy Murphy, Miss Carol Howard and Miss Stephanie Ames are among the winners of the Misses .
 The Junkie Classic started immediately after this race and included in the line-up such spectacular sights as a tandem bicycle, fluorescent bicycle and rider's shirt combination, bent bicycle wheels and bent bicycle wheels .
 Mr Gary Ziegler, 9.10.0; Mr Steve Srpague, 9:30.2; Mr TonyFischer, 9 .8; Mr Augie Meyer; Mr Jerry Macon; Mr Emerson Ellett; Mr Dick Runddl, Mr Bob Graham
 A discussion by Mr Brossman, president of the Campus Planning Committee at CC, and Dr. Dr. J. L. P. M. A. C. A discussion about the campus planning at CC was held at the end of this week .
 Wilbur Wright of the physics department will take up most of this program . The physics department's physics department is taking up the program .
 Wright will discuss the philosophy of the science buildings . Griffiths will conclude by giving the implications for the future of the new buildings and what this will menu for incoming students .
 Saturday evening the Parent-Faculty dinner in Rastall Center has been arranged for under the direction of Miss Trish Adams . Saturday evening will be Saturday evening .
 Parents will be seated with their son's or daughter's Faculty Advisor . Short addresses will be given by President Benezet and Mr Griffiths . Parents will also be seated in the Faculty Advisor section .
 For the expected S00 parents at the dinner, Miss Sylvia Stenovec has arranged entertainment consisting of the best acts from the 1900 variety show . Will he presented in Perkins Hall after the dinner .
 The parents are invited to attend the Blue Key dance from 9:00 until 12:00 a.m. at which new members of the National Blue Key fraternity will be selected . The parents of students are then invited to go to the dance .
 Semi-formal dance will be held at the Chanticleer and costs $2.00 per couple . The semi-formal dance will take place on Friday night at 8pm .
 Faculty and students will be the cooks and entertainment, including rock climbing demonstration, will be provided . Rock climbing demonstration will also be provided at the event .
 Miss Karen Bessesen has provided for a non-denominational church . service in Shove Chapel at 11m. service .
 Dean of Shove Chapel will speak on ""Fathers and Sons"" and a reception will be held outside the chapel following the Bervice .
 The efforts of all those people are to be acknowledged by (lie faculty and students of CC) because it is from Hit' parents of its students that an institution gets both financial and vocal support for its activities .
 Parents who visit Colorado College in such a pleasant way will be well .satisfied with their investments . Colorado College is a great place to study and study .
 ASCC cheerleaders chosen by enthusiasm committee to instill It in the student body .
 The girls will be given a slight, but necessary, handicap. on for five innings and the girls will not be able to play five innings .
 Under the point system, the class accumulating the most points will be the lucky recipient of a keg of beer . The point system is based on points accumulated by a class accumulating points .
 The AllSchool Picnic will be held on Saturday, the 6th of May . A large hose will be strategically placed on the lawn .
 Festivities will start with food served at 11 o'clock on the West side of Shove Chapel . Food will be served on the west side of the chapel .
 In the same area, the sophomore girls will play the senior boys in a softball game . In this same area of the school, the junior girls will also play the junior boys in softball games .
 The Tiger Club of Colorado College selects new members from among girls who have shown interest and enthusiasm in school activities in general and especially in school sports . Starting at 11:15, the game will go Tiger Club Taps Twenty .
 The Tiger Club is a woman's honorary organization and a service organization . It is a women's honorary group and is a service group .
 Its prime activities are . involved . awakening interest in the students toward their college . Its . activities are involved in awakening interest . in students .
 This activity is most conspicuous in the fall during freshman orientation and football season .
 Tiger Club members are most easily distinguishable by their yellow jackets which they wear at football games and on the day before football games . Members of the Tiger Club wear yellow jackets to football matches .
 Misses will be able to attend in dry clothes the varsity baseball game which will begin at 1m. on the baseball field .
 This became an overwhelming advantage when the race to put man in space began . This became a huge advantage in the space race to get to space .
 Many scientists think that the race to put man in space is of dubious value . Many -scientists think that that race to get man into space is a waste of time .
 Vannevar Bush has said that a man can do no more than an instrument, in fact he can do less . Bush: A man can't do more than he can .
 The U.S. has a singular success in solving scientific riddles beyond the earth's atmosphere with small, unmanned rockets .
 It works together with a pure white outer filter— to halanee the flavor elements in the smoke . The filter is a combination of white filter and pure white filter .
 Even with their far ' powerful boosters, the IW have made no efforts as far know to use satellites for things as communications rgi] in space .
 They have made tnejjj scientific contributions, including photogrf of the far side of the moon . They have also made important scientific contributions .
 Many thoughtful citizens convinced that the really excit discoveries in space can be lized better by instruments thai man . Dr, Harlow Shapely, form er rector of the Harvard Obsen-afe and one of the world's leadi stronomers remarked, ing such a
 A second reason for quests ing ing the justification of such space race is its danger of runni out of economic bounds . K •< m A second . reason for quest ing ing ing is the danger of running out of . economic bounds. K • m .
 The enthusiasts want to put a man into space as so as possible . Nevertheless no price seems t high to the enthusiasts who want space travel .
 The Russians have drawn into a competition on their o' terms . Unfortunately, .such a comjir son had not been made effectivi to the public both here and abrw in the past — and at this ...}""■ would only sound like sour g(W)
 Colorado College AH School Picnic Saturday Includes Games, Food, Beer, Beer . Saturday starting at 11:00m. behind Perkins Hall .
 The main events are a picnic lunch of fried chicken and lemonade and various games . The main event is the picnic lunch and the games .
 The regular lunch will not be served in Rastall Center Dining Room, so everyone will be able to attend the picnic . The picnic will be held at the center of the campus in downtown Atlanta .
 The sophogirls will play the senior boys in a game of softball . Starting as promptly as possible, about 11:15, the sophogs will play each other in the game .
 The class which accumulates the most points in the races will be awarded with a uf beer . Then the classes will compete in a sack and mob race, and the class will be given a beer prize .
 The freshmen meet the faculty in another softball match . The sophos and the seniors will try to pull the freshmen and the juniors through the water from a strategically placed campus hose .
 The picnic will end about 1:00 in time for the students to attend the intramural track meet or the baseball game . The picnic is expected to end about 2:30pm .
 The annual General Assembly to elect new members to the Honor Council will be held in the Taylor Dining Room at 4:45m., Tuesday, May 9 .
 Colorado College Honor Council meets to nominate and select members of each academic class . Student representatives from each class meet to nominate members of the council .
 The film will be shown Friday, May 5, at 8:00m. in the Music Room of the Fine Arts Center . It will also be shown at 8 p.m.
 Marshall family of Cambridge, Mass., who run the Polaroid Lens Co., went on safari to the Kalahari Desert of South Africa to study the Bushmen who still live extremely primitive lives there .
 Their daughter, Elizabeth, wrote The Harmless People, available at Colburn, about their experiences .
 The son, John, was at the time an undergraduate major in anthropology at Harvard and chose to find out about the Bush life . He chose to speak out about his father's life at Harvard .
 He accompanied Bush hunters on a giraffe hunt taking 4 or 5 days . Fortunately he had good endurance, for at one time he accompanied the Bush hunters .
 They had little to eat during the hunt, and nothing to drink except water which they sucked out of roots . They sucked out roots and drank water from roots .
 Young Marshall shared their privations and had, as well as everything, his equipment . Marshall shared his privations with the family, and had to share everything with them .
 Mr Jack Cashman and Mr Chris Griffiths will be entering in the two-man division . Entering in the three-person division will be Mr Cashman, Mr Griffiths. Entering into the two man division is Mr Jack cashman and Ms Griffiths . The two-
 Mr Charles Pucker, Mr Ma\ Power, Mr Dave Fnrgason and Miss Nancy Dehlin are entered in the four-man division . Mr Pucker is the only person to be entered into the division .
 The CC team will be competing against GO to 70 of the top colleges and universities in the country . Mr Al Johnson, who will accompany the learn as coach, said he felt the CC team was as good as any entered in the tournament .
 A special feature of the meet will be the initiation of three members of the CC group into Tau Kappa Alpha, which is a national honorary forensic fraternity . Three members will be inducted into the national honorary fraternity, Tau Kappa .
 Miss Nancy Dehlin, Mr Dave Furgason and Mr Chris Griffiths are among the students being initiated at Louisville . The three students are students at Louisville High School .
 Tom Rivers, junior from Muneie, Ind., of Beta Theta pi was elected Inter-Fraternity Council president . Rud Peck, junior of Denver, of Kappa Sigma was elected iIFC secretary-treasurer .
 The Council consists of two members of each of the five fraternities, Pat is, the president and an elected representative from each F'Use, making 10 members in all . Pat is the president of the council and the elected representative of the president .
 The presidents and PPtesentatives that were elected in respective houses just this spring *° put Mr Rivers anil Mr Peek ll <> the posts .
 Mr Rivers is well aware of the pontial of a group such as IFC and u °Pes to make it an active organ of he CC campus next year .
 Next year's Greek Week will be sponsored by fC, M r R, vers assures students students it will be planned for and take as scheduled .
 Sn Senior Ball Faculty Breakfast Class Gift for first and second sem seniors . Class gift includes gift from faculty breakfast class .
 A greater percentage of the freshmen voted than any other class, electing Mr Steve Sabom vice-president, and Mr Bill Greeley secretary-treasurer .
 The junior class elected for their commissioners next year . Miss Betsy Gaskill, president; Mr Brad Chase vice president; and Mr Skip Meis secretary-treasurer .
 Mr Bob Kendall will head his class next year on ASCC, voted in with a majority of 20 votes . Mr Kendall will be head of ASCC next year .
 Pick and Pan awards given each year for outstanding work in speech, radio, debate and drama . Members and Special Guests Honored at Annual Picnic at Colorado College .
 Miss Pegi Benham and Miss Terry Kidner have been chosen by Publications Board to be the editors of next year's Kinnikinnik .
 Arthur Daily, a freshman at CC, elected to serve as business manager . Arthur Daily has been elected to be business manager at the school .
 Miss Kidner plans to major in English, Miss Benham in philosophy . Both Miss Benham and Miss Kidner are qualifying juniors .
 Both have served on the Kinnikinnik and are acquainted with the duties necessary to handle the editoriship .
 They hope to put out two issues and continue the board of review and the presentation of awards . The group also hopes to continue board-review and presentation of the awards .
 First issue will concentrate on prose and poetry, the second on art . The first issue will focus on poetry and prose .
 Miss Benham and Miss Kidner have decided to incorporate the art and layout editors and perhaps illustrate the winning piece of prose or poetry .
 The magazine's success will largely depend on response from students, the authors say . They are both aware that the success of the magazine will depend on the response of students .
 Writers' Workshop plant to cooperate and work with the present poetry workshop and prose workshop, if it can be established next year .
 Mr Daily impressed the board with his comments and attitudes . Mr Daily is lacking in specific qualifications for business manager .
 His reason for application is largely an interest in publications, which he may be fulfilling in more than one capacity . Many recipients of the award hav these fields .
 Mr Harry Dlaclc, Mr John Black, Mr Jim Frolick, Mr Jay Viclcci, Mr Ed Boychuck, and Mr Evans. Mr Harry . Ed Boyluck, Mr . John Black and Mr . Jim . Frolik, Mr Frol
 The awards for debate are to go to Mr Chris Griffiths, Mr Ma\ Power, and Mr Charles Puckett . The awards will be given to Mr Griffiths and Mr Pucket .
 Four students arc receiving the award for drama, they arc Mi Leonard Dnlsemer, Miss Barbara Blair, Miss Georgia McClay, and Miss Carol Herndon . Four students also received the award .
 These award winners will be the honored guests of ""Chief"" Woodson Tyree at his home this Sunday morning lor breakfast .
 Sunday afternoon there will be a picnic at the Tyree's where the award winners will he the honored guests . Special recognition will go to the membership of the Talent and Speakers Bureau .
 Miss Ann Willcox, Miss Mary Elizabeth Bradly and Mr Wallace Caldwell will receive certificates of recognition at the awards assembly later this year .
 Bowl team includes Miss Ann Willcox, Mr Charles Greening, Mr Jim Flocrehinger, and Miss Terry Kidner . Bowl team, Miss Ann . Willcox .
 Many new additions and ini provements, baaed on the editor's exteneivi pa | . cperlence, will be incorporated into tho Nugget .
 Catchy advertisements will he used as often as possible in place of the usual trite ones . Catchy ads will he . use as often . possible in . place of any trite advertisements .
 Miss Larson hopes to put the Nugget, on a sophisticated college level, on the college level . The Nugget is a college-level college .
 Mr Peek intends to place an efficient bookkeeping system into practice and keep all accounts straight .
 With the new staff's experience and ideas tile \'M\2 yearbook will be well worth the work it will take to make it live up to expectations .
 At the annual Blue Key Dance held last Saturday night, II new members were tapped . At the end of the year, II members of the dance ensemble were tapped for the first time .
 Doug Norberg, Jim Hanks, Bob Kendall, Erv Hinds, Pete Pleasant, Tom Rivers, Chris Griffiths, Archie Prestayko, Al Church, Don Lavers, and absent from the picture because he is in Holland as an exchange student, Bob Williams, absent
 During the past week each class went through the process of electing a representative to the forthcoming assembly which will select members to fill vacancies on the Student Honor Council .
 The answer lies buried beneath a river of pious words which, in far too many cases, serves merely to cover cynicism or misunderstanding . The answer is buried beneath the river of p pious words, which, far too often, serve merely to . cover either cynicism or misunderstanding .
 Colorado College is aware that it operates under an Honor Code . We come to Colorado College aware of that . Colorado College operates under that code .
 The signature does not always indicate that we understand the workings of the system or more basically, the privileges of living and working in the context of being trusted . But that signature doesn't always indicate how much we understand or understand the system .
 Many of us never have been forced to work in a school where the guiding principle was that studen s are not honest . "Many of us ... never have worked in schools where we were not honest," she says .
 The consequences of this P.H.D. system are described as a "counter-terrorism system" in which the students are guilty ratal proven proven .
 Those who have been unfortunate enough to exist in this environment can appreciate the breath of the air that an honor code introduces . An honor code is a good thing for those unfortunate to be unfortunate to exist .
 An atmosphere of trust is essential for the best relationship between students and faculty, says professor . Students and faculty should be able to trust each other, he says . Students should also have a good relationship with faculty, he adds .
 The honor code permits the kind of enynyn onment that a liberal arts college seeks to achieve . But it does more for the individual, in giving him the full restart ion that he is not engaged in a game of trying to outwit his fellow students or faculty .
 This system makes each puson aware that he is responsible to himself for his ; own actum * It seems that his is far better than the other alternative-ot living constantly under the shadow of suspicion .
 "In order to maintain this atmosphere of trust, we must want the system to work. We must want it to work," she says .
 In order for the system to work, those who fail to live up to their trust must be made aware that they harm others as well . Those who harm others must be aware of their harm as well as those who harm themselves .
 Perhaps our greatest immediate responsibility is to ensure that those who sit on the Honor Council will be the best possible representatives .
 New members will be chosen on Tuesday by those we select from our classes . New members of our class will be announced on Tuesday .
 Those class delegates should be reminded that they have a serious job to do . The class delegates must be reminded of their duties .
 Those chosen to act on the governing body of the system have an even greater obligation . They must also have a greater obligation to act as a member of that body .
 They set the standard and have the power to enforce it in case of violations . They have the authority to enforce the standards .
 Recognition of that power and the responsibility it carries must serve to encourage them to give their energies to what may often be a thankless task . Recognition must serve as a good example of the power of the U.S.
 Only by the proper exercise of this authority will the students be well represented and the system itself survive . Only by this exercise, the students and the school itself survive, the system will survive .
 Colorado College, ASCC to Host Wyoming Academy of Science on May 5 and 6, 1961 . 32nd annual meeting of the Colorado -Wyoming Academy of science will be held .
 The students will meet with the Colorado-Wyoming Section of the American Association of Physics Teachers . They will meet jointly with the American . Association of . Physics Teachers and the Colorado .
 Anyone interested in science may become a member of the Academy upon payment of the required fee . The Academy is open to members of the public for the first time .
 The yearly membership fee is $3.50 for regular members and $1.00 for students . Memberships are required for the club .
 The Colorado-Wyoming Academy of Science meets at least once a year . The meetings are held at least one year, determined by the executive council .
 Three of the many section meetings being held will be chaired by faculty members of Colorado pology . Three will be led by Colorado polgy faculty members .
 On the second day of the meeting CC's ASCC is sponsoring a dance for the Junior Academy of Science in Bemis with records with records .
 Rinnikinuik 1 Spring Coir will be distributed to the dormitories on Monday .
 No longer can we safely look to our high government officials, educators, churches, military leaders, or even to anti-communists for true data in order to keep informed . We can no longer look to government officials or educators for true information .
 It seems that we are left in a state of paralysis as to whom to believe and what to do after we decide what to believe . It seems to be impossible to say what is the truth .
 As far as quoting the John Birch Society out of context, we wonder about some of the quotes made in the speech today . We wonder if some of these quotes were taken from context .
 Eleanor Jones Water Study done by CS Personnel Dr. Dr. Marcia Moses . Eleanor Jones .
 The most interesting achievement at the present moment is the development of a Water Study Kit designed to provide high school and junior high school teachers with a s^lf-contained unit to study water .
 This is the only unit of its kind in the country, and the patent has been applied for . The patent has recently been applied .
 This kit has an important special feature in its design — it provides the teacher's students with research apparatus so they can design their own investigations with water .
 There is a book of sample exercises designed to stimulate student interest in creating their own experiments .
 These two factors, if taken advantage of, will help the students understand how scientists work .
 Leading business people of today have become alarma] with the recent trend which young men are following in col. leges . The Failure of Our ""Business"" Courses By Jane Hult .
 Concern stems from their inability to find qualj fled men to fill important business positions all over the country . Their concern stems from being unable to find qualified men for important positions .
 These courses teach a man con,, pai'atively nothing, but waste four Parents Pointed Out As Root of Student's Baldness Problems years of his college life . These courses waste four parents pointing out as root of student's problems .
 The student does not have a chance to develop his thinking power, which is the primary asset in being a successful businessman . The student's thinking power is a key asset in a successful business success, he says .
 Leading businessmen feel courses taught under the heading of business administration teach students things they could much better acquire on the job . It is felt, by leading businessmen, that such courses teach them things which they could better acquire .
 Business leaders propose a better plan for turning out potential business leaders . The businessmen propose a new plan to turn out potential leaders .
 The liberal arts educator, in their estimation, provides the student with a more valuable background . Liberal arts educators say the liberal arts education provides students with a valuable background.
 Liberal arts course includes English, mathematics, the natural sciences, history, psychology, economics and the humanities . A liberal arts course is much tougher than a business administration course, but it develops mental discipline .
 A businessman has to have an agile mind and an ability to cope with situations which could never be found in a textbook . With the constant progress being made in business techniques a businessman must be agile mind .
 Business Administration courses take up the greater part of his time? leaving him no time to take liberal arts courses? Business administration courses are taking up more than half of the time .
 "It is not possible for a student to cram into four years everything which would make him a well-educated person," says the head of state-run university .
 "With this ability there is nothing that a good man could not accomplish," he said . "There is nothing in the world that can't be achieved," he added .
 A baldness gene is derived fron one parent and one from the otl parent will result in baldness the male and partial baldness  the femals . A bald gene from one parent is derived from the parent of the male .
 If one parent has baldness gene and the other p ent a nonbaldness gene, the bald ness gene will express itself in to sons, but the daughters will bo nt bald . The baldness genes express themselves in to boys, but not daughters .
 Nonbald gene derived from fcoth parents will always result nonbald offspring in what ever i they come together . The gene is derived from a gene from the gene of fcoths parents . The offspring will always be non-bald .
 Tb there are two examples of patti balding on our campus . It is interesting to note tb there were two examples .
 If you don't wish to be a l'i Bryner, I suppose toupees can be purchased some place in Color* Springs .
 StrK winds"" in this area of the rtl probably would make it diff» to wear one successfully . However, the strK winds."" in this region of the . area would probably make it . difficult to wear a rtl .
 1IGER DEADLINE: Pur best rebuilt, pleane submit i in Ruslull or Culler . Pur best built, please submit i to be submitted to be best rebuilt . 1 I Friday* is Friday Friday .
 Students to Guide Campus Visitors is being organized . Twenty students of junior and sophomore rank will be chosen .
 Prospective student tours around the campus and Rastall ■'enter . Students will also be at the disposal of the President, Director of Adnl i^i""ii and Alumni offices .
 Applications are open from May 6 to May 15 and can be picked at the Rastall desk . Applications will be available at the end of May 6 and the deadline is May 15 .
 More information may be obtained from Lani Markisen, chairman of (i ie Hospitality Committee, or other Rastall Board members . More information can be obtained by contacting Lani .
 Tree planted at Slocum is dedicated to the growing 1 and branching brotherhood of these young men from throughout the "" -id — 1961" -id .
 The tree was planted last Friday afternoon during the Parents Weekend Openhouse . It was planted during an open house for Parents Weekend .
 The dormitory president, Mr Fred Fingleton, placed the first shovelfull of dirt in the planting followed by Mr Aziz Aghbari from Yemen .
 The tree itself sits just outside the west entrance of im and a white picket fence >rs the planting site . The tree is located in front of the entrance to the school .
 Politics of Cuba Aired during WES Coffee Hour Wednesday, April 26 . Discussion by professors William Hochman and Herving Madruga on the situation in Cuba .
 A professor of history at Colorado College gave a twenty-five minute statement of certain aspects of the problem in Cuba, especially with relation to the overall U.S. foreign policy pursuits and aims .
 He began by putting the problem into the context of U.S. foi-eign policy problems in general . He said the problem is a problem in the United States .
 The US's two main centers of concern are the desire to contain international Communism and identify with the interests of the underdeveloped countries of the world, he said .
 Kennedy inherited and continued the policy of the Eisenhower administration of training and giving military and monetary aid to anti-Castro refugees .
 CIA presented intelligence estimate to Kennedy stating that the time was ripe in Cuba for an anti-Castro revolution . CIA presented an intelligence estimate of the time in Cuba was ripe for a revolution .
 The idea was that given the impetus of an armed rebel invasion, the predominantly anti-Castro population of Cuba would join in with the revolt with the result in the overthrow of Castro . The plan was that the majority of the Cuban population would join the revolt .
 Munist intervention into Latin America is an opportunity to indicate to the world that we do not aprove of dictatorship, and a demonstration that underdeveloped nations cannot best achieve their aims through identification with Communism . munist intervention .
 The disadvantages would be that we, in opposing the Castro regime, may be identified with opposing the social revolution as well, which would not help us anywhere in the world in our attempts to identify with the underdeveloped countries of the world . It might heighten the old Latin American fear of
 Kappa Alpha Thetas won first place in both large and small group competition . Tejon MElrose 2-0164 led the Kappa Alpha sorority in the annual Song Fest held on Parents' Weekend .
 Beta Theta Pi, led by Mr Doug Letts, received the first place for men's large and small groups . Also taking top honors was Beta theta Pi .
 P. ppa about this as arc it few, Another noticed a lack in the number of men stud . ids imvtlcimitinjr in social fund ma like dances as compared wit i the . number of girls who wouli like to join in the
 All par thanks foi the opportunity to visit the school see their children, talk with other parents and faculty members . Gntevtained at every turn by the school .
 Some Parental Opinions of Last Weekend's Event . Parents of CC students were entertained in many ways last weekend . CC parents were entertained by the event .
 SongFest was a delightful success in presenting one social aspect of campus life . The open houses and the campus tours proved benafiisid ir-. gettingthem acquainted with ths pliyBl2tl ispect of the school and the SongFest .
 The President's reception was well-attended and the dinner with the students' faculty advisors the next evening was quite instructive as well as fun for the parents . The students' parents were invited to the dinner .
 Most comments about the eventful weekend were made about the chuck wagon breakfast held in the Garden of the Gods . Most comments were about the breakfast held on Saturday morning .
 The parents were especially pleased with the friendly atmosphere and the various kinds of entertainment provided as well as the general aura of the ""Old West"" such an occasion always has . The parents of the children said they were impressed with the entertainment provided .
 A TiGER reporter asked several parents how they would feel about sending their daughters to a school which did not have dormitory hours . The question is provocative and the topic is pertinent .
 The rules are good training, and they like to know that their daughters are keeping certain hours . Two of them said, ""Yes, T'd let my daughter come"" and the other two said, "No""
 The first two parents indicated that hours were good to have because there are many girls, they feel, who need such limitations . The other two parents said hours are good for girls .
 Parents are pleased with what their children are getting out of this school . The other question asked of these parents was quite general and resulted in the fact that on the whole they are pleased .
 The two areas which were criticized were the academic honor system and the social life of the school . Academic honor system was also criticized by the students .
 Parents gathered at the Garden of the Gods for a chuckwagon breakfast on Sunday morning of Parents' Weekend . Mountain Club member demonstrates some necessary mountain climbing skills, needed in order to tackle Colorado mountains .
 Colorado College Tiger Outstanding Hockey Players Receive Coveted Awards . Colorado College Tigers' leading team members of last season with annual trophies .
 Brian (Duke) Dutkowski holds the Hopper Memorial Trophy as CC's high scorer . Larry Gilbertson holds the trophy as the most improved player . Stan Moskal receives the Cheddy Thompson Award as the Tigers' most valuable player .
 Mosfcal was elected by his teammates as team captain for next season . Mosf Cal was also elected by teammates to be captain of the Spanish national team .
 'Oedipus Rex' will be the final film shown during the current school year sponsored by Perkins Center .
 Written by Sophocles more than 2000 years ago it is the tragedy of the king who unwittingly slew his father, married his mother and finally came to ruin . The tragedy is the story of a king who accidentally killed his father and married his wife .
 This Greek tragedy has modern impact which is not merely confined to the drama, but which gave Freud a psychological concept which he called the Oedipus complex . Freud called the concept a 'psychological concept'
 The seminar will meet one hour a week for one credit hour on Thursday at 12:00 . The seminar is held at the University of North Carolina .
 The seminar will consider the elements of binary logic and its applications to the programming of a digital computer . The seminar is expected to take place at the University of Cambridge .
 Robert M Ormes will conduct the annual Rock School for the Pikes Peak branch of the Colorado Mountain Club in two sessions . Ormes to conduct the Rock School in Climbing Skills .
 First will be at 7:30 this evening, Friday, May 5, in the Berg Heil Room of Rastall Center .
 There will be a chalk talk on methods, practice in rope handling, and a showing of a film on safety techniques in climbing .
 The second session will be held in the military rock climbing area in North Cheyenne Canon, assembling at the staircase there .
 The third session will start behind the West stand at Washburn Field at 1:30 on Saturday, May 13 .
 The school is for beginners, who may apply the fee of $2.00 toward membership in the Colorado Mountain Club . Beginners may apply a fee to join the club .
 See Mr Ormes if you need transportation for field sessions or further information about the school . See him for transport to school .
 U.S. House Committee on Un-American Activities and the DAR, the Join Birch Society. The DAR was founded by members of the U.N. House of Representatives and the D.C. Committee of Un-Americans .
 Due to bad leather tennis tennis was never corniced and the points have not yet been awarded to anyone . Due to poor leather tennis, the points were never awarded to players .
 Softball has already begun with the Kappa ■L s and the Sigma Chis defeating JJ Betas and the Phi Delts respectively . Softball is already underway with the Phi ■Ls and the Chi Chis winning softball .
 Intramural volleyball s completed last week as the KaPP a ^'^ s 1,ername ^ undefeated ' win . KaPP won the tournament by a 1,000-0 victory .
 The Sigma Chis finished second, followed by the Phi Delts in third place . The Sigma Delts finished second and the Phi Chis came in third .
 A varsity tennis player was allowed to play in the intramural tennis tournament . The tournament was part of a team of students from the University of Wisconsin .
 These unusual incidents were allowed to occur because there is no one to enforce the rules of intramurals . The incident was allowed to happen because of the lack of an official on the sidelines .
 Perhaps this could be corrected by having a board composed of impartial members to decide on protests and decisions .
 i am enclosing 10* to cover handling and postage . Also name of nearest (or hometown) Artcarved Jeweler, or hometown . Also enclosing the name and location of the Jeweler .
 Jeweler for your Artcarved Diamonds 1 26 North Tejon St. in Colorado Springs, Colorado Springs .
 Boxes for the clothing will soon be placed in the Eve women's residence halls, Slocum and the fraternity houses . Boxes will be put in the women's dorms and the frat boys' houses .
 Some of the clothes collected from Colorado College students will be given to local charitable organizations . This year, as in the past, some of the clothing collected will be donated to local charities .
 In early June most of the clothing will be shipped to the World Clothing Fund's headquarters . Handy employees will sort the clothes in preparation for distribution to people on Indian reservations, in disaster ana-, in the U.S. and overseas .
 Last year over .500 pounds of good used clothing was collected from the freshmen dorms, Slocum and fraternities . Last year .
 The new presidents and the other members of the Judicial Board reviewed the applications for dormitory hall counselors . They were again able to make excellent choices .
 Soldiering Equipment Displayed in Rastall Teachers Wanted $5,000 and up . Soldiering equipment displayed in classroom . Teachers wanted to sell the equipment for up to $500,000 .
 Miss Joan Jilka to be the president of Loomis Hall next year . Miss Carolyn Troxell will be the vice-president of the hall . Miss Joan will be president of the Hall .
 The counselors will be Misses Linda Pierce, Sue Ballou, Kay Mathews, Jan Fry, Betty Rouse and Betty Rouse . Nan Bourroughs, third floor east and south, and Alice Brooks will also be counselors .
 Miss Rachel Jensen will be president of Montgomery Hall . Miss Mimi Jones and Miss Carolyn Morris will be her counselors . Miss Carole Morris will also be her counselor .
 Miss Sarah Gruen will be president of Ticknor Hall . Miss Ortclien Feroe, Miss Peggy Coe and Miss Diane KoUschel will be counselors . Miss Peggy co-chairs will be counselor . Miss Orland Feroe will be first Miss of the year .
 Miss Maroia Moses is the new president of McGregor Hall . She will have as her counselors Misses Sue Lauthau, Jean Torcum and Sue Laothau .
 Miss Ann Armstrong will be president of Bemis Hall and Misses Fifi Maroney, Betsy Dunham, Tish Amberg. Miss Ann will be the president of the hall . Miss Ann is the first Miss to be Missed in the Misses of the Hall .
 There will be a counselors' workshop on Saturday, May 13, beginning at 11:00m. at Star Ranch for the new presidents and counselors . interesting talks will be given at the workshop .
 This year's workshop has been designed under Miss Ann Armstrong's leadership to present the more philosophical aspects of counseling . The workshop will focus on the philosophical aspect of counseling, rather than just the physical aspects of it .
 The workshop will b> completed in the fall by a session dealing with the more practical aspects of the workshop .
 The workshop committee, the hew presidents and counselors are hoping to help the dormitory system become more meaningful and more fun for all of the girls living in the residence halls next year .
 The Soldier is a mock-up of what the soldier is expected to look like . The Soldier was a mock up of the soldier's face and body .
 There are several features that are yet to be produced and distributed for the Army . All that hasn't been tested will lie in the near future . There are still several features still to be developed and distributed .
 Among this equipment is a propulsion unit on the back of the Soldier's belt . Among the equipment is the propulsion unit that can be used to propel the Soldier .
 This will enable him to jump oyer small obstacles, across small ravines and also to run very fast across open fields . He will also be able to jump across small obstacles and also run very quickly across fields .
 The idea behind the belt is to neutralize' most of the soldier's weight . The belt is designed to 'neutralize' soldiers' weight .
 The vest will stop shrapnel and nil but a direct hit by small fire arms . It is made of alternating layers of tightly woven cloth and fine mesh . The vest stops shrapnel, but will not stop fire from hitting the wearer .
 The soldier's hoots, not shown on the dummy, will be able to withstand ""small nuisance mines"" such as the present anti-personel mines . The hoots are not shown in the dummy .
 If he stepped on one of the mines it would give him a jolt hut it wouldn't kill him . "It would be a good thing for him to step on the mines," he said. "I'm not going to die. I'm not sure if I'm going to
 TinSoldier's uniform protects him from fall-out and extreme cold . There are small heating cells in the cloth to keep his body at constant temperature .
 Caicado TYWW1 j SUWtY PAINT SUPPLY COMPANY PAINT — GLASS — WALLPAPER 1 13 1 1 1 5 E Bijou St. Caicados del Toro .
 Duke Dutkowski hit a solo home run for the Tigers in the second inning . The Tigers picked up their lone run in the first inning .
 Jim Hanks throws the first game for the Tigers in his mound debut of the season . Hanks pitches in the Tigers' first game of the 2014 season .
 He allowed 13 hits and 10 runs but limited the Indians to three bases on balls . He allowed only 13 hits, 10 runs, but managed to get the Indians out of the game .
 Hanks received meager backing from his teammates who were able to collect five hits and who committed three errors in the field . Hanks was the only player to get five hits .
 The Tigers scored twice in the second on a walk to Wisgerhof and back-to-back doubles by Graboski and Moe Moe .
 Jim Workman led the Adams State offensive, going three for four at the plate with one home run and three RBIs . Workman was one of Adams State's top three players to hit three home runs .
 Jorgensen pitched the second game; he allowed nine hits and ten runs but passed only three . He pitched the first game, allowing nine hits, ten runs and allowing only three passes .
 The Tigers held a slim lead till the (3th, then went behind and fell just short of victory . The 9th inning brought them within one run of the miners . The Tigers came back from a 1-1 lead in the 3rd inning .
 Ron Strasburger handled the mound duties and was hindered by the inept fielding of his teammates, with CC committing G errors . CC committed G errors in the game .
 These scores were set up by a Frolic triple, doubles by Hanks and Graboski, and singles by Yankovich and Dutkowski . Hanks was the only player to score a single in the game .
 The result of the failure of the invasion was that we gained none of the proposed advantages and all of the disadvantages . The result was that the invasion failed to achieve all the advantages .
 "Not only did our actions condemn us as aggressors, but aggressors not powerful enough to defeat Cuban forces," he said . "We are not powerful, not powerful," he added .
 Communist position was strengthened with respect to Cuba hut to other Latin American nations as well . Castro strengthened his own position in Cuba and Latin America; and we were identified as opposing the social revolution. Furthermore, the Communist Party was strengthened not only to Cuba .
 The threat we posed to world peace destroyed much of the work which Adlai Stevenson had been doing in the UN in our behalf . The threat to the UN destroyed much work which had been done in the United States in the wake of the war .
 Professor Madruga gave the United States actions in Cuba a completely economic interpretation . Hochman had called the US's over-all foreign policy in Cuba 'over-all'
 We are kidding ourselves with the help of news agencies when we back up our actions with excuses of moral intention of fear of Communism . We are fooling ourselves by using the media to make excuses for moral intention, fear of communism .
 There are certain companies in Cuba, like the United Fruit Company and the American-Cuban Sugar Company, which have been notorious for their exploitation of the people .
 These private American concert, have considerable political p 0Vfj J in this country .
 When Castro expropriated tti companies, they used their i n j ence to embargo Cuba, denyi, her many things necessary to'jjj success in the social revolm;^ In anger Castro . looked to Russia and China for t^ provision of the goods we
 These action . serva] to throw American opinion a{ the Cuban revolution, the desired by these corporation agers. These action serva]. serva.] to throw U.S. opinion a bit a bit .
 As far as Castro's being tator is concerned, Professoi druga explained that dicta torshij in Cuba at this point is mevita . The establishment of a democracy depends on a country's tradition of individual civic respoj, sibility and a relatively stable
 Tareyton's Dual Filter gives you a unique inner filter of ACTIVATED CHARCOAL . The taste of a cigarette is mild and smooth .
 Colorado Springs, Colorado, May 12, 1961 . Colorado College i e ace Corps Rep „ Review Corps lay 18-WES Room . The International Relations Club ' oYS a talk by Dr. Dr. John Dewey of Colorado Springs .
 Peace Corps has already igiteil more public enthusiasm than iy other program sponsored by the Peace Corps . Peace Corps already has a new admisistration .
 The voluniers will fill the gap between technical advisors and lo_,. experts on the one hand and jlatively unskilled local labor on the other . Voluniers are expected to fill the void between technical experts and unskilled locals .
 Peace Corps ulunteers will also work in apved programs undertaken by —...■ate agencies, the ICA, and Inited Nations bodies . The Peace Corps will work in the United States, Canada and other countries .
 Application blanks ...descriptive literature already tarted going out from the central ffice . Application blank blank blank space .
 The last concert of the Colorado College Winter Series will be presented next Sunday, May 14th at 4:00i n Perkins Hail . Perkins Hail will be the last performance of the college's Winter Series .
 Featured artists at this occasion will be Mr Henry Margolinski, pianist, and Mrs. Mrs. Margolinksi .
 Margolinski will then perform a group of songs by Handel, Martini, Haydn and Schumann . Handel will perform a selection of Handel and Martini songs .
 She will be accompanied by her husband, who will close the joint recital with Nine Preludes ,by Shostakovich and the famous Third Ballade in A-flat Major .
 For many years they have been outstanding teachers and performers in this community . They have also been outstanding performers in the community .
 Their appearance in Perkins Hall has become a yearly event counted among the highlights of the local musical season .
 Greenwich Week begins Sunday . The Rastall Center Board is sponsoring a Greenwich Village Week from May 14 thru 20 .
 The week center's around six cultural events that are to take place on the campus next week . Six cultural events will take place next week on campus .
 Henry Margolinski — piano 4:00m. Sunday, May 14 CC Winter Concert Series Irene Margolinski — piano .
 May 16 CC Band ""Pops"" Concert Tuesday afternoon Wednesday, May 17 Woodwind Quintet Thursday, May 18 Coffee Hour— ""Art vs. Music vs. Art"
 Colorado College music department will present Miss Jill Tyler in her senior piano recital on Wednesday, May 17th . Tyler to Perform Recital in Perkins Hall at 7.15pm .
 Miss Tyler Tyler is an outstanding performer and student at Colorado College . Miss Tyler came to Colorado College from Denver .
 During her undergraduate years at the college, she has been heard repeatedly in excellent performances . During her college years, she was heard repeatedly performing excellent performances.
 She won regional piano contests, among them first place in the Colorado Music Teachers Association competition .
 She has been president of her sorority, Kappa Kappa Gamma, and secretary of the Honor Council during her senior year . She has also been secretary of her Honor Council .
 Max Lanner will provide the orchestral part on a second piano . Mr Lanner is the conductor of the symphony .
 Have you ever had a crazy urge to have Dr. Hochman to be put 'On the Block?' Have you? Send it to iReport.com.com .
 Campus Chest Auction, Tuesday, May 16, at 7:15 in Perkins Hall, Perkins Hall . Famous ""Doc"" Stabler will, as in the past, demonstrate his rare talent as an auctioneer .
 The highest bidder will he be the proud possessor of the job of Dean of Men or Dean of Women, or even President of the College for a day . The best bidder will be able to buy a job as a dean of men or women .
 Mr Tyree will have breakfast cooked by Chef Tyree himself for two couples in his home . Whoever ""buys"" the breakfast will be cooked by chef Tyree . Whoever "buys"
 Some sorority with a yearning for some real home cooking will get Mr Chris Griffiths as a housemother for the day .
 Students, fraternities, sororities, or other groups may also purchase the hashing services of Miss Moon, Miss Russell and Mr Torrens .
 Students with dirty cars may bid on the group of faculty car washers, or if they have other odd jobs, they may' ""buy"" slaves . Messers Gary Gappert, Jack Cashman, and Bobby Johnson are the slaves .
 All the funds from the auction will go to various local and national charities, including Cerebral Palsy, American Red Cross, Community Chest, Hope House, Penrose Hospital, March of Dimes, Muscular Dystrophy, and Crippled Children . The auction will be
 Any student is eligible to fill out an application if he wishes to apply . Students can fill out the application if they wish to apply for the job .
 Rastall Center Poster Wkshop To Be Held the 18th May 18th at 7:00 m. in the Crafts Shop .
 Dave Dunlap will exhibit their technique in brief demonstrations and then all present will have an opportunity to put their own ideas to use on assigned projects .
 There will he no charge for this workshop and no need to bring materials of any kind; they will all be provided . The workshop will be free and there will be no charge .
 Everyone is invited to observe and participate in this learning experience . Results can mean a greater understanding among those present in the areas of new poster ideas, best materials and how to cut costs .
 Theatre is rehearsing for its annual dance concert . Theatre Theatre is once again in full scale rehearsal for the annual event .
 The program will lie presented May IS through May 21 at the Colorado Springs Fine Arts Center . The show will be held at the center in Colorado Springs .
 Dance Theater will follow its usual format of presenting works in all the important dance media . The Dance Theater's usual format will be presented works from all dance media, such as dance videos .
 A modem jazz interpretation of "The Insomniacs" is a new work by Igon Puchalski . The work is based on a new recording of the famous "Insomniac" The work will be released in New York City .
 A repeat of the gay popular ""Cakewalk"" is the ballet offering for this year's program . The Air Force Band under the direction of Gregory S Rodgers has performed and recorded the music .
 It was premiered in December on the Christmas Festival program which Colorado College Dance Theatre presented in conjunction with the Colorado College Springs Symphony Association . The show was premiered on the December 25th edition of the Christmas festival .
 The ballet, .based on the form and spirit of the old minstrel shows, is a humorous evocation of a vanished period . Music is by Louis Gottschalk .
 The eloquent and forceful ""Meditations on Ecclesiastcs"" will be performed as the modern dance selection . The eloquant and forceful "Meditations On Ecclesiasts" is performed as a modern dance performance .
 This work is based upon Jose Limon's ""There is a Time,"" and a total of 20 dancers have been assembled to assist in the performance . The performance is based on the work by Jose Liman .
 The music for this ballet won the Pulitzer Prize for the composer Norman Dello Joio . The ballet won't be performed at the same venue .
 A rollicking polka, a Spanish Jota, a fast and furious peasant dance, and a lively rendition of Lecuona's ""Andulucia"" will conclude the program fare . A lively rendition will conclude this program .
 Lighting by Jean Favre of the Arena Players and Calvin Lamb is sound technician . The Arena Players are also the Arena Arena Players .
 Tickets for the program go on sale May 10 at the Rastall Center on the CC campus . All seats are reserved and tickets will be reserved .
 Telephone reservations may be made by calling ME 4-7744, extension 334 . Reservations may also be made for the event .
 Colorado College faculty and students must have their activity cards punched in exchange for a reserved ticket . Colorado College students and faculty and faculty members must also punch their activity card to get a ticket .
 Examinations of classes not included in this schedule should be arranged to suit convenience of students and instructors . Students and instructors should be able to take part in exams at their convenience .
 Friday, by PEKBLESS PRINTING CO., Colorado Sprints. Busmess . Busmess — gj""^j TOEGASON Ml> M”£r — John HANEY STTAFF-Jaj "" PrioUd Friday .
 One smiles down on lovers dreaming, And lights the usual trick or treating . One of the usual tricks for trick-or-treaters .
 Now night skies mean real fear, No need for ghouls or ogres here, It soars so high yet seems so near, For more will come come and cost us dear .
 Gone hammer and sickle, gone eagle and spear, Nothing is left But the circling sphere . Nothing left But a circling sphere, the world's largest sphere of light .
 For best results please submit all material in ""•■-"" fame in RaltaU or Cutler .
 One hopeful estimate has been that 20,000,000 American lives have been lost . The loss of life and destruction of industry, communication and technology is estimated to have been 20,00,000 lives .
 And not to mention the possible loss of the very values we seek to maintain . And not the possible . Loss of the values we sought to maintain. And the . values .
 The Soviet Union does, along with England and France . Not only do we continue, but the Soviet Union also does, as do the UK and France.
 Under these conditions what is to stop China, Sweden, Israel, etc. etc., as soon as they develop the technology to do so?
 All attempt for a world ruled by law will degenerate into a terror-ruled world, he says . All attempt to rule the world of law will lead to terror, he writes .
 Last of all we feel that any disarmament must be followed by close inspection . Any disarmament should be followed closely by a close inspection, we say .
 In considering the alternatives to disarmament, we have no choice but to place our hope in a policy that will reverse the direction which our present policy is now taking us . But in considering alternatives, the alternatives are a world ruled by the terror of the bomb .
 To do this we must take initiatives towards unilateral disarmament, we need to take initiatives . To do that we must be at least willing to disarm ourselves ourselves .
 This could mean disposing of our nuclear capacity in the face of the Soviet's bombs . The UK could dispose of its nuclear capacity after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan .
 "We must show the world that our policy is directed by morality. Essentially we must show . We must show we must be moralistic," he said .
 The worst that could eventually happen would be Russian occupation of this country, he says . The worst thing that could happen is a Russian occupation, he adds .
 The force of morality would be in a struggle with the force of evil, says the author . In this position, morality would struggle with evil, he says .
 If one has any faith in the superior strength of the former, they would have to agree that in time it would win out . In time, it would be a sign that the former would be stronger than the latter .
 This is the worst that could happen, and it's doubtful that it would . But this is the best that could be, and the worst would not happen . It's doubtful it would.
 The Soviet Union may very well follow our lead, and if not, it would be quite preoccupied with the adverse opinion directed against it by much of the world . If not, the Soviet Union would be preoccupied by the negative opinion directed by the world, he says .
 Peace is based on trust of one's neighbor and trust of other countries, says President Obama . Peace is also based on the trust of others, says Obama .
 If it is peace that we are after, we must incorporate an element of trust in our policy concerning nuclear weapons . We must incorporate a trust element into our policy regarding nuclear weapons.
 "It is not until we have begun with trust that we can begin working for peace," says Nelson Mandela . Mandela: "We have to trust each other to work for peace"
 These are a few of the premises upon which the arguments for unilateral disarmament rest . These are the premises of the argument for the disarmament .
 It states that survival is better than mass suicide, that civilization is not barbarism, and that compassion is best than vengeance . The book says that civilization and compassion are better than barbarism . It also says that compassion should be better than vengeance, rather than murder .
 The advocates of unilateral disarmament are willing to accept the worst . Not a society dedicated to survival through cooperation and morality . The advocates are willing the worst, they say . They want to disarm the worst.
 Uses of Suffering Speaker: Mr Booth Worship Leader: Jeanne Daniels Hostesses: Kappa Alpha Theta Ushers: Phi Delta Theta members . Phi Delta theta members: Mr and Mr Jenkin Jenkin's baby Grant .
 It is a sermon on the inevitability of human suffering- some unsatisfactory explanations, and some more satisfactory ways of dealing with it . It's a sermon . It is . The author of the book, which is based in New York, New York City .
 It includes thoughts provoked by the death of some of America's finest skaters . Adolph Kallmann and the agonies of Ivan Karamozov . The witness of the . life of Adolph . Kallmanmann, and the . agonies .
 The continuing reliance on armaments to insure peace is becoming extremely dangerous . It is becoming more and more dangerous, writes David Cameron .
 The last meeting of the P 0I Workshop will be held on Tuesdai May 16 at 7:30m. in the Asc{ room .
 Poems for di sion should be submitted to Rastaji Desk by Friday, May 12 . Poems should be published by Friday May 12.
 This is a thought provoki scientific film about the circulj tory and blood system of the body with a Christian interpretation . National arrangements is feasible and if so, how means of violence can be limited through arms control .
 The initial step of the committee was to undertake an extensive evaluation of our national armaments . The committee is to undertake a comprehensive evaluation of the country’s national arsenal .
 The result of this study is ""1970 Without Arms Control,"" which is based on reliable non-classified information available to the American public . The study is based entirely on reliable, non-classified information .
 The problems of arms control are extremely difficult but not impossible, experts say . Arms control is difficult to control, but it's not impossible to do so, they say .
 Arms control requires the serious and well-informed attention of the American people . Arms control can only be studied when the facts concerning nuclear warfare are known . The public realizes the necessity for an immediate and serious evaluation of some form of disarmament .
 "The fantastic technological development of warfare in the last 16 years is amazing," says President Obama . "It's amazing. It's amazing," he says of the development of modern warfare .
 The atomic bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki on August 6 and 9 of 1945 were one thousand times more powerful than any other weapons ever used before . The bombs were the most powerful ever used in the atomic bomb attacks .
 A modern strategic bomber can carry a single hydrogen bomb having the destructive force of 20 million tons of TNT . The bomb is one thousand times as powerful as the Nagasaki bomb, and one million times more powerful than any weapon ever used before Hiroshima .
 With these nuclear explosions come temperatures of millions of degrees instead of thousands of thousands and a fantastic amount of deadly radiation . And with these nuclear blasts, there is a lot of death radiation .
 The blast would collapse a reinforced concrete building with 10 inch walls . The blast of the 10 megaton bomb would collapse the building . The bomb would be the largest in the world's history .
 From within 4 to 7 miles of the blast all buildings would receive heavy damage and a mortality rate of 30 per cent . Then from within four to seven miles the blast would be deadly . The blast would have a death rate of up to 30% .
 Outside of this area to 10 miles the damage of suburban homes might result from sweeping fires . The damage to suburban homes could be as much as 10 miles from this area .
 Third degree burns suffered at Hiroshima involved all exposed individuals within a mile and one half of the blast . All exposed individuals in the Hiroshima blast were exposed to third degree burns . The blast was the largest blast in the history of Hiroshima .
 Radioactive fallout is due to fission bombs which enables radiation to occur . Fission bombs are responsible for causing radioactivity to occur in nuclear weapons .
 The article would have had merit had it been written in the right context, but as it exists ed, it was of little value and possibly harmful . Basically, the article had merit if it were written in right context .
 This article correctly condemned those Colleges of Business Administration within various universities, which offer hundreds of hour of minutely detailed and specialized courses, dealing with business and finance . It also condemned those colleges of business Administration .
 Business Administration majors have little time to devote to basic, broadening, humanistic and scientific studies . Business administration majors need to devote little, if any, time to focus on basic and broadening of humanistic studies .
 Business Department of Colorado College is continuously altering course structures and offerings that it wili not apply in the future . This problem does not now apply to the business Depart Mentment .
 These required hours include basic principles of accounting, statistics and commercial law . Students are preparing for life even if they have no more contac 1 with business than waiting an occasional check .
 The TIGER article has made irresponsible generalise about business courses as a group, and naturally directs in plication towards CC's Business Department .
 TIGER article says, "The Businessmen P» pose a better plan for turning out potential business leaders"
 The plan indicated is a liberal arts course with the compl* absence of any business courses .
 These organizations all have some sort of chartable project or organization to which they contribute to TO i-k .
 Fraternities serve the further function of ,-oviding housing for many of their members . The fraternities are also known as 'fraternities'
 Beta Theta Pi: President, Mr Thomas McDowell; Vice President, William Bentley; secretary, Mr' Benjamin Eastman; treasurer, j [n Robert Poster. President, J ]r William Bentley .
 phi Delta Theta: President, Mr Donald Lavers; Vice President, Victor Kuehnert; Secretary, John Haney; Treasurer, Tim Moe . President, Ljney Peck; . feaglas Norberg; . Secretary, William Johnson; . William Johnson .
 President, Mr Theodore Worcester, Vice President, William Hybl; Secretary, William Grobowski; Treasurer, j(r) William Grofowski; . Treasurer, Mr William Grobbowski; President, Theodore Worcester .
 MeIrose 3-1219 at Cache La Poudre . At 15 E Bijou St. at 15.15 . MeRose is a registered artist and artist .
 Since 1899, The Golden Dragon has been serving Chinese-American cuisine in Colorado Springs since 1899 . Alto Vista Hotel is located at 18 N Cascade Ave. Since 1899 .
 Mr Jerry Osborne, Misses Maria Bullock and Ann Gourlay have been selected by Publications Board to be the co-chairmen of the Student Handbook for next fall . Handbook, Workshop Heads start to Work . Handbook will be published in fall 2015 .
 Mr Osborne is a junior; Miss Bullock and Miss Gourlay are both freshmen . Mr Osborne and Miss Bullocks are both a junior .
 All three are from Denver and will be able to work closely with one another on the Handbook's publication .
 Publications was impressed with their forethought given to the position and their ideas and plans for next year's hook . Publications was quite impressed with the forethought .
 Handbook will be smaller, perhaps pocket size, as it was two years ago . First of all, they hope to make the book smaller .
 The book will include illustrations and cartoons to give the book the' reader appeal it has lacked in the past .
 The editors are currently at work with faculty and administration, gathering the information necessary to complete the book early this summer . The editors hope to release the book in August .
 The new editors would like to have a complete statement from all organizations as to what they want included in the handbook . Most important the new editors want to have the new handbook published .
 There has been much criticism on this point in the past, but it has been partially the fault of the organizations, as they have not taken an active enough interest in what was to be said about them .
 Groups are encouraged to make a complete resume of all they wish included in the handbook and return the forms immediately to Rastall Center desk .
 M Jim Scarboro has been chosen as next year's chairman of the Writers' Workshop . Scarboro will take over as chairman next year as the chairman .
 Mr Scarboro hopes that the workshop will not he he exclusively a fall project but can be continued throughout the year .
 All School Picnic held on damp grass West of Shove Chapel . Poetry Workshop this year indicates at least partial, long-range success of workshop .
 Mr Torrens and his kitchen crew served a picnic luncheon with second helpings for anyone interested .
 Following this were many well-planned and interesting activities of the picnic which continued into the afternoon . Following this, the picnic was followed by a series of interesting activities .
 The Colorado College German Club held its annual meeting on May 7 at Autin Bluffs, although inclement weather kept all but the most devoted members from attending . The sophomore girls lost the baseball game to the confident, left-handed senior members .
 After a soccer game, a meeting was held to approve the slate of next years officers . The slate of officers was approved after the game .
 Chosen were Mr Daryl Anderson for president; Mr Vernon Olivier, vicepresident; Miss Ann Schneeberger, secretary; Captain Arnold Anderson, treasurer; Miss Cecilia Luschak, social chairman, and Mr Michael Orem, publicity chairman .
 Boys from each tli.juniors were moba, tbe mob ■g of beer . Thomas Brandt, club advisor, for an evening of games and German songs .
 The freshmen and juniors on one side and the sophomores and seniors on the other ended successfully for anyone who cared to grab a hose and shoot water at someone else . The tug of war ended successfully .
 Chris Batley in the pop stand wbn directed the activities and his jokes at thi> same time, creating a synthesL or a mess, depending on one's opinion . The show is set to be shown at the end of the week .
 Four fifths of tln> people this reporter tallied to enjoyed the picnic immensely . Many of these students hail planned to eat and run but stayed on to witness or participate in the games .
 One person said that the water fight should have been prevented . The unplanned water light caused the fight to break up .
 Wlien asking about having this kind of all school activity more often, it was felt that a warm Saturday would lose the interest and enthusiasm of tbe students .
 At the same time, there was a great deal of opinion that such an all school picnic would be good to have once in the Kail and twice in the Spring . At the time, it was thought it would be a good idea to have such a picnic .
 The radioactivity one hour later would equal that of 300,000 tons of radium . Without a Sssion explosion occurred and equalled one megabomb, the radioactivity would have been equivalent to that of a nuclear bomb .
 Uusuallv one-fifth of a gram of radium is used to destroy malign tissue in cancer therapy . Radium is also used in cancer treatment .
 Radiation from small bombs (less than one megeton) would rise into the troposphere where frequent rains occur and would carry the radioactivity back to the ground .
 A large bomb forces radioactive elements into the quiet stratosphere . Radioactivity may remain for years for years .
 The tropospheric radiation reaches the irround in a few weeks and covers an extensive area . It reaches an extended area of the globe . The radiation is thought to be the strongest in the world .
 The stratospheric radiation settles at a rate of 10 per cent a year and covers the entire world . The stratosphere radiation settles in at least 10 times a year, settling at 10 per year .
 The Federal Civil defense Administration has predicted the mortality rate of a nuclear attack on the industrial complex and the oirbases of the U.S. under typical weather conditions . The mortality rate has been predicted by the agency .
 Only will a peaceful world come when the people of the world realize and strive for peace through a realistic and sane way . Only will peace come when people realize that they must strive for it in a realistic, sane way.
 Th.s means it meets rigid standards of excellence in cut, carat weight, color and clarity . Th.S. means it is cut, weight and color and is made from a single crystal .
 Denial is to assume that if a third World War broke out that nuclear weapons wouldn't be used . Another form of denial is to think that if such a war broke out, nuclear weapons would be avoided .
 This is absurd— our whole military policy is centered around the use of such weapons, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "This is absurd," he says .
for we no longer posses enough conventional weapons. We have no other alternative. For us, we have no choice but to use conventional weapons .
 A final form of subtle denial is to use reassuring words to describe our predicament even though these words are rapidly losing their meaning . A reassuring words are used to describe the situation .
 Today, as always, man is faced with a rapidly changing environment . Thought Barrier Breakthrough is a thought barrier breakthrough .
 There is no real defense against the fury of nuclear war, David Cameron writes . In the days of conventional weapons an adequate defense was suitable, however, because of the new-found powers of nuclear bombs .
 Now a defense should be at least 90% effective — this, though, is virtually impossible with offensive technology advancing so rapidly . Defense should be 90% of effective, but it's virtually impossible .
 Some defenders of nuclear arms claim that a country can survive n nuclear war and still keep its social structure intact . Some say that a nation can survive a war and keep a country's society intact .
 Nuclear explosions will make the environment extremely hostile to man . However, the environment will be extremely hostile for man .
 All humanity will be the loser— the way of life for which the few survivors fought will be lost to the struggle for survival . "All humanity will lose," says the author .
 As a psychiatrist, Dr Frank Frank is especially interested in the command power which so many individuals hold in their hands . He is particularly interested in people's command power, he says .
 As nuclear weapons increase in numbers, the power over these weapons filters further down the chain of command . The power over nuclear weapons is increasingly becoming more widespread .
 Every population contains psychotic and neurotic and profoundly malicious people . It is only a matter of time before one of them assumes power over such weapons and fires one to destroy a city .
 Americans have nominal command of the weapons on our bases in foreign countries, but our soldiers are greatly outnumbered and' could not prevent a seizure . The homelanders could seize the weapons by the homelanders, the author says .
 "The individual responses to modern weapons include all of those ever found when one thinks of mass danger," says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 A habituation to the danger occurs and we seem to be able to sustain our fear . Also a habituation is also possible to sustain your fear of the danger .
 We lose our moral refutation towards that e ,'il which persists for too long . We lose moral refutations towards that . which persists .
 The inability of most humanists to contemplate their own deaths is a healthy form of denial . constant awareness of one's inevitable demise would lead to a continual state of depression, says author .
 If one men,. ber of a hostile group decides to merely speak wtih a member f the opposition, he is immediately subject to accusations of disloyery . alty . If one man decides to speak to a member of a . hostile group, he will be accused of disl
 We expect people to .beh a v e in a certain way and thus we behave . toward them as to . invoke the fulfillment of our expectations . We expect them to . behave in a . certain way .
 All their proposals and commitments f ot peace are seen as mere coverup s for violence . As a result all their . proposals and . commitments . seen as . mere cover-ups for violence, they are seen . as a result .
 If men's minds could be freed from the fi x . ation of ultimate superior violent as the only solution, this would enable the intellectuals, the politicians, and the moralists to construct alternatives for war . if this can be accomplished the world could be nearer to developing its full potential
 Varsity Slips By Tiring Alums 14-8 . The deciding factor in last Saturday's game was conditioning .
 The varsity pulled out a 14-8 victory when the alumni ran out of gas near the end pf the third quarter . The alumni pulled out of the game when the varsity ran out .
 They were unable to stop the varsity from tallying in the latter part of the fourth period .
 The alumni were first to score when, midway in the third period, Dave Parker went on a 72-yard touchdown jaunt . The varsity got their first tally well throughout the game .
 The varsity was held to 3 first downs while the alums picked up 11 in the scoreless half . The alums had 11 first downs in the first half .
 Passes counted for 59 of the 61 yards and Wayne Deutscher put the ball over in 2 single yard gains . Passes count for 59, 59 of 61 yards . Wayne Deutschscher scored two single-yard gains .
 The varsity picked up the 2 point conversion on a fumble recovered in the end zone . The team scored a touchdown on the fumble recovery .
 There will need to be considerable work on the ball exchange, timing, and general smoothness of operation .
 This will probably be worked out this fall when the team reports for fall practice . The team reports Sept. for fall practices .
 Colorado College will host the Fourteenth Annual Colorado Invitation Golf Tournament this Friday and Saturdav at the Broadmoor ' Golf Club . CC will be hosting the tournament .
 Fifteen teams from Colorado and adjoining states have filled six-man entries for the event .
 Houston Uninversity, current NCAA champions, will not be on hand to defend their CC Invitation crown which they won in 1959 and 1960 . A new champion will be crowned; since Houston Un inversity is not on hand .
 The tournament is a 54 hole medal play test, with 36 holes on Friday and 18 holes on Saturday . The tournament takes place on Friday, Saturday and Sunday .
 Each team is nllowed to enter six men, but only the low four men count in the team competition . Only four men are allowed to compete in the competition .
 A new individual champion will also be named, since Mr Larry Beck of Houston graduated last Spring .
 Gordon Aamoth, Jeff Race, Ed Boychuk, Chuck Beemer, Art Berglund and Paul Christensen will defend their Rocky Mountain title won last year . They will be defending their title in Rocky Mountain next year .
 The low RMC team in the tournament is recognized as the conference champion . A buffet luncheon for all contestants is scheduled at the Broadmoor Golf Club following the final round on Saturday .
 Six lovely CC coeds, Misses Julie Bohlke, Kathie Berthong, Carol Fisher, Nancy Bowers, Lynn Ballard, and Heather Kirk, will act as hostesses at the luncheon . The luncheon will be held in honor of CC students .
 Tigers lost both ends of a doubleheader to Adams State last Tuesday . First Tiger road trip of the season ends in defeat .
 The inimitable Don Jorgensen started the first game for the Tiger nine and went the route, giving up 11 hits along the way . The Indians won it 8-3 in the second game .
 Ron Strasburger sparked a third inning rally with a 2 run but was shortly put down . CC was put down after being hit by a pitch in the outfield .
 In the second game, the tireless Jorgensen again went to the mound for the Tigers, but had to call for help from Jim Hanks in the third .
 Jim Colbert, a Colorado Springs lad, led the Indian hitting with 3 hits in three trips to the plate and 3 RBIs . Jim Colbert led the team to victory in the first game .
 One of Colbert's hits was a home run, and Big Syl Carraway slapped a four bagger for the Tigers .
 Wittshire led the Mountaineer hitting witli up with the prospect of a good, tough line . Wittshire leads the line with a tough line-up .
 Ed DeGeorge, Rick Carroll, Steve Frink, Al Loosli, and Steve Sabol will be sophomores next year . Al Looosli is one of the team's top freshmen players . Steve Fink is a junior at the University of Maryland .
 Chris Batley demonstrated fine punting Saturday night with an average of over '40 yards per kick . Batley's punting average is more than 40 yards a kick .
 All things considered, the CC football team should be watched closely for they have the potential of having a fine season next year .
 CC failed to get the clutch hits they needed and left many men stranded . CC fail to get clutch hits and left men stranded on the field .
 Alex Yankovieh rapped Tevis for a home run with one aboard in the sixth . The Tigers beat the Tigers 4-2 on Tuesday night . The game was one of the first two games of the season .
 It works together with a pure while outer filter-to balance the flavor elements in the smoke . The filter is designed to balance the flavors of the smoke and balance the other elements in a smoke .
 DUAL FILTER n pj re white """" outer filter I ACTIVATED I"" 1 CHARCOAL &■-* inner filter fff Produtt p/ l/£ j/mAiil-tiit ,_/< Aia-c-t
 Sanders' Kentucky Fried CHICKEN ""it's finger lickin' good"" Take-Home Department Sf> Open *p\ I Im. to RC 12m.
 Hamburgers are tiavo 16c Hamburgers, too, buy 'em by the sack fulll ""till"
 Charles L Horn, president of the Olin Foundation, addressed the student body . Charles Horn is president of Olin's Foundation .
 The fourth annual Abbott Memorial Lecture was given Wednesday, May 9, in Shove Chapel . It was one s:« ngs, Colo., May 19, 1961 Colorado College Abbott Memorial . Lecturer Nevins Advocates Faith in Time of Crisis I .
 Mr Allen Nevins was introduced by Dr. Benezet, Dr. Nevins and Mr Nevins . After a few introductory remarks by President Benezets, Mr Nevin was introduced .
 Louis Geiger, head of the history department, [ v jio gave Mr Nevins full praise for his many achievements j n the fields of history and literature .
 Mr Nevins is a small man, with a quiet speaking voice, and gentle sense of humor .
 His talk went over the heads of many students . Perhaps this is the reason that he spoke over-the-headless .
 Mr Nevins gave the student body a faith to live by, a faith in democracy, he said .
 He stated that democracy is not a static faith, but one that grows stronger as it is exercised . He then went on to prove how this was so in the Civil War and is true now .
 By showing how Lincoln faced this crisis, Nevins demonstrated how we can deal with crisis today . He demonstrated how he faced it the way he did, Mr Nevins said .
 Lincoln referred to Lincoln's belief in ""the common sense of the common people"" as the basis of our democracy . Lincoln believed in the idea of common sense as basis of democracy .
 Lincoln never lost faith in democracy because he had faith in the people, Lincoln said . Lincoln said that he never lost his faith in democratic process . Lincoln was assassinated in 18th century .
 During times of crisis it is useless to analyze and theorize on democracy, but it is vital to practice it, says Julian Zelizer . Democracy is a vital part of democracy, says Zelizer. It's vital for democracy to be practiced, he says .
 Mr Nevins also stated that this democracy needed a strong leader, Democratic or Republican . He said this democracy needs a strong political leader .
 "This leader may make errors and stumble, but as he does, his faith in the democracy he represents will grow, and we will survive," he says . "We will survive. This leader may stumble and stumble," he adds .
 Colorado jfege held its annual fund-raising stion in Perkins Hall . There he Stabler Auctions Iffices, Services or UG Fund . Colorado Jfege holds annual fund raising event .
 The auction was to raise a nip sum of money at Colorado jUege . The money will be donated to e Colorado Springs United Giver's intl drive .
 The United Giver's md collects money from all over e community and apportions it to e various individual charities aejding to their needs . It is a collection of money collected by the United Givers .
 The object is to avoid the annoyance of conmt soliciting for funds of separate unties all year long . The object lo avoid the annoying annoyance of the conmt .
 Tlte one ive takes care of all the charities At Colorado College, rather than nply asking for individual student ntributions, an auction is held . The weeds of which go to the United iver's Fund are held .
 Bids were taken for the buying of many Hministrative offices, for the buyng of special services by some of the professors . Bids taken for buying special services and for buying student services .
 Stabler's inimitable feeling for picturesque revealed itself from beginning when he passed nd two bed-pans in which to ollect any ready cash which memrs of the audience may have had indy.
 The bed-pans produced $34 ash with many pledges for more iey to be donated later . Dr. Dr. Laving emptied the audience of petty cash, Dr.
 Stabler began the ual auctioning, with all the tee-cracking and gag-playing that motioning by ""Doe"" Stabler implies . Stabler: "Doe"
 Administrative offices sold Dean of Men to Miss Sue or $45; Dean of Women to '•well Bossart for $66; and [resident of the College to Phi dta Theta for $85 .
 These offices will be filled today, May 19, and ill be held for one day . These offices |11 be filled .
 Benezet pointed out Hie Blue Key Honors Assembly, not intended to be merely nomw, hut instructive, giving the stuFits a chance to see s involved in carrying out a administrative position . sold were the services of proe »ors and administrators in areas
 The author has a rare mind of a man who is able to see the past as it applies to the future . He has also seen the past and the future of the world .
 Mr Nevins is the ""dean of American historians"" indeed . Nevins' ability to see the past as it was, to pick out the important details from such a wealth of information .
 All graduating seniors who havenot yet tilled out Senior Questionnaires must turn them in immediately . Turn them in at Rastall Center Desk .
 All seniors are to meet in the Slocum parking lot at 10:00 the day of the Sneak . The Sneak will be held in the parking lot .
 Contact Jeff Race, . 375, Bob Selig, x375, or Annie Hereford, x396, soon if you need further information .
 Six outstanding music students will present in a student recital on Thursday, May 25, at 8:15 m.m. in Perkins Hall . Misses Isabel Wil and Isabel Wil will be featured .
 Miss Berneau came to Colorado College this fall as a Boettcher Scholar . She is a member of Colorado College's Boetcher Scholar program .
 She is not only a fine pianist, but also a very talented young composer . She is also a talented young pianist .
 A good example of her creative ability will be offered at the children's modem dance concert of Mrs. Mrs. Smith . The children's modelled dance concert will be held on Saturday .
 Miss Berneau has composed the entire music for this event which is scheduled for Saturday, May 27, 3:00m. in Perkins Hall .
 The student recital will be continued by Miss Barbara Morgan, a sophomore from Ft. Barbara Morgan .
 Collins will perform the violincello sonata by the English Baroque composer, Henry Eccles . Collins will also perform a sonata from the composer's sonata .
 Miss Morgan plays regularly in the 'cello section of the Colorado Springs Symphony .
 Miss Polly Franklin will sing an aria from Mozart's ""Don Giovanni"" and songs by Liszt and Gretchamnoif . The voice department will be represented by Miss Polly .
 Miss Franklin, a sophomore from Wichita Falls, Texas, was heard earlier this year in the stage production of Purcell's ""Dido and Aeneas"" as the sorceress .
 She is vice president of Kappa Alpha Theta . She is elected to the Alpha Lambda Delta, national scholastic honorary sorority for freshman women . She was elected to Alpha Lambdda Delta .
 She will be accompanied by the well-known pianist and organist, Ben Gehart . She will perform at the event in New York City .
 Mr Sherman is another Colorado College student who is a regular regular member of the symphony .
 He will perform the violin concerto in a minor key by Antonio Vivaldi . The violinist will be accompanied by Barbara Couey . He will also perform a piece by Vivaldi's Violin Concerto in minor key .
 The program will come to a close with the first movement of Mozart's piano concerto in C minor, with freshman Miss Barbara Couey as soloist .
 This young lady, who comes from Trinidad, Colorado, is already one of the best piano performers of the department . She comes to us from Colorado .
 Her accomplishments in the next three years will deserve special attention . Her accomplishments will be special attention. Her accomplishments should be special .
 This year he returned with Mr Whin to break ground for the building which is to be known as the Olin Hall of Science .
 Horn expressed his belief that an education should develop the student's capabilities for independent thinking, and not rote learning . Horn: An education should be developed to develop the students with independent thinking . Horn believes that rote teaching should not be taught to teach students how to think .
 Government paid education would suffocate development of independent thought, he said . He further stated that government paid education will suffocate independent thought .
 He finished by saying that he was extremly pleased to be visiting with us once again .
 The Olin Foundation is making a further contribution to the college and paying for the ""moveable equipment"" which is needed in the science building . Mr Whin addressed the college to the surprise of all present .
 The ceremonies continued with the changing of the ASCC president's office into the hands of Mr Chris Griffiths . The presentation of departmental, athletic, allcollege and Blue Key awards was presented .
 The Chemistry Department awarded the American Chemical Society Award to Mr Harold D Rider, the Chemical Rubber Co. Rider . The award was given to Mr Rider, who was awarded the award for his company's work .
 Award to the outstanding freshman in chemistry to Mr Michael Orein, and the Merck Index Award to Mr Frank G Mesich . The Merck index Award was given to Frank Mesich, who received a Merck Award for the best chemistry teacher .
 The Economics and Business Administration Departments awarded the Kaye Prize in Business Administration- to Mr Richard Street and Miss Joan Erickson . Miss Joan Erickson received the award for Economics and Economics . Mr Street received the prize for Business Administration .
 English Department awarded Evelyn May Bridges Prizes in Poetry to Mr John Ebey and Miss Roseann Brown, second prize .
 The Geology Department awarded Mr Fred Peel the Rocky Mountain Association of Geologists Award as the outstanding senior in geology . Mr Peel was awarded the award by the association of geologists .
 The German Department gave awards for excellence in German, given by the German government through the Consulate of the Federal Republic of Germany, to Misses Elizabeth Bungenei', Ann Schneeberger, Cecilia Luschak, Judy Gray, Elizabeth Kendall and Lorinda Taylor .
 The Mathematics Department awarded prizes to Mr Bobby Johnson and Mr Paul Jensen for excellence in mathematics .
 The Romance Languages Department gave the award for excellence in Spanish to Miss Martha Lockhart . Miss Lockhart also received the Olin Foundation's award for xl that was awarded by Dr. Olin .
 Charles L Horn excellence in French was given by the cultural section of the French government . Misses Linda Harrison, Judy Bensel, Stephanie Row and Stephanie Row were also given the award .
 The Sociology and Anthropology Department awarded the Southern Colorado Chapter of the National Association of Social Workers Award to Mr Eugene Higgina . Miss Shiela Tomlin received the Swart-Abbott Prize .
 Speech, Radio, Drama and Debate Departments awarded Miss Sigrld Hepp, Miss Ann Willcox, Mr Wallace E Caldwell . Mr Caldwell was awarded the award for Mr Caldwell .
 Athletic awards for the most valuable player in football went to Mr Jack Real . The most valuable players in basketball and baseball were awarded to Mr James Hunks . Mr Real won the award in football .
 Awards went to Mr Jeff Race in golf, Mr Jim Sperry in tennis and Mr Don Kintz in track . Awards were also given to Mr Jim and Mr Jim in tennis .
 ASCC announced that tho monetary awards for school activities went to Mr Robert Selig, Miss Janet Fry and Mr Charles Ritchie . Mr Selig and Miss Fry were awarded monetary awards .
 Black and Gold Elect New Officers For Next Year . Meeting held May 11 produced both new officers and new members .
 Chris Batley, Kick Carroll, Rich Cholakian, Mike Clark, Wayne Deutsche!'', Mike Durfee, Bill Greeley, Stan Hybl, Stan Kaiser, George Klein MrAlpine, Sieve Sabom, John Simus .
 Already great plans are being made for next year's projects which will include freshmen agitation and orientation . Plans are already being made to help students prepare for the new year .
 Colorado Spri Bright-Eyed anrfBushy-Tailed . Looking back we wonder where the semester went .
 It seems that it was only a couple of weeks ago that we got back from semester break, but now the specter of exams blows that dream to bits . It seems only a few weeks ago, but it seems that we are back in full form .
 The new building intrudes daily as we all try to find the shortest path to the next class . The new school has been built in a bid to keep students on the path of their education .
 "These have been, we feel, a real spark of student interest in both the college community and national affairs," the university says . "We feel that these have been a spark of interest in student interest," the school says .
 The new presidentt of ASCC, voted into office by a record student turn-out, has made some real hopeful promises . If the conduct of the two ASCC meetings he lias presided over are any indication, he means to carry them out .
 In less than a month most will leave and CC will be turned over to the summer students and tourists . All these things are barely started and in less of a month, most have left .
 One can't help but wonder if the welcomed hiatus of summer vacation won't prove too much for all the projects that have been started, and will dry up with the summer heat .
 A college campus needs two spring springs, one at the regular time and another in the fall . Seems a college campus need two spring breaks, one in the spring and the other in fall .
 Perhaps the incoming freshmen will provide the stimulus (and we don't mean just to upperclass men) to renew our energy to help finish all that has been started .
 To the graduating seniors we say goodby — come back in a year of two and see all the paper' projects become realities . To the rest of you, see you next fall, bright-eyed and bushy-tailed .
 CC demonstrated for a couple of hours downtown downtown on Monday . The group demonstrated for two hours downtown . CC students demonstrated for the first time downtown .
 Citizens were asking the people of this town to give some careful thought to alternatives to the nuclear arms race as a means for determining national security .
 As one of the demonstrators we received several unsolicited comments on the proceedings . We are happy to clarify that we were not involved in the demonstration .
 This paradoxical condemnation left us with two alternatives ; either this pair must get along grandly together at home or neither really knows what they were talking about since they really didn't know what was trying to do .
 This reminded us of similiar comments about our TIGER, one of which was by an individual who said he couldn't stand it anymore, six pages of sex was too much to read . So he threw it away as soon as he picked it up . This week eight glorious sinful
 He is now on his way to England from where he will return to CC next fall . He will play for the first time since returning to the sport next year .
 Thought about something yesterday — knew it was important day, but remembered Lincoln was shot , and forgot about you, since you had forgotton us at birthday, Christmas, Valentine's day, etc., etc. etc.
 Have name of five or six peers, but will have time for your friends, too . Have five or more peers but also have friends with them . Have time for friends, also have time to spend time with friends .
 Moscow titanic place — comparatively few buildings built since Revolution — and those in older style . Fewer buildings built in Moscow since Revolution have been built since .
 Everything massive, rather dilapidated, except in center of town, and on outskirts where enormous housing developments (big blocks of flats as we say) are going up .
 People seem in hurry, few speak English, but almost everyone was stopped by a couple of teenagers or people in twenties who wanted to know about Outside World .
 Hermitage great collection, part of it in winter palace; saw room in which Kerensky govt. was arrested, after Kerenky left . Room in which room was used to arrest him, after he left .
 People sometimes, not always, poorly dressed; seemed more accessible, outgoing in Leningrad, away from eyes of Nikita, window on West, etc. People sometimes sometimes, sometimes poorly dressed . People sometimes dressed poorly, but seemed more often, often more accessible .
 Guides either naive or restrained; much less strident nationalism there than we expected . Guide: "Guide guides either naive, restrained, restrained or restrained" Guide: 'Guide guides or restrained'
 Everywhere there seems to be, from what we could guess, great pride in achievement to date . Everywhere there is, from . what we can guess, a great pride . in achievement .
 Until that time we are kept on go . We take a few local trips, trying to make the most of our ""kotiapulaincn"" before we return to the Occident .
 The following letter was received by Mr Hairy Booth from last year's exchange student Bruno Attolmi .
 The TIGER is printing it because its message is pertinent to all CC students, and, in fact, all students anywhere in America . The message is important to all students in the U.S.
 "Only now I can look back and see this past year as a whole, as a past experience," she says . "I can now look back to the past year," she writes .
 "My experience has been partial and incomplete, limited in time and in space (only Leningrad and Moscow) but I like to think to have made the most of these days," says the author of the book . "My life in Russia has been very interesting, but it's
 The ASCC is a car with a perfect engine and no dri Vfc shaft; they both run beautifully but don't go anywhere . At this time the analogy was drawn b, tween the ASCC and a car without a dri VFC shaft .
 The ASCC has, in the past, been no attempt by the ASCC to express dent opinion . Th reason, it was said, that they don't go anywhere is that ther has been no effort to express .
 The people that you elected to represenen] hi""; you are, for the most part, enthusiastic and able, but it shotilj be pointed out that these people do not represent all interest, on the campus .
 If all interests are to fe represented by the ASCC, a good many of them will have to represent themselves . The means of representation are available to all students, says the author .
 AH ASCC meetings are open and all students are invited auj urged to attend these meetings . AHASCC meetings will be open and students are encouraged to attend them .
 The purpose of these letters will be comment on the progress which we hope to make in the con, ing year . The purpose is to comment on progress .
 The effectiveness of the ASCC will be largely <fc pendent on how well informed and interested the student bod; is . The effectiveness will be much dependent on the well-informed and interested student bod. is .
 The ASCt will become an organization respected by both the student, and the administration . I am looking forward to a fine year in which the ASCt is respected .
 One of the more distinguished current-day muckrakers, skilled in the art of expose' and revelation, recently visited ' cool colorful Colorado Springs and conducted a news conference .
 Drew Pearson is a rabble-rousing firebrand with more than fire in his eye, Pearson says . Pearson: "I'm not a man who doesn't have a sense of respect for the world" Pearson says Pearson's views on the world's most important issues of the day
 This reporter was rather surprised to find that the hard-hitting journalistic hand of Mr Pearson belonged to a quite engaging gentleman with nothing but a twinkle in his eye . Mr Pearson is a very engaging gentleman .
 Mr Pearson was able to offer a defense for the sometimes sensational news coverage offered by himself and other members of the daily press . He emphasized that it often was not sensational enough .
 Mr Pearson then turned his muckraking skills upon the past and current political situation . He then turned to the present and current situation .
 He also encouraged boycott of Cuba and expressed chagrin that Castro was receiving so much aid from Canada .
 Mi Pearson forecasts that Bolivia i be the next ""explosion spot"" South America . Mi Pearson predicts that Bolivia will be an "explosion" spot in the region .
 He recalled meetm ing the Peace Corps Director, SerF geant Shriver, the day before ar^i W called him ""an efficient operator/^™ Mr Pearson praised th' of America for doing a good j< in spite of being starved for funk and has much confidence
 The International Cooperation Administration neetfe in his estimation.to be revitaliwBL and cleaned out of ""joyr so that it will once again do a good job it did when it administered the Marshall Plan. The International Organization Administration.
 President Kennedy's )'"" ""Hundred Days,"" Mr Pearson sessed as being generally good ag predicts that President KenrtJ will pass most of the hi3 dome* legislation .
 All organizations which have 'ceived blanks from the editors of student handbook are requested fill them out and return them to the Rastall Center Desk .
 This is neo sary in order to tbat each orgua* u'on may get the representation they would like in the Handbook . This is a neo-socialist handbook .
 Kastall Center has just finished its second year as part of the Colorado College community . The Colorado College campus is home to Colorado College students and faculty members .
 In its two years of existence, Kastall Center has firmly established itself as the ""Hub"" 'f the college's extra-curricular life . In its 2 years of existnc e, the center has established itself .
 Three points of the philosophy behind our college union should be made if we wish to consider the direction that Ras']j should be taking . The union should definitely be made, says the writer .
 Rastall must pro -;,im itself to be just a piece of the college's activities pie . First of all, he must pro-im .
 iiggtaif has become the geographeal and traffic hub of the campus . It might be expected to also bethe social and activity hub to be sure, f or the campus itself .
 Both Rastall and ASCC are beseiged by requests to do this or that for this . or that group . Now, however, both Rastalls and . ASCC have been asked to do so much more .
 It would be loped that Rastall could limit itself to helping these groups to themselves, not spoon ceding them a massive bureauratic program .
 A significant part of Rastall's id Activities role can be the coordinition of the cooperation of several [roups in sponsoring such extend1(1, special affairs such as Writers' willVorkshop' Week and Greenwich tillage Week .
 The second point to be made ■ning Rastall's philosophy is ;hat it must keep pace with CC's icademic advancement and not be ntervailing drag on CC's luest .
 Every organzation on campus has an obligaion to add to the student's entire ducational development and effort, bringing to the students an appreiation of what he and others are loing in the classroom .
 Bridging the gap beween the various academic displines and cultures is the special sponsibility of CC's extracurricar activities . CC's Extracuricar activities are the special sponsors of the school .
 Rastall can aid in lis by sponsoring programs that fill give students, in sugar :oated form, a glimpse at what he artist and scientist are both .
 His field of interest is the USSR and its foreign policy, about which he spoke clearly and with much knowledge, he said .
 The thesis of the talk was that it is evident there is a new look in the way that the Soviets, or more particularly Khrushchev, wish to deal with what they call the western camp . The thesis was that there is an obvious new look at the way the Soviets wish to
 The change is most apparent by comparing the contemporary attitude with the policy which Stalin formulated . Stalin formulated a policy which is similar to that of the Soviet Union .
 Stalin outlined the 'old look' in foreign policy such that the world is divided into two camps, that of socialism and that of capitalism . Future would be determined by which camp defeated the other, Stalin said .
 Russia's job was to strengthen socialism (a synonym for communism) in Russia and then use it as a base to spread it by revolution to other countries . Russia's goal was to use socialism as a basis for revolution to spread socialism across the world .
 Russia would strengthen herself by increasing economically by emphasizing henvy industry rather than consumer goods and militarily . Russia would defeat the imperialistic world by playing upon its three inherent contradictions, its labor against its capitalists, the imperialist countries against their colonies .
 Khrushchev has ambitious ideas about socialism, already claiming that the socialistic world is ahead of the capitalistic world . The socialist world is already ahead of capitalistic, Khrushchchev says .
 This comparison is not made on grounds of production but he claims supremacy in this field too in a much shorter time than seems at all likely . This is not only because he is faster than anyone else in the field .
 He appears to .be placing much more importance on the strengthening of Russia and socialism than the weakening of capitalism .
 Russia has introduced light industry in Russia itself, and since the Commnuistic conquest of Red China, seems more aware of Communnist possibilities in Asia, Africa and even South America .
 The liberal arts school is truly the last fortress against the anonymous conformity of bigness . In this area, the college is truly a fortress against anonymous conformity .
 It should be Rastall's role to show that satisfaction and happiness can still be found according to the individual's own designs . One happy family often breeds nothing more than contented, unproductive cows .
 In the final analysis Rastall's most significant contribution to the liberal arts concept can be in breeding discontent, rather than in smothering with a barrage of group therapy activities, he says .
 COMMITTMENT Group Demonstrated for Peace in Colorado Springs . Sines 1899 ME; COMMITTment group Demonstrates For Peace . Sine 1899 ME.
 The demonstration began in front of the county court house . Sign carriers marched to Pikes Peak and Tejon, where they split into four groups .
 Literature was passed out to interested passersby, stating the purpose of the demonstration . The demonstration was held in front of the crowd .
 The real purpose of the demonstration was to ask the citizens of this community to become more informed as to the threat and danger of nuclear arms . The spokesman for the group said that the real purpose is to ask citizens to consider the alternatives .
 When questioned whether or not the group was advocating pacifism, the response was a firm negative . The group was asked whether they were advocating pacifist .
 A ""follow-up"" meeting was held on Wednesday evening at 7:30 in Carpenters Had. Had. A ""Follow-up" meeting was also held Wednesday evening . The meeting is a follow-up meeting of the meeting .
 The dangers and alternatives to a nuclear holocaust were discussed by some well-informed citizens . At the meeting the dangers and the alternatives were discussed .
 Two Colorado College students were given top honors in the sixth Annual Inter-Collegiate Art Exhibit . Dunloti and Carlson took top honors at the sixth annual show .
 This joint effort on the part of the two schools is designed as a double opportunity for students to gain individual attention as well as to bring attention to fine arts in Colorado .
 The graduating seniors should be closer to reaching these goals than the rest of us . Having been here for four years, they should be able to reach these goals, if they are valid .
 The college has achieved its goal of "helping its students acquire self-reliance without losing humility" However, one person felt that lie had perhaps lost some humility .
 The college has in no way ""guided them in the development of self-control and the habit of considerate conduct toward others"", because this was learned in the home or not learned at all . The college says it has no way of "guiding them" in developing self-
 The men interviewed felt that the atmosphere on campus promotes more aggression and self-assertion among the men students than it does consideration . The men said they felt the atmosphere promotes aggression more than consideration .
 The college has indeed ""prepared them for active and intelligent participation as citizens", says the college . This rightfully belongs among college's goals, says the author .
 In .most cases the college has not ""sought with them n knowledge of Cod and provided the occasion for worship"", and that it should not necessarily try to . do this . That in . most cases . has not . necessarily tried to do this, and that . that in
 Seniors feel that the two which belong in :i college atmosphere can lie sought after and reached very fully at Colorado College . Seniors say that the college's goals are stated incorrectly in the catalog .
 Finest quality leather, master-crafted in genuine moccasin construction, cradles your foot from heel to toe .
 MYRU MYRpeace to the world, and looking convinced and convincing; . I heard that heroic, great people speak of their scientific achievements, of their . po* tentialities . of their Land, of Mother Russia, of . Mother Russia ... of their beautiful sinning
 "I have just come back to this old, dear Europe, and I still have before me the shining, sterilized image of comfortable America," says the author of the book .
 You are a great, really great, Country, blessed by Nature in every possible way . You are also blessed by nature in every way, says President Obama .
 The word America meant to us all that is good, and loyal, and democratic, and ethical; the invincible force that STOOD UP and came to rescue Europe and the world from tyranny, despotism, violence . At the end of the war, the word America means to us
 My Russian experience scared me, because to us, and the world, and to hersell, America is no longer a flag, a symbol . America is now no longer an American flag, but a symbol, she says . "America is not a flag," she writes .
 Oh, she has kept the ""religious clubs"", the crosses, the altars; but she has lost her faith . She has kept her religious clubs, the crosses and altars, but has lost faith .
 A French writer said once that a young man who is not enthusiastic about socialism has no heart . A young man with no heart has no interest in socialism, he said . The French writer once said that young people who are not enthusiastic of socialism have no heart.
 Tfei Battalion passed in review unfe the command of Battalion Adju tant Gibbon . After tin dent had completed his speech, tfei passed .
 Nevada President Benezet and Miss Ann Williamson tie the Best Compj, ribbon to the guidon of Co. Nevada . Two European Trained Mechanics Factory Experience 310 .
 A ROTO Cadets Get Honors from Benezet on Thursday, May 11, in tile ROTO speech .
 Battalion of Colorado College gave special tribute to the president of the college, Louis T Benezet . Battalion gave tribute to president of college .
 The president presented many medals to the cadets, then gave a short Entertainment Not Business for Fr. Fr. John Sutter . Fr. Sutter is a member of the National Guard .
 The last meeting of the French Club will be held Thursday, May 25 at 7:45 in the Hayes House library .
 The meeting will feature entertainment by the professors and a few students of the French department . The meeting is expected to be followed by a few French students .
 It's great to look away from the miseries, the tragedies around us, and be able to say let's build a better world!-; and when one is young (in heart, sincere, generous, warm, enthusiastic) I think it is much more difficult not to say
 The socialist faith is constantly, systematically replacing the ""American symbol" 'in the eyes of a new section of the world' 'The socialist faith' is constantly replacing the 'American symbol' 'in a new way of thinking'
 Drill Competition (MS III, Is place) Mr Roger Mayo, (2w place) and Dana Ketchem, (MSI 1st place) Rifle Team (1st team) Messrs. Denny, Crofton Diack, Victor K hnert, Don La
 Mark Stetson, James Df son, Jerry Macon, Stephen Cross Bruce Lew, William Wisgerholf, Erie H . jord, Gary Ziegler, Gary . Zieglers . Jay Freer .
 Mr Gary Gappert has ' Lived a one year fellowship in edition at Makcre College, Kampala, Uganda, and a two year teaching apSWntrnent in one of the British East ifricnn colonies .
 Miss Betty Bungener has been chosen as an alternate foi an award of the Government it the Federal Republic of Germany . Miss Bungener was chosen to be an alternate winner of the award .
 Graduate schools from Connecticut (o California) have awarded Colorado College seniors fellowships or assistSntships for advanced study . Colorado college seniors have been awarded fellowships .
 Miss Betty Burgoon has rezed a tentative assistantship in etiology at Radcliffe College . Robert Johnson has been given an assistantship at the same college . Miss Burgoon will continue to attend Radcliffe .
 Off-campus students and fratemity men can pick up their Kinkinniks at the Rastall Center desk . The Kinkiniks will be available to students off-campus .
 This list is complete up to the present time but will undoubtedly be increased as more students are notified of decisions on their applications . This list of students has been updated by the University of Cambridge .
 Any foreign aid given is picked especially for propiigandististie purposes . Any aid given to the country is picked up especially for pro-democracy purposes .
 This difference in the Communist line is further illustrated by the conflict of the Mao Tse-Tung, Red Chinese Communist leader, and Khrushchev .
 At a meeting last year held in Moscow a document was issued, which because of the many contradictions involved is thought to be meant as a sign of unity rather than reconciliation of views .
 Mao feels Khrushchev is being too cautious with his dealings of promoting socialism and discrediting and weakening the West . The fact remains that Mao feels . He feels .
 Mao still recognizes Russia, however, as the leader of the socialist camp . Mao recognizes Russia as the head of the communist party .
 Khrushchev has every intention of furthering socialism and fully expects it to succeed . The new look, then, is that he fully expects socialism to succeed in the Soviet Union . He said: 'Krushchev had every intention to further socialism'
 At the same time, he agreed with President Eisenhower that there would be no war, no internal interference and no threats as far as the opposition of the two camps is concerned .
 Khrushchev is not willing to push his relations with the West to nuclear war, but does want an economic and ideological struggle, which he is convinced he will win . The Soviet Union is convinced it will win in ideological struggle against the West .
 Egbert Miles, visiting professor of mathematics, are retiring from the faculty of the Colorado College this year . Egbert J Miles is a visiting mathematics professor .
 Miss Raechel Jensen, a sophomore; Miss Lynn Carmiehael, a junior; Mr Govdy Aamoth, a senior; Mr Ben Lewis, a freshman; and Mr Steve Sabom, freshman .
 Re-elected president of the Honor Council is Mr Stew Richie, with Miss Karen Williamson being next year's secretary . Mr Richie is re-elected as president of Honor Council .
 Its main goals will add an increased intra-campus awareness of the freshman and transfer students . Its main goal is to add an increase intra-Campus awareness .
 He began teaching here in H)21, having been a professor at Rice for a year .
 Mr Edgar Racy read selections of the poetry of Gerard Manly Hopkins in the WES room . Poetry of Hopkins Glearified by Readings .
 Mr Racy gave a few biographical notes on Hopkins, noting especially the religions and the expermental nature of Hopkins and the tension which resulted .
 In the reading the rush and tension of the words, their contrast and tension within Hopkins, was well brought out .
 Senior Women Honored At Annual AWS Dinner . The end of four years of hard work and hard play is close at hand for many CC co-eds .
 A senior honors dinner was held by the AWS in the Bemis Hall dining room on May 11 at 6:00m. The AWS recognizes the graduating senior women .
 After the seniors, special guests, and hostesses had eaten -Trrrr .zzz^zzz, a delicious meal, Miss Sue Dave, incoming president of AWS, began the presentation .
 Intramural competition awards went to Delta Gammas, Kappa Alpha Thetas and Gamma Phi Betas . Delta Gamas took first place in the competition . Kappa Alpha Betas took second and third place in competition awards .
 Miss Jean Wilfong and Miss Sue Evans earned the WAA individual trophy this year . The award was earned by two senior girls . Miss Sue and Miss Jean were both winners .
 Wakuta, a Wakuta athletic club, tapped eleven new members at the banquet . Wakuta is based on interest and paricipation in sports events .
 Misses Sue Ballou, Karen Clausen, Nadine Chang, Nancy De-lan, Marian McClaughry, Leigh Rainey, Ann Seely, Jo Waller and Home B Wilson were Misses .
 Miss Sara Rivard relinquished the Loomis Pendant to Miss Joan Jilka, president for 1961-62 . Miss Joan gave up the Pendant in 1962 . Miss Sara gave up her title in 1961- 1962 .
 Alpha Lambda Delta gave awards to senior women with the highest academic standing . The organization is comprised of those women who have maintained a 3.5-orabove average during the first semester of their freshman year .
 Misses Betty Burgoon, Pat Crossin, Karen Legg, Sara Rivard, Ruth Snodgrass, Lorinda Taylor (who had the highest grade average) and Libby Tucker had the best grade average . They were Misses .
 Next on the program was a special recognition given to the various women's dormitory presidents .
 Phibbs, from Denver, to make an award to the outstanding senior girl from Denver . Phibts, from . Denver, was nominated for an award for the 'outstanding senior girl' from Denver.
 Misses Lynn Carmichael, Mariana Cogswell, Susan Dare, Betsy Foote, Judy Gibson, Joan Jilka, Kathy Lyons, Gay Petzold, Ruth Snodgrass and Karen Williamson were Misses . They are Misses Carmichael and Mariana .
 The Ann Rice award is a memorial to a young CC co-ed who passed away her first year in college . The award is presented each year to a junior girl who best exemplifies the characteristics of brotherhood, unselfishness, kindness and high .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Check out the gallery for more from CNN iReport . Please submit your best shots for next week .
 They're Goofers by Tex Tan . Tex Tan is soft as the Autumn mist of the Keats poem . They're soft as a soft mist .
 Mountain and Cycling Clubs End Season . The nature-lovers of CC have been making the best of the recent spring weather .
 Members of the Cycling Club took a ride up Cheyenne Canyon on Sunday . They feasted on the usual hot-dogs .
 Mark Stetson and Cassius DeFlon rode together in the Garden of the Gods . It was a windy day, but a good one for riding, and the group of ten decided to plan more such outings in the fall .
 The polka event included couples dancing to polka music supplied by a record player powered by a portable generator .
 An event yet to come is the Mountaineers' Weekend at Salt Lake City, Utah . The event will take place in Utah .
 This annual event provides an opportunity for climbing with members of other college mountain clubs in new areas of challenge . This year's event will be held in conjunction with the University of Arkansas Mountain Club .
 President, John Kuglin; Vice-president, Arthur Dana; Secretary, Annie Stratford; Treasurer, Art Merrel; and Publicity Manager, Jay Vickerman .
 RASTALL Bowling Florsheim shoe shop ME 3-7472 Pikes Peak and Tejon personal ideals. RASTall Bowling Florheim shoe store ME 3.7472
 Gilbert was the only man in Colorado to win a Guggenheim last year . Gilbert will go to England to study tb, the British welfare system . Gilbert is the only Colorado man to have won a Nobel Peace Prize .
 Three CC professors have ^ tired from the college they serve; so long they serve . So long and well, so long are well, well. So long, well .
 Miss Christine Moon, Dean of Women, recognized the ten best all-around senior women . Miss Moon also recognized the 10 best senior women in the country .
 Misses Pat Beaver, Betty Burgoon, Marti Gravitis, Sigrid Hepp, Anne Hereford, Karen Legg, Sara Rivard, Ruth Snodgrass, Jill Tyler and Karen Williamson were Misses .
 After a farewell address from the outgoing president of AWS, Miss Marti Gravitis, the speaker of the evening, Mrs. Gravitis spoke .
 Malone has had experience with reference to this situation, for she is both a homemaker and a practicing eye specialist . Malone is a mother-of-two and an eye specialist.
 Mrs. Smith explains how women have struggled to take their place in society . She gives several amusing examples of the difficulties women have had to deal with .
 Malone: 'A woman can do almost whatever she wishes in the way of a career these days' Malone: "In times past, there was very little opportunity for interests outside the home and family"
 YARNS AND ACCESSORIES FOR EVERY NEED . Help Aavailable during your Knitting Projects . Knitting projects .
 She will also study the Basque language, which, legend hath, so discouraged Satan that he fell off a country bridge and broke his neck . Satan is said to have broken his neck when Satan fell off the bridge .
 Dean of Shove Chapel and professor of religion has received a grant from the Congregational Church and a Doctoral Fellowship in Religion from the Rockefeller Brothers Fund for Theological Education .
 He too will work at the British Museum, leaving in June and returning in February .
 Professor of philosophy has been awarded a Guggenheim Fellowship for next year . Glen Gray, professor of philosophy, won the award .
 Gray plans to do research for a book tentatively titled To Make Men Seekers, A Theory of American Education . Gray does not yet know where he will work, but he plans to research for the book .
 Gray is the only Colorado professor to receive a Guggenheim Fellowship this year . Gray is a professor at the University of Colorado .
 He first became interested in educational theory ten years ago when classes began . He became interested when he began studying educational theory at school .
 Ruch will work toward her Ph.D. degree while her husband and child accompany her . Ruch's husband and baby will accompany her on the trip .
 Albert Seay, professor of music, received his Guggenheim last year . He will study the life of a little-known fifteenth century composer in Italy .
 In addition to his Guggenheim Fellowship, he has been awarded an American Philosophical Grant .
 Seay has had the honor of being asked to speak at the Colloques de Weiemant at Leige, a conference on medieval music . Seay was asked to give a speech at the conference .
 He has also received a fellow ship from the Lincoln Foundatiw to Claremont Men's College for a tax seminar . He has been awarded a Fellow ship from Lincoln foundatiw .
 Werner will u^ these grants during this summer and will be back to teach at CC September . Werner will be teaching at CC this summer .
 Howard Olson will take sabbatical leave during the si ond semester of next year . Howard Olson, also of t physics department, will take leave during next semester .
 She has a full tuition antship, plus a salary and assistant to the activities di Fortunately, along with all tho; leaving, three CC professors 1 be returning to the fold .
 Neale Reinitz will year's teaching and stud; ing in Helsinki, Finland . Di Darnell Rucker will return fn a year's studying and relaxing near-by Cripple Creek . Neale Reitz will return to teach and study in Finland .
 All good wishes are extended those leaving those leaving and an equally welcome is extended to th< returning . All good will be extended to those returning .
 Colorado College Tiger 19, 1961 Honors Assembly nted * he all-college awards . TEJON GOOD SUNDAY MORNING ONLY: "Colorado College Tiger"
 The award for service to Colo3 ' College publications went to l(r Gary Gappert . The award was given to Gary for his publications .
 Blue Key awarded Mr William gabom as the outstanding freshen' and gave Mr Harry Booth a necial award for his participation in campus activities .
 Richards, Nelle and Lynn Ballard were sold Beauty Salon We Specialize m High Styling Permanent Waving and Hair Tinting . U5 N Tejon ME 5-2855 .
 Ken Wis.fhof and Eddie Kintz for $19, and jotber $32, bought Mr Chris. Chris.iiiiths as housemother for a day .
 3 Messrs. Gary Gappert, Bob Johnson id Jack Cashman went as slaves for hour to Delta Gamma for $15, 3 Messr. Gary . Gappett, Johnson and Cashman were paid $15 an hour .
 Ron Strasburger, Tim oe, Tom Rivers, and Art Ackerman were bought as slaves by Miss Jan for $38. Ron, Tim, Tim and Tom Rivers were all bought as slave slaves .
 More hashers — Misses arol Herndon, Kay Matthews and ancy Bowers — were sold for $15 Beta Theta Pi fraternity .
 The Folk ngers, Inc., were sold for $30 to ag to Miss Joan Jilka for one half . An estimated $500 for le United Giver's Fund .
 CC Tigers end their ten game losing streak in RMC play by sweeping both ends of a doubleheader from Mines at Golden, 55-2 and 9-3 . The Tigers ended their ten-game losing streak by sweeping the doubleheader against Mines .
 The Tigers picked up all their runs in the first few innings in game one . Hanks held the Orediggers to only three hits in the game one game .
 The Tigers produced 2 runs in the first on a pair of Miner errors and a sacrifice fly by Hanks . The Miner errors led to the Tigers' 2-2 victory .
 Tigers picked up their last 2 6-l. lopsided games against the champs CSC in Greeley, Colorado . The Tigers have won their last two games in a row .
 John Andradi pitched 6 hit run in the third when Brian Dutba]1 j or tne R eal . s an d allowed only kowski tripled and danced across one mn . Three of the CC hits were the plate on an infield out, accounted for by
 Don Jorgensen turned in called on rather unexpectedly to a peerless performance . He handled the starting chores when only seven well spaced hits were made . Jorgenson was a parable of the parable Don
 Jorgy Ji m Hanks gave up 21 hits before the game for three including a 2 run homer called on account of rain in in the 6th .
 Saturday's game was 14 hits in his support in one of one of his snowed out games this season . His squad picked up the stn Saturday's 14 hits . The game was one of the snowed-out games scheduled this season.
 Colorado College won the 14th annual Colorado College Invitational Golf Tournament held at Broadmoor Goli Course last Friday and Saturday . The team battled high winds and intermittent snows to win the tournament .
 The low RMC team in the tournament each year is recognized as the conference champion . The low-ranked team is recognized by the RMC as the tournament champion .
 Colorado College finished eleventh in the fourteen team field and was fourteen strokes behind Adams State . Adams State finished 14 strokes behind Colorado College in the 14 team field .
 Gordon Aamoth, CC's number one man, was sixth among the seventy-five individual entries . CC's No. 1 man was sixth in the competition .
 Colo_^ rado College was host to the visitHging' teams at a buffet luncheon held at the Broadmoor Golf Club . Following the final round Colo_ ^ rado college was host for a buffet lunch at the club .
 Slocum Hall has introduced many new activities in the dorm . The dorm is intended to make the dorm more than a place for the residents to sleep and study . Students are encouraged to participate in these activities .
 It is hoped that these innovations, plus some new ones, will continue next year .
 A program was launched to recognize the wing with the highest over-all scholastic record each semester each semester . A program has been launched for the wing that has the highest scholastics record .
 The intramural program covered football, wrestling, basketball, table tennis, golf, swimming and bowling . It also included table tennis and golf .
 Traveling trophies will be on display in the display ease, along with team pictures . The display ease will be accompanied by team pictures and travel trophies .
 The Slocum Hall Council deserves a great deal of credit for a year of fine service and progress . The council has been in charge of the council for 12 years .
 Colorado College Tiger Important Dates May 19— Friday Departmental Comprehensive Exams . Friday departmental comprehensive exams May 19 .
 They are Mubian Twilight, Waters Over Nubia; Thinking Machines, Youth Has Its Say, and Ride with the Sun . They are also known as Thinking Machines and Youth has Its Say .
 These tapes may be obtained from KRCC-FM for private and classroom use . The tapes may also be obtained for private use .
 Hue., suit mtJxfiie dold Phars . You're needed .. .just as your father and grandfather were. You need to be needed just as you are .
 It's an obligation that a lot of qualified college men have to meet. ..that of serving your country, when and where you are needed. It's a big responsibility .
 This is caused by the rapidly expanding technology that goes with hypersonic air and space flight . This is due to the rapid expansion of hypersonian air and . space flight technology .
 You have the potential to profit from advanced training... then put it to work . You can profit from your advanced training . Then put it back to work.
 Air Force commissions certain college graduates after three months of training . The Air Force commissionuates college graduates both men and women .
 Navigator training program enables you to win a flying rating and a commission . The navigator training program is available for $1,000 .
 An Air Force officer's starting salary averages out to about what you could expect as a civilian . Air Force officers' starting salary is about $1,500 a year .
 Tax-free rations and quarters allowances, free medical and dental care, retirement provision, perhaps flight pay, and 30 days' vacation per year . Then add on such things as tax-free travel, quarters allowances and free medical care .
 As an officer, you will become eligible for the Air Force Institute of Technology . You will also be eligible for an Air Force Academy of Technology program .
 While on active duty many officers will win graduate degrees at Air Force expense . Air Force officers will be paid for their graduate degrees while on duty .
 Colorado Springs literary fine arts magazine is Colorado Springs Literary Fine Arts magazine . Colorado Springs is home to the world of literary fine art .
 Monthly features on books, movies, art, records, hi-fi, food, night life, TV and FM . Special series on summer theatre keep you smiling and informed .
 In announcing die ex-Ljnation the Department is seeking 'i Interest young men and women o have majored in such fields as economics, public and business .
 Candidates must be at least 21 and under 31 years of age as of October 23, 1961 . Candidates are required to be 21-years-old and 31-years old .
 Persons 20 years of iay apply if they are college Graduates or seniors in college . Applicants must be 20 years old at the age of 20 .
 A newly appointed Foreign Service Officer may serve his first tour of duty either in the Department's headquarters or in Washington .
 The starting salary for newly appointed Officers of Class 8 ranges from $5,625 to $6,345 per year, depending upon the qualifications, experience, marital status id age at the time of appointment .
 Any students interested in further information about die Foreign Service ilt Dr. Dr. John Sutter . The Foreign Service is available for students to visit .
 For the riext eight years he held various pastorates in England and taught part-time at the niversity of Durham . For the eight years in England he was pastorate in England .
 In 1958 he migrated to the U.S. ith his wife and three children . ip and Mrs.   migrated to  the United States ith he and his family . ip .
 Mr Burton will teach only one Ufse in the Department of Ketfon and so will have the time, 1 none of his predecessors have 'd, to be pastor to the whole col-6e community, particularly to Ments. Mr Burton .
 He and his family will Fein the Stewart house (on Wood Avenue just north of President szet's house), and he is lookH forward to getting to know s Many of the campus personnel 8 Possible, being willing to coners e .
 Seven new faculty members began their duties last Monday for the first time at Colorado College . Colorado College has a history of diversity in faculty and staff .
 The school bus and other transportation will leave the Rastall Center parking lot at 2:30m. for nearby North Cheyenne Canon . School bus, other transportation to the Canon Canon will depart at 2 a.m. local time .
 Rock climbing demonstration will be held on granite pinnacles surrounding outdoor amphitheater . Neal Reinitz will explain the rock climbing demonstration to the audience .
 Tbe Significance of Christ; Anger and Disappointment Speaker: Kenneth Burton, Minister of Shove Chapel Worship Leader: Dr. Dr. Kenneth Burton . Dr. Tbe signified the significance of Christ in the life of Jesus Christ .
 The sermon concerns the fact that too often we attempt to deny the real humanity of Jesus by refusing to acknowledge that He could be angry . Shove Chapel is a Christian-led service at the University of North Carolina .
 Mr Burton wishes to draw attention to the incident where Jesus curses a big bee .
 Richard C Bradley, 311, of Chicago, is associate professor, and George J Basbas, 23, of Manchester, N H. H., instructor . Richard Bradley is also an associate professor at the University of Chicago .
 Donald W Sheam, 30, of Oakland, Calif., has been appointed assistant professor of psychology . Donald W. Sheam has been named assistant professor at University of California .
 The Kinnikinnik is scheduled for publication in December . The first issue of the first issue will be published in December 2015 .
 The exact deadline for contributions to the magazine and for the above-mentioned positions will be announced later .
 Colorado College began its 88th year of classes last Monday with a freshman class boasting the highest achievement in the college's history . The largest new building program ever on the campus is now underway .
 Overall scholastic ability of students at CC is higher this year than ever before in the college's history . This year's results are due to exceptionally high averages posted by the freshmen class on college entrance examinations .
 This year there are some 3S0 freshmen and transfer students, plus a few special foreign students . Students come from 40 states and 15 foreign countries . This year's students will be in attendance at the school .
 Students will be among the approximately 1200 students enrolled in the college .
 More than 30 per cent of the new students are from the state of Colorado . The new students will be students from Colorado .
 The total number of applications for admission for the 1961-62 academic year was the largest ever recorded by the college . Students applied for admission to the college for the first time in their history .
 Officials say applications made this year surpassed last year's by more than 300 . Officials said applications for jobs were more successful this year than last year .
 Under construction at the present time are three fraternity houses, a new library and a new science building . Under construction are three frat houses, three new science buildings, three fraternaternities and a library .
 The §450,000 fraternity house cluster will be completed and occupied this fall . All are scheduled to be completed during the next two years .
 The Kappa Sigma, Phi Gamma Delta and Phi Delta Theta fraternities will be housed in three buildings . Kappa Sigma will be home to Kappa Gamma Delta, Kappa Sigma and Phi Kappa Sigma Theta . Kappa Gamma Theta Theta will be the Kappa Sigma fraternity's first fraternity to
 Each of the twostory and basement houses will provide quarters for more than 36 fraternity members during the school year .
 The Rastall Center Board has opened the position of Business Manager to application . The position is open to application for the position .
 The application forms are available at the Rastall Center desk and will close September 22 . All applicants will be notified by September 20 so that all applicants can be notified .
 The Sigma Chapter of Alpha Kappa Psi, The First Business Fraternity, will present Mr Joseph Schmidt, the Assistant Director of Research for tbe Denver and Rio Grande Railroad .
 Mr Schmidt will give an informal talk on the importance of the railroads in today's economy .
 He will discuss the problems railroads will face in the future, such as the use of rockets for carrying mail . He will also discuss using rockets to carry mail .
 Special guests at this meeting will be Roy Walholm Jr., past president of Sigma Chapter and Bill Graefe, president of Gamma Sigma Chapter at Regis College in Denver .
 This will be the first of a series of programs sponsored by Sigma Chapter of Alpha Kappa Psi . The program will be open to all male students interested in the fields of Business or Economics .
 There will be an organizational meeting of the Colorado College Debate Team next Tuesday, Sept. 30 .
 All students who are interested in the Debate Team are urged to attend . The debate team will be held at the University of North Carolina .
 Five CC students were among the approximately 4,000 Republicans who gathered in Denver last Wednesday to hear former Vice President Richard M Nixon . Mr Nixon commend Uiu GOP in Colorado for its organizational work .
 Nixon, while expressing disappointment with the first eight months of the Kennedy administration, made clear . support of the President iu the Berlin crisis .
 Mr Nixon spoke of the challenge presented by world Communism . He cautioned that in dealing with die Communists, strong words must be backed by strong action .
 Republican presidential nominee noted dial Premier Khrushchev had a grout deal to lose by a full-scale war . Republican presidential candidate urged that our efforts in other ureas of competition with the Communists strengthened .
 Mr Nixon personally greeted die many in attendance at the event .
 Henninu Gertrude Kilgore bus has given Coburn Library a copy of her new book . Coburn has given the book to the library in Coburn .
 Mrs. Rough Houd in the Rockies in one chapter of her novel, she writes of ""floating"" up to receive her coveted diploma from Colorado College in June, 1952, magna cum luude .
 Kilgore's book was published in July by Alan Swallow's Big Mountain Press in Denver, Colorado . It is on sale at tile CC bookstore .
 Rough Houd in the Rockies opens when the writer became a log-cabin wife in the mountains near Denver a quarter of a century ago, and ends with the author in her present position as Dean of Girls at Roy J Wasson High School in Colorado Springs .
 Through the entire book appear a lively wit and a warm philosophy . The author and her husband and later dieir children run the die gamut from experiences in mountain cabin to fox farming, to living in a trailer, to return to formal education .
 Kilgore has published articles in Christian Science Monitor, Empire Magazine, Parents Magazine, and educational and guidance journals .
 Please alft-n all malclrlal be contacted for further information if need be be needed .
 TIGER needs a new editor for the rest of the fall semester . Applicants must have at least a 2.2. for previous semester's work, lots of willing friends, willingness to work. Your cooperation with the above will be returned .
 From the Chair is the first of the bimonthly column from the Chair . Chris Griffiths expresses his enthusiasm for the coming year . "From the Chair" will be the first column from this column .
 We cannot help but have great expectations when we consider the able leaders who are found in almost every organization on campus . We are disappointed at the lack of leadership leadership in the past .
 This year's abundance of leadership and great enthusiam will mean that much of the responsibility for the organization of campus activities can be assumed by the various organizations other than the ASCC . The ASCC will concentrate on its primary duties as a coordinating and policy-making body .
 In the field of policy-making it is hoped that the ASCC can effectively convey student opinion to the administration and faculty . In so doing, it will contribute to the policies of the school .
 All students should attend the Monday afternoon meeting of the ASCC in Rastall Center and offer their ideas to the Council . For this reason, I invite all students to attend .
 Only active participation by the entire student body can insure the success for which so many of us have hopes, says author . "Only active participation is needed for the success of the student body," she says .
 Four students had to be dropped from courses with the grade of F for failure to observe the regulation of class attendance immediately preceding and immediately following spring vacation . I would appreciate this .
 "We have veryfew strict rules, but the ones that we do have are of course enforced," he says .
 Each of the four students was given every opportunity to present a legitimate excuse . None of the five even bothered to present one after being notified of the incident .
 This is a somewhat larger list than we have had in recent years at the spring vacation period . Perhaps you can have a brief notice of this in the TIGER indicating that the number is somewhat larger than normal . I hope very much that we will not have as large a list at
 Peoples of the world had better spend less time fighting one another, says William R Sullivan . Insects, water shortages, and diminishing resources, things that have the final say about how we live .
 Gary Gappert graduated from CC last spring and is in Africa studving to teach there . After graduating last spring, he is studying in Africa to be a teacher .
 Livingston Hall is one of the five halls on campus each with about one thousand students . I live and eat at Livingston Hall which has about 1,000 students . Livingston Hall has five halls with one thousand people .
 "Three other Americans live here also although we are pretty well separated which is good. Three other Americans also live there also."
 The' Africans are pleasant and have a wonderful sense of humor, says CNN.com's John Sutter . He says they have given him a warm welcome .
 All told they compare us favorably to the English, for whom they don't seem to care very much . All told, they compare them favorably to Britain .
 The English tend to be stand-offish in contrast to the Americans who have done a pretty good job of mixing . The English are more stand-out than the Americans, according to CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The food here is rather monotonous with a lot of rice and potatoes and bread . The food is a little boring with rice, potatoes, and bread and rice .
 The weather has been extremely nice and rather cool with quite a bit of rain, much like Colorado Springs in the springtime . We all have single rooms which are plain but the weather is rather cool .
 The first sixty Americans with teaching experience have just been assigned to their teaching posts . They will begin teaching next week .
 Forty of us stay here until January when we do our practice teaching, then move on to our regular teaching posts in April . Forty-five people will stay until January .
 The foi-ty of us here are enrolled in the Institute of Education and will receive diplomas in April . The students will receive their diplomas this spring .
 Most of us are doing a lot of extra reading on African Affairs . The courses are not too taxing but most of us do a little bit of extra work .
 "It reminds me of some of the Mississippi river towns like Galena and Hannibal," says author . "It's like a river town like Hannibal," she says .
 The most attractive part of Kampala are the open-air verandas and sidewalk cafes that offer good meals and drink for about $1-2 each .
 They are about two and one-half miles from the campus which makes a healthy walk . The walk is a two-and-a-half mile walk .
 The things we miss most are good black coffee, easy transportation, and news from home . We also miss good news and easy transportation from home.
 The newspaper and magazines in Britain seem to print no news from the USA unless it deals with race riots . The U.S. seems to print little news about race riots in Britain .
 The in ion lere, called the canteen, is a far cry from Rastall but has a ve ry homey, warm air . The canteen is called the In ion Lere, and is the only place in the world to visit .
 It is 'better' perhaps in that it serves beer and other such things but of cours e that does not help the students a ny. It is better in that way, but of course, that doesn't help them .
 Coburn's chemistry section offers iuu( h moi e than Coburn does . Coburn also has a chemistry section that offers more information about chemistry than Cobrun .
 Construction on the new sen building started last May, j modern four-story classroom j laboratory building was fij»j by a grant of nearly $1,5^ from the Olin Foundation of New York City .
 It was designed be nationally known architect firm Caudill, Rowlett and S of Houston, Texas .
 1%2 science building will house chemistry, physics and 1 ogy departments . Scheduled for completion August or September of the building, it will be completed in September or October .
 Becker's Radiator & Body Shop 16 E Bijou SL R, W Becker Colo. Repair and Fender Repairing and Painting .
 Each year CC's publications are faced with the problem of finding interested personnel to help out . CC's staff are looking for volunteers to help with the project .
 All-school dance held in Rastall Center after the football game on Saturday night . After Game Dance well attended .
 All-school activities are hoped to be held more often in the future, utilizing the new Rastall Center, and with continued good attendance .
 For the first time Slocum has added a director of intramurals . Individual wings will have their own managers and individual wings will also have managers .
 3,500 fans were led in enthusiam by CC cheerleaders and the freshman class . The freshman class turned out to cheer and perform a half time demonstration .
 The game opened with a spectacular 84 yard scoring play in the first two minutes, giving CC an down with only 1:05 remaining early lead of 7 points .
 The second half, opening PORTS however, with eleven grinding plays, finally pushed them across the goalline . The second-half, however, was the first goal of the game .
 Cassius takes off the brass knucks to enjoy his favorite smoke . Slugging Junius {Pretty Boy] Cassius is a member of the "Pretty Boy" gang .
 Says Pretty Boy, "Ecce Tareyton" is one filter cigarette that really delivers de gustibus. Says pretty Boy .
 Our middle I tlie Tigers' favor, 14-7, saw the lead slip away from them . The Tigers' lead slip from them in the first half of the game .
 In the third quarter, the Ichabods trapped CC's Holleran behind the line, scoring a safety . The Ichabod scored a safety against the CC in the second quarter .
 A lucky punt by Washburn which they recovored on CC's 13 yard line spelled the ond of the scoring game . Washburn puns a lucky punt on the 13-yard line .
 A final Tiger effort, a long drive from their 45, was interrupted by a 10-yard holding penalty, which lost them a first down . Tiger's final drive from 45 were interrupted by the 10 yard holding penalty .
 Just clip the coupon below or get an entry blank where you buy cigarettes and fill in your predictions oflhe icn game scores . It's easy . just clip the coupons below .
 Enter as many times as you want . Simply send an empty Viceroy package or a reasonable rendition of the name with each entry . Send an empty package or reasonable version of the Viceroys name .
 Viceroy weaves tiny strands into the special Deep-Weave Filter . The filter gives the good taste of the rich tobacco blend . Viceroys weaves the tiny strands in the filter .
 Some tudents became aware of the committee's authority only af|r being brought before it for misconduct unbecoming a [olorado College student . Unfortunately, in past years some tudent became aware . of the . authority only . only af |r being . brought before
 The Student Conduct Committee is a joint faculty-studittee consisting of eight Vol. Vol. students . The committee is comprised of eight students .
 Colorado Springs, Colorado, September 29, 1961 Peace Corps Exam Given October 7th tuiletita, two faculty and two adijnistrative members .
 Four studmembers of the committee are leeted each spring from the sophnore class . They serve during nior and senior years . Four stud members of the . committee are each spring .
 The comittep at present consists of studt members Jean Daniels, Leigh liney, Erv Hinds, Steve Lamb and Steve Lamb . The faculty and administraembors are Dr. Tom Rivers, Dr. Gordon Aa .
 Authority is delegated by the esident of Colorado College and the Executive Council of ASCC . The Student Conduct lommittee has the power to sit in dgment on cases .
 These involve tudent misconduct, except for ordinarily handled by the Council, the residence hall, or other bodies . The Council, residence hall and other bodies are responsible for misconduct .
 Cases lay be referred to the committee /one in the college communstudents, faculty, adminisration or supervisory personnel .
 Until recently the committee's ction on individual eases has not publicized . Until recently, the committee has been secretive about the eases .
 All decisions will be published n the TIGER in order that the tudent body will be aware of the ommittee's function . This year, howiver .
 Last year the committee acted in nine cases which involved 11 students . Last year, nine cases involving 11 students involved in the committee .
 Drunk and disorderly and use if vulgar and profane language n Loomis Hall. Drunk . disorderly and disorderly . Use vulgar and disorderly language . Use if vulgarly vulgar and use vulgar and . profane . language .
 Damaging of private propery in downtown Colorado Springs vhile under influence of alcohol . Colorado Springs police say it is a crime of crime .
 Unauthorized presence in the omen's residence hall area after -.. (specifically - on a fire es'ape) while under the influence of ilcohol . Unauthorized . presence in omen . residence hall . area .
 Decisions in two of these cases resulted in dismissal of two studEnt s from Colorado College . Decisions were made in the decisions of two professors .
 Penalties included probation, fines ai, d in some cases personal coun* elin £ was directed . Lesser Penalties include probation, fine, probation, and fines .
 Colorado College Debate Club began preparations for the coming season at their first meeting . 14 new members and nine members returning from last year's squad in attendance .
 Students interested in debate should contact Professors Johnson or Rudoff . Max Power, President of the Debate Club, is also interested .
 New members of the team are; Sue Caudill, Jim Cotton, Jim Heckman, Sue Heidel, Jo Heller, Diane Johnston, Crissy Moon, Carol Nelson, Suzy Patterson, Mare Streuli, Pete Trushell, Mike Von Helms and Bob Williams .
 Members of last year's squad returning include Dave Bitters, Nancy Dehlin, Dave Furgason, Chris Griffiths, Linda Pierce, Max Power, Charles Puckett and Max Taylor .
 The meeting was attended by college YR's from Adams State College and Western State College, and CC's club acted as host .
 Any the nts to ce Corps will have another opportunity to qualify by taking examinations on October 7 . The exams will take place in the fall .
 The third round of Peace Corps examinations will begin at 8 :30 m.m. at the Main Post Office of Colorado Springs . The examinations will last for six hours, with an additional hour out for lunch .
 Each person will be given his choice between two types of examinations . Each student will be able to choose between the two exam forms .
 One examination is designed for men and women who would like to be considered for positions as secondary-school or college teachers . The exam is designed to be designed for those interested in teaching at secondary school or college .
 To take one of these tests, you need a bachelor's degree but you do not need to be an accredited teacher . To take these tests you need to take a Bachelor's degree or a teaching degree .
 The other examination is for everyone else who wants to serve in the Peace Corps . The Peace Corps will be open to the public for the first time .
 Results are considered along with such other elements as background, special skills, and character references . Results are based on the results of an online test .
 The Peace Corps hopes to attract a large number of Americans in the agricultural and industrial fields . The tests will take place in October .
 Many of those who will take examinations will be men and women who have sent in a Peace Corps questionnaire since the last testing in July . Many of the tests will be conducted by those who sent in the questionnaire since July .
 The German Research Association (Deutsche Forschungs-Gemeinschaft) presented Colorado College with a collection of German-language history, literature, and art books valued at $400 .
 The gift includes a number of scholarly periodicals dealing with German literature, culture, politics, politics and history .
 Professor Thomas Brandt said collection would be valuable to students taking advanced courses in German .
 Library officials said a selected number of the German books will be placed on exhibit in Coburn library starting October 1 . Library officials say a selection of the books will go on exhibit at Coburn Library .
 The collection will be housed there until the Charles Learning Tutt Library, now under construction, is ready for occupancy next May . The collection is housed in the library's new library .
 Brandt has been in close association with the German Research Association since it first expressed interest in making a gift to the college library . Brandt says he is in close relationship with the association since it expressed interest .
 Bruno Werner, former cultural attache at the German Embassy, Washington, D.C. was instrumental in obtaining the gift for the college . Bruno Werner was the former ambassador to Germany at the U.S. Embassy in Washington, DC .
 Colorado College formally made witness to a new academic year at its traditional convocation ceremony . Benezet Stwaks As Convocation Officially Opens '61 Academic Year .
 The ceremony continued with a Invocation by Professor Kenneth Burton, the singing; of the Colorado College Hymn, a scrip .
 This faith, Rxn^i ,.,,”,‚Scholastic Improvement, and a Welcome and Introduction by Christopher Griffiths. This faith .
 Dr. Dr. Martin made comments on progress of the physical plant at the college . New fraternity buildings, science building and library now under construction, he said .
 The central problem is the relation between us as students dedicated th ■ of I eluded, allows us to look forward to the solution of tlie seemingly Insoluble problems facing the world today . This central problem involves the relationship between students dedicated to I .
 Brooks Opens Lecture Series at the University of Columbia University . Brooks: "A world which seems to be controlled not by reason but by fear, stupidity, and irrationality"
 Benezet first pointed out that overwhelming crisis was not new in 1961 . Crisis has existed almost continuously for at least 14 years, he says .
 He illustrated by e\amples from history that reason has never played a dominant role in the activities of men. Furthermore, he illustrated by . e\ samples from . history that . reason has . never been a dominant . role in men's activities .
 Tins all has tended to make the commitment to reason and intellect less tenable . Tins have tended to be made less accessible to the public by their consumption .
 Benezet went on to examine various reactions to the dilema of man as a seemingly non-rational creature . The dilema was the question of whether man is rational or irrational .
 Some react by becoming dogmatic and authoritarian, he said . Others become super-rationalists, holding out for possibility of the possibility of pessimism in the ability to do anything .
 Benezet's own reconciliation of man as rational and as irrational involves none of these extremes . The French writer's reconciliation with man as irrational and irrational involves no extremes .
 Certainly, man is not all rational, but neither is he irrational — that is senseless and completely without contol . That is senseless, but that is not irrational, and it is senseless .
 "He is partly rational and yet moved to a great extent by non-rational elements," he says . "He's partly rational but yet moved a great amount by non -rational elements. He's not rational, but he's moved to an extreme extent," he adds .
 Nonrational elements can be highly productive in terms of artistic creativity, motivation, development of friendships, and the like . But these nonrational elements are not rational and can be productive .
 Glenn Brooks, Assistant Professor of Political Science, will give the first of three fall faculty lectures on October 3, at 8:15m. in Perkins Hall . The first lecture will be held at Perkins Hall, Perkins Hall.
 Brooks will point out the stresses and strains which this swift acceleration has brought to bear on our political institutions . Brooks will also project ways in which we must change or strengthen those institutions if they are to survive .
 Decision making, not only in regard to nuclear war but also in broad social and economic questions, is one of the many aspects of the overall problem of time compression to which Mr Brooks will devote his attention to .
 William Fischer, Professor of Geology, will speak on "The Dimensions of Geologic Time" on October 17 . Fischer will discuss the dimensions of geologic time .
 He is the author of When Governors Convene, a detailed study of the National Governors' Conference . He is also author of the study of governors' conferences .
 The TIGER is the main line of communication between the various organizations on campus and the student body as a whole . It's the main communication line between students and organizations .
 This does not have to be its only function, but as a newspaper this should be its primary objective . As a newspaper, it should be a primary objective, not just a function of the job .
 The Kinnikinik presents the students with a collection of prose, poetrv, music, art, art and drama .
 A reminder of ones college experiences is provided by the Nugget . A chance for creative writing, literary discussions and lectures is available through the Writers Workshop .
 Campus publications do exist, but they cannot fulfill their functions without the support of the student bodv . Campus publications need to be supported by the student body to fulfill their function .
 In his three years at CC I have heard numerous complaints about various publications, but few people try to strengthen their complaints with action . In my three years as a CC editor, I've heard many complaints about the publications . I'm not satisfied with the complaints, I'm happy with the
 I think that much of this hesitancy to act is because of a feeling that work in publications requires much experience . I think much of the hesitation to act comes from a feeling of a lack of experience, especially in publications .
 The position of editor requires some experience, but there is no better way of achieving this experience than by working as a staff member . True, the position of editing requires some .
 This year we have many capable freshmen with new ideas that can and should be put to use . Upperclass students have spent from one to three years either complimenting or criticizing the campus publications .
 Now is as good a time as any to offer more than verbal support, not only if you've had experience, but also if you have only an idea or a willingness to learn . Don't forget to offer your support if you want to learn more from your experience .
 If you want campus publications that meet your demands, then you must provide the thought, time, and energy necessary to achieve the quality desired . Students need to provide the time, time and effort necessary to reach the quality they want .
 Please aim nil maletrlal si be contacted for further information . If need be contacted, please contact us at 0800 555 555 111 .
 The Executive Council of ASCC feel that it is essential for each student of Colorado College to take an active interest and participation in school affairs . The members of the Executive Council feel that each student should be involved in school matters .
 We believe that every student has something unique to offer for the betterment of the college community . The college community needs to know that students have something special to offer .
 List of committees and committee chairmen on ASCC . ASCC committees and chairmen . Committee chairmen to answer specific questions on the different phases of student government .
 Independent Men's Association takes this opportunity to thank the administration for giving us the privilege of having a house . Assemblies — Betsy Gaskill Athletic — Oscar Soule Communications — Hank Rase Constitution — Bill Greeley Curriculum — Nan Burroughs Judicial — Bob Kendall
 The house, located at 15 E Cache La Poudre, will be used as a private residence for the members of the organization . The house will also be a meeting place for the organization and private residence .
 It consists of a livingroom, lounge, kitchen, den, four bedrooms and study room . It has been completely redecorated by the members of the organization .
 Those presently living in the house are John Bluck, Jim Orban, Lynne Hare, Aziz Aghbari, Steve Peacock, and Elton Hay . Those currently living at the house include John Blucks, Jim . Orban .
 We will be holding an open house Sunday afternoon, September 24, from 3 to 5m. for all those who are interested . Everyone is cordially invited to the open house .
 Applications for chairman or co-chairmen of the AH College Conference to be held in late February, are now open . Applications for chairmen and co-chairships are open . Jim Orban is the Secretary of AH College of Education .
 Applications may he obtained at the Rastall Desk and must be returned there by October 16 . Applications must be submitted to the desk by the end of the month .
 Many law schools select their freshman classes in the spring preceding their entrance . Candidates for admission to next year's classes are advised to take either the November or February test .
 The Law School Admission Test is prepared and administered by Educational Testing Service . It features objective questions measuring verbal aptitudes and reasoning ability, rather than acquired information .
 The Bulletin (in which an application for the test is inserted) should be obtained four to six weeks in advance of the desired testing date from Law School Admission Test, Educational Testing Service, Princeton .
 Completed applications must be .^received at least two weeks before the desired testing date in order to allow ETS time to . complete the necessary testing arrangements for each candidate . ETS will test candidates for a variety of positions .
 Information and Bulletins will be available from Professor J Douglas Mertz, Peabody 301. Information and bulletins are available from J Douglas .
 Students who surpass the minimum qualifications required for each program may apply . Students who will be sophomores or juniors may also be eligible to apply .
 Students in each center may choose from a wide range of liberal arts courses . Students at each center will be able to choose a range of college courses .
 Intensive language instructon and other special courses are also available . Intensive languages are also offered .
 Loneliness is very much a mix], problem: witness the title of b-J man's The Lonely Crowd arid iC plays of Tennessee Williams, n'~ loneliness is not only a modem r> r ,i lem; Jesus of Nazareth, as the even]
 The only CDmrmMkl which exists which does not Fail man and which therefore can con, with the problem of loneliness. the h . Yet in the course op it. last evening He celebrated u r j Communion with His followers .
 Nine European countries will be visited by students in Vienna program . Students will visit German; Austria, Switzerland and Italy on field-study trips .
 Paris students wjij visit England, France, Belgium, Belgium and Spain . Paris students visit Belgium, Spain, France and Belgium .
 Crisply tailored, with raised seams and flapped pockets . Available in Herrings, Solids, and rich patterns. Available in herrings, solids, or rich patterns . Available on Herrings and Solids .
 Anyone interested in the position of a photographer for publications contact Bill Stafford at ext.175 .
 On Monday morning, Oct. 31, formal traffic tickets will be issued with resulting fines enforced . Traffic tickets will also be issued at S.C. traffic stops .
 Hank Rase and courageous Black and Gold members braved flying dinks, shaving cream and clenched fists in an effort to keep order among the rowdy freshmen .
 The class of '65 was aided by two hoses which were intermittently utilized by wary upperclnssmen as n defense against the class . Two hoses were used as hoses to protect the students .
 Included among the violations were the failure to wear dinks and nametags, and the inability to answer questions posed by upperclassmen . The frosh also failed to wear namets and dinks .
 Trisb Adams, president of Tiger Club, Nadine Chang, vice-president of Black and Gold, and Ben Eastman, president . Sam Coleman was, of course, guilty . The verdict was reached by judges Adams, Adams, Chang and Eastman .
 Several freshmen extroverts agreed to lead their class in the Fight Song and Alma Mater to bring to a close .
 Friday and Saturday nights the Hub will be open until 11:15 p.m, in. in. The Hub will also be open to the public until after midnight . The Hub is located near the center of Kangaroo Kourr.
 Two new improvements over the summer in the games area resulted in a completely renovated crafts shop . Crafts shop has been completely renovated since the summer .
 MeIr ZECHA& ADAMS 1 CONOCO SERVICE STATION Nevada Ave. Now available are all kinds of MEIr Zecha&ADAMS 1 .
 Slugging Junius Cassius takes off brass knucks to enjoy his favorite smoke . Cassius has been a Slugger for more than 20 years .
 Tareyton Product of <Jfa \j/mtu'£an J <j$a£ee>~(^Ty t3) September 29, 1961 ■ Colorado College Tic wood working, leather craft, and precious stone polishing equipment .
 Also available lo all students is a tandem bicycle which can be checked out at the games area desk . Also available is a bicycle for students .
 The Rnstnll Center Board again plans to attend the Association of College Unions yearly conference . The conference will be held in Luramie, VVyo.. on October 5, 6, and 7 .
 Julie Rolfe, I ini M.irk gen, skip Mcis, Cluy Son ■ k owis, and Student Aetlvi ies 1 lire tor Don Odcn.
 The group \ rill 1 e led by Mr Richard Mi okbu n, Hi stall's Union Director .
 ASCC Requests Student Opinions in an effort to arrive at proper judgments of policy . ASCC is interested in pooling opinions with the student body .
 This has become a pursuit of Chris Griffiths and will be carried out by the various committees under him . This has been a pursuit for Griffiths, who will be carrying out the search for the future .
 The evaluation of the lines of authority of the judicial organizations is in the effort of one committee . The opinions and criticisms of the student body on the subject are appreciated .
 ConJunior High Science Institute Underway versations . versations with members of the committees and editorials in the TIGER would aid these people greatly. Versations with . members of . the committees or editorials would aid . these people .
 This group will be composed of the leader or a member of the judicial organizations and interested students who are willing to participate . This group is composed of students, leaders and members of judicial organizations .
 The reasonfor this is that these people participating in the present organization can present opinions as to strong and weak points in the organization's authority from a position of practical experience . The reason for these people to present opinions is that they can .
 Those who disagree with the present system should participate in one of these organizations . Equally important, however, are the opinions of those who do participate in such organizations .
 They represent ideas which are sometimes neglected because they do not get voiced . They are often neglected because of the lack of voice in the world .
 This group will try to define the jurisdiction of the judicial organizations and arrive at a clearer understanding of the position of the administration, the judicial organization, and the student on matters of violations .
 Speakers will be announced on posters placed on all major bulletin boards . Speakers are expected to be announced at all major boards .
 About 20 junior high school science teachers from the Colorado Sprincs-Pueblo area attended the opening session of a year-long in-service institute Saturday .
 The day-long sessions will be held on campus each Saturday for 32 weeks during the regular academic year . The sessions will take place during the normal academic year and last 32 weeks .
 The tuition-free course carries eight semester hours of graduate credit for the year term . The course is open to general science teachers, and is tuition free to students .
 Each session will be tailored to introduce junior high school teachers to the broad spectrum of the natural sciences, with an emphasis on basic principles . Richard Beidleman, director of the institute and associate professor of zoology, said each of the sessions will be tailor-made for junior high
 Two sessions of meteorology, seven of chemistry, two of astronomy, two in astronomy, seven in physics, and seven in biology will take place .
 Pam Bays, Nancy Bills, Sarah Fish, Janette French, Catherine Grant, Sue Halton, Anne Holmes, Sue Iglesrud, Donna Jones, Sue Kania, Sandy Marvin, Anne Miller, Susan Patterson, Sharon Polkinghorn, Judy Reid, Susan Sehn
 Jan Afton, Cheryl Betts, Joanne Birchill, Sue Caudill, Ann Doremus, Roms Favrot, Jan Forsgren, Natalie Gee, Sarah Grogan, Julia Huenick, Marilee Knox, Diane Mitchell, Faith O'Reilly
 Karen Benson, Linda Burtschi, Sally Connolly, Meg Courtney, Sue Danovic, Liz Hickman, Marcia Irving, Caroline Jacobson, Judy Jaccard, Kay Knudson, Kathv Mcintosh, and Karen Tucker .
 Leslie Beebe, Barbara Bohn, Caroline Cool, Susan Gehle, Sue Henrikson, Jane Humphrey, Molly Macnamara, Jan Mastin, Myrle Miller, Susan Moore, Jan Nyquist, Susan Paige, Sue Thompson, and Polly Thompson .
 Lucia Bates, Barb Couey, Lucy Cristy, Sue Bea Fertig, Sara Harrell, Marcia Holden, Peggy Hoover, Mary Ann Hubbell, Ann Lea, Pam Meredith, Madelyn Millimet, Crissy Moon, Lynn O'Malley, Leslie Pearce
 Daniel Armstrong, Tom Ballantyne, Peter Booth, Frank Boydn, John Clarke, Richard Dhanes, Frederick Davis, Peter Goodbody, Steve Livingston, Tom Malone, Rich Nichols, Goeff Rivers, Coleman Robinson, Mark Streuli, Carle Wallingford, and Greg
 Ait Basham, Nolan Coogan, Hunt Cudahy, Rory Donaldson, Bob Edmiston, George Henzel, Jim Hutchins, Bill Kutza, Chip Lyith, Tony McGinnis, Mike Mestik, Rory Weed, and Lincoln Westcott
 Gil Burns, Tom Cooper, John Dickson, Glen Foust, Steve Fredrikson, Gus Hart, Dave Helms, Dave Holdort, Curt Kennett, Ed Lorsett, George Mansfield. Gil Burns was the first member of the team to win a World Series
 J. Goulort, Bruce Hansen, WilijJ Kranich, Ed McCarroll, Mick RaJ sey, David Smith, Hallett Smii James Smith, Brian Somers and Brian Somers .
 Coach Flood, Coach Carle, Frink, Gotto, Hayes, Strausburger, Dianovslty, Geary, Blair, Carroll, Cybulislc, imerllng, Sparkman, Carroway, Dakes, Eastlack, and
 CC Tigers eeked out a 9-6 win over St. Mary's Cavaliers at Dodge City last Saturday . CC Tigers were plagued by 13 penalties, a blocked punt and two faulty center snaps .
 The Cavaliers had suffered two previous early season losses and were geared to upset the highly favored CC forces . The Cavaliers defeated St. Mary of the Plains on a cold and wind-swept field . The team had been looking to upset CC forces.
 The pile-driving ■ picked up 30 yards in six s s and tore off three crucial down to keep the drive going . The game was the first of its kind in the NFL's history .
 G CC ground game sputtered, ver, inside the 10-10 . Tigers called on field 1 specialist Jim Blair to replace the Cavseven .
 Blair ■d by splitting the uprights the 18, on what was to he the winning margin . Ither team scored again the reiex of the first half, scoring again .
 St. Mary's then stopped three line shots . Finally thwarted a fourth attempt when they halted a fourth ii and fake field goal attempt .
 The Tigers scored again midway WUgh the third quarter when ^ lnt z plunged into the end zone . ^PP>ng a CC drive that started on 32 yard line. The Tigers score again midway .
 Key play in the r^es was a third down pass recep| from Kintz to slotback Dan 'fe'ht who squirmed his way back d zone making the score 9-0 . Key play of the r*es was the play-in-the-
 Both threats were the result of center snaps that sailed over the head of punter Fred Emmerling . Both threats came after center snaps were snapped by center snaps .
 In the fourth quarter an on-rushing Cavalier Lineman blocked an Emmerling punt attempt and recovered on the Tiger 45 . The score came from a blocked punt attempt by the Cavalier lineman .
 Cavaliers led by quarterback Jim Holmes and tricky running halfback Bob Lisa . Holmes and Lisa scored from the three for the Cavaliers . Lisa scored a touchdown in the game .
 Tiger defense rose to the occasion but piled up each bid short of paydirt . Tiger defense again piled up with each bid to win the game . But again the Tiger defense came to blows again .
 He has three chipped vertebrae and will miss tomorrow's game against Ft. Ft.W. A.C. He will miss the game with three vertebraes and will be out for the rest of the week .
 Applications for ASCC funds can be obtained at the Rastall desk . Applications must be returned by Oetober 9 .
 Slocum Hall began its intramural sports program with five touch-football games being played between the different wings . Touch football games were played between different wings of the hall .
 First South beat Second South 8-0 and Third West routed Second West 20-0 . Third West also beat Second North 8-1 and Third South beat Third West 8-2 .
 First West held Fourth West to onlv one touchdown as they went on to win 16-6 . Fourth West was held to one touchdown by First West in the game .
 The sixth scheduled game between Third South and the Faculty was post-poned . The game was the sixth scheduled match between the Faculty and Third South .
 Flu Shots Available At Campus Infirmary . Public health authorities warn that the influenza epidemic in Europe last year is likely to be prevalent in this country .
 The series consists of two injections about a month apart . The football squad has already received its first injections .
 Those known to be allergic to eggs are advised to avoid this i minimization .
 Colorado College intramural golf and tennis tournaments are slated for early October . Golf, tennis tournaments will be held at Colorado College in October .
 The golf tournament will be held Saturday, October 7 and tennis matches the following week . Tennis matches will be arranged the next week and golf tournaments will also be held .
 Hays Bengals, of the Central Intercollegiate Conference, invade Colorado Springs with one win and one loss in two previous contests this number two for the Tigers . The Tigers have won and lost two of their last two games .
 Mike Minelli and Jim Wujch will be able to start tomorrow night . Mike's name may will be one whose name may be one of the key players in the game .
 Dave Parker thrilled many a crowd with his spectacular running as a Tiger halfback in 1958 and 1959 . He is Dave Parker, the former CC scatbaek, who thrilled many of the crowd .
 In 1958, Parker sparked CC to the RMC championship and was voted outstandingfreshman in the conference . Parker was named outstanding freshman in 1958 .
 He returned in 1959 and that year was selected most promising player in the league . He returned to the league in 1959 . He was named most promising in 1959 after being selected by the league that year .
 Tiger coach Jerry Carle has geared his team's defense to contain Parker . Parker does most of his damage on the quarterback rollout . The Tiger coach says he's prepared to contain his quarterback .
 The Bengals also occasionally set Parker as a halfback where he is a constant threat to the outside . The Bengals often set Parker up as a back end halfback .
 Co-captain Ed Kintz at quarterback, Terry Holleran at halfback, Wayne Deutscher at fullback and Dun Wright at slotback . Carle will again go with his alternating units in an attempt to halt Ft, Hays and rack up win .
 Co-captain Pete Pleasant, last year's lending ground gainer, will direct the second unit, known as the ""meat squad,"" at quarterback . Pete Pleasant will be the quarterback for the 2014 season .
 Ron Strasburger will return to action tomorrow night . The three-year veteran senior guard returns to action for the first time since 2004 .
 Colorado College juniors who were in Advanced R.O.T.C. were sent to Fort Riley for six weeks of military training . Junior suffered a severe sprain of his lower back in pre-season practice and has missed the first two weeks .
 The cadet ratings were averaged from each school and then the schools were ranked . At the end of camp the cadet rating was averaged .
 Of the thirty-seven schools participating Colorado College finished second, seventeen hundredth's of a point behind the first place school . Colorado College was the first school to finish second in the competition .
 Just clip the coupon below or gel an entry blank where you buy cigarettes and fill in your predictions of the (en game scores) It's easy to do . Just clip it below .
 Simply send an empty Viceroy package or a reasonable rendition of the name with each entry . Send an empty package or just a description of the Viceroys .
 Next contest will be on games of October 21— when you'll have another chance to win . Next contest is on October 21 .
 October is the lit month for these students to apply to these various pro-amamamams . October is also the month for those applying to these pro-ams .
 Applicants will be expected to have a demonrated capacity for independent ind a good academic recti. Applicants must have a good ability for independent work . Applicants are expected to be able to apply for the job .
 The iir will be required to subdan of proposed study that carried out during the iir abroad .
 Qualifi.tions for application are identito those for application to the ulbright Program . Applicants are encouraged to apply for the program .
 Third group, the Marshall tholarships, are available for udy in British universities . Successful apkants will receive tuition costs arying amounts for living ipenses .
 Additional informatinon jil applications for the Fulbright HE grants may be obtained . Additional information can be obtained by Dean Worner. Applications can be submitted at the request of Worner .
 Variety Show lets Sought Sought ember 14, 15, 16, and 17 are le dates of the Colorado College f""'ety Show, an annual benefit r ^e Community Chest Drive . Colorado College will host a Variety Show .
 If interested, please contact the student direc£ of Mr Woodson Tyree Kgh Rastall Center Desk .
 Known as the Chaplain of Fleet Street (the Press Center for Great Britain), Dr. Dr. Peter Phillips is known as Dr. Phillips . He is also known for his role as a Chaplain at Fleet Street . Phillips is a former Anglican Chaplain .
 Morgan is in continuous contact with the British Foreign Office, the British News Service and the churches of Great Britain .
 He is one of the founders of Church Illustrated, the largest magazine of the Church of England . He founded Church Illustrated magazine .
 He is also known as the historian of the Lambeth Conferences, which are the .meetings held every ten years of all the Bishops of the . Anglican Churches throughout the world .
 Morgan said he wishes to speak about the most vital issues before the contemporary world in the light of Christian convictions . Morgan said that he wishes that he speaks out in light of the Christian convictions of the world .
 Tuesday Assembly will discuss Berlin, particularly in reference to the rest of Germany, at the Tuesday Assembly on October 10, at eleven o'clock .
 Mr Bernard will deal with the historical developments in Germany since 1945, as a background for the present situation in Berlin . He will also discuss the present and future of the Berlin crisis .
 The Federal Republic of Germany officially invited, with seven other professors, to go to East Berlin . Mr Brandt will talk first about his observations of the obvious differences between east and west Berlin .
 All members of the college community and the general public are cordially invited to attend the event . The event will be held at the University of North Carolina .
 Sigma Chi Watermelon Bust will be held this afternoon from 2:30 to 4:30 in the Sigma Chi parking lot . Sigma Chis hold the annual event in the parking lot of the campus .
 1800 pounds of watermelon have been ordered for consumption by CC students . Pete Law, chairman of the project, has announced that 1800 pounds have been purchased .
 Wes Bradley of KRDO radio acts as emceeee. Ray Krantz and his band will provide background music for the festivities . Wes Bradley will host the event .
 Housemothers Watermelon Eating Contest will begin at 4:00 p.m. The event will feature several courageous fraternity and sorority moms . The Housemother's Watermelon Eats Contest will be held in honor of the sorority mothers .
 These candidates are Sue Halton, Alpha Phi; Cheryl Betts, Delta Gamma; Karen Tucker, Gamma Phi Beta; Ann Brooks, IWA; Sharon Shackleford, Kappa Kappa Gamma; and Merle Miller, Kappa Alpha Theta .
 Rastall Center lot and street parking within the vicinity of Campus. Off Campus students will be able to use the lot . Parking will be limited to the campus campus, not the campus itself .
 Parking is available at all times in Slocum Hall parking lot, Rastall Center lot and Jackson House parking lot . Parking is also available in the parking lot north of Kappa Kappa Gamma lodge lodge .
 Failure to comply with registration rules will result in a §10.00 fine . Failure to adhere to registration rules can result in an additional penalty .
 If cooperation is still lacking, revocation of Campus driving privileges will result . Campus driving will be revoked if cooperation is not achieved .
 The last step in the violation of the traffic lules is suspension from the College of Technology .
 Your Student Traffic Committee needs your cooperation and support for the safe operation of traffic on our crowded campus due to construction and increase of faculty and staff . The committee is seeking the cooperation of the committee .
 Traffic tickets will be issued to violators beginning Monday, October 2, 1961 . Traffic tickets to be issued for violators starting Monday, Oct. 2 .
 Brooks questioned the ability of tutions to withstand the acceleration of technological and social changes taking place in the world today . Brooks, in the first of tures, questioned how tutions can withstand the changes .
 The political scientist made it clear that there is no immediate danger of machines taking over the decision making functions of government . He said that machines will not be able to take over decision-making decisions .
 He expressed concern about little time our leaders have for making key decisions . But he did express deep concern about the little time leaders have to think about making decisions .
 "The American people will not be consulted," Brooks said . The stakes of war and politics mounting so high, "there will be no time for extensive consultation"
 Brooks noted the problem facing the nation is the need to gather accurate information quickly and to employ it for making split-second decisions . Brooks said the problem is to gather reliable information quickly for the defense .
 I am convinced that we cannot survive if we cannot provide a genuine political reflection . I'm convinced that . We cannot survive . We can't survive if . we cannot . provide . genuine political . reflection .
 The second lecture in the series will be presented this coming Tuesday by Professor Carlton Gamer of the Music Department . Professor Gamer will present a lecture at the University of Cambridge .
 Prof. Gamer will speak on ""The New Fact and the Creative Life,"" at S:15 P.M. in Perkins Hall . Fall Faculty Lecour established political instiProf. Mr Gamer will be speaking at Perkins Hall at 8 p.m.
 Alexey N. Malyshev is assistant professor of Russian at Colorado College . Colorado College has taken the first step toward launching its first regular curriculum in Russsian language and literature .
 The college expects to offer a major in Russian in the next four years . Thomas O Brandt is chairman of the department of German and Russian .
 More than 27 students already have signed up for classes in elementary Russian classes .
 State Department's advance team worked out details leading up to the Kennedy-Kruschev talks in Austria . State Department was involved in the negotiations .
 The TIGER will be the instrument of service to the college community that it should be . We hope to make The Tiger the instrument for service .
 "We shall not strive to create controversy, but neither shall we avoid it," says the author of the book .
 We intend to take stands on many issues — stands which are well supported and responsibly presented . We will take 'stands which are very well supported, responsibly presented,' says the party .
 We sometimes reflect student opinion; yet other occasions we will attempt to inform and influence campus thinking . We sometimes will reflect student opinions, but sometimes we will try to inform .
 We take full responsibility for our opinions, as presented in this column . We will ask our contributors to do the same .
 Your cooperation with the above will help assure your material of publication . Please submit a photo of yourself to the gallery .
 Foreign students from Colorado colleges and universities are meeting at Colorado College October 13, 14, and 15 . As an opportunity to discuss the American way of life and the international situation, foreign students are meeting .
 The students will arrive Friday to be greeted by their hosts, Colorado Springs families . They will arrive in Colorado Springs on Friday morning .
 On Saturday, at nine o'clock, the first session will begin with the discussion of the American Campus and the American Community .
 At 3 o'clock, a second session, which will deal with the United States and the International Scene, will start .
 Saturday night will be informal dance and folksinging from 8:00 to 1:00 in Rastall .
 Sunday afternoon at 2:30 there will be a final discussion session and summary . There will also be a discussion session on Sunday afternoon . Sunday afternoon will be the final session on the issue .
 All members of the college community are strongly urged to try to come to part of the conference, if unable to attend all the discussion and activities . The conference will be held at the University of Cambridge .
 Any questions should be directed to Ray Boyce, chairman of the Foreign Student Weekend Committee . The committee is dedicated to foreign students in the United States .
 Dr. and Mrs. Lounge, the International Relations Club, will present its first program of the year . The club's first program will be hosted by Dr. & Mrs. Louise . Dr. Louise and Louise will be featured at the club .
 Reinitz will concentrate on the unnique Finish culture, which is independent of the strong political and social influences of neighboring Sweden and the Soviet Union .
 A short .business meeting to elect new . officers of I.R.C. for the coming year will precede the program . A short business meeting to . elect new officers of the . coming year is also set to begin .
 Applications for Danforth Graduate Fellowships worth up to $ 1 2,000 are now being received . Delphine Rupert Class of '61 Danforth Fellowship Applications Taken . Lloyd E Worner announced today .
 Male college seniors or recent graduates preparing for a career in teaching, counseling, or administrative work at the college level . The program is open to male college seniors and recent graduates .
 Applicants may major in any recognized field at the American graduate school of their choice, but should not have already undertaken graduate work . Applicants must also have already completed graduate work at the school they choose .
 Nominees will be judged on intellectual promise, personality, integrity, genuine interest in religion, and potential for effective college teaching . Nomineees will also be judged for intellectual promise and personality .
 Winners will be eligible for up to four years of financial assistance . Annual maximum of $1,500 for single men and $2,000 for married men, plus tuition and fees .
 The winners will be guests of the Foundation at an annual educational conference held on the shores of Lake Michigan .
 Leading scholars lecture, conduct seminars, and come in personal contact with the Fellows . Fellows also conduct seminars and come into contact with scholars .
 Dean Worner is the author of the program . Worner has written numerous articles on the subject of this week's program . The program is available on CNN iReport.com .
 Susan Connelly of Seattle, Washington, wins President's Prize for Scholastic Improvement . Sue Connelly is a junior at Colorado College, Colorado .
 The prize is given each year by President Louis T Benezet to the student making the greatest scholastic improvement from the first semester to the end of the fourth semester . The prize has been awarded each year since 2008 .
 Convocation ceremonies mark the opening of the 88th vear of classes . Lloyd E Worner, Dean of the College, was at the centre of convocation ceremonies .
 Freshmen Hazing Period Over Saturday morning at 6:30 A.M. Saturday morning . Saturday morning soplio mores and a handful of freshmen appeared on North Stewart Field .
 Upperclassmen grimly guarded a small flag on a fifteen-foot greased pole . The frosh huddled together, wondering whether they had come to the right place .
 By 6:45 eleven sophomores and thirty to forty freshrner had arrived, but since no judges or sponsors appeared, no sponsors appeared . The event was started by Bill Stafford, Tiger photographer .
 Mick Ramsey, boosted up by a fellow frosh, snatched the flag from the pole . The rest probably familiar . . . running . . shouting (and garbage) until Mick Ramsey snatched it from pole .
 The fight was over, and the freshmen who had not donned their dinks and sweatshirts, could officially elaim their freedom . The freshmen were not wearing the dinks, sweatshirt or dinks .
 WAF (Recruiter Due Captain Sara J Windland, WAF selection officer for the United States Aid Force Recruiting Service, will be at CC today to interview college seniors and graduates .
 Captain Windland will be in Rastall Center to discuss the opportunities available to young women eligible for commissioned officer status . Windland is a captain of the U.S. Army National Guard .
 Captain Windland may be interviewed by Sergeant Murphy at ME 3-7478 . Appointments for personal interviews with Windland can be arranged by telephoning Sergeant Murphy .
 German Club Picnic held despite bad weather . Annual fall picnic of the German Club was held on Sunday afternoon .
 In spite of inclement weather, 42 German Club members and guests attended a German Club picnic . The picnic was attended by 42 members of the club .
 A cabin of one of the members was used as a substitute for Austin Bluffs, the original site of the picnic . The cabin of a member of the group was used in the original picnic .
 The picnickers enjoyed an afternoon of German parlor games and refreshments at the cabin . The group enjoyed a German-themed German game .
 The group was invited to Doctor Brandt's house for an evening of singing and entertainment .
 Three examinations for the Peace Corps will be given during the current year — on October 7, November 30 and December 1 . Peace Corps exams will be held during the year .
 The Colorado Springs Post Office is given as one of the sites for the examination . Colorado Springs is given a list of possible locations for examination .
 Students may contact Professor Sondermann, who is acting as Campus Liaison for the Peace Corps . For general information of the Peace Corp. Students may also contact Professor Sondermanan .
 ASCC Finaiw Committee composed of chairman Bill Stafford, Bob Kendall, Betsv Gaskill and Jack Howari financial advisor . Any organization on campus can request funds; the validity of the request is decided by the committee .
 Any request submitted afts money has already been spent bj an organization will not be ognized .
 Applications are also open for chairman or co-chairmen of thf All College Conference . Applications are open for Chairman or Co-Chairmen of the conference . All College conference is held at All College College .
 Gus Hart, a freshman fffli Sharon Connecticut, and Charlfc Puckett, a junior from Wilson, Oklahoma, were elected Presided and Vice-President of Slocum Hall in an intra-hall meeting .
 The Young Democrats of Colorado College recently completed i successful Dollars for DemoctfB drive in the Colorado Spring area . Young Democrats completed the drive in Colorado Spring, Colorado .
 The Young Dems will hoW their second meeting of the y* 31 next Tuesday, October 10, to & termine plans for this year and elect officers .
 The honorary business fraternity Alpha Kappa Psi, held an informal lecture on September 2 .
 The Denver & Rio Grande Railroad's Research Director was the guest speaker .
 Brad well enlightened his audience as to the problems faced ■nd progress being made by the railroads of today. Brad .
 Reference was mnde to the bind railroads are in, largely due to high tax and overregulation . High tax, overregulation and high regulation are also factors in railroads' bind .
 Research is being made in this direction and an advanced .method of keeping track of all cars is now being initiated . Research being made .
 Three such engines are now on order, to be made by Krauss Maffei in Germany . The engines could represent considerable savings in operating costs . Three engines are already on order .
 The reason for the reliance on German producers is the unwillingness of U.S. builders to experiment in this area, he says . The United States is unwilling to experiment with new technologies, he adds .
 Colorado College Young Republicans had their first meeting of the school year on Tuesday, September 26 . Judge Urges YR's To Political Action .
 Speaker for the event was Judge David Enoch of the Fourth Judicial District . Judge Enoch was the speaker of the event .
 His message, ""The Role of Young People in Government and Politics,"" was timely and well received . The role of young people in government and politics was timely .
 Several members of the opposition were present and found the words of Judge Enoch directed at them as well . The opposition was also angered by the words .
 The theme of the address was that the younger citizens of this nation have the same obligations as the senior citizens — that of active participation in political and civic affairs . The theme was that younger citizens have the . same obligations .
 The active interest of all citizens would result in a strengthening of both parties, he said . He went on to say that the active interest would result from both parties .
 The strength of political organizations is the strength of our country, he said . The strength is the power of our political organizations, he added .
 The meeting had been opened with a call for unity by Chairman Jean Torcum . The meeting was attended by members of the Northern Ireland-based party .
 To close the meeting, Pat Dagg, Vice-Chairman, appealed to each member to bring at least one new member to the Club during the present year . The meeting was adjourned by the end of the meeting .
 Crissy Mo Bill Mendenhall, Natalie Gee, Gloria Farha, Polly Thompson, Polly Seaman, Nancy Seaman.
 Each empty package submitted on Marboro, Parliment or Alpine will have a value of 5 points . The empty package will be worth 5 points per package submitted .
 Each empty package on Phillip Morris Regular or Commander will have a value of 10 points . The empty package will be worth 10 points in total .
 Empty packages will be counted at Murray Drug from 1:00 to 3:00 Friday, December 1st . Empty packages can be counted from 1-0 to 3-0 Friday, Dec. 1 .
 At the freshman class meeting last Tuesday, eighteen members of '66 wennominated as candidates for freshman commissioners . Three of these nominees will bo elected as a result or voting by the freshmen on October 12 arid 13 .
 The candidates are Kent Drummond, Bob Edmiston, Marcia Irving, Sue Caudill, Mill Mendenhall, Natalie Geo, Chuck White, Polly Thompson, Gloria Farha . The candidates for the House of Representatives are on the ballot .
 Cubby Welch, Mark Streuli, George Honzel, Mick Ramsey, Bob Ward, Lynn Tondro, Frank Boydon, Nancy Seamen, and Nancy Seaman, in order to nomination .
 There will be campaign speeches by each of these candidates on Sunday, Oct. * at 4:30m. in I'erkins Hall .
 "Lust for Life" will be the first of the monthtv films sponsored by (install Center for the 19G1-62 school year) Center Movies Begin Sunday .
 It is the story of his failure in the ministry, his economic disasters and rescues, his ambitions, his associations and his art . It is also the tale of his failures in the government, his failures and his ambitions .
 The film stars Kirk Douglas as Van Gogh with Anthony Quinn in the supporting role . Anthony Quinn plays a supporting role in the film . Kirk Douglas stars in the movie .
 It is in color and will be shown in Perkins Hall on Sunday, October 8 at 7:30m. It will be in color .
 CC Tigers beat Fort Hays State 14-6 at Washburn Field . CC Tigers erupted for two second quarter touchdowns, then threw up a rugged defense .
 The Tigers contain former teammate Davy Parker . In doing so the Tigers racked up the second victory of the season against one loss .
 Parker, operating at both quarterback and halfback, had four of his attempt with a little over three minutes remaining in the third period .
 The Tiger's first touchdo\vn was set up when quarterback Eddie Kintz picked off an attempted Parker pass on the CC 25 and weaved his way back to the midfield stripe in the first quarter .
 Dan Wright took a reverse handoff, squirmed his way through five Hays defenders and bolted for the touchdown . Hays had a fourth and goal situation from the five, and it was fourth and five .
 Minutes later the Tigers started another scoring drive, but a clipping penalty set them back to the Hays 30. Minutes later, the Tigers were back to their 30th-minute drive . The Tigers started again, but the penalty was set up for a penalty .
 Kintz then hit Wright on a third down pass play moving the ball to the 15, just short of a first down . Wright's hit was enough to move the ball from the 15 to 15 yards .
 The Bengals were unable to move against the big Tiger line, and were forced to punt from deep in their own territory . The Bengals punter was forced to punter from deep into his own territory with a punt .
 The Kintz to Wright aerial combination again clicked on pass plays of 15 and ten yards to keep the Tiger scoring bid alive . The Tiger scored a touchdown in the first quarter .
 The second reception carried to the Hays six and on the next play Holleran breezed into the end-zone for the second CC score . The next reception carried out to the six .
 Half back Pete Pleasant added the extra point to seal a 14-0 half time lead . The Tigers led the Tigers to the dressing room with a 14 -0 half-time lead at half time .
 Hays tackle Mike Pope ejected from the game after being ejected from Haysville . Pope was ejected from game after a Kintz aerial and returned it to the CC 26 .
 Hard running fullback Mike Worley scored the first Hays touchdown from four yards out on the first play of the fourth quarter . From there, Hays ran off consistent gains and scored a fourth quarter touchdown .
 Perker's attempted pass for the two point conversion was deflected from the hands of the intended receiver by Kintz, and the score remained 14-6 . The score was 14-5 .
 Hays threatened twice more, but both scoring bids were squelted by the spirited Tiger defensive line . Hays scored twice more in the first half, but were unable to find the net .
 The Bengals moved from their own 13 to the Tiger 31 before Holleran broke up a fourth down Parker pass and the Tigers took over on downs . Worley pounded the line and halfback Wayne Schumacker skirted the ends .
 Intramural Football league nears final round . Four undefeated teams remain in the league .
 First West and third West are tied at one victory each in their division . First South and first North lead their respective divisions with two victories and no defeats . First North and First South are tied with two wins and no losses in their divisions . Third West and First North are also tied at
 In one of the hardest fought r;ames, the Faculty managed to overcome second South 7-6, after the referee disallowed the extra point attempt which resulted in a heated discussion .
 First South now appears to be the top contender for honors in the trophy Football Contest Open . Students and faculty may enter the Viceroy Football Contest as many times as they wish .
 There will be eight cash winners from this campus for every contest . There will also be a carton of Viceroy cigarettes for every student who predicts winners without guessing correct scores .
 "We're not only losing professors to industry — we're losing them to government."" — Reader's Digest night and the Tigers ran out the clock .
 Several times Holleran slipped through holes neatly opened by the Tiger front wall . Several times he slipped through hole holes neatly open by the front wall.
 The Tigers will go for their third straight non-conference victory tomorrow against Westminster College in Salt Lake City . The Tigers are looking to win their third consecutive non-league game .
 MeIroi 3 The Whickerblllll — is a gift and card shop full of "Happy Things" including a Finnish milk pitcher with a green coucil .
 Sunday at P.M. will be the regular time this series, and all but one will be held in Perkins Hall, ihe College campus . All but one of the games will be at Perkins Hall .
 The opening concert on Sunday, •tober 15, will introduce a guest list from Tulsa, Oklahoma, Mrs. s cn Kramer, who will present program of outstanding works r the viola .
 Mrs. Lanner, noted pianist and a d of the music department, who charge of the Winter Concert s, will be co-artist .
 Last Jum received the artist diploma in viola from the Eastman School of Music . She received a viola diploma from the school of music .
 Her earlier studies, both in violin and viola, were done with such famous teachers as Willy Hess in Berlin, Eugene Ysaye in Brussels and Ferenc Molnar at Colorado College .
 Other composers to be performed are Bartok, Jacques Ibert and Gaspar Cassado . Bartok and Ibert will be among the composers performing .
 Max Lanner has chosen the Scherzo in B-flat minor by Chopin for his solo solo . Lanner chose Chopin's Scherzo for solo .
 The concert in November, schedules for Sunday, the 19th, will be a special event . The concert will take place in November .
 It will be the second John Henry Strong Memorial concert . The concert was inaugurated last year with the sonata recital of Sidney Harth and Max Lanner .
 This year, the Memorial will bring a return engagement of the remarkable pianist, Stephen Kovacs, who had a rousing success at his first appearance in Perkins Hall in April, 1960 . Kovacs' first appearance was in April 1960 .
 The Board of Review has for its ten members: Miss Seece Boyce, Miss Roseann Brown, Miss Pat Swartwood, Mr Doug Cowles, Mr Norman Colbert, Mr Bob Goldman, Mr Myles Hopper, Mr Jay Heminway, Mr Harris Sherman, Mr
 Neale R Reinitz of the English department will assist the Board in reviewing material for the Kinnikinnik . He will review material from the board .
 The Denver Symphony Orchestra, conducted by Saul Caston, has scheduled its most ambitious season for this fall and winter . The orchestra has scheduled Outstanding Artists for the first time .
 Top attraction of the season will be the great pianist, Artur Rubenstein, who will be presented with the orchestra on February first in the Auditorium Arena .
 The season will open October 31 with Maria Cloudes Dhority, a young French-Brazilian pianist, as soloist .
 The program originally was planned as an all-orchestral evening, but after hearing Miss Dhority, Mr Caston was eager to present her with the orchestra this season .
 In November, the soloists will be Rise Stevens, a celebrated mezzo soprano, and Samson Francois, a brilliant French pianist, on November 13 . Rise Stevens will be the soloist on November 7, November 13 and November 14 .
 Claude Frank, gifted pianist, will be heard on December 5, followed by John Sebastion, sensational harmonica virtuoso . Claude Frank will play on December 12 .
 Three guest conductors will appear during the season, including Eugen Jochum of the famous Concertgerbouw of Amsterdam on Januai-y 23 with his daughter, Veronica Joachum, as soloist .
 John A Larabee of Palo Alto, California, will talk to students Friday, October G, about corporate image problems and the place of large business corporations in the world today . Hans Erisinan, Du Pont District Manager Speaks ■
 Larabee will be a guest lecturer in Professor J, Douglas Mertz' p litical science class in Constitutional Development today . Larabee is a regular guest lecturer at the University of Cambridge .
 Other soloists will include Jean Casadesus, Nathan Milstein, Rudolf Firkusny and Leonard Rose . Eugene List and Carroll Glenn, pianist and violinist .
 Special attractions will include the Ballet Janine Charrat de France and a concert version of the Strauss Opera ""Daphne" with Gloria Davy and Robert Nagy .
 A professor hunting for a place to live went to a local apartment house and asked to see a list of the peoph' living there . A professor was looking for a new home and asked for a list .
 When he came to the name of a certain student, the professor said, ""Put me down for that fellow's apartment, please. Put me down" Professor said, "Put me . down"
 Clip the coupon below or gel an entry blank where you buy cigarettes and fill in your predictions of the ten game scores . It's easy . . Just clip the coupon and gel a blank blank at the entry blank .
 Ne\t contest will be on games of November 4— when you'll have another chance to win . The contest will continue until November 4 .
 Viceroy weaves tiny strands into the special Deep-Weave Filter . That's the filter you can trust to give you the good taste of the tobacco blend .
 Q U of Colorado □ Air Forte □ U of Wyoming n California □ lowa □ Michigan St. n California — lowa . Lowa is the lowest level of college football in the country .
 All sororities will open house and desserts from 6:45 to 7:45 tonight . Greek weekend begins tonight .
 For this occasion each sorority has split its group into fifths (consisting of 12 girls), and each group will be assigned to another sorority .
 At 8:00m. there will be a panel discussion about the place nf sororities and fraternities in college life . The panel discussion will be held by students and two faculty members at 8:30m.
 The students will be Marianna Cogswell, Gay PetzStew Ritchie, and Tom Rivers . Marianna will be the students at the school .
 On Saturday at 1:15 the reek organizations will compete games which will have no effect i the intramural standings . The games will not affect the standings, but instead the teams will compete .
 Each fraternity will have ;> lai'iot race in which a member of ;ister sorority will ride . Chariot ace— each fraternity has a ;> race . Each sorority has a race to ride .
 Saturday night an all school ance will be held from 9:00 to 2:00 at the Alamo . The Alamo will be open to all school students from around the country .
 The words leadership, responsibility, unity, enthusiasm, initiative, initiative and initiative were heard, but widely varying contexts . Christian love was heard in many contexts .
 Bursts of enthusiasm, quiet seriousness, floor shows in the form of skits, and even a recitation of Poe's ""The Raven,"" were some of the forms of salesmanship .
 Candidates indicated that their's is the best rated class yet, and promised to turn theory into reality . Many candidates indicated that they's this year's class will be the first rated class ever .
 Some had good ideas, and were determined to lick the problem of class apathy . But some were disappointed with the lack of ideas .
 CC is well-rated and well-known in the U.S. and around the world . CC is known for its quality of service .
 Rasta Students meet in Rasta Foreign Student's Weekend . Enthusiasm dampened by length of the session, seemed to be a major factor .
 Professor Carlton Gamer: Creativity is essential to survival . He says man must commit himself to creative activity with religious zeal . Professor: If man is to survive annihilation through an all-out nuclear war he must commit to creativity .
 We must all, every one of us, commit ourselves to the nurture of creativity, to the development of a climate in which creativity can flourish . To assure it, we must all commit ourselves, every member of us .
 Creativity must become for us an ultimate value, if you will, a religious valuer — to which we commit ourselves as we would to the establishment of the Kingdom of Heav . Creativity should be for us to commit ourselves to the values of creativity .
 "Both creation of bealty and excellence, which can be seen in his art as in no other aspect of his life,"" he said .
 They are producers of art, following accepted models, rather than creators . They are not creators, but producers, rather just producers, they say .
 He made it clear that creativity in personal life, ways of thinking, political and economic life, and the sciences are equally important . He said creativity is an important part of his life, as well as creativity .
 Work lias become the great ruler of men's lives everywhere on earth today, Gamer said . Gamer said. "Work lias has become a very powerful force in the world"
 They are, first, the * survival of life on earth; and i ond, a life worth living . They are first and second, the survival of the planet, and the life of a human being .
 "For man craves freedom and is capable of sacrifices to achieve it. These ends are inseparably linked, and they are rooted in the nature of man's desire to be free," he said .
 Man loves life, but he does not love it well enough enough to live it at any cost . He says he loves life but not enough to 'live it at all cost'
 He will choose to destroy himself, and others with him, rather than live a life which is not worth living . He will not choose to live a 'life which is worth living', says the author .
 We cannot hope to survive today unless mankind as a whole can attain a life worth living . And therefore. we cannot . hope to . survive today . unless mankind . as a . whole can . attain a . life worth . living. And therefore . we cannot survive today ... unless mankind
 At the same time, they are the embodiment of man's highest creative powers, involving all man's faculties, rational and non-rational, and are therefore among the most durable of the monuments man leaves behind him . They are the very embodiment of the highest creative power of man, involving
 When he is not at work, he seeks to distract himself with entertainment, to ""mark time"" until his work begins again . Only in leisure can contemplation flourish, and only in contemplation can the seeds of creativity grow, he noted .
 Honor Sorority Meets A tea waB given for the Colorado Springs and foreign exchange students attending Colorado College, by Alpha Lambda Delta .
 NORAD — Its Significance and '1 Defense"" will be the topic J discussion this next Tuesdav, 'rtober 17, at 11:00 o'clock in rk ins Hall .
 Colonel Herbert Rolph, United States Air Force, will be the speaker . Colonel Rolph is the main speaker of the event .
 Lt Col. Lt. Col. John S. S. C. L. A. G. H. B. Hagan is a member of NORAD's Information Staff . He is at the "quarters at Ent Air Force Lt. Hogan"
 Rolph will be followed by tw faculty members, each of a om will give a five minute . Each of the faculty members will be given five minutes of their own .
 35 foreign students from seven colleges and universities in Colorado and Wyoming . CC Foreign Student Weekend begins at 5 p.m. ET .
 Eight hours of discussion and evaluation of world events as well as comments on and deactions to American life have been planned .
 Students, faculty and faculty, members of the administration and the general public are welcome to all or part of the conference . The conference will be held at the University of Cambridge .
 At six o'clock there will be a dinner at the Flying W Ranch Assemblies Committee . Committee feels this assembly will be interg and enlightening and corV invites the college commu^nd the general public .
 On Saturday there will be mornand afternoon discussion sessions with a break for a barbecue lunch at Chief Tyree's Ranch . The event will be held at the ranch on Saturday .
 Lounge in Rastall Center, then divide into two sub-groups for discussion . Lounge in the Rastell Center then divide in two sub groups of discussion .
 The first discussion session will be from nine to twelve o'clock with a coffee break at 10:15 . Members of the Colorado College faculty will lead the discussion .
 The sub-topics are: Student purpose and expectations in coming to America . Student purpose, expectations and purpose for coming to the United States .
 The duties and responsibilities of the foreign student toward his home society are among the responsibilities of a foreign student . The duties of a student in the U.S. must be fulfilled .
 The afternoon session will begin at three o'clock, with a break at four, and finish at 5:15 . The session will start at 3:30pm, with the afternoon session at 4:30am .
 The foreign students will eat dinner in Rastall Dining Room Saturday night . It will provide an excellent opportunity for any student to talk informally with them .
 Saturday night at eight o'clock, there will be informal entertainment in Rastall Center Lounge . Foreign students have been encouraged to bring any musical and/or talents which they may have .
 For Sunday dinner the foreign students will be eating again on campus in Rastall and Taylor dining rooms . The students will eat again in the dining rooms at the two dining rooms on campus .
 At 2:30 Sunday there will be a final discussion and summary session . Both groups will meet together to examine more fully some main points of interest coming from the two previous sessions .
 Any questions may be directed to members of the Foreign Student Committee; to David Hite, president, ME 4-3511 .
 Administration's views seem to be at odds with the dominant view expressed above . However, the administration's views here at CC seem to seem at odds .
 Political and ideological groups are given freedom to organize and meet . Political groups are allowed to organize, meet with each other in the country .
 Discussions or activities of a controversial nature are accepted, or even encouraged, by the community . Discussions of controversial topics are accepted or encouraged . Disfavor and contempt of the local press and of large segments of the community may be incurred .
 Few students take active part in groups which deal with political and ideological issues . And yet, in this unusually free atmosphere, few students take part in these groups .
 Young Democrat and Republican clubs have very few active, acutely aware members . Young Democrats and Republicans have few active members of their clubs .
 Commitment won the dedication and effort of a few students last spring . Commitment is a campus organization of real note, Commitment .
 Even though CCs administration and faculty do not enforce the ""hygienic concept"" of isolating students from the issues of the outside world, the students enforce that isolation on their own account .
 We at CC have the opportunity not generally afforded college students to face the issues of the day squarely, without fear of banishment by an overly-cautions administration . We are at CC to face our issues, not to fear banishment .
 If we are to make our college experience a valuable one, we must cast aside our own bland acceptance of isolation . But if we're to make it valuable one when it comes to facing complex political and ideological questions in the future, we need to cast aside .
 We must make use of this opportunity — a far more crucial one than we realize . We must use this opportunity to take advantage of the opportunity, says President Obama .
 Your cooperation with the above will help assure your materia] of publication . Your cooperation is needed to ensure publication of this article .
 Colorado College psychology professor awarded a S5000 research grant by the National Institute of Mental Health . Carl L Roberts is associate professor and chairman of the psychology department .
 Roberts has been studying the effect of certain sensory changes on the learning process . Roberts studies sensory changes to learn more about the nature of behavior determinants .
 The CC psychologist has been working on a pilot project of the study for the past two years . CC psychologist is working on the pilot project for two years.
 Roberts joined the faculty in 1957 as an assistant professor . Roberts will be assisted in the initial phases of the project by senior students Jerry Northern and John Clark .
 Other students will be brought into participation in the experimental work . The research will be carried out by students at the university .
 I have heard so much about the minimum job when it comes to college work. "I'm not going to be able to do anything I want to do," she says . She says she wants to make sure she doesn't have to do so much of the minimum work .
 I should very much like the chance to tell all such students why they should read more than just enough to pull the wool over the eyes of their Profs. I should be able to tell them why they must read more .
 "I would start out by asking why they are going to college in the first place," she says . She says she would start with a simple question: "Why should they go to college?"
 Even people that feel they will get by as easily as possible would probably have a lot of high idealistic reasons for taking courses they are trying to slip through . Even those who feel they can easily get by would have high ideals for themselves .
 "If we continue to live up to our standards I am sure we will decide it really isn't too bad to do the complete assignments and perhaps a little more," says author .
 This article is written to acquaint the student with Coburn library . How to Use the Library: Coburn Library . Coburn is located at Coburn College in North Carolina .
 The answer is found in understanding that this library really belongs to Mr Coburn, the author of the book . Coburn's library is in the heart of the nation's history .
 It's all his and he doesn't have to let any of you use it unless he wants to . It's his own and he's not allowed anyone to use it, he says .
 Coburn Library is located in Coburn, Georgia, home to Coburn University . The library's card catalog is used to find out what books are in the library . Coburn is home to the largest library in the world .
 The library has a large collection of periodicals which are available for student use . The library is available for students to use in the summer .
 It is a mistake to ask the librarian for copies of Sun-Bather's Monthly, View or other magazines . It is, however, a mistake for asking for a copy of the magazine .
 You will notice that a librarian will spend all day with her nose buried in a book . You can also notice that she spends a lot of time with a book in the library .
 With hardly any effort on your part you can make her life more enjoyable . With hardly the effort on her part, you can do much more to make your life more fun .
 After about twenty minutes of juggling microfilm cans she will return and begin to put the film in the projector . She juggles microfilm canisters around the room .
 As she leaves a comment such as ""Well, out of sight; out of mind"" will probably give her a chuckle .
 When the librarian finally returns with the correct copy and inserts it into the projector, you turn to the want-ads and look them over for about fifteen seconds . The librarian eventually returns to the library with the right copy of the ads .
 Another method for amusing the librarian takes a bit more effort but I believe that you'll find the rewards make the project worthwhile .
 At this point you dash for the door leaving a trail of books in your wake . At the end of the book, you dash to the door and leave a trail behind .
 It is usually advisable to stay away from the library for a few days after this as the librarians are rather forceful when expressing their gratitude .
 You will rest securely with the knowledge that you have brought some excitement to an otherwise dull life. Of course, you will rest secure with the . knowledge that . you have . brought . some excitement .
 In conclusion, I want you to remember that the library is here for your use . I want to remind you that it's here for you to use . The library is free to use.
 It is commonplace to say that many of us walk around with our eyes closed and ears shut to the beauties and gratifying possessions of life . It's commonplace that many people walk around walking around with their eyes closed .
 There is that within us which can spoil and destroy the community and our surroundings, be it a fraternity or a state, even when we may be sensitive to the deeper things of life, says the author .
 The purpose of Professor Burton's sermon is to examine our lives in the light of Christian faith . The individual may live to the fullest of his power as a child of God, Professor Burton says .
 Shove Choir Seeks Additional Members . Membership is open in the Shove Chapel Choir . All interested persons are invited to join .
 Everyone, students and faculty alike, is eligible for the program . One does not have to be a member of the college choir .
 The choir sings for the Sunday morning service at Shove Chapel . They will also sing the ""Buxtehude Cantata,"" and ""Rejoice Beloved Christians"" for the Christmas vesper service .
 The choir rehearses at 4:15 on Thursday afternoons in the lecture room of Shove Chapel . The choir also rehearses Sunday mornings at 9:45 before the service .
 Anyone interested in singing please come to the rehearsal Thursday afternoon . Anyone interested should come to sing please come for the rehearsal .
 CC Players to Stage ""Rashomon,"" to be staged in Perkins Hall Oct., 27, and 28 . Rehearsals have gotten under way at The Colorado College .
 The Japanese drama by Ryunosuke Akutagawa features a cast of nine college students under the direction of William E McMillen, associate professor of speech and drama .
 Thev include Lynne Hare and William Fisher of Colorado Springs; Carl Chard of Boulder, Colo. Weld County, Colo., is a Colorado Springs resident .
 The story set in the outskirts of a small Japanese village a thousand years ago, is a dramatization of the belief that out of the ashes and refuse springs new hope . The story is set in an area where the story takes place in a small village .
 Freshman la [the asta tli tli ight iled [its * tions will be Thursday and Fri< of this week . Freshmanla will be on campus Thursday and Friday for classes .
 Thetas Win Booth Prizi At Watermelon Bust . Water, watermelon, and confu sion highlight Sipt Chi watermelon bust .
 Kappa pledge hs ;toi to ""walk the gangplank"" into a pool of water . If ft were broken, a Kappa pledge would have to walk into the water . Kappa pledge pledge was to throw darts at balloons .
 Kappa Al] Theta ""KAT"" booth was to pi the right rope and douse a pledg with a bucket of water . The object of the Kappa Al]. Theta's booth was the ability to pi a rope and use a bucket .
 Sue Halton Alpha Phi was declared queen of the United States . She is a member of the Alpha Phi chapter of Alpha Phi Phi Phi .
 The Folk Singers Inc., Color College's own folk singers, display the talent that has m them a favorite of people thi'oug; out the Pikes Peak Region Sat; day on Moods in Music .
 Folk Sing 1 Inc. Inc. will perform live from the studios of KRCC-FM at 1:00m. Dkk Dm dale, host for Moods in MoS will introduce the Folk sing 1 Inc., live .
 The hi long special program will inch such favorites as ""Darlin' Cor ""John Henry,"" ""I Never ^ Marry"" plus many others .
 The f' singers sparkle the dead monii of turning between songs < interesting and humorous q 1 about their songs. < interesting, humorous q about their song.
 KRCC-FM will broadcast live the A Faculty Lecture at 4:15m. The Colorado College radio station will broadcast the lecture live .
 Mr Robin Rudoff, instructor in history, and Captain Louis ist one of ROTC gave a talk on the problems and implications of the Berlin Crisis . Kinnikinnik Deadline Is October 24* Colorado Colleqe Tiqer October 13, 1961 Berlin .
 Historical events form the background for the jghtening situation in Berlin today . Mr Rudoff gave a brief, but complete summary of the historical events .
 He ,te*l that is is is generally accepted Washington showed little resight in this matter . He said it was a mistake that Washington showed no resight .
 Ber110 miles inside the Russian ■, is was chosen as the natil capital of Modern Germany . The four zones were deoying the unity of Germany .
 On May 12, 1949, the blockade was formally lifted, but the Russians still felt they had the authority to control all transportation to and from Berlin . The blockade was officially lifted in May 1949 .
 On May 23, 1949, the Western Powers united their sectors to form the Western Republic . The Western Republic was formed from the Western Union in 1949 .
 The Russians refused to join the Hepublic, officially formed the East German Republic . Soon afterwards the Russians, who had refused to . join the . Hepublics, which was formed from the . East German republic, formed from East Germany .
 "It is a moral commitment a an economic and political necessity that we stay," says President Obama . "We are committed to the U.S. to stay," he says . "It's a moral decision to stay. It's an economic, political necessity," says Obama .
 Kennedy also said he no longer cared if Khrushchev did sign a treaty with East Germany . Kennedy: "I don't care if he signed a treaty" Kennedy said he did not care if the treaty was signed .
 We can withdraw from Berlin and lose NATO and all it stands for, our political prestige and leadership of the Western World, says President Obama . We can also lose NATO, says Obama. "Our political prestige, leadership and leadership in Western World"
 We promised to support West Berlin and we should not fail in our obligations, says German Chancellor Angela Merkel . Berliners promised to back West Berlin, says Merkel .
 This is a tremendous responsibility which can lead to war and one which could well escalate into a nuclear war . The responsibility is a huge responsibility which could lead to nuclear war. This is one of the greatest responsibilities in the world, says David Cameron .
 This is power politics, the most dangerous of all to fool with, but it is now the only position America can take . The U.S. can take its position as a nation of power, says President Obama .
 General Johnson is the political as well as military governor of Berlin . General Johnson was the political and military governor in Berlin . He is also a former German president .
 He approves all laws passed by the West Berlin legislators, heads REAS (our propaganda agency) and supervises the polizei. He is also responsible for Berlin's propaganda agency, and heads the Berlin police .
 Russia's ratio of 1 to 6 is large enough for the Russians to take the offensive at any time . This ratio is considerable, and the Russians are capable of taking the offensive against the odds .
 Our 7th Army depends upon STRAC and its ability to mobilize its forces quickly enough, says President Obama . STRAC is a key to the success of STRAC .
 If an all out attack should occur the forces in Berlin could hold out two to three days . The forces could be able to hold out for two or three days if an attack occurs . If an attack is launched, the forces could still be in Berlin for two days .
 Of several possibilities, other than peace, the possibility of East Germany attacking with Soviet reserves is the most likely . The possibility of a Soviet attack with Soviet reserve is most likely, the author says .
 In this case the Army could hold out for two weeks without reinforcements . The Army could be held out for at least two weeks .
 In the first Assembly of the year, Professor Paul Bernard and Dr. Paul Bernard of the History Department discuss the history of the University . Try our Fresh Pizza or Tacos .
 Brandt related his recent experiences in West and East Berlin . The lecture was attended by a capacity audience . Brandt relates to the dendly silence and utter stillness in the city .
 Professor Brandt noticed an abundance of flags m East Berlin which brought back in a sense of the atmosphere of Nazi Germany . The former East Berlin resident said the flags brought back an atmosphere of the Nazi era .
 The title of the lecture was somewhat misleading, for there was no attempt to discuss or consider the various alternatives that the Western powers face today in the Berlin Crisis . It did provide a good background for further discussion on one of the most vital problems of our time .
 Bernard stated that until October of 1943, the Allied powers had not considered the problem of handling a divided Germany . Bernard stated until October 1943 that the Allies were not aware of the problem until October .
 Latei in that year an Allied conference in Moscow first brought forth the suggestion of a divided Germany and Berlin . Latei was the first Allied conference to discuss the idea of a division in Berlin .
 In 1D44 there were many conferences that discussed the re-oecupation mvf division of Germany, among these was the Quebec Conference . The Quebec Conference was one of the conferences .
 The ""Goat Pasture Plan" proposed to design Germany as an agricultural state . The plan was designed to create Germany as a state of Germany .
 Professor Bernard recounted the important aspects of the Potsdam Conference, including our access to through air corridors, u railroad, and a highway to West Berlin .
 The Russians stopped the flow of raw materials such as raw materials from Mast Germany into West Berlin . He stated that the harassment came in 194G .
 Western powers have started shipping supplies to the isolated city . This in turn forced the western powers to start shipping supplies . This has led to the city being isolated from the rest of the world .
 The Russians faced a great defeat in the 1946 elections when the Communist part.-' only obtained 20 per cent of all votes cast . The Russians were defeated by the Communists in 1946 .
 Berlin Blockade began in 194S when the famous Berlin blockade began . All these things finally culminated into 194S .
 Bernard attributed to West Berlin's prosperity and East Germany's povery . The revolt in 1953 was attributed to East Berlin's economic prosperity . Bernard attributed the revolt to the city's prosperity .
 In 195S the Soviets renewed their tough policies by giving the Western Powers a sixmonth ultimatum to get out of Berlin . Bernard Bernard nsserted that in 195S . The Soviets gave the West Powers a 6month ultimeatum to leave Berlin .
 After backing down, Mr Kruschev said ""there is a season fo every vegetable and the mandrake and the bitter herb are upon Dr. Dr. Kruschev" After backing back down, he backed down .
 Brandt referred to liis visit to Berlin, which occured only four weeks before the closing of the bonier . Brandt said the visit was made just four weeks prior to the closing . The bonier was closed in December .
 He commented on the people, traffic, stores, buildings, churches, and progress of West Berlin before describing his visit to East Berlin .
 Brandt's comments came when he described the West Berliners as ""relatively unconcerned"" with their various problems . Brandt described the city's residents as "relatively unconcerned" with their problems .
 Max Lanner will perform a concerto by Tartini, the ""Sonata in E flat"" by Brahms and a group of shorter pieces .
 It was played in the eighteenth century, but there are very few artists today whn can perfoim on this instrument . The instrument is played by a very few musicians today .
 Violation tickets will be issued for parking in front of Cutler from 8:00m. to 5:00am . Violation will be in place for parking at Cutler between 8am and 5am .
 Westminster College's bare-footed place kicker Dave Branch missed an attempted 20-yard field goal in the final 15 seconds . CC Tigers salvage a 6-6 tie with the Parsons on a dismal day .
 A steady morning drizzle soaked Dane Hansen Field, contributing to the sluggish offense displayed by both teams . Both teams had a slow start to the game .
 CC Tigers open practice sessions Monday at Cossitt Gymnasium . Each team was able to launch only one scoring drive, both touchdowns coming in the second .
 Leon Eastlack has lost four of his five regulars from last year . The former Manchester United head coach is facing a major rebuilding job . The club have lost four players from last season .
 Jim Hanks and Jim Wexels were all-conference performers for the NCAA small college tournament team . Jim and Wexel won't be together again for next year's team . Hanks was one of last year's top performers .
 Art Ackerman and Tony Sellito are also out of contract with the NFL . The two players are expected to graduate this year . The loss of both Ackerman, Sellito and Ackerman is the first major loss to the team .
 Eastlack does have five returning lettermen including backcourt men Dan Wright and Farrell Thompson . Backcourt players will return this year for the program . The team is looking forward to the next season .
 Thompson took over a starting guard position last year when Wright was declared scholastieally ineligible at the end of first semester . Thompson is expected to start at the start of the freshman year .
 Eastlack has more backcourt strength in sophomore Willy Pelz, a regular on last year's successful freshman team . Gregg Smith, transfer from Pueblo Junior College where he was starting guard for national junior college champions .
 Eastlack's real problem seems to be in finding replacements for Wexels and Hanks, says the new boss .
 Dave Krell, John Reid, Farrell Howell, Carl Cabinnas, Ed Loosli, Al Lizzul and Jim Haley are returning lettermen . They also include junior college transfer Carl Cabinas and junior college graduate Ed Looosli . The team is looking to
 Bill Burke, a transfer from Trinidad Junior College, and Steve Sabom, will compete for the number one center spot . Sabom is a sophomore at the University of Maryland . Burke is a transfer to Trinidad JCC, and Sabom will be a sophomore in the fall .
 The Tigers are also scheduled to play in a holiday tournament in Galesburg, 111., Dec. Dec. 11 .
 Coach Eastlack asks that all freshmen interested in trying out report for practice Monday at 3:30m. Monday at around 3 p.m.
 The Parsons scored first when Terry Hunter plunged into the end zone from the tow . Terry Hunter ran in for the score .
 The Westminster drive started on their own 48 and carried to the Tiger three . Ron Hauser lost his grasp on the wet pigskin and the Tigers recovered on own two .
 Hunter crossed the goal line to give Westminster a 6-0 lead . On the next play, CC fumbled the ball right back to the Parsons and two plays later Hunter crossed it back .
 The Tigers struck back with two minutes remaining in the second half . Quarterback Ed Kintz sneaked over from the two capping a 64 yard drive . The Tigers hit back with a 64-yard drive .
 The march was sparked by three pass receptions from Kintz to end Jim Wujcik, and a 23 yard burst by halfback Vince Greco . The march ended with a 23-yard burst by Greco and a touchdown by Kintsz .
 Neither team was able to put together a scoring drive in the hard-fought second half . Neither team managed to score a goal in the first half .
 The Tigers threatened twice, but each time their scoring bid was stopped by fumbles . The Tigers came from behind in the first half of the game to win .
 Freshman center John Grose pounced on the loose ball at the Tiger 30 . CC had one final chance to break the deadlock .
 Westminster recovered on the CC 35, setting up the last ditch field goal attempt . But once again the Tigers lost control of the slippery ball and Westminster recovered .
 Colorado College opens its bid for Rocky Mountain Conference football honors . Tigers take on always-tough Colorado State College at Greeley tomorrow night at 8pm .
 In four non-conference games, the Tigers have compiled a won 2, lost 1 and tied 1 record . Greeley Bears from Greeley have dropped four straight contests .
 The Bears lost their first three non-conference affairs to South Dakota, Omaha U and Drake . The Bears dropped their conference opener 10-8 to Western State last week .
 The comparative team records, however, leave no indication that the Tigers will have any sort of breather tomorrow night . The Tigers have a better record than the other teams in the baseball world .
 Jerry Carle is in his sixth year as head Tiger coach and has yet to see one of his teams defeat Colorado State . Carle has coached the University of Colorado State for six years .
 Mainstays in the Bear offense so far this year have been halfback Henry Morgan and end Ken O'Rourke . The Bear offense has been a stalwart this season .
 Morgan does most of the running and O'Rourke has been the number one aerial target . Morgan is known to be a big threat to the ground in the past year .
 The Bears have so far been without the services of all-conference back, Butch Gardener . The Bears are looking to win their first game of the season in a row .
 He was injurred in preseason practice but may be ready to go against the Tigers tomorrow . He may be back in the starting lineup for the first time since his injury .
 Nelson Carlson has taken over Gardener's duties at quarterback up to now . Carlson replaces Gardener at quarterback . Carlson has been at quarterback for the past two years .
 CC will again rely on the running of Terry Holleran and the right arm of quarterback Ed Kintz . The RMC is the RMC's leading passer, and will play in the next two weeks . CC will play host to the U.S. State Cup on Saturday
 Kintz's favorite targets have been slotback Dan Wright and end Jim Wujcik . The coach has been tight-lipped about the tight end and slotback .
 Members of the winning team were Hunt Cudahy, John Rinderknecht, George Graham and Jim Hutchins . Members of winning team include Hunt Cudaahy and George Graham .
 Nine men qualified for the final eighteen holes that will be played today and tomorrow at the Patty When It's Music It's Millers Miller Music Co. Co. The tournament will be held at Patty's Miller Music Company .
 Airline Airline RAILROAD STEAMSHIP XMAS . Worldwide travel system . World's largest championship championship championship .
 Hunt Cudahy, Kappa Sigm a Bob Magie, Zeta, 79 John Rinderknnecht, Kappa . Lee Hunt, Unaffiliated, 84 Mike Irsfield, Sigma Chi, 85 Coleman Robinson, Beta, 86 Bill Hybl, Sigma . Hybl
 "For all its technological advances, this fast-moving world has done nothing better than to reveal the weakness and finitude of man, thus uncovering his need for religion," he says .
 Dewi Morgan, Secretary of Society for the Propagation of ' gospel, and one of the outfiling religious journalists in land, gave two talks at Colo■ College last Sunday .
 His general theme for both ~ 3 sions was ""Christianity and ' World Crisis."" is the title suggests, Dr. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. is the author of the book, "World Crisis"
 The effects of world ‘[ s on man on man, and the role of J' r istianity in that crisis . The world 's on man' is on man . The role of world 'tianism' is to be seen as a role in the
 Changing intel. attitudes and capacities p, a iso rife rife and are witnessed by U things as literacy camji'gns and radio propaganda . Changing intel.(gal attitudes and capacity p) p, is rife and is witnessed by things such as literacy . camji.gns .
 This age is not jus in the Christian sense sessarily, but in the sense of an .e r\vhelming realization of the realization of . something greater than something greater . In this era of religiousness Christianity is challenged, Dr. Dr. Martin says .
 Christianity must be committed to the spreading of God's word throughout the world, since its basic function is mission . Christianity's mission is to spread the word around the world . Christianity is committed to spreading the word through the world.
 Christ, as the word of God made flesh, came to the earth to make witness to God's love . Christ was born in Christ's birth to the world, and came to be a witness to his love .
 Christians, through baptism and belief, are a part of Christ, and therefore involved as witnesses . Christians are involved in Christ's life through baptism, belief and belief . Christians, however, are also involved in the creation of Christ's creation .
 "The Christian mission is important, especially today, and cannot be less than total," says Pope Francis . The Christian mission must be total, he says, especially in the future .
 Morgan again presented the essentials of his morning Herman and then called for a discussion of Christianity and the Christian mission . Morgan again called for discussion of Christian mission and the mission of Christianity .
 The discussion centered chiefly around problems and attitudes in missionary work .
 Any CC student who would be interested in attending all or any part of this conference is urged to contact Dr. Dr. Chris. Chris . Chris .
 Fred A Sondermarm, Faculty Sponsor of the CC International Relations Club, for arrangements and other information . The CCI Club is a member of the International Relations Council .
 Programs for this year will include plays, movies, dances, and other functions . Programs will be held in honor of President Obama .
 The National Academy of Sciences — National Research Council has been called upon again to advise the National Science Foundation in the selection of candidates for the Foundation's program of regular graduate and postdoctoral fellowships .
 Committees of outstanding scientists appointed by the Academy Research Council will evaluate applications of all candidates . Committees will also evaluate applications from outstanding scientists .
 Final selection will be made by the Foundation, with awards to be announced on March 15, 1962 . Award winners will be announced in 1962 .
 Fellowships will be awarded for study in the mathematical, physical, medical, biological, and engineering sciences . Also in anthropology, psychology (excluding clinical psychology), geography, geography, economics and economics .
 They are open to college seniors, graduate and post-doctoral students, and others with equivalent training and experience . The event is open to students, graduates, post-graduates and others .
 All applicants must be U.S. citizens of the United States and will be judged solely on the basis of ability . Applicants must be American citizens .
 The Educational Testing Service will give out tests on January 20, 1962, at designated centers throughout the U.S.
 The annual stipend for post doctoral Fellows is $6000 . Limited allowances will also be provided to apply toward tuition, laboratory fees, and travel .
 The deadline for the receipt of applications for postdoctoral fellowships is December 18, 1961, and January 5, 1962 . Applications for regular postdoctoral . fellowships are open for the next year . Applications are open to the public for regular and graduate fellowships .
 On display is an assortment of military weapons including a .30 cal. machinegun . On display was an assortment . of . military weapons . The weapons were displayed in a military museum .
 An ordnance man from Fort Carson explains the new M14 rifle . The new rifle is currently replacing the Ml.Ml. rifle, which is currently being replaced by the M14 .
 He also brought in a new M60 machine gun with which the Army is now being supplied .
 This gun is considered one of the most advanced weapons of the Army's arsenal . The weapon is considered the most technologically advanced weapon in the Army arsenal .
 A movie, Operation Hollywood, filmed by Pershing Rifles members two years ago, was shown for the entertainment of prospective members . The movie was shown to prospective members for entertainment purposes .
 Meetings are held at 7:30 Thursday evenings in the ROTC building . For the benefit of those who could not make it to the Smoker and are interested in this organization, meetings are held in the building .
 JERRY NORTEHERN gives orders of the day to staff officers Captains Murphy, Stetson, Diack, Fisher, Fisher and Moe .
 Among the employees are faculty andministrutors and other members of the college staff . The college is home to students and faculty members .
 The directory lists the 1,326 students enrolled for the current academic year . Students are enrolled at the University of Cambridge .
 The Foreign Student Committee believes that this program is of the widest general interest . The committee strongly urges members of the campus community to take advantage of this opportunity to meet and discuss with students from the world over problems .
 The Foreign Students Committee realizes that many of the students on campus do not know all the six official one year of reign students nor the three four year students .
 Theodora Brodin, Linkoping, Sweden, is particularly interested in the art of acting, stage management and history of the theatre, music and literature .
 Theodora plans to attend a Swedish university, after this year, leading towards a B.A. and a career as a stage manager . She plans to study stage management at Swedish university .
 Allen Johanssen, Helsingfors, Finland, who is living at the Sigma Chi House, is interested in all kinds of sports, especially swimming and shooting .
 His major field of study is natural and applied sciences, with concentrated study of higher mathematics and atom physics . His major interest is in higher mathematics, atom physics and atomic physics .
 Reuven Rosefelder, Haifa, Israel, is living at the Phi Delta Theta House . He is living in Haifa with his wife .
 Vijay is his second year in Indi living in Slocum Hall . Vijay also studied humanities and economics during his time in the UK .
 Magdalena Finchensen of Poland has not arrived on campus yet, due to complications in leaving her home country . Finchenen is not on campus at the moment due to the complications of leaving her country . Magdalen Finchhensen has not yet arrived on
 Viceroy's Deep-Weave Filter is made of vegetable material that's pure and safe . The filter is made from vegetable material made of pure and pure .
 Q U of Colorado G Air Force, U of Wyoming, U. Wyoming, California, Iowa, Michigan, Iowa and Michigan . Si. A. G Air force, Air Force and U.S. Air Force were all selected for the top 10 .
 Solomon Nkiwane, Neh; Chingola, Northern Rho^ wants a college education . So he will be better equipped to tinue his teaching career .
 Both Abiodun and Solomon will be living in Slocum Hall . Omon's interests include sp* debating, and music (conduct)
 The college community glad to see him again this as well as extending a heart; come to all the first year fort students . The college is glad to . see him . again this .
 Sue Caudill, Bill Mendenhall, and Frank Boyden are newly elected freshman commissioners . The newly elected commissioners are Sue and Bill Caudills .
 Sue, with 79 votes is president, Bill with 11 is vice-president and Frank with 65 votes is secretary-treasurer . Sue is president of the group, Bill is vice president and Frank is secretary treasurer . Sue and Bill are Sue, Bill and Frank are Sue and Frank
 The traditional homecoming festivities will begin on Friday, Nov. 8, at 8:30m. with the Pep Rally . Jerry Osborne, Chairman of Homecoming, will crown the Queen .
 Homecoming ade built on the theme ""Quotable Quotes,"" through the mtown business section Saturday morning . Saturday morning will be followed by the dedication of the new fraternity houses at their sites .
 The football game at 1:30m. against Adams State will be highi ■ ■ CI ■ J jf&X^XSM Assembly Slated ilrs. The football team will play Adams State at 1.30m .
 Benezet will give a reception ii Rastall Center Dining Room 'allowing the game' and the sorority, fraternity, and independent organizations will have Open Houses Dm 5-6m.
 The Alumni activities will start m Friday Nov. at 7:30m. in iastall Center with an Alumni irum on ""The Changing AcademScene at The Colorado College.""
 Jaeulty-Alumni Coffee to be held »aturday morning in Bemis ■Mnge to provide an opportunity to become betr acquainted with members of e faculty . Another new feature will be the Jaeulty
 The third annual meeting of the freedom and Authority"" alumni (i| l consider ""Our Current Notions "* Freedom and Authority Relent to a World Confronted by Nuclear Catastrophy"" in Palmer 'a 'l Saturday morning .
 William R Hochman of the History Department will speak about the United States Peace Corps this Tuesday, October 24, at 11:00 o'clock in Perkins Hall .
 Hochman will speak about the purpose for which the Peace Corps was set up, the nature of the program, and its plans . He will talk about the nature and purpose of the peace Corps .
 He will explain how one can prepare for the Peace Corps, and how application and selections are made .
 He will also talk about the Peace Corps examinations and the training program . The Peace Corps is the largest branch in the world .
 At the one-day testing sessions a candidate may take the Common Examinations, which include tests in Professional Information, General Culture, English Expression, and Non Verbal Reasoning . A candidate may also take one or two of thirteen Optional Examinings designed to demonstrate mastery of subject
 The college which a candidate is attending, or the school system in which he is seeking employment, will advise him whether he should take the National Teachers Examinations and which of the Optional Exams to select .
 A Bulletin of Information (in which an application is inserted) describing registration procedures President Benezet will give his ma y be obtained from college of^Ual ""Report to the Alumni""
 Completed applications, accompanied by proper examination fees, will be accepted by the ETS office during November and December, and early in January so long as they are received before January 12, 1962 . Completed applications will also be accepted in January .
 Colorado Springs Opera Association's production of "La Boheme" will be performed Nov., 3, and 4 . CC, Faculty Members to be in the production at the Fine Arts Center . Colorado College faculty and staff are participating .
 J Julius Baird, instructor in organ and organist at Shove Memorial Chapel; Donald Jenkins, instructor . Norman Cornick, assistant professor of dance; Norman S Cornick . David R Austin, violin; Earl A Johas, associate professor of music; and Janet LeMieux
 A graduate of Oberlin College and the Juilliard School of Music, he joined the faculty here last year . He was a teacher at the school before joining the faculty at the University of New York .
 A graduate of the college, he has been a member of the faculty since 1956 . He has been on the faculty at the college since 1956.
 She sang the lead in the Gilbert and Sullivan opera ""Trial by Jury" at St. Paul's Opera House . She sang in the opera "Trial by Jury"
 The opera later went on the road in Wisconsin, presenting 25 performances . The opera was presented 25 performances in Wisconsin .
 Mozart, Bernstein and Bernstein to perform on February 22, 23, and 24 . Mozart's "The Impresario" by Mozart and "Trouble ni Tahiti" by Leonard Bernstein will perform .
 The season will close with ""The Mikado"" by Gilbert and Sullivan on April 26, 27 and 28 . The Mikado is set to open on April 25, 28 and 27 .
 Season tickets are $6, and single tickets, available one week before each performance, are $2.50 . Single tickets are also available at the theater .
 Members of the Colorado Springs Fine Arts Center, teachers and students have the privilege of borrowing books, pictures and reproductions available in the library .
 Professor Fischer suggests future Hoods could again cover much of the earth's land surface . Fischer: Future Hoods may again cover the earth .
 Geologist says man represents the highest form of life on earth thus far . Geologist: Man represents the most life ever found on earth .
 Evidence from astronomy and geology all suggest that the earth was formed about 5 billion years ago . He said evidence from the fields of astronomy and . geology suggest that Earth was formed 5 billion . ago .
 The earth was initially hot, gradually cooled, then cooled, developed atmosphere, hydrosphere and geological processes began to operate . Earth began to be hot, cooled, cooled and developed atmosphere . Earth gradually cooled and began to develop atmosphere .
 The State Department has announced the 1961 examinations for appointment as Foreign Service Officer of Class 8 for December 9, 11.01.01 .
 Denver is one of the centers where the examination will be administered . Denver is among the centers that will take place .
 The application to take the examination must be made on State Department Form DSP-24, which must be received by the Board of Examiners, Department of State, no later than October 23, 1961 .
 In order to be eligible, a person has to be between 21 and 31 years of age, a U.S. citizen of the United States for at least 9 years . A person can be eligible for the program .
 Candidates who are successful in the Written Examination will be required to take the Oral Examination within 9 months after the date of the written examination . Candidates are required to complete the oral examination within nine months of the examination date .
 Government informed of developments abroad, to protect American citizens and interests in foreign countries, and to maintain friendly relations with peoples of other nations .
 Officers may expect to perform a number of functions during the course of their careers . Officers can expect to do many of these functions during their careers.
 Sondermann is a member of the Board of Examiners, Department of State . He is a former member of Congresswoman Barbara Walters .
 Outings Club will present its first program Saturday, October 21, at 7:30m. in the WES Lounge . Saturday's program will be held in the club's Lounge .
 The program will include a slide show of a trip made this summer by the Cycling Club, a film entitled ""Ridin Round the Peak" presented by Oskasita, and some slides of various climbs made by the Mountain Club .
 A Colorado Springs Army sergeant who aided in protecting the United States Embassy in Ethiopia during the short-lived revolt against Emperor Haile Selassie was decorated by the Army here last Thursday .
 Charles K Morton, 2624 Meadowlark Lane, was awarded the Army Commendation Medal . Morton was awarded a posthumous Army Medal for his service in Afghanistan . Morton served in the U.S. Army in Afghanistan, Afghanistan and Afghanistan .
 He is assigned to the CC Reserve Officers TrainingCorps as instructor and the presentation was made by Lt. Lt. Cpl. Cm. T. G. Gentry . Lt. J. H. Hettler was awarded the Commander of the Armed Forces .
 Morton was with the Army attache group in Rthiopia during the abortive attempt to overthrow the royal government . Morton was involved in the failed coup attempt to oust the king .
 Army and Air Force personnel fought both loyalist and rebel forces in preventing them from storming the embassy compound . The embassy compound was attacked by loyalist forces and rebels .
 There were no American casualties, although some members of the embassy staff suffered minor injuries .
 Morton described the fighting as being particulary heavy on December 13 and 14, first two days of the revolt . Morton described it as "particular heavy" during the fighting . Morton said the fighting was particularly intense on the December 13-14 .
 The revolt, led by an Ethiopian prince, was put down and Haile Selassie retained power . The revolt was led by a prince, but the revolt was eventually put down by the prince .
 The Air Force needs college trained men and women as officers . Future Youi will be the Air Force's new generation of officers .
 This is caused by the rapidly advancing technology that goes with hypersonic air and space flight . This is due to the rapid development of the technology involved in hypersonian air travel .
 The Air Force takes certain college graduates, both men and women, and commissions them after three months of training . You've probably heard about Officer Training School .
 Base pay, tax-free allowances, free medical and denial care, retirement provision, perhaps flight pay . Perhaps flight pay, perhaps .
 You don't have to be an eco major to see it adds up to an attractive package of eco-friendly products .
 As an officer you can apply for the Air Force Institute of Technology . Future Yom will be a member of the Air force .
 While on active duty some officers may even win their Ph.D. degrees . At no cost, some may even earn their Phs. degrees while on duty .
 Individuals of six different nationalities pooled their respective resources to defeat Fountain Valley School in a soccer scrimmage . There's a place for professional achievement in the United States Air Force PORTS soccer team .
 Following a two-minute warmup, the first half of the game ensued with the Colorado College players attempting to locate their positions and retrieve their wind . Colorado College's players had not worked together before .
 CC's players dominated the play with good control of the ball and the result was two goals to Fountain Valley's count of nought . Fountain Valley scored nought in the second half of the game .
 Edward Kuiper scores the first goal of the game in a volleyball shoe . The first goal was the result of a carefully placed shot by Edward Kuaper's foot .
 Abiodun Afonja. me soccer players held anothj scrimmage with Fountain VailSchool on Wednesday, Octcjjj 17th . The second goal was a bullet off the bedroom slippered foot of Abioduna Afonjaja .
 Anyone interested in fostering a truly j n ^ national sport at Colorado Colb is cordially invited to join us practice every weekday afterm at 4:00m. on the field north the library .
 It was the first time since 1952 that a Tiger football learn had been able to defeat the CSC Bears . Tiger footballers were able to beat the Bears in the first meeting since 1952 .
 The two teams traded leads throughout the first three quarters and early into the final period . The two sides traded leads in the first two quarters .
 The Tigers opened I ntramuralS Cudohy Shoot's 155, Slocum Football Playoffs Slated Slated . Terry Holleran plunged into paydirt from the Bear pne yard line in the first quarter .
 The score was set uP when slotbaek Danny Wright f a ]red a reverse run, then found jim Wujcik wide open on the opposite side of the field and connected with him on a 40 yard aerial kick kick .
 Three plays later Holleran scored, ari d Jim Blair added the extra point to give the Tigers a 7-0 |e3d. The Tigers won the game 7-1 .
 The Bears struck back in the second quarter when Henry Morgan intercepted a CC pass attempt and returned it to the Tiger 34 . The Bears scored a touchdown in the first quarter of the game .
 Morgan finally burst into the end zone from “ne yard out. From there the Bears stayed on the ground with Morgan finally scoring . Morgan scored a touchdown for the Bears .
 The attempted PAT we nt wide, and the Tigers held a narrow 7-6 halftime margin . The attempted kick missed a field goal .
 Blair boomed a 32 yard field goal to give the Tigers a 10-6 lead in the third period . The only score in the hotly contested third period came from Blair's field goal .
 Once again the Bears came back, this time scoring in the early moments of the fourth period on a one yard sneak by quarterback Tom Carlson . The Bears came from behind to score in the first quarter .
 CC took the kickoff and larched to the CSC 17, where they were confronted with a fourth and five situation . CC took advantage of the first and fifth situation .
 On the next play the Tigers scored a touchdown on a perfectly executed fake field goal . The Tigers scored their second touchdown on the play . The next play was a touchdown for the Tigers .
 Quarterback Eddie Kintz took the snap, sed up and hit Wright who ting with a wall of blockers . The pledge class of Phi Gamm was Phi Phi .
 Delta challenges any other pledg dais to a touch football game . The game will be held Saturday afternoon, Octobe 21, 1961 .
 The Tigers forced a CSC fumble and recovered on the Bear 34 . The two teams then traded punts and the two teams traded puns .
 CC drove in for their final touchdown with freshman halfback Ron Taylor punching over from the five . From there, CC drove down for the final touchdown .
 Once again, the Tigers put forth a fine team effort, but it was the determined running of Holleran and Deutscher, the vicious blocking of Wujcik, and the all-around play of Kintz and Wright that spelled out the difference .
 The Tigers will rest this weekend with an open date before playing Western State at Gunnison October 28 .
 Freshman dominated the second round of the intramural golf tournament, which was to determine the tournament medalist . Five of the seven finalists were members of the class of 1965 .
 Schultz birdied five of the first eleven holes last Friday . He ran into trouble on the long par four holes on the back side .
 Slocum Hall men enter the last phase of their intramural football program this week . The championship playoffs are held in the championship playoffs . The college's men enter their last phase in their football program .
 Both Third West and First North have 3-0 records . Faculty and First South are 2-1 .
 This tournament is the highlight of the Slocum football season, and will provide good entertainment . This tournament will provide a good entertainment for Slocums fans .
 All games are to be played on the fields between Slocum and Cascade Avenue at 4:15 . All games will be played at 4.15 .
 Slocum is busily preparing for the next event in this year's intramural program, pushball . Since the football season is virtually finished, Slocrum is preparing for pushball, the pushball is a new event .
 This game is new to the CC campus and should prove to be interesting, providing that a ball can be found to be pushed . This game will be a new addition to the campus .
 Slocum is without his vital piece of equipment after an accident with the pushball during Greek Week . The incident happened during the Greek Week in Athens .
 Harris Sherman asked students on the panel to imagine CC without Greek groups . Harris Sherman then asked the students to imagine a Greek group without their groups .
 People need friends, says Miss Cogswell, to be secure in school . People band naturally together together for security . Small cliques would form if there were no organized groups, she says .
 Mr Boyce stated that there were only five fraternities and five sororities for 1,200 students . He said that there are only five fraternity and five sisters .
 Miss Cogswell stated that for a Greek group to gain anything, it must be kept at a workable size . Miss Coggswell said that for the Greek group's gain anything to be gained is to be kept in size .
 The best time for us to see how valuable the sororities and fraternities are to this school is in the nine ensuing months of school, says Mr Rudoff .
 Colorado College Tiger Summer Srience Institute starts to Pay Dividends . YR 's Help Organize High School Groigram launched six summers ago by CC for bringing junior and senior high school science teachers .
 The program has resulted in the development of new science teacing methods at the independent liberal arts college . It appears to have encouraged some of the college's top science students to consider teaching .
 The first summer science institute for secondary school teachers was undertaken by The Colorado College through local support in 1956 . Colorado College was supported by local support .
 Since 1957 the institutes have been supported by National Science Foundation funds . The institutes are based in New York and Washington .
 The summer science institutes are encouraging faculty members in some fields of science to de-emphasize formal lectures in favor of a round-table seminar approach to teaching .
 The Colorado College's science institute program is a special threesummer-session graduate program for secondary school science teachers . Colorado College is offering a special summer-summer session program for teachers .
 The rill progra the teachers to obtain a Master of Arts in Teaching degree with emphasis on science subject material, rather than on education courses .
 About 45 teachers, all with at least five years of science teaching experience, currently are involved in the program . The program is being led by teachers from around the world .
 The State Central Co. put their Teen Age Republican program into motion Saturday . Pat Dagg, vicechairman of the CC YR's was on hand as coordinator for TARS activities for the party's College League .
 Senior party members, College YR's and teenagers came from throughout the state to formulate plans for a concerted organizational drive . The event was organized by a group of high school students .
 Those attending were able to work out a format for the campaign . Elizabeth Priest of Lakewood, representing State Republican Headquarters, attended .
 Both Mr Ethell and Mr Wells stressed the importance of younger citizens being interested in politics .
 Colin Wilson, Britain's most controversial young writer, will be on The Colorado College campus Sunday though puirsday to talk with students . Wilson will participate in two student seminars, and give a public .
 Wil'"" hold seminars for selected Uents and faculty at 4m. He will Existentialism and the Modjjj predicament."" author of five books, all jng with ""far-out"" ideas, Wil''"s five books . Wil'''s seminars for
 30-year-old writer broke to print five years ago with ijosophical book of criticism till The Outsider . He will probe deeper g existentialism and lecture on artist and world in which lives .
 Colin Wilson Wilson's latest work, Adrift in Soho, rolled off the esses earlier this month . The novel is set in London's boinian quarter .
 Adrift in Soho, deals with a ung Midlands poet-philosopher to London to ply his trade .
 The former Nietzschean is tryt to dispel the idea that he was ( England's ""angry young 31" a British beatnik .
 He now lives in a house by the Cornwall, which he says is stocked with books, records wine and records wine .
 Wilson's books inle Religion and the Rebel, The ture of Man, and Ritual in the ""It.s. and Ritual" are published in the "It.S. and "The Ritual" series of books .
 The latter is a novel based on the life of the 19th century 'Jack the Ripper' The book is based on a novel by the same name, Jack the Rippers .
 Dance Today in Hub ^is afternoon . There will be an J°""nal dance in the Hub .
 Rastall Center has chosen w ay to celebrate Halloween, l0 Pes that an informal aftern party may catch on as a Pilar . Chuck and his Combo will perJ for all interested students at ^ Rastalls .
 Everyone is invited to at^ and is urged to come in school ^ae s f or an nour or so f danc-'elaxinging .
 An unusual kind of alumni reunion will be held here Nov 4 when scores of former Colorado College students and seven faculty members gather around a huge seminar table to re-examine their notions of freedom and authority .
 The occasion will be the third annual reunion of alumni of C.C.C.'s Freedom and Authority seminar . The reunion will be held at the end of September .
 Freedom and Authority alumni have been holding reunion discussions at homecoming since 1959 . Alumni have been discussing reunions since 1959 at Freedom homecoming homecoming . Freedom and authority alumni have held reunion discussions since 1959.
 William R Hochman, associate professor of history, will act as moderator of the round-table this year . The round-up will be held at the University of Cambridge .
 Dean Lloyd Worner, Dean of the college; Philosophy professor J Glenn Gray, currently on a Guggenheim Fellowship; Carlton Gamer, composer and assistant professor of music; Dr. Carlton Gamer .
 Dr. Douglas Merts, professor and chairman of the department of political science; Dr. George Mills, lecturer in general education and assistant director of the Fine Arts Center; . Mr J Douglas . Douglas . Mills, professor in general . education and director of Fine Arts . Center,
 All seven faculty members have taught the Freedom and Authority seminar . The seminar was held at the University of Cambridge .
 Students and faculty aim to understand the nature of freedom and the kinds of authority that restrict it . They regard the course as a joint quest by both students and faculty into freedom .
 The college homecoming also will include an Alumni Forum on ""Continuity and Change in the Liberal Arts Curriculum" The homecoming will include a homecoming luncheon and rally, a football game and a dance .
 Louis T. Benezet will address the annual luncheon of The Women's Educational Society of the Colorado College Saturday, October 28, at 1:30m. in Bemis Hall .
 Julie Bohlke is a psychology major from Hastings, Nebraska . Nadine Chang is a French major from Kauai, Hawaii . Joan Seelig is a philosophy major from Atherton, California .
 Eighteen members of the Colorado College Debate Club are in Denver, Colorado participating in the Colorado Women's College Forensic Tournament this Friday and Saturday .
 Eight of these students are returning members of last year's highly successful debate squad . Eight return members of the debate squad are returning to the team .
 Chris Griffiths, Dave Furgason, Robert Thrasher, Max Power, Charles Puckett, Linda Pierce, Nancy De-lin and Dave Bitters are featured in this week's show .
 Susan Caudill, Max Power and Robert F Williams are participating in Extemporaneous Speaking . Robert Williams, Jo Heller, and Peter Trushel are entered in Original Oratory . Susan and Max Power will be competing in Original oratory .
 That labor organizations should be under the jurisdiction of anti-trust 1 egislation . Anti-trust laws should be applied to labor organizations, the author says .
 CC coaches for this tournament will be Mr James A Johnson, Economics Department, Mr Robin Rudoff, History Dept, and Captain Louis J Pistone, ROTC Dept.
 Three Japanese students will visit Colorado College from Nov. to Nov. 2014 . Colorado College will play host to three Japanese students .
 Kinnikinnik's deadline has been extended until Sunday, November 5 . The deadline has now been extended to November 5 for the project .
 Students urged to turn in contributions on or before this date to Rastall Desk, or to Terry Kidner, Peggy Benham, or John Etiey .
 Art contributions may be left at Rastall Desk, in the Basic Design Room at the Fine Art Center, or may be given to Vilis Berzins . Art contributions are submitted at the Rastal Desk, or by Vilis .
 Prizes of fifteen dollars each are being awarded for the best poem, best art, best phtography, and for the cover design . Prizes will be awarded for poetry, bestp rose contribution, art and best art .
 Mr Aramak feasor student affai senior maj assistant proand head of 1 Mr Demizu, in economics and head of the student association at the university are here to study the aspects of studentuniversity relationships .
 They are especially interested in observing such things as the student union, studentfaculty relationships, guidance and testing services, and student placement . The students will be able to observe such things .
 Several CC students will act as hosts and hostesses to these visitors . Students will take them to some of the various homecoming activities, showing them around campus .
 A commentator on the college scene, writing; in the October HARPER'S MAGAZINE, made a couple of challenging observations in regard to religion on our campuses .
 "The standing assumption is that ultimate questions are in principle unanswerable, and hence not worth asking seriously,"" he contended . "It's a standing assumption," he said .
 These articles, we believe, indicate something of an active approach to the problems presented above . These articles indicate that something is being done to address the problems .
 The campus religious program, under the very able direction of Mr Kenneth Burton, is developing along two main lines . Campus religious program will focus on the development of students and adults .
 First, it is presenting to the non-Christian student a means of exploring Christianity and of determining its relevance and its values .
 "The assumption underlying this program is that ultimate questions are indeed important and meaningful," the program's creator says .
 If they are unanswerable, they nevertheless have great significance, and the religious program is attempting to give the student, be he Christian or not, a way to explore both the significance and some possible answers .
 Mr Burton lias made it very clear that the student's approach to ultimate questions is extremely important to the religious program . In relation to the second point quoted above, Mr Burton said that he made it clear that .
 Only through the expression of students' thinking can religion become meaningful and relevant in the context of the campus . Only through students' expression of religion can be meaningful, relevant in context of campus .
 We believe that there is among many students a real concern about the meaning and purpose of their lives and of life in general . We believe many students are concerned about their lives .
 The religious program is now embarking on a commendable course which will enable these students to examine the Christian approach to these ultimate questions .
 We strongly recommend the Sunday chapel services and other programs under the direction of Mr Burton and the Religious Affairs Committee to the inquiring and perplexed student .
 So far this year, two of this year's programs have been presented — one on Berlin, the other on religion . This year's program focuses on Berlin .
 Both have been sharp and enlightening, but, unfortunately, attendance has been poor . Attendance at both events has also been poor in recent weeks . Both are expected to be at the end of the year .
 We should like to commend and encourage those who are responsible for these programs . We urge more faculty members and students to attend these informal sessions .
 We believe that it makes very well a point which needs desperately to be made, and so we have reprinted it here . We have reprinted the original article .
 On the same day the President and a former President have given the American People the same good counsel . President Obama and former President George W. Bush gave the same counsel .
 Dwight Eisenhower reminded them that many of their forefathers faced equal insecurity courageously, even happily . Eisenhower: "Many of them faced equal security courageously and even happily" Eisenhower said Eisenhower's words were a good example of courage .
 People today, confronted by the threat of nuclear war, are tempted to believe their hazards are unprecedented . People today are tempted by the prospect of a nuclear war to think they're unprecedented .
 For the man trying to plow a straight furrow with a rifle on his back an Indian arrow could be as large as an H-bomb . The arrow is an arrow that could be larger than a rifle can be used to shoot a man .
 Men and women who experienced wartime bombing need such reminders less . Women who experienced WWII bombing need less. Men who experienced bombing need more reminders .
 In rallying to meet attack many people threw off mental ills of softer times . And they discovered that in rallying they threw off the mental ills, softer times. And they found it was a good way to cope with it .
 KRCC-FM has two new programs slated for this weeks entertainment . KRCC will feature two new shows on this week's program .
 Gary Zeigler is the host of "Rapsody" with Gary from 12-1-1:00 Monday through Friday . He hosts the first show of the show at 12-12:00 a.m. ET on Monday and Friday .
 The approaching week portrays the unique in Russian composers as well as the Don Cossack Chorale . This week marks the beginning of the week for the Russian Composers .
 KRCC-FM is presenting the first all jazz show from 10 until .midnight ham . On Fridays, KRCC will present the show from .10 until midnight .
 This program is possible due to Brigham's extensive knowledge and collection of jazz records . This program was produced by Brigham Brigham .
 Copies of the KRCC-FM schedule can be obtained either at the Rastall Center desk or in the Tiger office .
 Much talk at Colorado College of the non-existence of a social need to join a fraternity . Then' is much talk at . Colorado College . Then 'Then' Then'
 Sincere feeling, no doubt, is behind this talk; however, feeling will do hardly anything to face the problem, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 The college is all too willing for the fraternities to take the responsibility of most social events . Fraternities are responsible for many of the college's social events, according to students .
 The most effective way for the college to show that we don't have to be ""Greek"" to have a social good time is for it to sponsor some social functions of its own . The college should sponsor its own social functions, the college says .
 The blame for the deplorable control fraternities have over this campus must not stop with the college administration . The blame is not only to blame the frat brothers, but also the university's administration .
 When college sponsors functions, independents should come out in droves . Independent voters should be encouraged to come out to support the college .
 The administration must sponsor more all-college functions, both formal and informal . 2.2.3.4.5.5 . The administration needs to sponsor more . all-College functions; 2.1.3 . The college must also sponsor more formal functions; 3.2
 All material will be retut with the above will help assure yoi ned if so indicated . All material is retutted .
 Dick Brig, trom the Uhdir Hank Rase, ASCC VP . The college experience contributes much more than just academic fulfillment .
 The atmosphere of college and the enrichment one attains covers a wide variety of experiences . Indeed, college is the most enriching experience of college, the author says .
 Colorado College students are encouraged to express themselves . Students can choose how they want to express their feelings at Colorado College . Colorado College is a college where students can express their opinions .
 The many clubs, organizations, discussion groups, lectures, assemblies, and governing bodies offer a multitude of creative outlets . Clubs, organizations and discussion groups offer many creative outlets.
 Associated Students of Colorado College encourages students to participate in various groups on campus . Students should participate in all activities on campus, says president .
 United Airlines recently in atJ urated a special Youth Fare, nfare allows young people throw the age of 21 to travel at a r» duced rate . The Youth Fare is available at a special rate for young people .
 Passs gers are unable to secure rest, vations for a specific flight njj three hours before departure t^ Many young people who plant, use this special fare will face dif, Acuity during the Thanksgii^ and Christmas holidays .
 On &» tain dates there will be nearli 1,000 military youth fares pass® gers standing by at the Dpnve airport .
 May we request that you pass on this information on to the stu dents of your institution and un, that they purchase full fare tick ets. May we ask that you pa$ this information .
 On Saturday, Nov., the Unioin Pacific Railway will operate, for the last time, its sole remaining steam locomotive, number 844, from Cheyenne, Wyo., to Ogden, Utah . They then may make resr vations and avoid the disappoin
 All persons inteersted in this historical event are urged to contact Steve Sparling, ext. 329 for further information .
 Anyone inteersted in the chairmanship of Rastall Center Movies contact Will Johnson at X232. Center Activities . Center Activities are at the center of interest .
 The job involves publicity for movies of the current year and selection of the program for the 1962-3 school year . The job entails publicity for films of the year .
 A Poster Workshop will be held next Thursday at 7:30m. in fiastall's Crafts Shop .
 History can provide useful perspective and combat fevers of fear evoked by assumptions of total catastrophe . History provides useful perspective, but history can also be useful to combat fears .
 The counsel, coming from two men who have had to learn to live with the responsibility of possibly having to order nuclear countermeasures, carries extra weight . And such good counsel can antidote calculated terror and foster sane resolution — resolution which itself is a deterrent to aggressive war .
 Eisenhower made the remark in a remarkable television interview presented by ""CBS Reports" Another comment of Mr Eisenhower's in the same interview bears on this problem .
 He questions assumption that one bomb would automatically set off a holocaust . He questions the assumption that a bomb would set off an apocalypse .
 There are forces working to prevent an accident and double checks would operate to limit the effects of one . For instance, the Soviet authorities know that the U-2 would not have come alone if an attack were intended .
 The desire to get the ""tension eased"" is understandable under some conditions laudable, but not laudable . The need to get tension eased is laudable under conditions like this, but it's not always easy .
 Eisenhower pointed out that one effect of tension is to evoke alertness to a challenge . Eisenhower said tension is a good thing for the nation to be alerted to the challenge .
 It would be well to recognize that the challenge is not likely to be soon removed from the U.S. President Barack Obama's administration .
 It remains even when not visible and can visibly be turned on overnight in the Kremlin . The Kremlin can be seen as a sign of life in Russia .
 Of course learning to live with any wrong condition involves the danger of too-easy acceptance of it . Of course ""learning to live"" with any right condition involves too easy accepting it .
 But it will be best prosecuted in an atmosphere free from self-induced panic . The case will be prosecuted in a free atmosphere free of self-imposed panic .
 Let us seek undistorted facts and heed wise counsel. be demonstrations followed by dividual participation. To that end let us seek unpressured facts, heedwise counsel. Be demonstrations .
 This Sunday, The Mounl Club will hold its first in a sens of Rock Schools . This Sunday's event will be the first in the series of rock schools in the UK .
 The Cycling Club and all into ested will leave Rastall ParkiiJ lot at 9m. sharp on Sundii morning for Canon City . Everyone is invited, n should wear rubber soled shoes .
 Christianity is not just more religion or one more ethic* path but represents, especialll now in the midst of the niegalo' bombs and the Berlin crisis, 'genuinely new understanding <j life'
 The sermon po^ out that actually Jesus is the t^ ically new in Christianity— becaiS of Him, the Church speaks of wine wine, a new song and the Testament .
 GC Hochman Tells Assembly about Peace Corps . T the f remai play, onion pie d ieht conicof th done . Dr. Dr. T the remai plays the onion pie .
 Wili am Hochman of the History Department scribed the Principes, functions, and actions of the Peace Corps in the Tuesday assemby .
 Hochman referred to the Peace Corps as ""a new outllet"" for serving our country besides the normal military and diplomatic channels . The Peace Corps is a branch of the U.S. military, diplomatic and military branches .
 Peace Corps became a reality under the guidance of the Kennedy Administration . The Peace Corps was created under the President Kennedy administration .
 Hochman described Rashmon's leader, Sargent Shift MEDIUM, as its leader . Rashmon was the leader of a group that terrorized the U.S. government .
 CC Players Present 'Rashomon' Rashomon, a play by Fay and Michael Kanin based on a Japanese story by Ryonsuke Akutagawa . Rashomon takes place in Kyoto, Japan around the year 1200 .
 A woman has been raped, a trial has been held, and a priest and a -wood-cutter are discusssing the happenings at Rashomon gate when the play begins .
 As the three men discuss, flashbacks of the trial and the crime appear on the stage . The three men are shown discussing the case in a new documentary .
 The accused gives his and gives his interpretation of each person's character . The accused and the accused give their interpretations of each other .
 Victim's husband gives her i, and the victim's husband, (through the Medium, Terry Kidhis) Then tim gives the victim the i and the husband's husband . Then Tim gives Tim and Tim's husband the i's .
 Only a fourth interpretaeveals the true situation and the true reactions . Only a third interpretaevesals the truth and the reaction to it .
 For the presentation of this flashback structure some fairly staging has been arranged . For the purposes of this presentation, this is a fairly staging of the story .
 Two sections of the stage, to the far right and the far left, remain unchanged throughout the play . The play is set to be shown in London at the end of the month .
 At stage left one sees Rashomon gate and the three townspeople discussing the case . At stage right one can be seen from the stage left .
 At stage right lies the witness stand where each interpreter gives his story to the court . The witness stand is set up for each interpreter to give his testimony to the jury .
 The flashbacks of the crime' itself take place in the midfile of the stage in which there is a revolving 'set arranged to accomodate the four re-enactments of the . crime'
 All set changes are <W with blackouts, the curtain not lining used at all . All sets changes are set changes with blackout, not using curtain curtain or curtain .
 The Colorado College drama department gave its first performance of Rashomon last night, Thursday, Nov. 23 . The college drama department will present the play again tonight and tomorrow night .
 After a series of ""breakfast conferences"" with various Congressmen, Dr. Dr. Dr. Martin visited Washington, D.C. and visited the U.S. House of Representatives . Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was assassinated in 1968 .
 Shriver was able to convince our national leaders that the Peace Corps was a vital and important organization . Shriver convinced them that the peace Corps was an important part of the U.S. history .
 Peace Corps will work with U.S. agencies, United Nations' agencies, various American universities, and various private groups such as CARE . The Peace Corps has a program of its own, including working with private groups .
 Several projects are underway in Chile, Columbia, East Pakistan, the Phillipines, Ghana, and other areas . Several projects have been started in South America .
 Most of the Peace Corps volunteers are involved in forms of agricultural work; in various teaching positions on the secondary school level; and in areas of technological skills such as electricians, carpenters and draftsmen .
 Eighty-four percent of the present Peace Corps are college graduates . Of these, 19 percent have done graduate work . The Peace Corps is based in Washington, DC .
 A college student in a libei'al arts school would have his best chance for becoming a member of the Peace Corps by trying for a teaching position . A university student would have best chance to become a Peace Corps member .
 Interested Colorado College students should do well in their courses, especially in developing language skills . Colorado College is a great place to study languages and languages .
 A major in education is not necessary in order to attain a teaching position in the Corps. The Corps. is not required to be a major in the education field .
 Hochman encouraged interested students to become involved in overseas experiments or participate in national groups such as the American Friends Service Comm. Students also encouraged to participate in overseas projects .
 First, there is a questionnaire which evaluates knowledge and interest in languages, history, special skills, and activities such as athletics and hobbies . There is also a questionnaire that evaluates knowledge of languages and history .
 It also asks about your college background, and what organizations you have participated in . It also includes what you have done in the past .
 The second part is a comprehensive 5% hour examination which covers American history and culture, language apptitude, personal qualities, and one's area of competence . The exam is a 5%-hour examination covering American history, culture and language .
 Colorado College Tiger need of his skill. MElrose 3-6069 ""* N T,| 0n ME 4-0102 .
 There are no racial, religious, or political qualifications except for a loyalty oath . The oath of allegiance to the U.S. is a non-political oath .
 The selected volunteers will then be sent to training centers located at American universities . They will undergo a vigorous training program aimed at perfecting a language and perfecting one's special skill .
 The last supplement program is held in the rugged Puerto Rican mountains where the candidates will undergo a rough program of physical conditioning . The final supplement program will be held in Puerto Rico .
 Peace Corps members will live on the same level with their counterparts . In their designated country, they will be able to live on a level with counterparts . The Peace Corps is based in the United States .
 This means they will receive no special privileges and only receive a living allowance . This means that they will not receive any special privileges . They will only receive the living allowance and will only be allowed to use their money .
 Hochman illustrated that this program would lead the way to a better world where relations with other countries would be based on peace rather than on a military basis . Hochmann illustrated that such a peace program would be a good example .
 Artcarved diamond rings must meet traditionally high standards lor color, cut, clarity and carat weight . Art carat rings must also meet high standards for color and clarity .
 Every Artcarved ring carries a written guarantee for quality and permanent value . The ring is recognized and respected by fine jewelers from coast to coast .
 Stop in at your jeweler and he sure to see all the exquisite Artcarved diamond rings .
 Discussion Slated National Magazine on offbeat items Benezet Article Explores Problems of Excellence . The usual program will be held at Professor Burton's house, 1228 Wood Avenue .
 Reverend Jack Alford of the staff of the National Council of Churches will play a number of modern records . Alford will comment briefly on them .
 Mr Alford's intention is to encourage his audience to ask themselves what these records are saying in protests against some aspects of our society . The records will be entertaining and interesting in themselves in themselves .
 Mr Alford is a graduate in Fine Arts of the Art Institute of Chicago . He has been responsible for youth work in the Churches of the Chicago Area . At present is serving as a field worker for the National Council of Churches .
 Adrift in Soho is a half glorifying, half condescend tale of the penetration of London's beatnik kingdom by* naive nineteen year old named Harry . Reviewed by Terry Kidner .
 Colin Wilson's ] a L hero finds himself adrift from the RAF and working ‘■ manual laborer in the Midlands” Colin Wilson’s ] a hero . Colin Wilson finds himself working as a laborer .
 Millers Miller Music Co. Co. is a music company that produces music from all over the world . The company is based in New York, New Jersey .
 Fine imported worsted fabrics styled with the distinctive look, supple softness, and hand detailing you expect from the custom maker .
 Mr Wilson's book gathers both speed and sympathy upon Harry's arrival in London . The book is published by Mr Wilson and Mr Wilson at the end of the year .
 In a pub he meets Doreen, the New Zealand girl destined to drift two-dimensionally through the work, and Charles Street, an unemployed actor . Charles Street is the unemployed actor simultaneously embodying joi de vivre and the freedom of the individual .
 Charles deftly guides Harry through the artsy, aesthetic, accepted and abnormal strata of Soho life . With an acceptable talent for the theatre and an exceptional one for bumming food .
 The portraits of Charles' friends and fans are dryly and adeptly drawn . Charles' portrait is dryly, adeptly and well drawn .
 All subscribe to some form of the ""freedom"" philosophy — freedom of the individual from the oppression of society, freedom both to create and indulge oneself at the same time .
 Harry struggled to "get to grips with the subtlest shades of one's emotional experience" The ultimate in self expression is not to be found in empty coffee cups or sleeping bags on bare floors .
 First person narratj a continual Harry's generates a continual emphfeeling . For me, that's not tt^A. — it's only the appearance of fo dom."" first person .
 In reaction to the erionrBplace of London, he quotes Eliot, re , rushin esoteric books, and then gravis toward the strength of Chg^itb friendship .
 New Zealander Doreen makes Han, tea and platonally shares bed . Yet where Wilson succeeds Harry, he fails .
 WhethffiP this constitutes gentle sarcasm lack of ability is debatable . WhethFFiP: "This is not a joke"
 Harry spends the hulk of I book adrift adrift and searching he eventually finds is dubious . Harry spends a year adrift in search for a new book .
 Harry, e the optimist, continues to liven Charles and his friends . D) een and he have obviously fon that they prefer sugared tea rolled marijauna .
 CC Tigers, currently deadjed with Adams State and Colo'jdo Mines at the top of the Rocky oU ntain Conference will travel v Gunnison today in quest of their Loud straight conference victory 'a inst Western State's MountainnL Game time is scheduled for i-
 The Tigers have had a two week layoff since their Oct. 31 win over Colorado State . The Tigers should be in D shape to put the clamps on halfback Bill Farnsworth and his Mountaineer running mates .
 Colorado College has a fall semLter enrollment of 1,324 full time iludents . The off again, on again MounCC Enrollment Up .
 Full time undergraduate student Inrollment totaled 1,171, compared ;o 1,153 for the same period last real 1 , according to Mrs. Mrs. Robinson .
 This was jght above the number enrolled it was the close of 1960 registration . The number of people enrolled in the UK at the end of the 1960s .
 They scored a 10-8 victory over hapless Colorado State College and dropped a 29-0 decision to defending champion Adams State in their two league outings . They also lost a 30-0 defeat to Adams State College .
 In non-league play Western has disposed of Chadron State and Eastern New Mexico while losing to undefeated Idaho State and powerful New Mexico Highlands .
 The Tigers will again rely on the passing of Ed Eintz and the running of equally capable backs Terry Holleran, 'Pete Pleasant, Vince Greco and Wayne Deutscher . The Tigers are looking to bounce back after the loss of their head coach Ed Eints
 The winners in the first Viceroy Football Contest were announced this week . Football Contest winners have been announced . The winners were announced at the end of the week .
 Ed DeGeorge took second prize of $50, and third place, worth $25, went to Barry Anderson, another junior .
 Runner-up awards of $10 each went to Scott Bruntjen, Jack Real, Bill Stafford, John Kieser, and Prof. Prof. John Kieer .
 II IAST PIKES Piak HE3r*M *-5801 ighty-three persi ttendance at the ""Skier's ning' program held last Sunday evening, October 22 . The program was held at the end of October 22.
 This kickedoff the 1961-62 ski program and triggered some activities designed for ski bunnies and schuss-boomers as well .
 Skier's Evening centered around information for the beginning skier primarily . Skiers' Evening centered on information for beginning skiers primarily .
 Rollin Poe asked for a show of hands to indicate interest in forming a ski club this year . The response was great, with many indicating interest in the club .
 A steering committee was formed and soon will be busy considering a Skier's Evening II . Tony Ptaczek, a registered Ski Patrolman, gave some do's and don'ts for the beginner . Beth Kendall followed up by giving definitions to some thirty ski terms .
 Bob Nussbaum and Karen Clausen gave mention of ski clothing, the essentials, how to cut costs, what to wear in different conditions, etc. What to wear is essential ski clothing .
 Bob Kendall acquainted the group with the ski areas in our region and what they have to offer in the way of lifts and runs .
 Warren Miller ski film was to be shown at the Broadmoor International Center, Tuesday, Oct. 31 . The group was reminded that the famous Warren Miller film was shown .
 Coach Leon ""Red"" Eastlack was pleased with the way Colorado College's 19G1-62 basketball team was shaping up at the end of the first week of practice . Carl Cabiness of the title to defend, Coach Leon.""Eastlack said he was pleased at the
 Twenty men reported for practice last Monday afternoon, working on defense fundamentals and rebounding positions . Twenty men showed up to practice last week .
 The squad includes five returning letter-men from last year's conference-winning team . The squad has five returning players returning from last season's team .
 They are Dan Wright, Farrell Thompson, Farrell Howell, Dave Krell and John Reid . They are on the air at 8 p.m. ET today .
 Eastlack said he was extremely pleased with the work of three Carl Cabiness of Independence, Missouri, Bill Burke, Chicago, Illinois; and Gregg Smith of Canon City, Colorado .
 Cabbiness played at Cameron Junior College in Lawton, Oklahoma; Burke at Trinidad Junior College; and Smith at Pueblo Junior College . Smith also played at Trinidad College in Trinidad, Oklahoma .
 Three of the returning lettermen are seniors; Wright, Thompson, Krell and Krell are returning seniors . Wright is a guard from Muskegon, Michigan; Thompson is guard from Jerome, Idaho . Krell is a center from McPherson, Kansas .
 Howell, a forward from Albuquerque, New Mexico, is a junior; Reid, a sophomore . Howell and Reid are both from Colorado Springs, Colorado Springs . Howell is a senior; Reid is a sophomore.
 Tareyton Produd of J& JVmt-ut-an S^CCt^&'m. The film was shot in New York City, New Jersey .
 Reverend Kenneth Burton spoke on ""The Possibilities and Scope of a Religious Program on the CC Campus,"" Thursday, October lft at the Coffee Hour . Burton Outlines GG Religious Program .
 It is difficult to preach to members of all faiths and of no faith, but it is a challenge, says the author . "It is the challenge. It is a difficult thing to preach," says author .
 A Religious program on this campus should be directed to those students who are religiously non-connected, the enquirer or agnostic, and must also help and nurture the Christian student . A religious program should also be aimed at those who are non-religious, agnostic or non-
 The question of Peace and War, the fate of the U.N., and the refugee problem all stimulate him to thought and, wherever possible, action . He says: "Peace and War" is the topic of his thoughts .
 All students are concerned about the Meaning of Life and of Death, but not formally . Students are concerned with the meaning of life and death .
 "To their minds there is a total lack of connection between the Church and their questions," says one of the church's critics . The Church has been criticized for its lack of transparency in recent years .
 Reverend Burton will host a get-together to listen to jazz and tell sick jokes . The group will discuss the influence of such things in our culture on the young adult of today . Reverend Burton's home will be held on October 29 .
 Through informal discussions such as this on Life and its values, through retreats and study groups, Religion can be connected with our life from day to day . Religion can also be connected to our lives from day-to-day .
 Religion is not just an hour of worship on a Sunday morning, it is part of one's whole life . Religion not just worship, it's part of a whole life, says Rabbi David Frum . He says religion is not a matter of worship but a life of life .
 Benezet Article Explores Problems of Excellence . He warned that excellence may also may be assuming class overtones .
 The faculty should place its direct teaching attentions more on the first two years of college than on the last two . Second, the faculty should be persuaded to place its . attention to the first . two years more on college than the other two years .
 Third, we should try harder to end the cold war between professors and student personnel officers . It is a real block toward achieving excellence in the student as a person .
 Fourth, a sustained effort should be made to throw out false and superficial inducements to learning, he says . Fourth, he adds, “Sustainability should be encouraged to learn”
 In one way or another most of these titles refer to our obsession with grades . The grades are a reflection of our love for grades .
 Fifth, colleges should move to reward real learning among students and real teaching among professors . Colleges should also reward students and professors for real teaching, professor says .
 For the former, plenty of rewards will come to mind once the stranglehold of grades has been broken . For the latter, there will be rewards for the former . The former, however, will have to wait until the end of the day .
 For the rewarding of teaching, we must solve ""the publishing racket"" by freeing them from arbitrary pressure to publish scholarly articles . We must solve the publishing racket by freeing teaching staff from arbitrary pressures .
 We want to give you and everyone at CC the best possible paper, but, in order to do that, we need more help . We are happy to provide the best paper possible paper. We need help from the public .
 If you can write, type, read proof, take pictures, or even offer moral support, you can do us and the college community a great service .
 If you are interested in working for the TIGER, please fill out the adjoining coupon and return it to us in Rastall Center . The coupon will be returned to the editor of this article .
 Clif Rouse, Business Major, Class of 1963, walked awey with Viceroy's first Hundred bucks prize money .
 Ed DeGeorge, class of '64, took second prize of $50.00 and Barry Anderson '63, got third prize of . $25.00 . The winner of each prize is a member of the Class of '63 and '64 .
 Any stud nl or faculty rr ember on this campus may enter e»eept employees o Brown & Williamson, its advert sing agencies, or memb ollheir imm diate families . The properly ol Brow iirned .
 Entries m ed or dropped n ballot bo* or campus no later than Wednesday nidnighl belore he games are played and received by Friday of the ame week .
 The ghltodiscontinu efulureconlestsisieserv. On M sado on an Official Entry Blank or piece of paper ol the same size and lormat. write your predictions ol the scores of the games .
 Enclose an empty Viceroy package or a reasonable rendition of the name as it appears on the package front . Mail entry to Vicoy at the 6oi Number on the entry blank, or drop In Vicheoy Football Contest Ballot 3 .
 Alumni-Faculty CofFee — Members of the faculty will be on hand to greet former students . Alumni Officers' Breakfast — WES Lounce, Rastall Center. Alumni officers' Breakfast .
 Francis Van Derbur, chirman, Interfrateinity Research and Advisory Council — Site north of Palmer Hall . Francis van Derbur was appointed as chairman of the council's advisory council . He was appointed to head of the Council of the Arts and Humanities .
 Homecoming Luncheon -and Rally — Reunion tables for Classes of 1921 and 1936 — Report to the Vlumni by President Benezet . Report to be made public on Thursday, Friday, Saturday .
 Colorado College — I arade of winning floats, crosscountry meet — Washburn Field . Individual Dedication Programs — Kappa Sigma Phi Delta Theta and Phi Gamma Delta House .
 Rastall Sororities, and Independiturday morning in Bemis ™&ge to provide an opportunity former students to become acquainted with faculty members . Benezet Center Dining Room, will greet alu and friends of the college .
 Louis T Benezet will give a report to the putf"" Saturday at the Home|"">»>e Luncheon Rally in Palm Beach, Florida . The annual report will be held at the JQ.000 Kappa Sigma, Phi Delta .
 Homecoming Parade to take place at 1:30m. Saturday . T Adams State. aturday activities will wind up n a reunion dinner .
 Homecoming weekend activities will conclude Sunday with the dedication of the Rastall Center Memorial Lounge, honoring the Colorado College war dead, following a church service in Shove Chapel .
 Laurence Frederick, a staff member of the Lowell Observatory, Flagstaff, Arizona, will speak on the topic ""The Sun's Neighbors,"" in Perkins Hall, Wednesday, November 8, at 8:15m.
 This lecture is sponsored by the American Astronomical Society and the National Science Foundation . This lecture was hosted by the Astronomer's Astronomy Society .
 Frederick has made notable contributions to the recent advances of astronomy and will attempt to tell something about them in non-technical language . Frederick will try to tell the latest advances in astronomy . Frederick has written numerous books about astronomy .
 Homecoming dance — Semi-Formal — Presentation of Trophies — Bob McGrew and his orchestra — Broadmoor International Center . E James Brady, 70 Marland Rd., Broadmore, is hosting the homecoming dance .
 Colorado College Homecoming Church Service . Colorado College homecoming church service . The Rev. John W. A. L. Cevallos is a member of the Colorado College community .
 Arm in B Barney, '20, chairman of the college's Board of Trustees and president of the Coorado Springs National Bank, will preside during the ceremony .
 The three buildings form a courtyard plan with the open-end facing Palmer Hall . The open-ended courtyard plan is designed to look at Palmer Hall's Palmer Hall, which is located in central London .
 All have steelbeam concrete construction, with brick and stucco exteriors . All have a steel beam concrete construction .
 Designed to house 34 fraternity men and one housemother, each of the houses can he expanded to accommodate additional students . The fraternity houses can be expanded to house additional students and can house more .
 Interiors of the three fraternity houses are identical in design and furnishings . The interiors of all three houses were designed in the same way .
 The main floor includes a spacious lounge, furnished with solid, comfortable furniture; a well appointed dining room; and a gleaming modern kitchen . Main floor includes an elegant lounge and a well-appointed dining room . The house is located in the heart of London's central park .
 On the second floor, there are 18 bedrooms, each accommodating from one to four students . The second floor includes 18 bedrooms .
 Denver businessman and president of the Nation Interfraternity Research Foundation, will be the dedication speaker . Denver businessman will speak at the dedication .
 Mr Van Derbur is the president of the Olinger Life Insurance Company . He is the chairman of the Interfraternity Research and Advisory Council .
 Kenneth Burton is assistant professor of religion and minister of Shove Memorial Chapel . Burton is also an assistant professor at the University of Columbia University .
 Dedication ceremonies will conclude with the presentation of the buildings to the three fraternity chapters . The buildings will be presented to the fraternity chapters of the three chapters .
 An opportunity to inspect the three houses will be provided before the homecoming lunch at 12 noon in Rastall Center . The lunch will be held at 12 p.m.
 The fraternity complex is located on a three acre plot just north of Palmer Hall . The new fraternity complex will be located on the campus's Palmer Hall campus .
 The basement contains a recreation room, a chapter lounge, a laundry room and a trunk room . Land is located in the basement .
 Each fraternity house has a fulltime professional cook who prepares and serves lunch and dinner . In addition to the housemother and maid, each fraternity house also has a professional cook .
 Colorado College is one of the few colleges in the nation conducting a fraternity feeding program . Colorado College has a frat feeding program at the college .
 The fraternities will hold open houses and individual dedication programs at 5m. The fraternity will also hold individual dedication events at 5 m. The event will also take place at the end of the year .
 Pershing Rifles will again sponsor the fabulous Falconaires of the Air Force Academy . Pershing will sponsor the Falconaires at the Academy .
 Harry James, Les Brown, Frankie Karl and Gerry Mulligan are represented by the seventeen players . Such great names as Harry James and Les Brown are represented . Bob Crosby and Russ Morgan are represented as well .
 This band is known from coaBt to coast and have appeared on the Bob Hope ""Buick Spectacular"" as well as Radio Monitor . Have appeared on Bob Hope and Radio Monitor shows .
 The consequences of our response to those challenges present some terrifying possibilities . Ck.lo Springs, Colucudo 'Beware the Terrible Simplifiers'
 The way in which we answer the questions of armament, the way we interpret the needs and desires of the masses in underdeveloped areas of the world, will determine whether civilization itself lives or dies . The institutions we construct to keep pace with our technology will .
 It is against this backdrop that the ""terrible simplifiers"" are at their best . The 'terrible simplifiers" are the best of the series .
 Our insecurity and frustration, resulting from our inability to resolve the pressing problems which face us, provide a fertile ground for the seeds of radical panaceas . Our insecurity, frustration, our fear, resulting in the . inability to . resolve the . pressing problems . face us .
 Those who would propose radical solutions to our problems generally simplify matters . Those proposing radical solutions often simplify matters by simplifying matters .
 First they lay the blame for those problems at the feet of some collective demon or another . First they blame the problems on some collective demons or another. Then they blame each other for the problems they face .
 Return to the principles and methods of the past century and strike down anyone who advocates or supports change therefrom . Return to those methods and methods, strike down those who advocate or support change .
 The former, in addition to ignoring the complexity of modern life, forget to tell us who's to take care of the government, of the solution of those complex problems . The former .
 The latter, also ignoring those complexities, fail to explain how removing the changes of a fast-moving century will eliminate the problems which caused the changes .
 The radicals on either hand, moreover, advocate schemes which would stifle individual endeavor and excellence under a strict pall of conformity . The radicals are either side of the issue .
 The examples of the application of these points of view show that they have yet more in common with each other .
 Both for instance, are based on fear and suspicion . Both use secret police tactics to a great extent . Both for example, both use secret tactics to great extent.
 The frightening thing is that radicalism is no longer an academic question for us. Radicalism is not an academic issue for us, says Julian Zelizer . "Radicalism is now no longer academic question," he says .
 A radical revolution of the left now controls our neighbor, Cuba, and evidence of a growing radical right can be found in many parts of our own country . A radical left is now controlling Cuba, with a growing right in the United States .
 This is not to say that conservatives or liberals, in the vague, general meaning we give these terms, are selling America down the river to totalitarianism . It's not the case that liberals or conservatives are selling U.S. down the the river .
 The reasonable conservative and liberal positions which hold basic the longstanding broad concepts of Our Constitution will very likely become harder to maintain . But the reasonable conservative . and liberal . positions which recognize the complexity of the problems . we face will likely become more difficult to maintain.
 As fear and frustration mount, the simple, black-and-white pronouncements of the radicals will have wider appeal . The simple black and white pronouncements will have a wider appeal, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The greatest service we Americans can do is to cast aside our principles in fear and suspicion, the author writes . The author says the greatest service is to do the international Communist conspiracy .
 Freedom is most in danger from those on the far left and the far right who cry loudly that their radical schemes will preserve it . Freedom is in danger because of those who say they want to preserve it, says Julian Zelizer .
 The Photography Workshop will be held Thursday, November 9, in Rastall's Crafts shop at 7:30m.
 Following the demonstration, all those present will be qualified to use the lab at any time . The lab will be available to anyone who wants to use it .
 Rastall keeps an inexpensive camera at the desk available for check out at any time . The camera is available at a desk at his desk at the hospital .
 There will be a scoreboard on the Rastall Center Desk giving upto-the-minute scores of all CC away games . The scoreboard will be available for the next two weeks .
 The scoreboard is to inform the college community as promptly as possible of all CC athleticevents . The scoreboard will be used to announce the end of the season .
 On exhibit now in the Rastall Center lounge are works by Colorado College art instructors and students . Colorado College's art instructors are on exhibit at the center .
 Mr Arnest, Mr Wynn and Mr Snyder are showing a painting each . In additioil there are prints from the graphics classes .
 There was no coffee hour this week due to Homecoming activities and mid-term tests . The coffee hour was no longer available due to the busy schedule .
 Anyone inteersted in working on coffee hours contact Diane Johnston or Nancy Delhin, co-chairmen of the Coffee Hour Committee . Diane Johnston: "Coffee Hour Committee"
 They are Kathy Bertrong, Nancy Bowers, Rachel Jensen, Sue Louthan, Jennie Moore, Nancy Newman, Marsha Nye, Mary Nelle Webb, Melinda Wells, and Carol Wright . They are the group of women who have raised money for cancer research
 Its members are selected on the basis of good citizenship, enthusiasm, and support of the althletic teams . Members of the group are selected for good citizenship and enthusiasm .
 It is hoped that the Bible's du a i attitude will be resolved and the dangers and opportunities inherent in the Biblical concept will be made relevant to our day and ag e . This week only Chapel Serv ice will begin at 10:45m.
 KRCC-FM will be on hand to bring you on-the-spot interview and news for the gala Homecom. ing weekend ahead . Service will be followed bv the dedication of the Memorial Lounge in Rastall Center at lj Program Notes .
 The interview with the Homecoming Queen candidates will take place this afternoon at 4 :30 . The interview will be held at 4:30 p.m. ET .
 KRCC-FM will cover the exciting moments of Homecoming on Saturday . KRCC will also cover the events of the weekend .
 A happy Homecoming to all from the staff and studios of KRCCFM, your campus radio . In short, a happy homecoming .
 The ASCC Election Committee shall check the eligibility of each nominee . Nomination petitions shall be presented to the Chairman of the ASCC election Committee at least three weeks before the electa) Section Section Section
 The person elected as tain a grade point a^ at semester during hi shall be removed frc President must mainerage of at least 2. ; term of office or he office .
 Nomination petitions shall be presented to the Chairman of the ASCC Election Committee at least two weeks before the election . The ASCC election will be held in November .
 Any person who was defeated in the Presidential election shall be declared a candidate for Vice President, Secretary, or Treasurer at his request without submitting another nomination petition . ASCC will hold elections for vice president, secretary, treasurer and treasurer .
 The defeated Vice President, Secretary, or Tareasurer candidates shall be allowed to run for commissioner in their respective classes after presenting an additional petition containing names of thirty students from the nominee's class .
 Nomination petitions shall be presented to the Chairman of the ASCC Election Committee at least five days before the election . Nomination petition must be presented five days prior to election .
 Those declared eligible shall be announced in the Tiger at least one week preceding the election . Those declared ineligible shall be announce in the week before the election.
 The persons elected to each of the positions must maintain a grade point average of at least 2. at semester during his term of office or his position shall be declared vacant . No change .
 Nominations for representatives of the sophomore, junior, and senior classes of the following year shall be made by petition containing names of thirty students of the nominees' classes . No change .
 Nominations for representatives of '"" e freshman class shall be made from the flo» r at a freshman class meeting conducted W the ASCC Election Committee . No change .
 All candidates for freshing class representative must give speeches at Freshman Class meeting held prior to W election . Freshman class meeting must be held before W election to be representative .
 Rocky Mountain Conference powers Colorado College and idams State College come to grips tomorrow at Washburn Field . CC's homecoming encounter probably will decide ,1^5 year's conference champions . Colorado College Tiger .
 Game time is scheduled for 1:30m. in what should be one of the best football battles j n the region this week . Game will be played in the first half of the week .
 Both the Tigers and the Indians are undefeated in conference play and are currently Kgtiloeked in first place with idenlical 2-0 records . The Tigers and Indians are currently tied for first place in conference .
 Adams scored a 29-0 victory over Western and disposed „f C-State 7-0 last week in the gear's homecoming game at Greeley . Adams scored 29-1 win over Western, 7-1 victory over C-St.
 Adams State wasp re-season favorite to take the crown again this year in j walk-away . Defending champion Adams State is the defending champion .
 The Tigers were ■riven only a slight outside chance of capturing the conference title . The Tigers won't be the first team to win a conference title in six years .
 Experts now feel that tomorrow's game could go either way . But their worth wtih impresive wins over C-State and Westerns is worth their worth . The game could be a toss-and-a-half game between the two teams .
 The Tiger's offensive punch will again lie in the running and passing of Ed Kintz, the running of ffaye Deutscher, Terry Holleran, pete Pleasant and Vince Greco . The all-around offensive .brilliance of slotback Dan Wright will
 Tomorrow will be a tine test of the Toger's stout defense as they attempt to quell the offensive minded Indians . The Togers will be hoping to keep the Indians at bay .
 Tiger's have scored an average of 9.9 points per game in six of their six matches . The Tigers have been averaging only 9.3 points a game in their last six games . Tiger's are currently fourth in the Premier League table .
 Coach Jerry Carle is concerned, however, about the present strength of the CC forward wall . Coach Carle says he is not worried about the strength of his side's forward wall.
 Two of the mainstays in the Tiger defense are injured and will probably be used sparingly tomorrow . Tiger fans will be hoping to see them back in action for the first time .
 Dianovsky suffered a severe sprain of his left ankle against Western last week . Melton is still slowed by an aggravating charley horse suffered in play against C-State . Dianovsky is expected to be sidelined for the rest of the season .
 Big Sylvester Carroway and not so big Dan Kaltenbaugh and Bill Geary will hold Adams' huge array of tackles in check . That leaves big Sylvesters Carroways and not big DanKaltenbaugh to hold Adams down .
 They run from a lonesome end T-formation and occasionally switch to a double wing . They are often used to play from a single wing formation .
 Running back Ed Hodnick and running back Walt Weaver also feature in the back end .
 Alamosa is expected to be on hand to Aeer their Indians on to a posible conference championship . Nearly the whole town of Alamosa expected to attend the game . Alamosa will be hoping for a possible championship .
 At last year's homecoming, the Tigers rolled over Western State in a howling bliz*M on Washburn Field . Same, the same, won last year at homecoming for the Tigers .
 More l ""an 3,000 fans turned out for the clash which commenced under a *arm sun . More than three,000 turned out to watch the match .
 Colorado Mines is the third contender for the Rocky Mountain championship . Colorado Mines rested this pa st weekend and rested this weekend .
 Adams State has a 5-2 record for the season, compared to Colorado College's 4-1 and a tie . Adams State's record is 5-1 . Colorado College has a 4-3 record .
 Colorado Mines take on Colorado Mines November 11 and Nebraska Wesleyan November 18 . They meet Colorado Wesleyan on November 11 .
 Head Coach Leon ""Red"" Eastlack recently announced the Tigers' 1961-62 basketball schedule . Tiger Cagers Schedule Set Set .
 Last year's Rocky Mountain Conference winners will enter 23 contests, 10 of which will be home games . Eastlack said the Tigers, last year's conference winners, will play 23 games this year .
 Slocum Hall touch football league finished this past week with a series of tough and tumble championship games . Socratic Seven lose in Intramural Finals . Intamural Director Jim Hanks reports .
 The 1st South Wing knocked the Socratic Seven out of their championship perch of last year . In first place, they knocked the ""always tough"" Socratic 7 out of the championship perching of last season .
 Lee Hunt is the Intramural Manager for 1st South and seemed very proud of his men . Lee Hunt seemed proud of the men's achievements .
 The second place berth went to 3rd West; spirited on by Terry Jones who was injured in the final game . Terry Jones was forced to miss the final match .
 William Hochman seemed to think with effective recruiting this summer they would be back to get the first place slot next year . Hochmen: "With effective recruiting, the team will be back in contention for the top spot .
 Weymouth finished 4th in the tournament play . Finishing 4th was 1st North North led by manager Butch Weymouth .
 Trophies will be awarded at Slocum's first Fireside Program of the year on November 9th . The program will be held at the end of the month on November 11th .
 Slocum Intramural program is showing tremendous growth and participation over last year . The touch football league kicked off this year . It is the first time the program has been successful in the community .
 Intramural managers are already laying groundwork for the other approaching sports . Swimming, basketball, volleyball and even two field days will be planned .
 The Tigers raced for four second half touchdowns to completely outclass the favored Mountaineers . The Tigers, picked as pre-game underdogs, made Denver newspaper predictors squirm in embarrassment . Denver newspaper predictionsors squirmed in embarrassment when they won .
 The Tigers, operating in an Iformation from which they shifted into their slot-T, failed'to generate much of an offensive punch in the first half . The Tigers were playing in the Iformation .
 They were unable to pick up a first down until midway through the second quarter . The defense was unable to score a single touchdown in the first quarter .
 CC spotted Western a 7-0 lead when quarterback John Hancock scored from the one early in the second quarter . Hancock scored a touchdown in the first quarter .
 The Mountaineer drive started after Bill Farnsworth returned a CC punt to the Tiger 37 . The Tiger's drive started with a return from Farnsworth's punt .
 Eddie Kintz scored a five yard scoring pass to Dan Wright in the closing moments of the second period . The Tigers did manage to muster one scoring drive in the final minutes of the period .
 The Tigers left the field at the half trailing 7-6 . The attempted kick for the extra point fell short and the Tigers were left at half time .
 The Tigers abandoned their I-formation, designed to throw off defensive adjustments, to score after the i-eceiving the second half kickoff . The Tigers overcame the cold and blistering wind and stormed downfield .
 The drive was sparked by Wayne Deutscher and the aerial combination of Kintz to Wright . The pair won the World Cup for the first time in a row .
 Terry Holleran finally cracked in to score from five yards out . The pair clicked for three long receptions for the Lions . The win was the first time the two players had scored in the game together .
 Wright made a circus catch of another Kintz pass for the two point conversion . The Tigers took a 14-7 lead in the first quarter . Wright made the catch in the second quarter .
 The rugged Tiger defense, fast coming to be respected as one of the best in the region, stifled the Mountaineers . The Tigers soared on to score thre more touchdowns in the final quarter .
 On the first play of the fourth quarter Wright took a reverse pitch from Kintz and scooted eleven yards to score . Wright scored the touchdown in the first quarter of the game .
 Halfback Gary Sparkman crashed his way to paydirt with a couple of Mountaineers with him . Halfback took a handoff from Kintz on the Western State seven and crashed into the pile .
 Pete Pleasant added the extra point and the Tigers held a comfortable 27-7 lead in the first half . Pete Pleasant's extra point made it a comfortable victory for the Tigers .
 Holleran intercepted an enemy aerial on the Mountaineer 20 and twisted his way to the end zone for the final CC tally . The desperate Mountaineers then went to the air in an attempt to strike back, but the intercept was intercepted . The final score of the game was
 Pleasant added the extra point and the Tigers led, 34-7 with 20 seconds remaining to play . Pleasant added an extra point . The Tigers led the Tigers, 34, 7, with the last play remaining .
 There was a number of outstanding individual efforts, but once again it was the overall team performance that contributed to the victory . There were many outstanding individual performances, but the team performance was the best .
 He has a severely sprained left ankle and may miss tomorrow's homecoming encounter with Adams State . He has been ruled out of the game with a severely sprained ankle .
 Artcarved diamond rings must meet traditionally high standards (or color, cut, clarity and carat weight) Artworkcarved diamonds must meet high standards . The rings must also meet the standard of carat size, color and clarity .
 Every Artcarved ring carries a written guarunlee for quality und permanent value . Ring is recognized and respected by fine jewelers from coast to coast .
 Stop in at your jeweler and be sure to .see all the exquisite Artcarved diamond ringsthe rings you buy .
 Ten leadingsingers in the first production of the Colorado Springs Opera Association for the 1961-62 season will travel a total of 1,000 miles to participate in the three performances . La Boheme is scheduled at the Fine Arts Center November 2, 3, and 4 under the direction
 Rashomon by Ryunosuke Akutogawa as adapted by Fay and Michael Kanin produced for three nights at Perkins Hall last week . Two singers from Denver ; CC Builds for Future by Haii Jaf .
 Despite the usual technical lapses found in all college productions, this was a very effective performance . Despite the few usual lapses of technical errors, the production was very effective .
 All the leads did commendable jobs, but James Fox and Carl Chard were particularly excellent . James Fox was particularly excellent in the role .
 Terry Kidner in a smaller part made her short stay on the stage one of the highlights of the play . Kidner appeared in a small part in the play at the end of the show .
 "In all respects, from the movable sets made by Mr David Hale Hand to the costumes and makeup by Mrs. Mrs. Hand, the sets were all made by David and Mrs. David .
 Audience attendance was not commensurate with the effort put into this play . However, the audience attendance did not meet expectations of the play .
 Mario's of Aspen is Denver's unique restaurant featuring the Mario Singers . Owner Mario's is the owner of the restaurant with the famous singing group .
 J's FRESH PIZZA Sausage, Mushroom, Pepperoni or Anchovy . Sausages, Mushroom or Pepperoni . Largest size 12" pizza .
 You'll come out on top because they tit so well and keep their good looks . You'll be out of the top because of their tit and good looks, she says .
 New striped Oxfords, with button-down collar 4.50 Custom Tailors — Men's Furnishings French Shriner Shoes Cor\Hw>r< . The role of Mimi will be sung by Mrs. Mrs. Mimi .
 Berge has been soloist with the Colorado Springs Chorale in addition to extensive musical experience before moving to Colorado Springs two years ago . Berge is a soloist and has extensive experience in the musical world .
 She has sung in the operas Madame Butterfly, Rigaletto, and The Gondoliers . She has also sung in Rigalettto, Rigeletto and Rigelette .
 FBI Special Agent Edward J Rodgers Jr., will sing the role of Colline, a philosopher . Rodgers Jr. will play a philosopher in the play .
 Semon took second place in the Cook County division of the Chicago Music Festival . He sang in the regular chorus of Chicago Lyric Opera .
 Johnson sings in the First Presbyterian Church choir and in the Colorado Springs Chorale . Johnson is an employee of Colorado Interstate Gas Company .
 Donald Jenkins, instructor of music at The Colorado College, will sing the role of Schaunard, a musician . Donald Jenkins is an instructor at the college .
 David Porter, a music teacher at Cheyenne Mountain School, will be Parpignol, a toy vendor in La Boheme . David Porter will be a teacher in the musical community .
 Charles Johnson is a music teacher at Widefield High School . Stuart Creighton is a graduate of Colorado College . Charles M Johnson is also a teacher at the school .
 In addition to his interest in music, Johnson has played featured roles in several Civic Player Productions .
 Johnson is cast as Benoit, a landlord, and Creighton will play a customs guard . Johnson is also cast as a landlord . Creighton is set to appear in the film .
 Erling Foss is chairman of the selectionc ommittee for the 1961-62 operas . Foss is also chairman of a selection committee for the 1960s operas. Foss is a member of the committee .
 Season tickets are $G and single tickets, available one week before each performance, are $2.50 . Single tickets are also available at the theatre in New York .
 La Boheme will be sung in English as will the productions to be given in February and April . The productions will be held in English and will be performed in English .
 Members of Reserve Officers [raining Corps and reserve com ■orients of the armed forces, including the National Guard, are quired to register . Members of the Reserve Officers ... are . members of the . armed forces . The National Guard is also required to register in order to join the
 Only persons I a ctive duty in the armed forces at not required to register; but , ey must register within 30 days liowing separation from services born after August 30, 1922, and lt previously registered .
 Each mg man will be mailed a regisiition certificate that he is retired to have in his personal possiion at all times . Shortly after registration each mg man is mailed a .
 If the cerPjcate is lost or destroyed, a dup■ate may be obtained from his cat board .
 Department of Justice and m ay result in induction before the irmal time . The U.S. government has issued a statement to the U.N. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton .
 The local board is located at the Colorado Springs Post Office, [jcond floor] and office hours are 8:30m. to 5:00m.
 Colorado College is one of thiry-two colleges and universities iwited to participate in the Nalional Invitational Debate Toumanent to be held at the United Slates Air Force Academy Decemm 8th and 9th, 1961 . Debaters Receive Air Force Invitation
 USAFA is already recognized as the leading national debate tournament held in the first semester . The USAFA tournament is only in its third year and is recognized as a national debate competition .
 Colleges and universities are selected on the basis of their overall records for the previous year . Colleges are selected based on the results of their previous year's overall records .
 More than half of the freshmen class at CC this fall have a higher scholastic ability than 90 per cent of the average college and university freshmen throughout the United States .
 Dwane Collins is associate professor of education and director of the college's Counseling Center Services . Collins is also a counselor at the University of Columbia .
 Collins based his report on the results of the School and College Ability Tests given on the campus last Sept. to entering freshmen . Collins says the tests were given to students at the University of Columbia .
 The Colorado College freshmen scores were then compared to the results of a normal national sampling of entei'ing freshmen at 99 leading colleges and universities across the nation . Colorado College freshman scores were compared to those of 99 leading universities .
 The scholastic ability of the Colorado College student body is nearly twice as high as it was six years ago . Collins said the national sample of students is twice as good as the national average . Collins: The college has a national student body of nearly 100 percent .
 He attributed this to an admispolicy designed to select colstudents who can profit most from a high level liberal arts and science education .
 In comparing the results of freshmen at the liberal arts college here to the national sampling, Dr. John Sutter compared the national sample to a national sample .
 Collins found that 98. percent scored better on the ability tests than the top 50 per cent of the national average . The study was carried out by the Collins Foundation .
 A review of reports issued over the past years shows that scholastic ability of students at The Colorado College is improving measurably each year .
 Only 54. per cent of entering freshmen in 1954 scored higher on the School and College Ability Tests than the top half of the normal sampling . The current 98.4 per cent test results are higher than those in 1954 .
 The percentage increased from 54. in 1954 to 05. in 1955 and to 83. in 1956 . In 1956, the percentage of people in the United States was 83.7% .
 It should be obvious to regular readers of this column that this week's title is merely a ploy aimed at attracting the multitude who, week after week, skip over these writings . This week's headline is a ploy to attract the multitude of readers .
 She hadn't done this for five days and decided to get it over with this morning . She had decided to do it this morning after five days' worth of work .
 Laura Kastor had finished her task and started to prepare for an early lunch at the Hub . Laura had to finish her task before heading out for lunch .
 Laura Kastor overheard the lady tell Alan Peterson that there were no pickles . She overheard a lady tell him that there was no pickle pickles. She said she was disappointed .
 Our job is providing communications of all kinds, wherever needed . We flash word of possible enemy missile attack, or in your home or college . We're providing communications wherever needed, including in the northern snows .
 When we can't fill a need off the shelf, then we start fresh and create the answer to the problem . We start fresh, create the solution to that problem, says author .
 World's first undersea telephone cables to speed calls between continent's . Then we developed the world's first underwater telephone cables .
 We have started development of an important world-wide communications system employing satellites . And we have started developing an important communications system using satellites .
 Data-Phone can transmit mountains of data at extremely high speeds . Industry and government needed a way to gather huge amounts of coded information from distant points .
 Long Distance service, Direct Distance Dialing, Transistor, Solar Battery- a succession of firsts which goes back to the invention of the telephone itself . And so it goes .
 Universal communications-the finest, most dependable anywhere-are what we deliver . Universal communications are the most reliable, reliable communications anywhere .
 One half of the world's population is caught in the maelstrom of the Twentieth Century . A new force which is destroyingcivilizations and societies which have been stable for hundreds of years is destroying societies and societies . The world is experiencing a new force of destruction .
 Politically these transitional societies are called the ""neutral,"" or ""uncommitted"" countries . Politically they are known as "neutral" or "uncomcommitted" countries . They are transitional societies that are politically neutral .
 What these countries believe, why they believe it, and how we can take account these beliefs in formulating foreign policies are major problems for the U.S. today . The United States needs to understand the beliefs of these countries .
 All of these countries are proud of their new independence and after centuries of colonialism they would like to be left alone to work out their own individual forms of government .
 No money comes wtihout qualifications attached to the money, no money comes with qualifications attached .
 The problems of transition facing the newly independent countries have no historical precedents, says President Obama . The problems facing independent countries are no historical precedent, he says .
 There is no way to evaluate what will happen as the result of an action taken today, and this makes the new nations extremely wary of long-range policies . The idea is to remain flexible, cross the bridges when they come, do not get committed in advance, for the present problem
 Both the East and the West are fighting for their friendship, but the power of the neutrals is magnified . The power of neutrals in the world is often greater than their status would suggest . The West is fighting for the friendship of the two countries .
 While new nations would like to pursue a policy of "flexibility," the major powers of the world want concrete decisions and commitments . The U.S. and its allies do .
 The Soviet block hopes for the same, but it goes about achieving the results more carefully . It hopes to achieve the same success as the Soviet block .
 In order to fight ideological battle with the East, the West must understand the code of operations it fights against . The West needs to understand that the West is fighting a winning ideological battle against the East . In order, to fight the West, it must understand what it is fighting against .
 The Soviet block understands and sympathizes with the neutrals' wish for flexibility . It is content to give huge sums of money to nations it deems important for three-to-five yeai*s .
 In excange, the Soviets hope to tie these new countries to them economically . The Soviets hope they will tie these countries to economic ties .
 The new nations are aware of this underlying motive, and they hope that when the Soviet payments slow down that they will be able to break away and find another benefactor . New nations hope to find a new benefactor when they find another .
 The importance of General Nasser to the countries of Asia and Africa cannot be denied . His prestige as a ""neutrals' neutral" neutral"" is enormous, says Nasser .
 At any rate, he is the only one who has succeeded in taking from both sides without being recolonized . At any . rate, the only . one of those who succeeded in . taking both sides have succeeded in winning .
 Becker's Radiator & Body Shop is located at E Bitou St. Call ME 3-0076 Radiator, Body & Fender Repairing and Painting Repairing & Painting .
 As a catalyst for the Soviet pattern of spending, there is the incentive of the European Common Market . The Soviet pattern was catalyst for Soviet spending, says historian .
 If the Market becomes a reality, discriminatory tariffs against non-members will be five or six times those charged to members . Non-members would be five to six times the rate of tariff paid to members, according to experts .
 All former colonies still send their crops to the old colonial paver to be processed, in exchange for European goods . The former colonies are still sending their crops back to the paver .
 Nigerian cocoa beans go to England to be processed and return in tins along with cloth for Nigerian dress, Nigerian hats, shoes and other goods .
 The new nations do not have factories to process their own crops; they must spend their money on schools, hospitals and a higher living standard . New nations must spend the money on hospitals, schools and higher living standards, says President Obama .
 In Africa the Japanese, Israelis and now the Canadians are filling the vacuum . They are attracted by the mineral wealth which is being discovered in these new countries .
 The Soviet bloc hopes to establish economic dependency, simply through lack of competition . But Japan, Israel, and Canada cannot fill the gap alone, and so the Soviet bloc .
 American business can go into high gear for the next fifty years or more if it realizes the possibilities . Payments will come back in mineral form, minerals which are indispensable to us and many of which are running out of .
 Strong new nations should be able to participate equally, perhaps equalizing the power struggle with a strong neutrality which could discriminate economically against violators of its wishes . For the rest of us, we hope to see strong new nations, taking their rightful place .
 We must realizet hat this is going to happen, with us or without us. And finally, we must realize hat this . This is not only about the future, but also the future of the United States .
 We have no choice but to support the present governments, though they be good or bad, by our standards, because they are going to change as more and more of their people become educated andd issatisfied . We are not going to support them, but they will change if they
 There will be upheavals, most of them peaceful, we hope, a great . many within the next ten years, all of them in the next five after that . The UK has a long history of political upheaval, says David Cameron .
 In most of the underdeveloped countries small political business cliques control the country . Small political cliques play a key role in the development of the country's economy .
 With more and more schools and universities being built and more wealth coming in, this restriction of wealth will have to disappear, as surely as it has whenever and wherever these things happened, says the author of the book .
 Colorado College Debate Team combined experienced debaters with talented freshmen . Colorado Woman's College Invitational Debate Tournament was held in Denver October 27th and 28th .
 Eleven colleges and universities from the Colorado and Wyoming area participated in the meet in which two CC teams narrowly missed taking honors .
 Charles Puckett teamed with freshman Jo Heller in the senior division and lost but a single round of debate . Harris Sherman and Linda Pierce in the junior division also did not win a single debate .
 Only one of the seven teams entered from Colorado College had a losing record . The junior team moved to the senior division in order to gain experience .
 Sue Caudill placed 1st and 2nd in her two rounds of extemporaneous speaking, and Jo Heller took third in tow rounds of original oratory . Jo Heller placed third in her first round of original speech, and second round of speech .
 Max Power, Robert Williams and Pete Trushel also participated in the individual events . Max Power and Robert Williams also took part in individual events.
 In adition to Heller and Puckett in the senior division of debate, Chris Griffiths, Max Power, Robert Thrasher, and David Bitters were entered . In addition to Heller, the other contestants were entered by Max Power and Max Power .
 Sue Caudill, David Furgason, David Helms, Marc Streule, Faith O'Reilly, and Susan Heidel also participated in the junior division . The junior division also took part in the event .
 Professors James A Johnson, Robin M Rudoff, and Louis J Pistone accompanied the team as coaches . Professors Johnson, Johnson, Rudoff and Pistone also coached the team .
 The sitar artist is making his first full-length tour of the Unj ed States . He is touring the United States .
 The musical director of All IiHr e f r dia Radio, he has composed il background music for a numbi . 'j' of internationally famous India ■ motion pictures . He has composed a number of pieces of music for the films .
 Sitar is a gourd and teal wood instrument with 19 strinj and 20 frets . The sitar is an instrument made of 19 strinnj and 19 frets and has 20 strinjs .
 Almost no form compositions for the sita Sitar concerts are somewhat lil jazz concerts in that the perfom er improvises on traditional thei . He says that the composition i most never comes out th way twice .
 Delta Epsilon to Hea Arizona Astronomer ■mlri, brin; cm t I'M be a meeting of WJ..,,“ Epsilon in the WES lounge, """" tall Center, at 4:00m., No«Jhb w ber
 Colorado Springs and ioracio College are sponsoring lie's Campus Merchan . This plan is already in feet on many campuses throughil (he country)
 The purpose of i,. CMP is to give girls who are Oersted in fashion careers an . Spovtunity for experience in this of work .
 Nancy £ Sue Graham, Diane Johnston, Nan Burroughs, Ann Holmes, and Ann Holmes are among the writers .
 Vivian Arviso, Betsy James, Ellen Price. i Mcllvaine, Nan Augenstein, and Nancy Keens. The Mademoiselle Plan promotional ideas for both the benefit of the store and the college .
 College Board is comprised of representatives from dorms, sororities and IWA . The College Board was selected on the basis of their interest in the dorms and sorority .
 Throughout the year this group will be sponsoring fashion shows, good grooming sessions, makeup demonstrations and other pertinent programs .
 The first fashion show, ""Budget Boutique,"" will he at Kaufman's on Friday, November 17 at 4:00m. The first show will be held in Kaufman's .
 The German Club will hold its coml meeting of the year on lursday, November 9, in the ES room at 7:30 .
 Jown at the meeting and prizes pen for the best pictures . These will be Jown's pictures of the best of the meeting .
 For non-staff contributions: 12 noon on Monday prfceedniB puliation . For staff contributions, please email us at: http://www.mailonline.com/puliation .
 Novembe 3, 1961 • Colorado College Tiger American Friends' Presentation Today . Two weeks ago in the Tuesday assembly, Dr. Dr. John Sutter gave a speech .
 Hochman, in his Peace Corps speech, mentioned the value of work camp experience such as that offered in the American Friends Service Committee . The Peace Corps is a volunteer in the Peace Corps .
 Warren Witte, program assistant for the North Central Regional Office of the AFSC, is on campus at the University of Cambridge . Mr Witte is a program assistant and program assistant to the North central Regional Office .
 He will talk about summer service projects, peace projects, and civil liberties . He will show slides and discuss service projects .
 In addition to its imaginative and skillful photography and interesting background rhythms and .music, the film carries a very real message for those concerned about peace and war .
 The Society of Friends invites and encourages students to attend the showing of this film today at 4:30 int he Shove Chapel lecture . Colorado College faculty and administrators will join a number of alumni in taking a thoughtful look at the college's admission picture .
 The workshop will open with a luncheon at which college administrators will discuss the kinds of students attending the college . Administrators will also discuss future admision problems . The workshop is scheduled to start with a lunch at the college's campus .
 Admission Director Richard E Wood and Dean Lloyd Worner of the physics department. Professor Wilbur H Wright of the Physics department. Brossman, Dean . Worner, Dean Lloyd. Worner and Admission Director. Wood .
 The workshoppers will meet in four separate sessions during the afternoon, followed by a guided tour of the campus and a dinner .
 Work sessions will consider how admission procedure operates at the college . Topics will include financial aid to stu students .
 The administration sent Professor Paul Stratton to the Hub to check on the situation . Professor Stratton is a member of the administration .
 Paul Stratton didn't want this assignment, but the choice wasn't his, and he planned to do it . Stratton planned to take over the job at the end of the day .
 Paul Stratton walked toward the Hub, he knew what had to be done, and he steled himself for the task . Stratton: "I'm going to do the most difficult thing I can do, and I'm not afraid to do it"
 As he returned to make his report, Paul Stratton knew, for the first time in his life, what it meant to be alone . Stratton: "As he returned, I felt alone" Stratton says Stratton now knows what it means to be a man alone .
 He had just completed writing the order that would close school for the day . As he sat, quietly weeping, his wife entered the room carrying his cup of hot cocoa .
 Colorado College's 14th annual Colorado College Variety Show is a benefit for the Community Chest Drive and United Fund Campaign . CC Variety Show tickets are on sale at Rastall desk now for 75 cents .
 The show will be held November 14, 15, 16, and 17 in Perkins Hall at 8 :15 . It features Colorado College student talent .
 Try to get your tickets for a night other than Friday because of the limited number of seats . Get tickets for the show on Friday night .
 Sherbet ME 5-2740 dents, new prospects, and case studies of applicants . Sherbet: "I'm looking forward to a great future in my life"
 Those attending the workshop will be provided with copies of a manual containing actual admission cases that have come before the admission committee during the past few years . For the latter, the manual will contain copies of the admission manual .
 Alumni will study each case and vote as though they were members of the real admission committee . Alumni from the University of California will vote as if they were on the admission committee for admission to college .
 Actual decisions will be announced with a follow-up on the applicant, following each vote .
 William L Pfeiffer, Arthur C Sharp, W Marshall Cross, George H Keener, Mrs. Keener and Mrs. William L . Keener died at the age of 92 .
 Edward B Liddle, and Terrance M Golden of Colorado Springs, Colorado Springs . Mr and Mrs. Liddle were married to Liddle; Terrance Golden was married to Mrs. Golden .
 Mr and Mrs. Henry Williams and Miss Anna Maud Garnett of Pueblo; Frank E, Muynes of Dunvngo; . Frank E. Muynes and Mr Williams of Dunngo . Mr Williams and Mr Garnett were married in the 1920s .
 A returning Harvard alumnus stopped in Cambridge long enough to visit with a favorite professor at his alma mater . The only Republican professor, he believes, in the Harvard government department .
 Professor says Kennedy administration depleted the staff of the Kennedy administration . He asked the professor what he thought about the depletion of the staff .
 Clip the coupon below or get an entry blank where yon buy cigarettes and fill in your predictions of the game scores . It's easy . Just clip the coupon and get a blank blank to fill in .
 KfllP , V ceroy College Football CONTENT NO 4 . He re are my predictions Tor next Saturd ty's games . I (Attach Viceroy package or facsimile here)
 G New Mexico □ Colorado Q Nebraska I G Air Force G Bay or I G Bay . G Bay is the name of the Air Force Air Force's most powerful air force .
 Professor Geiger is the author of three books and numerous articles . El Pomar Foundation, L -h owns the world-famous lilist. Slated In Bonhoeffer Land-Grant Group ient in United States history .
 Colorado College Charter Trustee from 1934 to 1950 . Colorado Springs, Colorado, November 10, 1961 . Colorado College charter Trustee of 1934-1950 .
 El Pomar Foundation gave hope to the College during some of its most difficult times . His keen insight into business ade numerous grants to trends was of significant help to College and provided the Endowment Fund .
 The independent liberal college was founded in 1877 . The college is now a private college .
 Annual grants for faculty u tt gave their family home on salaries continued . The number and number of El Pomar Scholarships ge increased .
 The text of the resolution passed matured and the head of the t the college's Board of Trustees Broadmoor was loyally present s followseacn IU £ ht at tne games . IU £ tne hockey program was created by the university .
 El Pomar Foundation's The Religious Affairs Commitcornerstone gift launched a sucS of the college is sponsoring a cessful drive to make the heating is a retreat retreat over the last plant possible .
 In similar vein, the eekend of the month of Novembuilding campaign of 1960 was set a at La Foret Camp in Black in full momentum .
 This retreat has been argift of the Charles Learning Tutt mged by Professor Kenneth BurLibrary . This retreat was the first of its kind .
 Louis G. Gei profesS or Bi in letters and papers which and chail . man of the historv de . iggled out of h ls concenpartment at Colorado College, will amp. up . Louis G Gei .
 Discussion will continue after ppper closing the, evening with Creation or Creation or informal discussion with Creation .
 Mr Burton is the organizer and president of the ^ntact Mr Burton and he will North Dakota Social Science Assoish further details . He is the :|l ° are interested are asked to . organize an event .
 Sylvia Stenavec and Jane Thomas in Their Variety Show Act Panel Discussion Slated For Nov. Nov. 11 . Panel discussion is scheduled for Nov. 12 .
 Education versus Job Training and/or Cultural Veneer"" will be the topic of a short panel discussion next Tuesday, November 14, at eleven o'clock in Perkins Hall .
 Stephen Kovacs, internationally known Hungarian pianist, will give a solo piano recital at 4m .
 Strong Memorial Concert Series is sponsored by the music department . The concert will be the second event in the series, which was inaugurated last year with violinpiano .
 Colorado College's colorful Variety Show opens Tuesday evening at 8:15 for a four day run in Perkins Hall . Dress rehearsals will be held Sunday and Monday for the show .
 Proceeds from the two-act show will go to the United Fund Campaign and the Community Chest Drive . The show will be held at the University of Charleston, Georgia .
 Co-directors are Carol Fisher of Pasadena, Calif., and Jane Pierce of Tucson, Ariz., with Woodson Tyree, associate professor of speech, as faculty advisor . The project is based in Tucson, Arizona .
 The show opens with a scene from Birgadoon by Norman Cornick's Dance Theater group . The show is based on the book "Birchadoon"
 It features Jim and Jeannie Bramweli, Holly Menkle, Bill Brooks, Jenny Moore, Ann Williamsen, Peter Webster, Margaret Speer, Hadley Taylor, Carrie Sanborn, Seece Boyce and Pierre Adam .
 Cornick will present three other numbers, including ""A Time to Embrace"" with Cynthia Lamb, ""Pas de Deux"" from ""Cakewalk,"" and a number called ""Jazz" with Fifi Maroney, Steve Kersey, Jane Thomas, Sylvia St
 Other numbers in the show will include folk songs by Mary Lee Turtle and Ray Chatfield . Other numbers include a Japanese dance by Kasoko Kosugi and a hula by Judy Hooker, Barbara Bunnell and Lee Boynton .
 A monologue by Ethel Six Geary, an AbioAfrican Congo Chant and a Philippine dance called ""Tinickling,"" folk songs by the Weekenders . Also featured will be the Brigham 4 Combo and the Gibson 4 Combo . Judo demonstration by Shoji H
 In charge of sound effects are Wallace Schultz, Jay Vickerman, Jim Bolick, and Dick Dougdale . Wallace Schultz is in charge of the sound effects on the sound of sound .
 Lighting will be under the direction of Norman Larson, Drane Wilkinson and Joan Carter . The event will be held in New York City .
 Freshman Commissioner Sue Caudill said she had heard some complaints that such meetings are dull . She said ASCC does nothing but fill the traditional requirement that there be a student government .
 Perhaps, then, it would be wise for us to explore the current operations of ASCC more closely, perhaps . Perhaps, perhaps, we should look at ASCC's operations closely .
 President Griffiths has expressed his goals frequently, both before and after his election . Griffiths says he is committed to achieving his goals in the future .
 ASCC should be modified to allow future ASCC members to continue such execution without confusion . ASCC's mechanical functions should be executed competently and efficiently . The organization itself should also be modified so that future members may continue such executions without confusion, he says .
 ASCC should deal with substantive issues concerning the student's position on CC's campus . ASCC must also deal with the student position on the campus of CC .
 ASCC can push, on a sound basis, for meaningful, progressive policy changes . If it is, it will push for meaningful policy changes, ASCC says . ASCC is in a position to push for progressive policies .
 President Griffiths is taking a lead from far more important deliberative bodies, he says . Committees can most effectively handle the details, and deliberations about details, of student government .
 The ASCC's Monday meetings are able to deal with fifteen or more areas of student government swiftly and finally . The result is that the meetings can be completed quickly and efficiently . ASCC meetings can also deal with student government issues .
 If these meetings seem dull, then that is the price of effective student government, says student leader . Students should be aware of what is involved in the business conducted, he says .
 The progress of ASCC toward the goals mentioned above has been encouraging, but much, certainly remains to be done . ASCC's progress in the community is encouraging .
 The Constitution Committee has already produced needed amendments to the constitution, and more are forthcoming . Commissioner Bill Greeley has led the hard-working leadership of the committee .
 The Judicial Committee, ably chaired by Bob Kendall, is currently conducting an exhaustive study into the workings and scope of our student judicial bodies .
 The finance committee, chaired by Treasurer Bill Stafford, has studied money requests thoroughly and proposed the budget . The budget will appear in the TIGER today .
 Many other examples could be mentioned here, but it is our hope that they will, by their actions, speak through the news columns of this paper .
 We do not hold that the measure of student government is the length or heatedness of its meetings, the intensity of the publicized controversy among its members or the number of headlines it or its members get for attacks on the school administration . We don't hold that .
 We look rather for its sound and enduring accomplishments, for its hard and honest effort and for the quality of its work, we say . We look forward to the future of the U.S. government .
 ASCC currently compares very favorably with other student governments with which we are familiar with . ASCC is currently ranked higher than any other student government in the world .
 If our student government can continue to set forth accomplishments of quality and lasting value, we shall be content that ASCC has a great deal more meaning than simply the manifestations of a useless tradition . ASCC will be content if it continues to set out accomplishments that have lasting value .
 We recommend to ASCC's critics that they attend its meetings and the meetings of its committees, that they set forth their own ideas . The council has failed to meet its purposes or has wrongly interpreted the issues at hand, we say .
 Criticism of this kind cannot help but make student government more than a bothersome custom . When It's Music It's Millers Miller Music Co. Co.
 This sermon is based upon the incident at Bethany where Mary, the sister of Martha and Lazarus, awaited Jesus with some costly ointment . This sermon was based on the incident .
 It is hoped to show that it is worthwhile to commit oneself to something finer and greater than ourselves and utlimately and supremely to God himself .
 Three years ago when the last inventory was made, 44,800 books were missing . The last inventory of books was made at the time of the last count .
 These books are the ones most frequently used and many are out of print . Many of the most popular books in the world are no longer available in print .
 Photostatic processes replace periodicals which can only be replaced by photostatic process . Some of the periodicals were periodicals that can be replaced with photostats . Photostats replaced periodicals such as periodicals .
 Last year when freshmen English classes were assigned term papers about one half of the books on Shakespeare were taken . Last year, one in five Shakespeare books were taken by students .
 Since the end of World War II most college libraries have experienced a sharp increase in book loss . Ellsworth Mason head of Coburn Library, said that since the war, most libraries have seen a sharp rise in book losses .
 He also said that since then the American attitude towards honesty has changed for the worse . He said since then, American attitudes towards honesty have changed from honesty to honesty .
 He has already contacted several dorms and Greek organizations . Some might be hurt, for in the past we have seen so little protyjj displayed .
 Our reason desiring that informal war cease is that this war in the p^ has done little to cement relations between CC and Mines, fact, our relations have become so shaky that there is a gofj chance, if another riot should occur this year, that all con petition between
 It would seem foolish if we were to allow a few gl 0] seekers to deprive us of good competition, it seems to seem foolish .
 We therefore as that everything possible be done to discourage activity thi reflects badly on the school and on the competition behveeee mot CC and Mines .
 Fellows if you must fight, do so behind the stands . You can be effective without police interference. Fellows should be able to fight behind the scenes .
 No on stands a very good chance of getting hurt — the safety numbers will protect them all . The safety numbers are designed to protect all of the players and their families .
 Policy recommendations serve to clarify the thinking of those who participate in their formulation . For whatever else they may be worth, policy recommendations help clarify thinking .
 The Soviet Union is possessed of the same religious fervor that motivated the Crusaders in their quest to enlighten the world . The Soviets are possessed of a similar fervor to that of the Crusades .
 She cannot be expected to approve a settlement that might yield comparable results . The settlement might yield a similar result .
 That the West is able to maintain a bastion in a sea of ft eign imperialism manifests its cm tinued strength and determinate to resist further Russian e croachment .
 Alta Vista Hotel I 18 N Cascade Ave. II [AST PIKES PEAK MBlrOM 4-S501 Oil Kachina Lounge . II [ASPIKESPEAK MBLROM 4 -S501]
 Wilson established an unus■apport with the students IJjch lie had apparently not ex; ° D erienced at other colleges . Wilson's great personal warmth Da.i rid magnetism were immediately evident in his work at the University of Cambridge .
 Wilson's most outstandg and endearing characteristic ras his immense willingness to ;ive of himself and his time . Wilson's greatest characteristic is his willingness to . ;ive himself and time .
 He delivered his scheduled and seminars, but lecured several classes as well . He delivered several lectures and seminars .
 The .offing of the coat and seizure of ater glass became a prelude . discussion and careconsidered answers to almost iny question .
 "The faculty's reaction to the nlocaust seemed to be me of poorly concealed hostility," she says . The faculty's reactions to the Holocaust seemed like hostility .
 Wilson tapped a new vein of thought in many students . To both points seem irrelevant, iresenting his case for ""optimistic existentialism"" and the unrealized potential of mankind .
 Whethis rich in gold or not seems mportant than that it might awaken other previously dormant concepts and ideas .
 Wilson must fe commended both for what he *aid and what he did — the impact f an exciting, forceful personalty which imprints its surround'""gs in such a way that the image quite return to jts former state . Wilson must be commended for his impact on
 Sean O'Faolain will give a public lecture at The Colod| J College on December 7 . O' Faolain is one of Ireland's "" ■est distinguished writers"
 The majority of students who attended his lectures felt that while his lecture on ""Contemporary British Authors"" was well presented and informative, the one on ""Existentialism and the Modern Predicament"" Authors,"" considered the eveHere was vague, disorganized and difficult to understand
 A student, who attended the lectures and seminars, stated that he was reasonably impressed . As to what, if anything he was trying to put across, opinions are somewhat diA student said he was "reasonably impressed"
 Wilson's thoughts were not too well organized, but at least at least the ideas were there . Wilson: "I'm not sure what I'm doing here, but I'm glad to see what's happening here"
 The student added that Wilson's conduct was deplorable for a campus guest . Wilson was a guest at the University of Columbia University in Washington, DC .
 A student who talked to Wilson personally and got to know him better than most CC students believes that he is a ""pleasant and personable man, sincere about his feelings and his topic" Wilson is a student who talks to him personally believes he is sincere and sincere . Wilson is the author
 Having this kind of visitor can be stimulating, provided we are not overwhelmed by names-in-print or exotic backgrounds . We are happy to welcome visitors from all over the world .
 Wilson threw himself into the visit, and exerted himself in every respect, Mr Reinitz added . Wilson was 'toughest' during the visit to the World War II summit, he said . Wilson's visit was 'a very special moment' for the British president, he added .
 Students and faculty were not too favorably impressed by Colin Wilson's performance . Wilson is a graduate at the University of Cambridge .
 Friday afternoon in the Hub is perfect for a little twisting or just sitting around listening to some music . Nothing more opportune than a Friday afternoon is to enjoy a little twisted or listen to music .
 Rastall Center will sponsor the successful and enjoyable Friday Afternoon Club . This week's club will be held at the center of the center . The Friday afternoon club will meet at the centre .
 If you missed the first F.A.C. C.C.-themed event, come over to the Hub this afternoon to take part in the fun .
 Rastall Center announces the formation of an all college bowling team of six men . The team will be six men at the center .
 These men will be chosen from their past records, but will be open to challenge by anyone . The event will be held in a bid to raise awareness of the world record .
 The team already has plans to compete with Pueblo Junior College and has contacted several other nearby colleges in hopes of having matches .
 Any college group that is interested in challenging this group is welcome to and should contact the Games Area desk . College groups are welcome to challenge this group .
 This Sunday evening Rastall Center will present the outstanding Japanese film, The Golden Demon in Perkins Hall at 7:30m. to all interested . All interested .
 The film stars Fujiko Yamamoto as Miya and Jun Negami as Kan-ichi in a setting around 1890 in Tokyo . The film is in color and stars .
 The film is based on an unusually popular Japanese novel, Konjiki Yasha . It is one of the best films to come from Japan since the war .
 The Rastall Center Memorial Lounge was dedicated this past Sunday with about 60 relatives of the war-dead present . The lounge was dedicated to the war dead . About 60 relatives were present .
 Erv Hinds accepted for Rastall Center and Colorado College . President Benezet made the presentation and accepted for the center .
 Following the dedication everyone adjourned to the dining room for lunch . The dedication was dedicated to the schoolgirl .
 Robin M Rudoff was honored with an invitation to address the Southern Historical Association at Chattanooga, Tennessee, yesterday .
 Miss Pat Weaver, America's National College Queen, revealed her feminine taste as well as her practical sense when asked about diamond rings .
 One of Artcarvcd's award-winning designs is a lovely Artcarved Evening Star . She selected us her favorite to show you your favorite .
 You sec, every Artcarved ring is guaranteed in writing for all the years to come by America's most respected ring maker .
 Artcarved diamond rings have been the choice of millions for more than a century . Visit your local Art Carved Jeweler and see why they are popular .
 The Miners, traditionally a single-wing team, this year have abandoned their power type offense . Miners are now playing in the middle of the season on the wing .
 Coach Fritz Brenecke has has has Orediggers now running from a T-formation .
 Mountain recreation includes rescue, geological study, hiking, hiking and camping . High-altitude medical research is also a big part of mountain recreation . Mountain medicine is a big thing in mountain medicine .
 The Colorado College Mountain Club is offering an elementary rock school . The school will run for live weeks, including lecture sessions and practice .
 For more information please refer to the sign-up sheet at the Rastall Center Desk . For more details, please visit the signing up sign-in at the center .
 CC campus will have its first intramural contest of pushball . Slocum will hold a tournament and the CLOSED MON DAYS Blueberry Pancakes Banana Pancakes or Maple Honey .
 The coming winter season will be a busy one for Slocum Hall . The basketball, bowling, and volleyball season will provide the entertainment for the men's basketball and volleyball .
 Slocum Hall has adopted a new trophy which will be presented to the wing that has accumulated the greatest number of points throughout the intramural season . The wing that accumulated the most points in the competition will receive the trophy . Slocums Hall have adopted the new trophy for the
 This is not unlike the method already employed by the fraternities in which points are awarded to teams who win or place in a contest . This is similar to the method used by the fraternity .
 This trophy will be of the traveling type and the winning wing will have their name engraved on it . Winning wing will be engraved with their name on the trophy .
 Adams State hit for four first half touchdowns, rui^ CC's homecoming and took a major step toward their second straight Rocky Mountain Conference championship . The Indians scored four touchdowns in the first half to take the Tigers 25-8 .
 Adams scored on their first series of downs when Bob Hidalgo hit speedy Walt Weaver on a touchdown pass that covered 53 . On the ensuing kickoff, the Indians forced a CC fumble and recovered the loose pigskin on the 22 .
 Adams moved in to score in a matter of minutes with Hidalgo hitting Frank Smith on a three yard scoring pass . From there Adams moved into the game with a three-yard touchdown pass .
 John Blatnick kicked the extra point and the Indians soared into an early 13-0 lead . The Indians led the game early in the morning . John Blatsnick kicked an extra point .
 The Indians capitalized on another alert defensive play early in the second quarter . Ed Hodnick intercepted a CC aerial and returned it to the Tiger 13 .
 Each empty pacfcage on Phillip Morris Regular or Commander will have a value of 10 points . Phillip Morris regular or Commander has 10 points for each empty pacfage .
 The drive covered yards and was capped by a yard pass reception from £ Kintz to Jim Wujcik . The drive was capped with a yard-long reception from $Kintz .
 Wuj< hauled in the pass on the Indiai. 22 yard line and raced unmolested into the end zone . Wuj < hauled in a pass from Indiai . 22 yards from the end of the field .
 Kintz then hit Mike Minelli for the two point conversion to give the chilli homecoming crowd a faint glimmer of hope . The two-point conversion was the only point of the game .
 The Indians took the ensuing kickoff and marched methodically downfield to register their fourth touchdown on a 75 yard drive . Hidalgo sneak in to sneak in from a yard out to score a yard-out .
 The Tigers' aerial game was tM^c, effective as ever as they hit fa; 15 of 25 passes covering flj yards . The Tigers won the game by 15 points .
 Last May he acted as an interpreter for the U.S. State Department's advance team which work out details leading up to the Heiv nedy-Khrushchev talks in Austria .
 On a base of 1162 full-time students enrolled for the first ,mester and with an attrition rate of 5%, 1100 students, for k e second semester, the approximate operating fund for this y is $18,000 . Figur& on a base .
 Depression Grads of '36 Reunite at Homecoming . CO IRG Schedules Communist China Discussion Nov. 30 .
 The committee considered the requests of other organizations on campus . Next, the committee considered other requests .
 The proposed appropriations for these organizations and its utility to the student body . The proposal is based on the effectiveness of these organizations .
 Members of Colorado College's 1936 ""depression year"" graduating class gathered at homecoming Saturday . They reneged acquaintance after 25 years to renege acquaintance .
 Today the men who earned their degrees in the bleak year of 1936 have an average income of nearly $20,000 . Statistics released by the college show that today the men . today . today the . men who . earned their . degrees in 1936 have a average income .
 The average annual income of the 22 men replying to an anonymously conducted income survey is $18,838 . The 22 men surveyed responded to an anonymous survey of their income .
 We are very much opposed to the huge proportion of our tax dollars that go into military expenditures . We try to keep our income below the taxable limit, so we try to .
 Fourteen are in the professions, eleven are executives, six own own their own businesses, two are self-employed and two are in service occupations . Fourteen of the women are women and six are men .
 Research physicist, professor of chemistry, lawyer, public accountant, medical director of a hospital, structural engineer . Bank president, clergyman, production manager of a major oil company . Federal government executives .
 Professor Mertz will discuss opportunities in the field of Law . Professor Brooks will cover opportunities in State and Local Government and in Federal administrative positions . Professor Sondermann will speak on job opportunities in foreign affairs field .
 Faculty members will trace the background of American recognition policy . They will outline the problems involved in the current situation with respect to Communist China's admission to the UN .
 All interested students, faculty and administration are cordially invited to attend this meeting . The meeting promises to be one of the most interesting events of the current semester .
 The International Relations Club is open for membership to all students who are interested in its program . The club is open to membership for all students interested in the club .
 Since World War II, O'Faolain has traveled extensively in Europe and in the United States . In 1945 he gave lectures on contemporary literature at Princeton; lectures later were published in his book, The Vanishing Hero .
 South lo Sicily, Sicily, and many shorter pieces, some of which appeared in Holiday Magazine .
 The Irish Revolution, in which he took an active part, is reflected in much of his work . The Irish revolution was a major event in the history of the Irish Revolution in Ireland .
 He has become one of the best known interpreters of Irish life . His books on modern Ireland and its people are praised as realistic and sympathetic .
 Summer jobs in Europe are now available to almost every American college student . Summer jobs are offered in Continental Europe . Summer summer jobs are available in Europe for college students .
 The American Student Information Service, known as ASIS, has more than 3,000 summer jobs in their files awaiting applicants . ASIS is a service that helps students prepare for summer jobs . The summer jobs are in the files of ASIS .
 ASIS has placed thousands of U.S. college students in various summer jobs throughout 11 European countries . In the past four years ASIS students have been placed in various jobs throughout Europe .
 Jobs are mostly unskilled and many do not require a knowledge of a foreign language . Many of the jobs in the United States are unskilled jobs that require a language knowledge .
 Monthly wages range from room and board in Spain to §150 for the highest paid positions in West Germany . Room and board wages in Spain range from $150 to $150 for a position in Germany .
 Jobs include factory work, resort work, construction work, farm work, hospital work and hospital work . Child care, child care, camp counselling positions and many other positions .
 Students will receive the dame wages as the Europeans with whom they are working . Students will also receive the same wages as Europeans with which they work .
 A summer job in Europe can defray the cost of the trip as much as 50 per cent . In addition to an opportunity to personally get to know "the man behind the counter" in Europe, a summer job can also be a great way to get a job .
 ASIS, 22 Avenue de la Liberte, Luxembourg, is a Luxembourg-based organisation . ASIS is a non-profit organisation dedicated to international causes . For more information, visit ASIS.
 GreggSmith, Education Major, Class of 1963, walked away with the second hundred bucks of the Viceroy football contest . GreggSmith won the contest by playing a football game .
 Jim Shumaker, Class of 1963, wins third prize money of $25 . Jim, class of 1963 wins $25 prize money .
 DeWavne Crumb Class of 1962 DeCourcy Graham Class of 1963 Don Jorgensen Class of 1961 . Prof. DeCourcey Graham class of 1963 class of 1962 class of 1961 class of 1964 class of 1960 .
 Brown & Wlllijillfr.ilone will be relumed . Any student or laculty n n this campus may e nter except employees ot advertising agencies .
 V nners will be notified weeks after the contest . Wi nes may be published paper .
 Viceroy name as it appeal on the pactape Inml M, M,il enky In, or drop in the Bo* Number on the entry blank . The 8ox on campus will vote on the 8ox ballot .
 The CC Ski Club steering Committee promises a good program with a movie, pop corn and drinks . The program includes ski-ditioning, ski instruction and Club activities .
 Ski posters will line the walls and displays of various equipment will help the beginner to become acquainted with certain specialized features of this sport .
 Ski Club membership cards will be available for one dolriday afternoon the F.A.R.C. rittoy Afternoon Club) sponsorwister"" in the Hub . The club will offer membership cards for one day only .
 The ir this occasion was profed by a five piece band comatl of Chuck Gibson on piano, Sabom and Ed Mason on iters, John Barker on drums and ink Weible on sax .
 By five o'clock the floor of the arena was completely mobbed with twisters . By five . ous types of twisters were all over the floor .
 Besides confusion on the floor, a great of enjoyment was shared by e drinking coffee and observating from the sidelines .
 The communist religion of the state will be reflected in P public worship of Lenin and the pride in industrial growth ipetition with the United States . A glimpse of Russian hisjy will be shown by the historilandmarks such as the Kremaml various Tzarist palaces — f
 Neale Reinitz, associatePmfessor of English, went from Finland by train to Moscow .
 Mr RichPaine, assistant professor of ittcs, went privately by i to Leningrad and Moscow . He went privately to Russia and Russia privately .
 Julie Bohlke went with an Occidental College group by bus to Leningrad, Moscow, and Kiev . The group traveled by bus by bus from Moscow to Kiev .
 Oscar Soule went privately by airplane to Leningrad, Moscow, Kiev, Odessa and Odessa . Soule traveled by private plane to Russia and Ukraine .
 All four found that while guide servics were always available, the tourist is free to take it or not and can even go off by himself . All four were happy to see that guide services are always available .
 Alexey Malysev, assistant professor of Russian, is helping with the organization of the two part Russian Assemblies .
 The first program, on November 21, will be a visual picture, through slides and movies, taken by members of the group, as described above .
 November 24th is the date for the annual race around the world's largest known race of the year . Last year's race took place over a sixty mile course in cars guided by a list of hints .
 Driver Al Petersen and navigator Jim Dyson crossed the finish line as winners and thus gained the privilege of tapping the trophy keg . Al Petersen won the race by tapping the keg as he crossed the line .
 Both names appear on a plate attached to this colorful traveling trophy . It will be interesting to see whose names will be engraved this year .
 Further details as to the starting place and time will be available at the start of the event .
 As in the past, the terminating point of the rally will be kept a secret . It promises to be a fun place complete with food, music, dancing and movies of European rallies .
 Drivers are again urged to offer rides to interested freshmen . This is not a race but a skilled drive over a course, outlined by hints and regulated carefully by accurate and indicated speed averages .
 Women drivers did very well last year and are encouraged to enter again . Women drivers will be able to compete in the event in the next year .
 Stephen Kovacs will give a piano recital at -Im. T2 Concerts at Fingertips . Renowned Pianist Will Play Program of Audience Choice .
 Members of the audience vote on the program they want him to perform . He likes to go on concert tours with more than a dozen separate programs ready .
 The concert, open to the public without charge, is beingsponsored by the music department . The concert is being hosted by the department .
 All Young Democrats are urged to attend and participate in the above programs . Young Democrats should be encouraged to attend the events .
 Student Conduct Committee Passes on Drunk Driver . Student conduct committee passes on drunk driver . Driver under the influence of alcohol .
 The individual was placed on disciplinary probation for one year and must report to the Dean of Men on two occasions . Thp decision of the council was as much as a decision by the council . The individual has been placed on a year of disciplinary probation .
 If there is a violation of thisp enalty he shall be suspended pending a hearing of the committee . The suspension will be suspended until the hearing is held .
 Committee elected two new members to fill vacancies . Sue Hoyt and Mareia Moses were also elected to the committee .
 The Strong Memorial Concerts are an endowed series in memory of the Baptist minister, teacher and musician . The series is based on the memory of Baptist minister and teacher .
 They were inaugurated last year with the violin-piano recital of Sidney Harth and Dr. Dr. Gerald Harth . The violin and piano duo were first to play together .
 Max Lanner is a professor and chairman of the music department at the college . He is a member of the faculty of music department .
 Mr Kovacs made his debut in Colorado Springs, I960, in April, when he appeared in Perkins Hall .
 His success was so sensational that a re-engagement of the artist was planned immediately . The artist was re-evaluated after his success .
 Born in the famed Tokay mountains of Hungary, Stephen Kovacs passed the difficult entrance examinations at the Franz Liszt Royal Academy of Music in Budapest at the unprecedented age of five . Kovacs is one of the world's most accomplished musicians .
 Fourteen years later he was graduated from this distinguished music school with the highest honors . He was awarded the highest honor at the school .
 A triumphant debut followed in Berlin where the leading critics compared him with the greatest masters of the keyboard . A triumph in Berlin followed by a triumphant debut in Berlin .
 In a long career of concertizing, Mr Kovacs has fascinated audiences wherever he was heard, and held his listeners spellbound . In a career spanning decades, he has held audiences spellbound.
 This enables him to keep 13 complete and formidable concert programs under immediate command . He has a total of 13 programs under his command .
 Mr Kovacs walked on the stage and played it for the first time in April, 1960 . Kovacs played the program in April 1960 .
 The audience will also be handed the complete program of all thirteen recitals to convey the scope of Mr Kovacs' tremendous repertoire .
 Mr Kovacs reportedly is the only artist on the stage today who offers the unique feature of playing any one of thirteen concert programs on a moment's notice .
 Max Power placed 1st and 2nd in two rounds of Extemporaneous Speaking to take second place overall in the tournament . Twenty-three Rocky Mountain area colleges and universities were entred .
 Susan Caudill took a 1st and 3rd in two rounds of Rxtoinp, ami Petfi Trushel finished 2nd In his round of Poetry Interpretation . Petfi also took a first and second place in Poetry .
 Two CC Junior Division teams won three of four rounds of debate . David Furgason, Nancy Dehlin, Harris Sherman and Dave Helms won three rounds . David Helms: "I'm a good guy, I'm not a bad guy. I love debate"
 Robert Thrasher, David Bitters, Susan Heidel, Faith O'Reilly and Karen Johnston were also entered in junior debate . The debate will be held at 7.30 p.m. ET on Saturday .
 In the Senior Division Colorado College teams continued to receive high ratings but lost important rounds of debate by close margins . Colorado College's Chris Griffiths, Max Power, Charles Puckett and Susan .
 Professors James A Johnson and Louis J Pistone accompanied the team as coaches . Professors Johnson and Pistone also coached the team .
 Hungarian concert pianist Steven Kovacs will hold Piano Workshop Monday morning from 9 to 12 in Perkins Hall . Kovacs has agreed to remain at Colorado College one extra day to hold a Piano Workshop . This meet normally attracts strong teams from the California and Alpha Kappa Psi .
 This session will be free to all music teachers and advanced piano students who are interested to attend .
 Kovacs will lecture on problems of technique and interpretation . He will also listen to a few advanced students to give constructive, artistic advice .
 Alpha Kappa Psi, CC's business fraternity, held a highly successful initiation dinner last Sunday night at the La Logando Italiana Restaurant . Students should pur chase within the week an> hooks still still needed for the curren Alpha Kappa .
 Sixteen people were present including the new members, who were honored, and their guests .
 This was one of the many upcoming events planned for the future by the recently re-organized CC chapt'-r of Alpha Kappa Psi .
 Panel Discusses Goals at this Tuesday discussion a list of eight goals for CC was discussed by a panel . Panel consisted of President Louis T Benezet, Mr Ellsworth Mason, Dr. Dr. Ellsworth M Mason, and Dr. Louis T. Benezets .
 Official Colorado College Student Publication Business Manntrei ri,oili.i.>n M:uu. lohlke, Carolina Cr. Cr.-yk,idnur. i.lohke, . Carolina Cr,.yk, idnur .
 The committee should recommend several important changes in our judicial system . Within the next few weeks, the committee will recommend several changes in the judicial system.
 The Dean of Men or the Dean of Women can far more effectively and justly handle certain cases that can student boards . It is very likely that the dean of men or women can more effectively deal with certain cases .
 The Deans, after all, have a great deal more experience and are much less susceptible to papular student pressure . They have been criticised for their lack of experience with students .
 We hold no bias here for or against student judicial bodies or administration disciplinary actions . We have no bias in favor of the student judicial body .
 We simply ask that the committee, in its proposed revisions, try to determine from which authority will the individual student, and the student body as a whole, be able to expect more justice in particular cases . :i) It may be necessary, once organizational reforms are effected, to review
 "We trust that these procedures will be closely evaluated so that the merits of each case, and not procedural confusion and discrimination, will be the basis for decision rendering," the judge says .
 It is hoped ASCC will be able to accomplish the major task of judicial reform . The value of student government relevant to student life will be proved, says ASCC .
 We urge every interested student to offer suggestions or constructive criticism to the committee now involved in this important undertaking .
 Mr Malyshev, who has worked as an interpreter for the State Department, will be discussion leader . He has worked for the U.S. State Department .
 These assemblies are the result of returning members of the Soviet Union . They want to pool the benefits of their experiences in order to provide a better understanding of Soviet Union and its people .
 The Assemblies Committee feels that these assemblies will be of great interest . The committee urges all curious members of the College Community to attend .
 A.S.C. Curriculum Committee Discusses Programs For Junior Year Abroad . New system in psychology department, library hours, and library hours discussed .
 The official purpose of the committee is to serve as an intermediary body between the faculty and the students concerning courses and class procedure . The committee will serve as a body between faculty and students .
 The meetings are not regular, but are tentatively scheduled for Thursday afternoons at 3:00 . The meetings will be held at 3 p.m.
 Local ACLU Holds Membership Meet Shove Chapel; Sunday, November 19th, 11:00am . Any suggestions concerning courses and procedure are welcome .
 The purpose of this service is to examine this strange, seemingly misplaced passage in John's Gospel . Burton Burton . Burton .
 The incident is not so much concerned with the woman's behavior, but with that of her accusers and with the compassion of Jesus for the sinner and his anger against the hypocritical, gloating of the crowd . Jesus is angry at the hypocrites of the hypocritical and glo
 The fall membership meeting of the Colorado Springs chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union will he held at 8m., Monday, November 20, at Rastall Center on the Colorado College campus .
 Rev. Fred So dermann, associate professor of political science at Colorado College, talks with Rev. Sigurd E Burch, junior pastor of Trinity Methodist Church and chairman of the Colorado P.T.A. committee on Character and Spiritual Education .
 The Boulder chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union is Boulder, Colorado . The ACLU says it's a violation of free speech rights . The organization is Boulder's largest chapter in the U.S.
 In 1520 So. So. Own*; (IOWA ot TEJONEti. own*; . (IowA ot Tejone)
 ROTC lias consistently been the most criticized institution on this campus . The college has been criticized for its lack of oversight of the military .
 Most Americans hold the belief that their government is — or should — run by the educated citizenry . Most Americans believe their government should be run by educated citizens .
 There is much to learn in Military Science that can not be learned in civilian life for one does not come into close contact with the military in any other place . Military Science is a vital part of the military's survival .
 Yes, ROTC does move us closer toward the goal of a more educated citizenry, says author . Yes, yes, yes. Yes. Yes, it does move closer .
 ROTC Cadets get out on the field once a week for leadership training . Then there is leadership training for the Cadets . Cadets are also required to take part in leadership training.
 I have made a lot of fun of this, but lately I have wondered just how good training it must be for one of my friends to tell me my brass definitely is not up to par, or that my black shoes are turning brown, or my haircuts aren't really that expensive
 If a person can tell a friend his faults and get any action, then he must have a degree of true leadership . If a friend can tell his faults, he will have to take action, he must be true leadership, he says .
 "If we can't run ROTC down with legitimate reasons, let's get behind it with our support," says CNN.com.com senior reporter .
 The first Slocum Hall Open House for 196I-G2 will take place on Sunday, November 19th, from 2:00m. to 7:00 m.m. The first Open House will be held at 196I -G2 . The first time 196I
 Awards Offered For Ethical Code The Alpha Kappa Psi p 01]|ll . (01) Kappa Kappa psi p ° national professional business f' temity, announces awards for Personal Code Business Ethics .
 Each entr Some should stress those ideals of Per sonal and professional conduct j business which should be observi by the individual in order that h may be a credit and an asset ( business, community, and natio a s a businessman and as an Amp, ican citizen .
 The lectures are ached uled for November 8 and 29; De cember 13 and 13; January 10 a 17 . The lectures will be held on November 8, 29 and 29 .
 The November 15 lecture will NOT be given in Perkins due to the Varsity Show . November 15 lectures will not be given at Perkins due the show . The show will be shown on November 15 .
 Each Sun day 7:30 to 10:00m hostess for ""Music and Poetry which call attentk cultural events in Colorai] | Springs and Denver .
 KRCC-FM 1m., nad 12-1:00m. and 4-1m. weekdays for the latest cam pus news and music to suit your tastes . Stay tuned to KRCC 1m.m. nad . weekdays and 4 p.m
 Northland Skis • Garmisch Henke Booh • Dovre • Ski Free Bindings White Stag and Franconia Clothing • Waxes Poles • Mitts and Mitts • Sweaters • Sox RENTALS .
 The modern, four-level Ijrary is scheduled for completic , r ly next summer . It is scheduled to be completed in 2015 .
 Library named in memory of the late jharles Learning Tutt, president of the El Pomar Foundation, who died Vrt'fitiber 1stulti-million dollar building .
 From the bottom up, the new library consists of a garden level opening on one side to a sunken court, a glass-walled main floor, and third and fourth floors walled with pre-cast concrete panels measuring 11 by 22 feet each .
 Two upper stories will be pierced by six-inch wide vertical strip windows . The two upper stories of the building will have six inch wide vertical windows .
 The entire building is supported by 35 eighteen-inch-square concrete pillars . 35 pillars are flared at the top to form a modern version of a colonnade .
 Library will contain seminar rooms, typing rooms, microcard room, special collection room, tape recording rooms, periodicals room, administrative offices, and stacks . Library will provide more than 70,000 square feet of floor space .
 Colorado College fired up its ew heating plant Friday evening *ith a flaming half-million dollar rtgage note at a special cereny naming it the Williams Heat .
 The modern plant was named for e late Leon E Williams of Pu™j generous benefactor of the Inject, and his four sisters .
 Mr Williams left $100,000 toM the construction of the .370 heating plant and distribrib""'""g system, which was completed n April of 1960 .
 More than 2,000 feet of the pipe is running through the campus . The tunnel is part of a standup tunnel on the campus of the university .
 Two Colorado College history professors said last week a permanent organization to promote the study of the history of Western America may be in the making . Plans Emerge for a permanent Western American Historical Society .
 Professors Louis B Geiger and Harvey L Carter said western historians already are taking steps to organize a conference on the history of Western America . The conference will take place in western America .
 Preliminary plans for a permanent western historical organization emerged at a conference of western historians last October 1214 in Santa Fe, New Mexico . Preliminary proposals emerged at the conference in 1214, 1214 at Santa Fe .
 An organization committee will meet in Milwaukee Valley Historiing the Mississippi Valley Historical Association Convention . A formal organizational meeting will be held in Denver next October .
 A proposed constitution, by-laws, and the formal name of the proposed organization will be worked out at the Denver meeting . A proposal will be made at the meeting .
 Professor Carter is serving on the program committee for the October meeting . Professor Carter will serve as a member of the committee .
 CC Chemistry Professor Meets with High Schools from three southwestern Colorado communities . Students will hear about recent developments in chemical research .
 Eldon Hitchcock, assist- ant professor of chemistry at Colorado College, will spend the day at Montezuma County High talking with local students and science students from high schools in Dolores and Mancos . Hitchcock will also talk with students at the local high school .
 The Colorado College scientist will discuss colloids, colloids and the modern theories of acids and bases . The scientist will also discuss acidbase reactions .
 Colorado College science professors are visiting high schools throughout the area . The visit is one of a series of science professors making to high schools .
 The trips are co-sponsored by the National Science Foundation and the Colorado Wyoming Academy of Science . The trips will take place in Wyoming and Colorado .
 A cast, made up of faculty and students, has been selected for the Colorado College production of tinGreek drama, ""Oedipus Rex," scheduled to open December 7 for two-evening run in Perkins Hall .
 Eleven members of the faculty and 24 students have been chosen for roles in the 2,500-year-old play by Sophocles .
 It will be under the direction of William E McMillen, associate professor of speech and drama at the University of Cambridge .
 It was used extensively by Aristotle in his analysis of what a tragedy should be and for the requirements of the tragic hero . Aristotle used the tragedy extensively in his theory of tragedy .
 Dr. William R Hochman, associate professor of history, will have the rote of Oedipus . Dr. Dr. Hochmen will have a rote from Oedepus .
 Neale R Reinitz, associate professor of English will play the Priest; John H Lewis, instructor in geology, will play Creon; Dr. Creon . Dr. Neale H Reinitz will play Professor Creon and Dr. Lewis will play Englishman .
 Dr. Wilbur Wright, professor of physics, as the messenger from Corinth . Dr. Dr. Wright was the messenger for Corinth .
 Kenneth Burton, assistant professor of religion and minister at Shove Memorial Chapel, as Choragus . Kenneth Burton is a minister at the chapel .
 Two students, Ethel Six Geary and Mary Pat Hill, double-cast in two roles . Two students have been double-crowned in the roles .
 Each will play the part of Jocasta and the role of the maidservant . The pair will be alternating in the roles on different nights .
 Students cast in supporting roles include Leland Larson, Caspar Benzins, Ann Brooks, Dennis Sauve, Patricia K Dodge, Linda Hamilton, Barbara Blair, Ingrid Swenson, Polly Miller, Sarah Jamison, Caroline Sanborn, and Johanna Waller .
 The chorus, which in Greek plays provides the necessary exposition, includes three faculty members and nine students . The chorus also includes nine students from the university .
 Paul Kutsche, junior, assistant professor of sociology and anthropology; Robin M Rudoff, instructor in history; and Dr. Dr. Paul K. Rudoff is professor of history and sociology at University of Wisconsin .
 Students in the chorus include Vernon Olivier, Ray Boyce, Fred MeKee, Christopher Flower, William B Grabouski, Dale Spall, Ben Lyon, and Carl Chard .
 Dean Reid Elected Veep of United States Chess Club for a three-year term . Dean of men at ColoPueblo rado College re-elected as vice president .
 One of 24 vice presidents of the federation, he will be responsible for organized USCF activities in Colorado, New Mexico, and Oklahoma . He will be the president of the USCF .
 Dean Reid is president of the Colorado State Chess Association and the Colorado Springs Chess Club . Reid is also the president of Colorado's Chess Association . Reid has been a member of the Chess Club for more than 20 years .
 Colorado Springs Club plays Fort Collins in inter-city matches with Fort Collins . Colorado Springs play Fort Collins at Colorado Springs in the winter .
 The Colorado College administrator said be learned to play chess at the age of 40 . Boulder, Denver, Colorado, is located in Colorado .
 Reid is vice president of the National Chess Federation, which represents the United States in all international matches . This is Reid's second term as vice president . Reid has been in charge of the federation for two years .
 He placed second in the Colorado State Chess Tourney in 1057 and 1360 . In 1360, he tied for 18th place with Dr. Dr. John Sutter in Colorado Chess Championship Chess Tournament .
 Miss Pat Weaver, America's Nulional College Queen, re vealed her feminine taste as well as her practical sense .
 She selected as her favorite tin lovely Artcarved Evening Star — one of Artcarvcd'a nwurd's winning designs .
 Artcarved ring is guaranteed in writing for all the ye come by America's most respected ring maker . Artscarved ring will be available for purchase at the end of the year .
 Arte diamond rings have been the choice of millions for more than a century . Visit your local Artcarved Jeweler and see why Arte diamonds are the most popular .
 AI-.o o£ ncuresi Arlcarml Jeweler. cntlosiiiK 'Or lu cover liundlinj; unJ jiualugo. AI-.O o£ o£ .
 Colorado College Tiger Honor System Explored by Caroline Creyke . Last spring, a poll was taken of the student body to determine the effectiveness of the system .
 Suggestions to improve the quality of freshman orientation were made by those who felt there was not adequate orientation . The individual professors concept of the system is up to the individual professors .
 64% of students agreed with the present violation system . Support of the system was shown by the* fact that 64% agreed with it .
 15^ felt that penalties should be administered according to the degree of the violation . However, 15^ thought that penalties would be administered based on the severity of a violation .
 In another section of the questionnaire, a student stated that he felt the honor system was somewhat weakened by the fact that many professors don't follow the rules .
 Another commented that it was hard to adjust but was worth it . "Not to the system, itself, but to the fact that my personal integrity was on trial," another said .
 The honor system has great significance as a basis for independent achievement plus integrity, integrity and personal pride . These are the bases of all human relationships, says Dr. Richard Quest .
 Honor Council President Stew Ritchie says he feels the council is working quite well .
 In the past years the H.C. has heard about a fairly consistent percentage of the cheating, and this number has been going down . This number of cheating is going down, says the president of the state .
 Stew stressed the necessity for people to turn in suspected violators and let the H.C. decide whether or not cheating occurred . Stew stressed that people have a responsibility for turning in suspected offenders .
 An honor system offers ""advantages to the individual for further development of his self mastery and self development,"" Stew stated, Ruth Snodgrass, a three year member of the council, feels that the system is only effective in its ideal .
 The honor system, she stated, has to judge a case on the basis of one person's word against another's . She said the honor system has to be based on one word against one's .
 "The minute we have to come in in in an enforcement capacity, we've failed," says the government . "We've failed. We've failed to do so," says President Obama . "The moment we have come in is the moment we fail, we have failed," he says
 Bob Kendall, also a three-year member, says that judging by the surveys and polls, the system is quite effective .
 The honor council can't really tell how much cheating there is, but he's sure that there is some that the council doesn't ever hear about . He says the honor council has no idea how many cheating there are .
 He feels that the public relationships and orientation program of the honor souncil are quite good . The honor council is based in Washington, D.C.
 "If an honor system is not properly operated by those in it, it will fail," he says . He would hate to work in an institution that didn't have a good honor system .
 "The students must report it when they see violators, they must not be hesitant or afraid,"" he stated .
 If a professor can get the kids on his side and then explain how important it is scholastically, morally, and emotionally, the system will succeed, he said . But, he added, if a professor . can get them on his . side and explain that it is important to
 The women howl on Monday and Wednesday evenings and have scheduled a 30-game sea . The teams are recuited from among among the women employees of Cutler, Ticknor, Cossitt, Bemis, Rastall, Buildings and Grounds .
 Art School faculty member Pat Eager is a faculty wife of Art School alumnaudan Eager, Ed. Ed., whose husband is part of the art school faculty . Pat and Pat are both faculty members at Art School .
 There is room for two more teams in the league; any woman interested in regular bowling — or bowl ing substitute — may contact Mr Powell, Games Area Manager, for further information .
 Th> workshop is designed to acquaint the teacher of reading with new means and methods of instruction . It will show how these techniques can be incorporated successfully into present school reading programs .
 For best results please submit all material in double-spaced, typi iillr i form al . Submit all material to be published in the next edition of this week's Daily Mail .
 Officials at Colorado College took a nose count of veterans enrolled in classes at the college . Colorado College is an independent liberal arts and sciences college in Colorado .
 All were men — ranging from age from midtwenties to early sixties . The victims were men ranging in age from early to mid-thirties .
 Children of servicemen who died during, or as a result of, their military service . They are the children of those who have died during or after, their service .
 The veterans currently enrolled at Colorado College come from 4 states . Colorado College is offering programs to veterans from all over the world .
 Colorado College Alumnd Tiger Varsity hockey game has been discontinued for the p a3l ' five seasons . Officials at the college recalled Saturday that veterans have been enrolled in classes here continously since 1044 .
 The game is scheduled for 8:15m' Saturday, November 25 at tin) Broadmoor World Arena . Featuring some of the greatest hockey stars who have ridden tk CC Tiger down through the years .
 Hockey coach Tony Frasea said that some 20 alumni, dating back as far as the 1946-47 teams, agreed to turn out for the annual Alumni-Varsity meeting . Some 20 alumni dating back to the '46-47 team, li aV( , agreed to
 Athletic Department has announced that student body cards and faculty cards will not be honored that night . Most of these are from the Colorado Springs and Denver areas .
 Admission will be he$l per seat, and there will be no reserve seats for this particular game . Admission will cost $1,000 per seat .
 All proceeds from the AlumniVarsity game will be used for tlie Freshman hockey program . All proceeds will go to the Freshman Hockey program .
 Coach Frasea says that he has lined up eight freshman hockey games and hopes to schedule two more for a ten game freshman season . Coach says he is looking forward to a freshman season of eight games .
 The loss leaves the once title-contending Tigers in third place in the RMC standings with Western State . The Miners are now in second place with a 2-1 record .
 Mines lias a chance to shave the conference a freak series of ball exchanges, title if they can knock off unde undeMines . Mines had driven deep into CC feated Adams State tomorterritory only to have a pass interasketball . Business ooking up this Season is the
 The prime reason for this is the iult of pre-season hoop turnin Cossitt Hall druing the last weeks . Pre-season hoops have been turning up in the last few weeks .
 Eastlack feels that the entire liketball business for the fnrthniing season is looking up . CC cagers will sport five ilermen from last season's titlefling squad .
 Dan Wright, FarThompson, Farrel Howell, .-e Krell and John Iieid are k on the maplewood and in d form .
 In the last few years Eastlack :d his squads have become rather tached to the Rocky Mountain inference title, and after the two ctice the coach is makI optimistic sounds about the nihilities of the 'Gl' crew keept it snugly .
 Kappa Sigma captured first in crosscountry race held at halftime of Adams StateCC game . Tony McGinnis was the runner .
 Kappa Sigma Phi Gamma Delta Beta Theat Pi Zeta Sigma Chi Swimming will be held at Palmer High School Pool Tuesday, November 21 and November 28 . Swimming begins at 9:00 a.m.
 Tony Frasca is an exAll American Colorado College hockey coach . Frasca was a member of Kappa Sigma 8 Beta 8 Sigma Chi 2 Phi Gam 1 Phi Delt 1 Zeta .
 All his iremen on one line row on one row on the Indian's home field .
 Two safeties have spelled the margin of defeat for the Tigers . It was the Tigers third loss of the year, all coming on their home field . It is the second time the Tigers have lost two safeties in a row .
 The upset loss proved to be a double heartbreaker for the Tigers . CC also dropped an 1814 opening game decision to Washburn U., the four point difference coming from the Tigers twice being spilled in their own .
 Senior quarterback and co-captain Eddie Kintz is out of the saddle for the Lions . The loss comes after a hard-fought battle against their ancient rivals from Golden . The Lions also lost the services of senior quarterback and captain .
 He underwent surgery immediately following the game and will miss CC's final game of the season tomorrow against Nebraska Wesleyan .
 CC started off as if they were going to make a shambles of the Miners and do it in rather easy fashion . CC started to look like they would be going to do it, but did it in easy fashion.
 They took the opening kiekoff and with Kintz hitting on two key passes, moved easily downfield to score in the opening two minutes of play . They took an early lead in the first half of play with a first-half goal .
 The touchdown came on a 15-yard aerial from Kintz to halfback Terry Holleran . The touchdown was the first of the season for the Redskins . The score came from a 15 yard aerial pass from Kintsz .
 Pete Pleasant added the extra point and the Tigers were seemingly on their way . Pete Pleasant's extra point gave the Tigers the lead in the first half .
 CC spent most of the rest of the afternoon in their own territory . After Kintz was hurt, they were able to cross the midfield stripe only twice .
 The only other Tiger scoring threat came in the fourth quarter when they were able to penetrate as far as the Miner 17 .
 Freshman quarterback Cubby Welch hit Mike Minnelli on a pass play covering 23 yards to spark drive .
 But the Tiger attack was quelled when Holleran was thrown for a long loss on a third down situation from the Miner 20 .
 MB 2-0887 ALL TYPES ALTERATIONS AND REPAIRS 10% 1 1 7I/2 Eo*t sche La Pood cepte-d by Wayne Deutscher at the Tiger eight .
 An attempted Kintz aerial was picked off by Miner end George Brinkworth and the Orediggers were again in scoring position on the Tiger 25 . On the next play, however, an attempt was intercepted by Miner's George Brinksworth .
 Two plays later Deutscher intercepted for CC, this time on the Tiger seven, but seconds later the Tigers fumbled the ball right back to Mines, again on the CC 25 . The Tigers fumble the ball to Mines on the second play, but again fumbled it back to
 Grant Owen finally crashed in to score from the CC two . Mines managed to keep possession of the elusive pigskin .
 The extra point attempt went wide, but the Miners went in to an 8-7 lead by virtue of their first safety scored in the first quarter . The Miners had the first safety in the game, and the extra point failed .
 The first seemingly unimportant two point safety came after the Tigers had stopped a Mines threat on the CC two . The Tigers stopped the Mines threat in the first half of the game .
 The Tigers took over there on downs, but seconds later Kintz faded to throw and was hauled down by Pansze . The Tigers won the game on downs .
 With time running out and the Tigers with their backs to the wall, Welch attempted a roll out pass and Pansze again crashed through to pin him for another two points for Mines .
 CC had one final chance to pull it out when they took over on downs on their own 25 . CC had a final chance of pulling it out with one last chance of winning .
 Welch completed one pass to Jim Wujcik, but his second aerial attempt was intercepted by Owen and Mines ran out the clock . Owen intercepted one of Welch's two aerial passes .
 Frasca says his theory has nothing to do with a line system . Frasca: "Bring Your Laundry with Your Dry Cleaning" is a dry cleaning method .
 The Tiger stiekmen have been turning out for nearly a week now . Frasca says the squad is showing a lot of drive and enthusasibility .
 They staged a regular inter-squad scrimmage at the Broadmoor World Arena on both Friday and Saturday evening November 10 and 11, he said .
 There's no admission charge for the scrimmage games, Frasca pointed out .
 He said hockey fans are invited to come out and nee how the squad is shaping up . He said fans should come out to see how the team is looking .
 Frasca felt that the league this year would be much stronger than it has ever been . All in all, Frasca said the league would be stronger than ever before .
 Frasca doesn't believe that the Denver crew will be much weaker than their l'JOO League champions . The Denver crew lost many good men via the graduation route, but Frasca believes they will be stronger .
 He feels that North Dakota, Michigan and Minnesota will be tough to crack . North Dakota and Michigan are also tough states to crack, he says .
 GANO DOWNS MEN'S CLOTHINf! — FURNISHLNOS an BROADMOOR HOTEL . ZECHA & ADAMS CONOCO SERVICE STATION Nevada Ave. Nevada Ave is located on Nevada Avenue .
 Continental will introduce jet economy service December 1 to supplement its present luxury first class and Club Coach jet service . President Robert F Six said last week that with permission of the Civil Aeronautics Board, Continental will .
 Fares for the ""no frills"" economy service will be approximately 25 per cent lower than present jet coach fares, Six said . Six said the service will cost around $100,000 less than the current cost of air travel .
 There will be no change in fares or service standards for the Golden Jet deluxe first class or Club Coach service .
 Continental's Golden Jets are scheduled between Denver and Chicago and Los Angeles . The Golden Jets will play in Denver, Chicago, Los Angeles and Chicago .
 The Boeing 707's also operate from Kansas City to Denver, and over Chicago, Kansas City Los Angeles and Houston .
 Pure jet operations represent over two-thirds of the total capacity operated by the company over its 7,000-mile system . There is a ride book at Rastall Desk for those driving home for Christmas who want riders .
 "Niblet people had changed the entire character of the Green Giant," the author says . "Somebody changed the whole thing of the Giant," he says .
 No longer is the gruff green man who would stalk the corn fields clutching a can of Niblets to his chest . Instead, he's a man who stalked the fields with a can and a can .
 We find the Green Giant sitting on a mountain top with his head resting on his chin and, across his face, a beatific expression . Instead, we find the green giant sitting in front of us, sitting with his hands on his head .
 The picture shows corn stalks in the foreground and a charming little red farm house in the center . The picture was taken at a farm in the middle of a corn field in the country .
 Green Giant is so proud of his corn family that he often sits and watches it grow inch by inch . Folks in Green Giant land say he often watches the corn family grow . The Green Giant often sits in front of the corn to watch it grow .
 The Green Giant doesn't have the time to sit around and watch corn grow inch by inch . "The Green Giant" has no time for sitting around and watching the corn grow .
 Last year Birdseye people contracted for 35 Green Giants to supervise corn production, and when the corn season came around, only hired 10 . Last year the Birdseyes people contracted . for 35 . Green Giants . When the corn . season came round, only 10 were hired .
 Carl Horn, a telephone company economist, graduated from college just last year . Horn is tasked with helping to find the right answers . Horn: "The right answers could be very expensive. Helping to find them is the job of Carl Horn"
 His studies help management make important forecasting decisions . His studies and estimates help managers make important decisions .
 Carl Horn of Illinois Bell Telephone Company, and other young men like him in Bell Telephone Companies, help make your telephone and communications service the finest in the world . Carl Horn was a young man who helped make your phone company's telephone service the best .
 An original page from the first edition of The King James Bible . The Colorado College librarian at the Colorado College shows an original Bible page .
 I ; is one of several first edition pages given to the college by an imnus living in London . I ; was one of many first edition copies of the book .
 A Colorado College alumnus who c lives in London has given a folio of pages from origial editions of some of the more aportant books printed in Engmd. Assisting him is a student part-tir the library, Miss Margie Taylor of Sidney, Australia
 The pages are from works from works back to the English RenIssanee in the early fifteen-lvunffds down to the twentieth cenwry . Nearly all of the pages in the book are from first editions .
 The which are not come from exely rare editions. ie collection was sent to the ge by Dr. Dr. John Sutter .
 Taylor formerly was chairof the humanities division at too State College in California . Taylor was also a professor at California State College .
 In the folio are original pages mm Pynson's Froissart, published 1523; The King Jame Bible, 11; The Second Folio of Shake*are, 1G32; The Well at the Grid's End, 1896, and others . Original pages mm
 The King James pile currently is on display in Cobum Library . The pages are a fine example of the hisir y of printing in England .
 He said he hoped 8 display would interest students fine printing, and encourage e m to become collectors of origW editions .
 Lord Ber:f s translation of Froissart is redded as his most important p'ub^h'on . Lord Ber'f:f's translation is his most significant translation of Lord Ber's translation .
 The King James Bible, the work nf some 40 translators, was printed by Robert Barker, the royal printer, who helped finance work .
 Some of the other pages in the collection are from the second edition of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Dr. King's second edition .
 The folio is just one of many valuable gifts from Europe's rich storehouse of original editions, early music scores, and other collector's items . Dr. Dr. Martin says the folio was a valuable gift from Europe .
 Taylor presented to Colorado College during the past few years he has lived in London . Taylor has presented to the college during the last few years .
 The privilege of tapping tiif Keg is awarded to the winners, whose names will later appear on a plate attached to this colorful traveling trophy . The names of the winners are later shown on a traveling trophy attached to the trophy .
 It is recommended that those who have already entered and those who register before 3:00 m.m. today in Slocum have flash lights, full gas tanks, and cars in good condition .
 Student Guide Service Aids GG Administration . New group formed for the purpose of aiding the school administration .
 The main duty of the group is to show the campus to prospective students and guests of the college .
 The Student Guide Service was started under the leadership of Rastall Center Board, with Lani Markisen in charge . Lani is in charge of the Student Guide Services .
 She worked with Mr Nicholl, the assistant Director of Admissions, in setting up the purposes of the service .
 Each member of the group is expected to know much about the past and future of Colorado College and what this college can offer to the prospective student .
 The guides, the admissions office feels, can answer many questions of the prospective student which do not come up in an interview with the admissions director . The guides can also be used to get a better idea of the school's qualities from the student body .
 The people making up this year's Student Guide Service are Suky Arentz, Suzanne Armstrong, Mary Bardone, Bradford Chase, Betsy Crockett, Polly Franklin, Ann Gourley, Donna Hampton, Walt Hecox, Erv Hinds, Raechel Jensen,
 This group hopes to become independent of Rastall Center and become an honorary club like the Black and Gold and Tigers Clubs, within the next few years .
 Another round of Peace Corps Placement Tests will be given on November 28th and 29th in testing centers throughout the nation . The tests will be held at testing centers across the country .
 The tests will begin at 8:30m. and last for six hours, with one hour out for lunch . The tests are expected to last for up to six hours .
 One is designed for men and women who would like to be considered for positions as secondary school or college teachers . The other is designed to be a secondary teacher .
 Many applicants will be applicants who have sent in a Peace Corps questionnaire since the last round of testing . Many of those who will take the examinations will be those who sent in the questionnaire .
 Both men and women who are interested and who have not yet filled out a Peace Corps questionnaire will also be permitted to take the examinations . The examinations will be open to both men, women and women .
 They will be accommodated on a ""space available"" basis at the testing centers . The testing centers will be on a 'space available' basis .
 The local testing center is the Main Post Office on Nevada and Pikes Peak . It is located on the main road between Nevada and Nevada Peak .
 Lenin and the country he created from Romanoff ruins were on prominent display at 11 o'clock Tuesday morning . ""A Visual Picture of Russia"" was presented as the first of a two part assembly program on the Soviet Union .
 The color slide and film format portrayed four main facets of modern Russia . The film format was shot in a color slide .
 Mr nitz's slides reflected the intense Soviet emphasis on industrial and agricultural success . The slides reflect an intense Soviet focus on industrial success .
 Russia's historical past reflected as Julie Bohlke commented on her slides of Leningrad . Richard Paine gave the audience an inside view of the Kremlin .
 Miss Bohlke pointed out such landmarks of the ""Venice of the North"" as the famous Winter Palace . She also emphasized the great popularity of soda and ice cream stands along Nevsky Boulevard .
 Mr Paine reminded the audience that the inside of the Kremlin is as large as downtown Colorado Springs . The many onion-domed cathedrals and the huge two-hundred ton ""King Bell"" were of particular interest .
 The face of modern Russia was reflected in the conversion of prerevoliition palaces to office buildings and in the stark modern architecture of massive apartment houses .
 Both Reinitz and Soule emphasized the great pride the Russians take in their parks and monuments .
 An excellent example was the fantastically ornate, chandeliered Moscow subway station .
 In portraying the attitudes of the Russian people, Reinitz mentioned that the general public usually appeared somewhat shabby, although it was by no means true that all Russians wore poorly fitting clothes .
 The high cost of clothing ( fifteen dollars for a rayon slip) was emphasized . The high cost of clothing was emphasized in the show .
 Both Miss Bohlke and Mr Soule dwelt on the friendliness of the people, even when communication was limited to sign language . The pair spoke to each other in a sign language interview .
 Mr Alexey Malyshev, who helpfully performed the necessary translations, will participate next Tuesday, November 28, as leader of a panel discussing the impact of the Soviet Union on travelers .
 College teaching and scientific research are two professions requiring training at an academicgraduate school . College teaching and scientific research require training at academicgraduate school .
 Members of the Graduate Fellowship Committee will be at the meeting . Professors Champion, Brooks, Reinitz, and Reinitz will attend .
 The curiosity of the Russian people about all things Western, and especially American, will be one of the subjects taken up at the second assembly program on the U.S.R. next Tuesday morning nt 11:00 .
 Mr Paine, who speaks ■ fluent Russian, engaged in a number of impromptu street-comer conversations .
 Oscar Soule, another panel member, was most interested in the Russian conception of life in the United States, particularly with regard to segregation . The panel was also interested in how the U.S. has dealt with segregation in Russia .
 The attitude of the Russians toward their own government, their own expressions of opinion on such topics as war and peace, and some of their feelings on moral and social questions will be considered at next Tuesday's program .
 Mr Alexey Malyshev, assistant professor of Russian at CC, will contribute his knowledge of the Russian character .
 Janet Cosby has been managing this series of programs for the assembly committee . The assembly committee is meeting in New York City for the first time this week .
 Professor Max Lanner will represent Colorado College at the 37th convention of the National Association of Schools of Music meeting in Denver today and tomorrow .
 This information was made public this week in an attractive fourpage brochure prepared by the college's admissions office . The brochure is made public in a fourpage advertisement released this week .
 Those receiving assistance are averaging about $1,200 for the academic year . Those who receive assistance are receiving about $2,000 a year .
 A great many more also hold campus jobs, working from one to four hours a day . "Nearly half of our student body receives or earns financial aid from college and outside source"
 Colorado College Student Publication is Colorado College's official college student publication . The publication is the Colorado College College's Student Publication .
 In the past week, the reader has undoubtedly seen greater tributes to the deceased ""Mr Sam"" than we can pen . Mr McCormack's funeral will be attended by his family and friends .
 We feel compelled to add our voice to those of eulogy, and also to look for a moment beyond the fact of Sam Rayburn's death to the state of congressional government . We are compelled to look beyond that fact of his death to state of Congress .
 He served in the House of Representatives from that day until one day a few months ago . He served as a member of Congress from that time to one day ago .
 For one third of his 48 years on Capitol Hill, he served as Speaker of the House . He served as a Democrat for more than 48 years .
 His steady hand guided the House from the New Deal through world war, through the Fair Deal, through McCarthyism, through Modern Republicanism and through Cold War to the New Frontier .
 His guidance was consistent in fairness and firmness, in integrity and respect, in political realism and foresighted statesmanship, he says . He says .
 Sam Rayburn held the respect of four presidents, untold congressmen, and countless Americans in public and private life . Rayburn was the second most powerful man in the land .
 We can add little to the eloquent tributes paid Mr Sam by these people . Mr Sam's funeral will be held in New York City, New York .
 The U.S. has lost one of its greatest incarnations of the ideals of representative government . Yet we do want to say that the United States has lost a great thing .
 We wonder if this statement does not also point up the seriousness of Mr Sam's passing . But we wonder if it does also point to the serious seriousness of his passing .
 "It was unifying a body of individuals who are in a large sense independent of the President, the Speaker, and one another," he said .
 It was using the full force of a great and respected personality, of political compromise and fairness, to meet the crushing demands of world tension and mass society — demands magnified .
 There are many congressmen, unknown outside their districts except to the closest observers, who work and work very hard, year after year, to promote the ideals represented by Rayburn .
 Any one of them could rise to the occasion, and could build quickly, given the pressure of time, build quickly the respect and prestige which served Rayburn as a powerful tool time after time .
 Most likely successor to Rayburn, John McCormack of Massachusetts, is not, in our opinion, one of these men . McCormack is not likely to succeed Rayburn .
 He does not now command sufficient respect among his own party members . Many are dissatisfied with his majority leadership, many are unhappy with him .
 McCormaek's open and publicized break with the President over school aid makes him an unlikely successor to the tradition of conciliation left by Mr Sam . McCormaeks' break with President Obama makes him a likely successor to Mr Sam.
 There is little evidence that Mr McCormack has or can exercise the far-ranging and far-sighted political judgment which characterized Rayburn . McCormack is not likely to exercise the same judgment as Rayburn, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Many of his less-known colleagues, on the other hand, could exercise such judgment . Many of these colleagues could exercise their judgment, too .
 McCormack took the Speaker's chair in the closing weeks of the last session of Congress . McCormack was Speaker of the House of Representatives in the 1990s .
 We believe that the House, in the best interests of itself as an institution and of the nation as a whole, must replace Mr Sam with a man who, if not like him, can at least serve as well .
 Our readers who agree would do well to write their own Congressmen of their concern .
 We wish to help, in what ever way possible, to make representative government a continuing, worthwhile and vital part of our society .
 As a full-time student and a participant in the basic ROTC program, I feel compelled to reply to Mr Trushel's article (""Comment"") in the Tiger .
 Two years ago, faculty voted two to one against compulsory ROTC . Trushel says decision was based on 'mere whim or flight of fancy'
 In regard to this vote (which had no effect on the administration) the following actions were taken by the ROTC department . The vote did not affect the administration, but the actions of the department were taken .
 Trushel's assessment of the value of the ROTC's The Red Menace at Home and Abroad and The Care and Feeding of Your M-lays is worth 2 extra hours .
 I feel that Mr Trushel forgets that his friend is being a ""tine leader"" in an entirely imposed and unnatural circumstance and that he, as a cadet, is obeying out of a fear of punishment .
 Mr Trushel's belief that the ability to observe dirty brass and to say ""two demerits"" is ""True leadership" is what he might call the man who leads others to safety .
 Mr Trushel next tells us that ""the most common gripe"" is that ROTC is compulsory .
 Jesus told a parable about a businessman who embezzled funds belonging to his employer in order to insure that he himself would be provided for after his dismissal . Jesus told the parable of a man who was about to be dismissed for incompetence . Jesus said that a businessman embe
 Jesus praised the businessman and said he had shown himself to be wiser than many of the faithful . And Jesus, according to the original form of the account, praised him for his wisdom .
 This is the kind of statement we'd expect to hear from a cynic, not from Jesus . Jesus' comments come from the mouth of a cynical cynic . This is not the first time Jesus has made such a statement in his life .
 This parable doesn't run counter to Jesus' message as we know it elsewhere in the New Testament, but rather has a lot to say to all men, particularly those who are realistic enough to be aware that their own hands are not entirely clean . tp^EM^Qt
 There was collective bargaining, etc., so even you can see how busy the Green Giant must have been .
 It should be obvious that he certainly had no time to sit around watching corn grow . It's not surprising that he didn't have time to watch the corn grow.
 Only someone who has spent his life in a telephone booth taking notes of the behavior of Margret Mead wouldn't know that . Mead's life in the phone booth is over and over, Mead says .
 When the kernels reach that one fleeting moment of perfect flavor, the corn is picked licketysplit . And when the corn reaches that moment, it's picked for the perfect flavor .
 The room is painted a corn green and the conference table has yellow chairs . The room was painted corn green .
 A.K. 'I've called you to this meeting because the three of you representt he finest thinking in corn. A. K. 'A.K.' 'I'm calling it a meeting because I've called it because I'm a corn farmer'
 It seems to me, chief, that America is just not thinking Niblet I Jim: I don't know; maybe they just don't like the stuff . Jim: "It seems to be that America ... just doesn't like Niblesat I Jim"
 WonderfulK you've solved the problem. tyr get to work on it immediately. We'll soften up that nasty i giant. WonderfulK . WonderfulK get to the task immediately. Wonderful .
 "I've been thinking for some time that yo might need a trip. You know, Jim, Jim," he says .
 You' not allergic to corn are you, Jjnji . I suppose it's pretty clear w^ happened but, you know, on col, nights when I'm lying slug-a-h in Sloeum, just listening to t] trucks go by, I can
 First the honor system considers college gir]| mature enough to turn themselves in when they are late, but th< dorm restrictions on girls' noun assumes that they are not mature enough . The honor system assumes that girls are not ready to decide how late to stay out or study .
 This system can still be moldd into something very worthwhile with more change on emphasis on emphasis than on the system . This is still possible, but it can be molded into a very worthwhile system .
 First, the freshmen girls should be told that they will be given choice, as freshmen, as to what the school policy on hours will be for them .
 If they prove they can follow the restrictions of the dorm system and the honor code that goes with it, then they will be given the chance, as Sophomore;, to set their own hours on a honor system that is truly an honor system .
 If the students are unable to maintain a decent grade average, they will be put on the same system freshmen . If the; unable, in the . first semester of their sophomore year, they . will be placed on the . same system .
 As seniors, all girls wta have a 2.2. should be allowed to live in an honor dorm . Second, as seniors, girls should also have to have 2.3.5 .
 They will set their own hours, for as seniors they have cei'tainly at sometimewhether at home or during some summer vacation . As seniors, they have had sorm perience in deciding their hours .
 Signing out is more for the benefit of the girls than it is regulation against them . They will still have to sign out as signing out is not against them, but it is for them .
 If one of these seniors gets below a 2. her first semester, she should be put in a lower class dorm or hBV hours in the senior dorm . If one these seniors get below a . 2. Her first semester — even if it '5 unlikely — should she be
 The girls would be getting practice in showing their matuntj'i . The school will have the P a ^ in that growth facter that should .
 The girls will be given . a questionaire on Monday the 27t&On this questionaire they are p*j ing asked to tell what they thin* of the present school dorm system and if they have any suggestion .
 CC soccer giants whipped L Air Force Academy's freshen soccer team by a tally of three goals to one on Tuesday jfternoon November 21st .
 After a goal-less first half, CC giants came back from behind to score . CC giants scored in the tenth minute of the -econd half .
 Edward Kuiper collated a perfect in-swinger from f ny Gaskill and by a beautiful j^dy movement clearly waltzed di s way between two Air Force defenders . The video was shot from the Air Force base in New Jersey .
 Ifie lobbed the ball into Ifie net, leaving the Air Force goalkeeper sprawling helplessly on the marshy goal -mouth . Ifie was the only player to score a goal in the first half of the game .
 Two minutes later the icademy gained an equilizer, but the CC boys were undaunted . Two minutes after the Air Force   gained the equator, the boys were back in the air .
 Soloman Nkiwane sold a dummy to his opponent and swit-hed the ball to Ed Kuiper . The pass found the feet of Soloman . Ed Koeper completed a beautiful pass to find the ball in the box .
 Soloman's solo effort beat three men in a row to win the match . Eddie teat one man and passed the ball to Soloman . Soloman sent a sizzler which went s few inches below the crossbar to plump into the corner of the net .
 In the dying minutes of the game, ""wonder boy"" Eddie sealed the hopes of the Air Force with a perfect grounder .
 All attempts by the Air Force boys to reduce the goal feast were foiled by the CC defenders . CC defenders also foiled attempts to stop the scoring .
 ROTC is an infringement upon the academic freedom of the American college student, of questionable value in a student's education and a great waste of some student's time . ROTc is a waste of time and an infringement of academic freedom, says author .
 In the third paragraph we leani that, basically, the educated citizens control the army and that the ROTC program enables ""inexperienced freshman"" to better fulfill this duty . In the . third paragraph, the . educated citizens . control the Army .
 If the reasons presented in this letter and by the faculty in their two to one vote and at other times are illegitimate, are *e . Then to suppose that, equal arguments against dope addiction being invalid, we should support it. If . equal arguments are invalid, then to suppose .
 Would Mr Trushel have us support nuclear bombs if we can't get rid of them or perhaps we might have cancer or syphilis? Perhaps we might also support cancer, syphilis or cancer, he asks . Would we support a nuclear bomb if we couldn't get it?
 Perhaps Mr Trushel should look at the situation obkely before writing his comments and stop attempting to be goodness incarnate . Merely be goodness innovations and not goodness incarnates .
 Wesleyan suffered their ninth straight loss this year and their seventeenth straight loss give Wesleyan their first six over a two year period . The easy victory enabled Coach Jerry Carle to clear the bench as the Tigers registered their fifth win of the year and sent Wesleyan reeling to their ninth
 After forcing Wesleyan to punt on their first series of downs, the Tigers took over on their own 46yard line . Minutes later they moved in to score the game's first touchdown .
 On the next play, the Tigers again called on Deutscher and the hard running fullback obliged by powering bis way the final seven yards to score . The Tigers won the game by 14 points in the first half .
 Ron Taylor fielded a B W' -iryan punt on the Plainsmen's 44-yard line, headed for the right sideline . Behind a wall of blockers, Taylor raced unmolested into the end zone for the Tigers' second score .
 CC's third touchdown came in the second quarter when Jim Blair broke through through Wesleyan's defense to block an attempted punt by Norm Washburn .
 Blair picked the ball off Washburn's toe as if he had intercepted a pass, tucked the pigskin away and hustled 25 yards to score . Blair picked up the ball in one motion, picked it up and scored 25 yards .
 Late in the second quarter Wesleyan finally managed to hit pay dirt . At this point Carle called on his reserves, and Wesleyan eventually managed to score .
 Tiger quarterback Cubby Welch fumbled late in the second quarter and Wesleyan recovered near the mid-field stripe . Wesleyan recovers near the midway point of the field .
 Washburn clicked on a 45 yard scoring pass to Dan Johnson to nd the Tigers left the field with a 21-6 halftinie advantage .
 Neither team could generate a scoring drive in the third quarter, but the Tigers got rolling again in the last period and rucked up two more touchdowns .
 Gary Sparkman throws a 22-yard touchdown pass to Dan Wright . The first came on a 22 yard scoring pass from Sparkman to Wright . It was the first touchdown of the season for Sparkman .
 Mike Romero split the uprights for the extra point giving the Tigers a 28-7 lead . This time the Tigers scored a touchdown in the first quarter . The Tigers also scored an extra point for the Tigers .
 Tiger aerial arm again connected for a touchdown with a little over six minutes remaining . Tiger's aerial arm was used in the final quarter of the game to secure the win .
 Welch found slotback Ed DeGeorge alone on the Wesleyan five yard line and hit him for a 25 yard scoring pass . Welch's pass was a 25-yard touchdown for Wesleyan in the first quarter . Welch also threw a touchdown in the second quarter .
 Plainsmen's final touchdown came minutes later when halfback Dwnyne tiichorb gathered in a Fred Emmerling punt and scooted 76 yards .
 Wesleyan picked up two more points in the final seconds of the game when Welch was trapped in his own end zone for a safety . Wesleyan won the game with a safety in the closing seconds .
 The two points came after the Tiger reserves had staged a tough goal line stand that stopped a Wesleyan scoring threat on the CC one . CC reserves had stopped a Wesan goal from scoring a goal .
 They tied for second in the Rocky Mountain Conference with Colorado Mines and Western State . Colorado Mines, Western State and Colorado Mines finished second .
 Sanders' Kentucky Fried CHICKEN ""it's finger lickin' good"" Take-Home Department Open m. to 12m. from 12 a.m.
 The Colorado College hockey team will open its season tomorrow night at the Broadmoor World Arena against an alumni squad composed of former CC greats .
 Head Varsity Coach Tony Frasca, a former All-American, at CC in 1952-53, will take the ice with about 20 other area alumni . Some of the alumni dates back as far back as 1946-47 .
 The varsity squad started workouts Oct. 31 and Frasca has been quite pleased with their work up to date . Frasca says he's pleased with his team's progress .
 Tigers have no one outstanding individual performer, says coach . Tigers coach says Tigers have 'no one outstanding performer' in team .
 Veteran defenseman Paul Kilbreath has shed some weight, and has worked well so far . He mentioned that veteran defenseman has shed a lot of weight .
 Frasca currently has his team divided into three lines, not according to ability, but according to how well his stickmen play together as a team . Frasca says his team is divided by how well they play together, rather than by ability .
 Frasca indicated that he is undecided as to who will he his number one goalie . Frasca said he is very undecided as he is unsure who will be his next goalie . He indicated he is still undecided on who will become his next goalkeeper .
 Norm Laurence is currently engaged in a battle with Pete Doyle and Art Warwick for the number one spot . Art Warwick and Pete Doyle are currently battling for the No. 1 spot .
 Warwick was injured when he caught a puck in the shoulder at practice last Monday and it is not known whether he will see action tomorrow night . Warwick caught the puck in practice and it was not known if he will play again .
 Students and faculty members will not be admitted to tomorrow night's game with activity cards . The game will be held in honor of students and faculty .
 Proceeds from the game will go to improve this year's Freshman team schedule . Proceeds will go towards improving the Freshman's schedule this year .
 Hockey Coach Tony Frasca whistles his Colorado College Tiger ice-men onto the rink for their first practice session of the year . Coach Frasca says the team is looking forward to the start of the season .
 Frasca looks forward to icing a greatly improved team for the forthcoming season opener against Denver U at Denver . With seventeen returning lettermen from last year's squad, Frasca says he is looking forward to a much improved team .
 Norman Laurence, Stan Moskel, Larry Gilbertson, Mike Minelli, Jim Frolick, Alex Yankovich, Doug Hill, Gil Grabowski, Dan McGill, Brian Dutkowski, Don Stouffer, Ken Cairns, Archie Prestayko
 Frasca said that he would cut the squad turning out to about 18 men within the next couple of weeks . Frasca is looking for a much improved club after viewing his potential material .
 He pointed out Denver IT., North Dakota, Michigan and Minnesota as particularly rugged obstacles . North Dakota and Michigan are particularly rugged .
 There will be a Christmas card workshop on Tuesday November 28th in Rastall's Crafts Shop .
 Both silk screen and block type methods of making Christmas cards will be demonstrated . The cards will also be shown how to make them .
 This is a chance for anyone to cut down the cost of their cards and at the same time be original . This is the first time anyone has ever been able to buy a new card .
 This Sunday the Cycling Club and all others interested will leave Rastall Center parking lot at 9:00 m. sharp for Waldo Canyon — weather permitting . This Sunday's event will take place at 9 a.m. sharp .
 This may be the last ride this Fall, so all those who have been intending to ride and haven't had the chance will not want to miss this beautiful ride . This may well be the final ride of the Fall .
 Ideas about planning and different types of programming were exchanged . Union programming was exchanged . Ideas about the future of the Union were exchanged.
 Col Springs Civic Players' production of Look Homeward is scheduled to open November . The play is set to run at the Fine AiS Center in Colorado Springs, Colorado .
 Playing the part of the Pro , taganist, Eugene, is James H p J a sophomore from Swarthmore Prof. Prof. Eugene . Playing the role of Eugene is James J p J .
 The play, based on the first noi of Thomas Wolfe, deals with t M( problems of youth growing up in a small Southern city .
 Works by a Colorado Collep art professor are included in a traveling collection of oils, water. colors and drawings . Works by some the nation's leading artists now being exhibited in galleries ani museums across the country .
 Bernard Arnest is a professor of art and director of the School of Art at Colorado College . Arnest's painting is a collaboration of artists from Colorado College.
 Arnest studied at the Colorado Springs Fine Arts Center . Arnest has been on the faculty at Coloradt College since 1957 .
 Traditional Sport Shirt is tailored with trim tapered bodies for campus and classroom from from from the 5.5 to 6.5 inches .
 Stephen Kovacs, ^jd-j-enowned Hungarian pianinist, plays piano in concert for second time in two years . Debussy's Clair ile Lune, Chopin's ""PolO' Emotion Marks Kovacs Concert By Onica Friend for the second
 Trimming the tree ill finish a day of decorating istall, . On Thursday afternoon the sority pledge classes, under the Hjrdination of Jr. Jr. The tree is trimmer .
 Panhellenic, jd the Bengals, the freshman i's pep club, will put up other jcorations . iReporters will be in attendance at the end of the week .
 Throughout the hour and fortyfive minute concert, Mr Kovacs' love of music was evident .
 He seemed to long to be a part of the piano and the music appeared to eminate from not only his fingers but from his whole being . The music emigrated from the piano to the piano, and it eminated from his fingers .
 With each piece of the second half he became more emotionally involved, he became emotionally involved in the second-half of the match .
 The ""Polonaise"" suffered from an irregular tempo as he strove to project his intense feeling .
 Panel Slated on Travel Abroad A Panel Discussion on ""Student Travel and Study Abroad"" will be presented by Cap and Gown on Tuesday, November 28 at 7:15m.
 Oscar Soule, Bob Seelig, Gay Petzold, and Jeannie Gibbs will discuss the advantages and disadvantages of the various programs available to students such as the Experiment in International Living, Junior Year Abroad, and Independent Travel .
 The floor will be opened to questions and discussion . After a brief presentation, Mariana Cogswell will moderate the discussion .
 This year, Cap and Gown consists of 10 members and has elected Karen Williamson as president . This year's president is Karen Williamson, who has been in office for 10 years . The group has 10 members .
 The students plan to serve the College through projects like the Student Travel and Study Panel . They are in charge of coordinating the Sunday Shove Chapel Coffee hours .
 Robert R Pauley, President of the ABC Radio Network, announced the announcement . Foreign Policy "Foreign Policy" will be broadcast on ABC .
 Money towards the winners' tuitions to post-graduate school will be contributed by stations of the ABC Radio Network, by the AFL-CIO, which sponsors the weeknight program .
 All ten will receive complete sets of the 1962, 24-volume Encyclopedia Britannica . All ten children will receive sets of complete sets .
 Plans call for the winners to corrverse and dine with Cabinet members, senators and congressmen . The winners will also meet with the heads of various federal agencies .
 When It's Music It's Millers Miller Music Co. Co. etyty show highlights . CC Stockton and Betsy James talk about the Millers Millers' Millers . Co. co-hosted the show .
 Oedipus Rex plays next week in Perkins Hall . The play is based on a Greek tragedy of that name .
 Oedipus Rex' 11 of the 39 roles in the 2,500-year-old Sophoclean tragedy . The play is based on the 2.500 year-old tragedy of Oedopus Rex .
 This marks the first time faculty members have been cast in major roles in the production . William E McMillan, associate professor of speech and drama and director of the production, said this was the first in years faculty members had been cast .
 Colorado College stage productions previously have had all-student casts . Colorado College productions have been mostly all-students .
 Neale R Reinitz, associate professor of English, plays the Priest . John H Lewis, instructor b Geology, plays Creon; Dr. Dr. Creon is Creon . Dr. Reinitz and Dr. Lewis play Creon in the play .
 Dr. Wilbur Wright, professor of physics, plays the messenger from Corinth . Dr. Wright is a professor of science at the University of Corinth in Corinth .
 The Rev. Douglas freed, assistant professor of psychology, is the messenger from the Palace ; and the Rev. Rev. William Douglas freed . Douglas freed is an assistant professor in psychology .
 Kenneth Burton, assistant professor of re'igion and minister at Shove Memorial Chapel, plays Choragus . Kenneth Burton also plays minister at the Chapel .
 Dr. Paul Kutsehe Jr., Jr., assistant professor °f sociology and anthropology; . Dr. John M Rudoff, instructor in history; and Dr. Peter Mudoff, professor in history . The class is comprised of students from the University of Wisconsin .
 Public performances of the famed Greek drama are scheduled for December 7 and 8 in Perkins Hall on the college campus .
 Colorado College Debate Club is sending representatives to two tournaments this weekend . The club is sending nine students to Albuquerque, New Mexico, to participate in the Duke City Invitational Tournament, and four students to Ft. Ft.W.
 This is one of the largest high school tournaments in the state . It will include debate, oratory and extemporaneous speaking . This is the largest debate and oratory tournament in state .
 Student chairmen for this event include Chris Griffiths, David Furgason and Nancy Dehlin . The event will be held at the University of Washington, Washington .
 Novice debaters are Robert Thrasher, David Bitters, Faith O'Reilly and David Helms . The audience is invited to participate in the debate .
 Peter Trushel is entered in poetry interpretation, and Power, Power, Caudill and Heller are entered in other individual events . Power is entered for poetry interpretation and Power is also entered for individual events.
 James Heckman, Peter Bonavich, Mark Streuli and Karen Johnston are entered in the novice division at the Ft.S. Ft. Johnahahaham .
 Jack Walker, a former debator forced to give up active competition because of ill health, will accompany this group as coach . Jack Walker will accompany them as coach. Jack Walker was forced to quit active competition due to illness .
 Irish author will give a public lecture at Colorado College next week . He will discuss the crafts of fiction, poetry, biography, criticism, and travel book writing .
 Sean O'Faolain, Irish writer and critic, will give a public lecture at 8m. He will give the talk at 8pm .
 The Colorado College Chess Club defeated the United States Air Force Academy 8-4 in a match held Sunday, November 2G . The talk CC Defeats AFA In Chess Tourney .
 Twelve CC students and professors under the leadership of Professor Paul Rernanl participated in the dual meet .
 Winning players for Colorado College included Dean Juan Reid, Professor Bernard and Professor Alvin Eoderman . Colorado College's winning players included Dean . Reid and Bernard .
 John Reid, James Cotton, Joe Wilcox and Wayne Maxwell win their boards . Also winning their boards were John Reid and James Cotton . Wayne Maxwell, Wayne Maxwell and John Reid also win .
 Professor Al Johnson and John Keiser drew their games, while Professor David Van Becker, and Terry Rosen and Fred Luft were unsuccessful in their attempts . Professor Van Becker was unsuccessful in his attempts .
 The Mademoiselle College Board is presenting a fashion show, ""Budget Boutique"" this Friday, December 1st. at 4:00m. downtown at Kaufman's .
 Active and spectator sportswear, class and date dresses, cocktail and formal dresses, and coats will be shown . There will be an emphasis on the holiday season with an emphasis .
 The members of C.C.C.'s College Board will be models for this first show .
 Later on in the year other girls on campus will be given an opportunity to model for the fashion shows .
 Advent Vespers Slated for Dec. 31. will be open to the public without charge . Advent Vesers will be free to attend without charge of admission .
 His first writing was done in Gaelic, although this was an acquired tongue . He wrote his first writing in the Gaelic in his native Scotland .
 His latest book of short stories, ""I Remember, I Remember," was published by Aalantic-Little and Brown in October .
 O'Faolain is known throughout the world for his novels, short stories, literary essays, biographies and magazine articles . He is known for his short stories and literary essays .
 He is the author of an article on New Orleans in the November issue of Holiday Magazine . He is also a New Orleans native .
 Irishman of letters speaks at colleges having Phi Beta Kappa chapters . He says he was the ""only humanist in the group"" of a half-dozen distinguished scholars speaking this year .
 He said he is able to ""retire back into myself"" from time to time during his busy lecture schedule to do some work on the autobiography he is writing .
 O'Faolain said he thought it was going to be a short book, but that it might take a year to complete . The book is due to be released in September 2015 .
 Irish writer has lived and traveled in the United States extensively since World War II . One of the main drawbacks of this country is that it has no pubs, he says .
 He has become one of the best known interpreters of Irish life, and the Irish Revolution in which he took an active part . He has also become a well known interpreter of the Irish revolution .
 Lewis Knnpp of the English Department will road selections from the Christmas poetry of many different centuries . He will present selections from Christmas poetry from all over Europe .
 All members of the college are warmly invited to attend . This will be a beautiful and inspiring service, and all members are welcome to attend.
 The new and interesting life of the Russian of today was portrayed by Professors Malyshev, Paine, and Reinitz .
 Panel members describe personal experiences they had with Russian people . All five panel members have been recent visitors to the Soviet Union .
 The five found the Russians to be most interesting and extremely curious as to our ways and customs of life .
 Russian people described as friendly and courteous toward American travelers . Russian people were described as very friendly and friendly .
 They seemed to be most interested in our material goods and our capitalist way of life . But they seemed most concerned with our materialism and our capitalism, they said .
 With the appearance of an American automobile, Russians are eager to see the capitalist who owns it . The Russian automobile is the latest in a long line of American cars .
 Mr Soule brought out the constant problem we face in foreign policy today resulting from our lack of foreign policy in the South . He said the problem is that our foreign policy is in the south .
 There is no religious persecution in Russia today, Russian President Vladimir Putin said . Putin stressed the fact that there are no religious persecutions persecuted in Russia .
 The home may encourage religion but the educational institutions will not . It will not encourage religion in the home . The home will be used as a model for children's education .
 Panel agreed that Russian people and their government are extremely interested in living in a peaceful, friendly world . In conclusion it was agreed upon by the panel that the Russian people are extremely concerned about living a peaceful world .
 This past weekend, we had the good fortune to attend a retreat at Camp La Foret . The retreat was held at the base of the retreat .
 "It was a very worthwhile and stimulating affair," says Burton . Burton's visit was part of a new religious program .
 Such programs are valuable additions to CC's already good assortment of extra-curricular programs . CC is a good place for students to take part in extra curricular activities .
 One of the real advantages to be found among these is that a student may choose to take in or to participate in those which have special interest or meaning to him .
 Of course, the pressures of time and conflicts in scheduling often limit a student's involvement in these activities .
 We wonder if most students are aware of the advantages to be found in these organized activities . Yet we wonder if they are not aware of these advantages .
 Even when conflicts of time and scheduling are recognized, we still find that attendance at many such programs is poor . Attendance at such programs, such as retreats, coffee hours and assemblies, is poor.
 The purpose of the college is education, and the student's first obligation is to his studies . Perhaps we are being unfair, many will say, in that the purpose is education .
 We might retract the words of the preceding paragraph but for two considerations . We may retract the entire article . The author of this article retracts the words .
 First, we're not convinced that most students spend most of their waking hours studying . We're not sure that most of them are students, but we're glad they're studying .
 Students are faced with apportioning considerable amounts of non-study time to other activities . What generally happens is that the student is faced with . apportioned . amounts of time to study is not enough time .
 No time is allotted to these organized extracurricular activities simply because the student is not aware of them or of the value they hold . Very often, no time is given to these activities because of their importance .
 Many of these organized activities, from Mountain Club to International Relations Club, serve an educational purpose . Secondly, many of these organizations, such as Mountain Club, also serve a purpose .
 One might learn about useful physical activity, about faraway lands, about railroad research, about political organization on the precinct level .
 We shall try to continually remind our readers of the many activities taking place on our campus and of their advantages — educational, recreational, practical, practical or social, or what have you .
 The ranks of Congress have suffered another severe loss, the second in a matter of weeks . A Second loss of Congress has occurred in just two weeks . The loss of members of Congress is the second time in a month .
 Styles Bridges, 63, was the ranking minority member of the United States Senate . He was a Republican of New Hampshire . Bridges was a Democrat of New England .
 He was ranking Republican on the powerful Appropriations Committee and second-ranking on the crucial Armed Services Committee . He was also ranking Republican in the House of Representatives .
 Senator Bridges defended his conservative principles knowledgeably and convincingly, both in the committee room and on the Senate floor . Bridges' conservative principles were knowledgeably, convincingly defended in the Senate .
 "His character and ability won him the esteem of his colleagues, Republicans and Democrats alike," says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: "He was a hero of his own, not just a politician, but a hero"
 Bridges was chairman of the Policy Committee . Bridges consistently brought together elements of the Republican minority into an effective opposition force .
 This in itself stands as an unusual tribute to a great statesmanpolitician . This is a tribute to the late British Prime Minister .
 Trear Sunley. Proposed By-Law Amendments to Article 1, Sections 4 and Onica Friend. Proposal by-law amendments . Proposal for Article 1 and Sections 4 proposed .
 The members of the Executive Council shall take office during the month of May and shall serve one calendar year . They shall be sworn in at the beginning of the year .
 Representatives of the outgoing senior class shall serve until the end of the Spring Semester . Representatives of this class will serve until end of spring semester . Representatives will serve for the remainder of the year .
 The election of freshmen representatives shall be conducted the same as the other class representatives . No change will be made in this article .
 In case of a tie-vote for any ASCC office a run-off election shall be held within a week following the initial election . OMIT No change . ASCC No change.
 All rules pertaining to the initial election will be valid during the run-off election . Run-off elections will take place in the next two weeks .
 The person in each class receiving the highest number of votes in the class commissioner elections shall serve as president of that class . The person with the second highest amount of votes will serve as Secret ary-Treasurer of the class .
 The President of ASCC and the Election Committee shall tabulate the ballots . ASCC is the largest body of the ASCC .
 Written report of the results of the election shall be sent to each candidate by the Chairman of the ASCC Election Committee .
 The Chairman of the ASCC Election Committee will submit a report of the election results to the TIGER within one week following the election . ASCC election results will be submitted by the chairman of the committee .
 The ballots shall be packaged together with a copy of the results and stored in the ASCC files for one calendar year and then destroyed . The ballots will be packaged and stored together in the files .
 No change Should a vacancy occur within one month before the end of either semester for any reason in the position of class commissioners, a class meeting .
 The class election S will be conducted by the ASCC Election Committee . The election will be held within one week after the primary e i"" tion .
 Executive Council shall approve his eligik; ity before the appointment is made valid . Executive Council will approve his eligibility .
 The president, or th acting as such, shall be delegated the powe point any eligible student to fill an interve cancy of the ASCC Executive Board until a meeting is held . The president of the school will fill the position of an eligible student .
 Nomii tion petitions shall be presented to the Chairman the Chairman of the ASCC Election Committee at least one week be fore election . The ASCC election committee is at least a week before the election .
 The subject of women's dorm hours was considered in last week's ""Comment"" column in preparation for a questionnaire received this week by the women dorm residents .
 The article misrepresented, to some extent, the ideas behind this questionnaire and its immediate purpose . The article was misrepresented by some extent .
 The Hours Committee is investigating the problem of women's hours . The present system seems faulty and is constantly being contested, at least verbally, says the committee .
 It is felt that while the present hours are necessary for freshmen, sophomores, and probably juniors, a senior woman is practically ready to go ""on her own"" and be considered responsible for all her actions .
 As a senior she is still restricted seems a poor preparation for the life after college . The fact that as a senior . as a . senior she . still . still seems to be a poor prepare for the . life after . college .
 The Hours Committee feels that one of the primary purposes of a liberal arts college is to help the student's ability to adjust and carry the responsibility for his studies now, as well as for later life .
 The idea of an honor dorm for senior women is one way of bringing responsibility back to the student . The honor dorm is meant to be a safe haven for women in order to be responsible for their education .
 Each girl would have her own key and would be responsible only to herself . Sign out would still be required for purposes of safety, but signing out is still required .
 Those senior women not interested in the honor dorm would live with underclass women . Underclass women would abide by the existing hours . Senior women would live in honor dorms with younger women .
 A letter will be sent to the parents of this year's junior and senior women to find out their feelings on the subject . If the results of last week's questionnaire seem favorable towards the idea of a senior women's honor dorm, a letter will also be sent .
 We want some people that cai actually paint good pictures, pla) a musical instrument, a short story, and many things — even if their major litical science . We want people that actually paint pictures, and that they can do anything .
 They have been prepared to do well m their chosen field, but can not go beyond into the world of othei things that call for them . They are prepared to succeed in their chosen fields, but not beyond .
 We need to show Have You Seen 'Oedipus Rex7' connection between now seem in f>' unrealted fields . We need a connection between the now and now seem to seem in 'f>' fields .
 Few math majors say that they hate art, and fewer art majo fi say that our colleges would turn out a * e men who are more than just "" e ""' versed in many fields . Then we may have fewer math majors saying that they don't like art .
 Colorado College Tiger December 1961 ir; ■PillChape Ihtft kn; :eloc ,,u»*i■C'hri Ibe ( Karei Fred ; jrst Xmas Concert fill Be Held Dec. 31 .
 The first Christmas concert of e season after the Advent Vespy Service will be ""The Christmas »oi7t"" or "" D 'e Weihnachtsgesehi|ite,"" by Carl Orff . The first concert of the Christmas concert will be "The Christmas
 Carl Orff is composer of the famis ""Carmina Burana,"" and one of e foremost of modem composers, known for his use of medieval M jlodies and instruments and a luasi-medieval orchestration .
 College Madrigal Choir, soloists, an instrumental ensemble of recorders, celli, percussion and percussion . The speakers will be coached in Bain by Mrs. Mrs. Jenkins .
 A translation of the dialogue from the original Bavarian dialect into English will .be /ovided to aid the audience in understanding this unusual work . The dialogue will be translated into English .
 Traditionally the season of Advent deals with the coming of death, hell, judgment, and death . Drane Wilkinson is the author of a new book, Death and the Christian .
 The object of the sermon is to try and point out what *ipe ble actually says about death id to emphasize the ""this worldly"" character of the biblical mes;e and its relevance to our comn life now .
 Many Christian peohave non-biblical concepts mixed up with their faith and asiate it with what is called the spiritual, whereas the Bible speaks of the ""incarnation — the made flesh,"" is vitally concerned with the material .
 We can see Ms. in the way the biblical writers ;peak of this theme of death . We can . see Ms in the . way the . biblical writers .peak of the . theme of this . death .
 Outstanding Juniors at Colorado College have been awarded Perkins Prizes for outstanding academic achievement . Colorado College has two juniors who have been named as outstanding seniors .
 John S Power of 16(50 S Lincoln, Denver, and Miss Lynne Vincent, daughter of Mr and Mrs. Vincent) of Denver, Colorado, is 16 .
 The two had the highest academic averages of the sophomore class la st year . The two students were in the same class of sophomore class .
 Robe of zoology Z Bn prof> at Colorado College, discussed the social life of army ants before a joint meeting of the Scientific Research Society of America and Sigma Xi last evening .
 This Friday at the FAC (Friday afternoon club) is sponsoring a Big Bopper at 4:45 in the Hub . The FAC is sponsored by the Big Boppers .
 The music will be furnished by the Rythm Tones, consisting of three electric guitars, a drum, and a piano . The music is provided by the three guitars, drums, and piano .
 The student may be inclined to wonder just what his money is paying for . How much actually goes for the books, how much for operating costs, and how much is profit for the bookstore .
 Mary C Vickerman, manager of the Colorado College bookstore provided enough room to house the 5000 . Vickerman provided the following information .
 The prices on all books are set by the publishers, not by the bookstore, not the bookstore . The prices of all books will be based on the publishers' prices .
 Five percent of this goes to pay the postage in order to get the books here . Five percent goes to the postage .
 The bookstore takes approximately a 16% margin on which to operate, so actually no profit is made on textbooks . Manager of the bookstore stated that it takes approximately 16%.
 At the end of the year, any profit goes into the general college fund . And, at the end, any profits go to the college fund.
 The taking back and re-selling of used books is handled on a consignment basis . Used books can be taken back and sold on consignment at the store .
 Used books are sold for 75% of their original cost, the student receives 50% of the original cost . Used books can be purchased for up to 75% the cost of the student .
 Vickerman stated that all of this goes to pay for the red tape operations, such as bookkeeping and auditing, involved in the handling of these books . Vickerman: All of the money goes to paying for the bookkeeping, auditing and bookkeeping .
 Vicmentioned that someday she hopes the bookstore will be able to cover the paperback field . Vic mentioned that she hopes to cover paperback books in paperback .
 MC Perry KRCC-FM is now presenting music and news each weekday from seven to eight in the morning . MC Perry will be on the air from 7 to 8 a.m. on KRCC .
 On Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays Vivian Arviso and Sam Coleman head the show with soft strains of ""Winter Wonderland" type music . Then present a half mour of national, regional, and campus news .
 Stanley Zagrodnik follows the same schedule of news and light, eye-opening music . On Tuesdays and Thursdays he follows a news and music schedule .
 Amanda M Ellis, professor of English and writer in residence at Colorado College, named one of three judges for the annual short story contest sponsored by the Denver Women's Pi-ess Club . Ellis will judge for the short story competition .
 Judging with Miss Ellis are Margaret Cousins, Doubleday editor, and Anne Einselin, assistant editor of Ladies Home Journal .
 Aside from paperbacks used as texts, the store does carry 1,500 titles . Aside from the paperbacks, there are more titles in the store .
 Any other listed in the paperback catalogue can be ordered for a student or professor with a delivery service of only three to five days . The paperback catalogue is available for students or professors .
 GC's Rastall Center is the subject of a cover story in the November issue of a national magazine . GC is featured in the magazine's November issue . GC has been featured in a number of college publications .
 F Lamar Ketsey of Colorado Springs is the architect of the modern college union building, completed last year .
 The article contains eight photographs and a floor plan of the $800,000 Colorado College building . Featuring an exterior view of the center on the cover of the magazine, the article includes eight photographs .
 A half-million meals were served in Rastall Center during its first year of existence . The Colorado Springs architect said a half a million meals were .
 CNN iReporters learned about diamond rings . They also learned how to make sure of the diamond you buy .
 Artcarved guarantees every diamond in writing for color, cut, clarity, clarity and carat weight . The diamond company guarantees each diamond for color and weight .
 Artcarved'a magnificent assortment of award-winning styles . And, they were most delighted with Art Carved, they said .
 Visit your local Artcarved jeweler and see all the wonderful styles, including those selected as the ""10 best"" by the College Queens . See all the beautiful designs at your local jeweler .
 Colorado College Tiger Radio Programs to Feature CC ""The Role of the Private College in Higher Education" will be discussed by four Colorado college presidents at 9m. MEIrose 3-6069 I 1961 .
 Louis T Benezet, president of Colorado College, Colorado Springs; Richard F Ryan, S.J., president of Regis College, Denver; Sister Frances Marie , president of Loretto Heights College, Loretto; and Eugene Dawson . Eugene Dawson, president .
 During the following 12 weeks, life on the four private college campuses will be depicted . Life on the campuses of four private colleges will be shown .
 The series will feature Regis College on December 10, Loretto Heights on December 17, Colorado Woman's College on December 24, and Colorado College on Dec. 31 . The series also features Colorado Women's, Regis and Colorado State colleges .
 The programs will continue in this order in January nd Febaruary according to Dale Morgan, KHOW program director .
 Three renowned guest artistteachers of music will return to the Colorado College campus next summer . Three guest artists will perform at Colorado College .
 AU three have made extensive concert tours of Europe and the U.S. AU three are currently on tour with the band .
 The three musicians will give private lessons and ensemble classes . They will join with Professor Lanner in presenting six faculty concerts at the Fine Arts Center .
 Summer Session dates at Colorado College are June 18 through August 10 . Summer Session is June 18-August 10 . Colorado College's summer session will run through to August 10.
 Our aim is to have a wellrounded record collection, and additions in areas of jazz, folk music, classical music and popular music have accomplished this .
 The Turkey Bowl held in Rastall on November 20, 21, 22 was won by Bill Evans with a high series of 631 . Bill Evans won the Turkey Bowl .
 He was awarded two free turkey dinners at the Chicken Shack on Thanksgiving .
 SUN DOWN SKIING will be held again next Thursday night for the second of three programs to be held at the Broadmoor Ski Area . Sun Down SKIing is the latest in a series of programs to take place at the area .
 It will leave the Rastall Center parking lot at ti:30m. after an early dinner in Rastalls .
 The bus is free to all ski club members along with free instruction for any interested beginners . The bus will be available to all club members .
 Further information about this will be posted on the ski club announcement board in Palmer Hall .
 Undergraduates submit all plans for entertainments to Dean of Women some time in advance . Only such entertainments as are approved by the authoritji of the College .
 Undergraduates shall not leave the campus on excursions of any kind without registering at the Dean's office .
 Seniors and Juniors only may go on trips with men, either walking, driving, or riding, without a chaperone, in parties of not less than four or not more than eight 4.5.5 . Juniors and Seniors only allowed to go with men without
 The young women of the three upper classes only may ride or drive without a chaperone . Young women of all three upper class are allowed to drive without the need for chaperones .
 Parents' approval is necessary in all cases of riding, parents' approval . Party must consist of at least two people at the time of riding .
 If two horses are used, a driver must be taken from the livery stable . In the case of driving, two horses must be used in the same way .
 Freshmen who wish to ride or drive must be accompanied by an older person who is an experienced horsewoman . Freshmen must also be accompanied with an older horsewoman who is experienced .
 Undergraduates must register place and character of evening entertainment, chaperone, and hour of return with the House Mistress, and report to her in person on return, 2. Report place, character of entertainment and return time .
 Undergraduates shall not be out more than two evenings a week . Freshmen, not more than one, should be out twice a week. Freshmen must be out at least one night a week; undergraduates must be two nights a week out .
 The WHICKER BILL is o GIFT AND CARD SHOP full of ""Happy Things" including a Swedish Piggy Bank with a Laurel Wreath annual his bacon region . This does not include evenings .
 Undergraduates shall not out with men in the evening; q$ out a chaperone, except cases when men are allowed to enter corts .
 General spreads and othei tertainments encluding girls onl; shall be confined to Friday 10.30am . General spreads, including girls, shall be restricted from Friday 10am .
 Undergraduates shall not i tertain men on Sunday (exci those from out of town) or atten church services with them 11.11.11 .
 Chafing dishes may used until owners have signt the chafing-dish regulation have deposited them with ti President of the Executive Board . Chafed dishes may be used until the owners have . signt they have deposited the . plates with the President of . the Executive
 House Mistress befoi™ uses chafing-dishes in the publ rooms . Arrangements must be mad with the House Mistress .
 Undergraduates who are . tertaining out-of-town men sha observe the same rules that pertai to College men .
 Dan Wright, 22; Dave Harrington, 24; Farrell Thompson, 23; and Al Lizzul, 33; John Reid, 44; Farrell Howell, 34; Barry Anthony, 45; Steve Sabom, 41; and Dave Krell, 42; Bill Burke, 31; Ed
 Coaching staff, from left; Trainer Roosevelt Collins, Coach Leon ""Red ""Red"" Eastlack, Manager Fred Singleton, and Assistant Coach Jim Hanks . Coaches Roosevelt Collins and Leon "Red ""Eastlack" are pictured together .
 Coach ""Red"" Eastlack's Colorado College cagers weave their way toward their opening game tonight . Colorado College Cagers prepare for first game against Creighton .
 Creighton is "about as tough as you can schedule them," Eastlack said . The team is one of the toughest teams in the nation .
 Red will have a better idea after the middle of the week how his manpower is going to shape up . Red will be hoping to find out how his squad will shape up in the next week .
 Many of the younger Tiger cagers are showing plenty of fire and ability, he says . He hasn't made up his mind yet, but says he hasn't decided whether he will play again .
 Last week Ed Loosli, Bill Burke and Barry Anthony were stand-outs in inter-squad practice . Last week Bill Burke, Barry Anthony and Bill Burke were standout performers in practice .
 Eastlack is looking forward to the addition of senior Dan Wright to the squad this week . The former Manchester United star is looking ahead to the arrival of the new signing of Dan Wright . West Bromwich Albion travel to Ipswich in the Premier League on Saturday .
 A veteran of last year's championship team, Wright has been busy with the gridiron Tigers throughout the season . Wright will start his basketball practice this week .
 Tony Frasca's Tigers showed that they quite possibly possess the skill and ability to climb the tricky ladder of the Western Hockey League . Even more important than the lopsided score was the glimpse of a greatly improved CC varsity ice squad .
 Both teams move to the Broadmoor World Arena Saturday night for the second game of the series . The two teams meet in the first game of their series at the BroadMoor World .
 The Pioneers lost heavily from last year's NCAA Championship squad via the graduation route . Coach Tony Frasca of the Tigers estimates that they will be anything but a pushover this year .
 To face them, he has 17 returning lettermen and some skilled transfers . To face the challenge, he will have to rely on his team's returning players .
 They all saw action against the alumni Saturday night and proved that they can put the puck where it counts when it counts . They all played for the first time Saturday night .
 Two of last year's crew, Duke Dutkowski and Gary Martin, and a sophomore, John Simus, all of whom rang the red light twice . Leading Saturday night's scoring were two of last season's crew .
 Each of the three racked up a goal in the first period, and one more from veteran Alex Yankvich and another from Marv Parliment rocketed the varsity squad ahead at the end of the first quarter, 5-0 . The scoreline continued to extend throughout the
 The alumni managed to find the range in the second period, firing three scores for their total of the game . The alumni scored three goals in the first period .
 Hersack scored the opening goal with an assist from Len Maccini . Gambucci added a third for the club . Hersack and Gambucci scored the other goals .
 John Simus, Ken Cairns, Jim Froelich, Gary Martin and Archie Prestayko all hit the net . But they failed to hold the varsity scoring down with four goals apiece .
 The grads managed to hold the Tigers to two goals fired by Wayne McAlpine and Duke Dutkowski . The Tigers failed to score themselves in the third period .
 Frasca: "The grads were nobody's easy mark. And the action against the grads ... seems to prove that," Frasca said .
 Frasca picked out some mistakes his crew made Saturday night and it's a sure bet they'll put a lot of time on these during the week's practice session . Frasca: How they will stack up against a fired-up Denver team next Friday is open to question .
 Saturday night's tilt against Denver will be the only home game the Tigers have until they meet Michigan Tech in December . Saturday's game is the Tigers' last home game until they face Michigan Tech at Michigan Tech .
 Faceoff time for the Denver game at the Broadmoor World Arena will be 8:15m., Saturday, December 2 . The Denver game will be played at 8 p.m. Saturday night .
 Coach ""Red"" Eastlack's 1961-62 hoopsters polished off a final round of scrimmage opponents as they made final preparation this week for the forthcoming season . Coach ""Eastlack" coached the team in the '60s .
 The alumni was able to hold a lead until the final seconds of the first half when the score was tied 34-all . Jim Wexels, Jim Hanks, and other familiar names such as Art Ackerman, Ron MeCarty, Paul Mott, and Leroy Williams
 The alumni jumped to a quick ten point lead in the second half . The training and conditioning of the varsity began to show up late in the third quarter . The game was almost a repeat of the first half .
 The alumni continued to hold its lead, due to some excellent second effort attempts by Jim Hanks, and to a slightly superior scoring punch . The alumni, however, continued to lead the game .
 By the time the fourth period rolled around, the varsity had overcome its jitters, and was able to organize an effective offensive drive .
 The Theodore Fisher Management has carried ""Horizons Unlimited"" into its second season . 'Horizons' returns this year .
 This week, John M Goddard will present his journey from the source of the Nile to its mouth on the Mediterranean Sea . Goddard will tell the story of his amazing journey from equatorial Africa, 4200 miles to the mouth of the river .
 His trip has been ranked with the conquest of Mount Everest and the voyage of the Knn-Tiki and should prove interesting . His trip will be ranked with Mount Everest .
 There will be a matinee on Sunday, December 3 at 2:30m., and repeat performances Monday, December 4, at 7:15m. and 9:15 m. There will also be repeat performances on December 4 at 7,15m .
 The staff of Mademoiselle S I azine is again offering §500 and publication in their magazine to NAVIGATOR TOM SIMENSEN and driver, Steve Frink, congratulate the winners of their annual art and ^msetves on placing first in Rally for the Keg
 The fiction contest is open to Rally for Keg Proves Successful SKSSrS The Rally for the Keg, held last year .
 All storKridav, November 24th, proved to ,es must have fictitious characters 'successful as last year's Eal;ini1 situations or they will be disaffected .
 The route took participants to Black Forest and the Garden of (he Gods and ended at the Iron Springs Chateau . The route went to the Black Forest .
 A group of 21 cars and over 80 people enjoyed dinner, dancing and European Rally Films .
 First place went to driver Steve Frink and navigator Tom Simensen, who ongratulated on their driving skill .
 They were allowed to tap the traveling Keg and dispose of its contents . They were also allowed to dispose of the contents .
 Sue Brackney and Jerry Macon captured second place •hile Rod Mayo and Bob Blauvelt took third place .
 Rastall Center's December art exhibition is a showing of paintings and prints by Louise Hovey, a Colorado College student majoring in art . Louise Hovesy is a junior at Colorado College .
 These works will be on sale, and interested buyers should inquire at Rastall Desk . The works will also be available for purchase .
 Prints and paintings would make nice Christmas gifts or would be good in one's own collection . The prints and paintings are available for sale at auction .
 Llyod Goodrich, Whitney Museum of American Art; and Roger Schoening, Art Director of Mademoiselle . Unipersilg S6op (Lee's Llyode Goodrich) is a work of art that has been commissioned by the Whitney .
 The two winners will be asked to illustrate one of the winning fiction entries for publication . The winner of the fiction fiction contest will be published in the UK .
 Additional information and contest rules may be obtained from the same address . Contest rules are available at the same email address as this contest .
 Richard E Wood, Director of Admission at Colorado College, has been unanimously elected president of the Rocky Mountain Regional Conference of the Admission Associates of Co-Educational Liberal Arts Colleges . Wood Elected Prexy Of Admission Group .
 This appointment will make Mr Wood the most powerful admission-policymaker in the organization, giving him considerable influence .
 Mr Wood entered the CC admission after two years as Executive Director of the recent and hugelysuccessful Building Fund Campaign . Mr Wood was responsible for the current multi-million dollar program presently underway .
 Six years ago Bill Pigot graduated from college with an engineering degree . Pigot: "Six years ago, I was proud of my engineering degree" Pigot says he is proud of his achievements in Washington .
 Today he is responsible for the performance of 12 microwave relay stations, numerous communications cables, and other equipment . Today he has responsibility for the . performance of the 12 microwave . relay stations and numerous communications . cables .
 Bell Telephone Companies throughout the country help bring the finest communications service in the world to the homes and businesses of a growing America . Bill Pigot of Pacific Northwest Bell Telephone Company .
 Colorado College Tiger Relreaters Discuss Bonhoeffer's Works . 12 students, three professors, and two ministers discuss the writings of the German martyr-theologian Dietrich Bonhoeff .
 Bonhoeffer's Prisoner for God was written while he was confined in a prision camp in Germany . He opposed National Socialism in Germany, and was confined to a prison camp .
 The retreaters participated in volleyball, soccer, and pingpong matches . They also participated in community singing, dancing, and even the highland fling .
 A vesper service was held in the camp's Spanish-style chapel Saturday evening . The camp is located in a small town in northern California, California .
 Mr Burton has expressed his hope that more such retreats can be scheduled and that those in coming months will be better attended .
 The brochures are considered one of the finest sources of student travel information available today . They include travel brochures from the University of California .
 Study programs in France, Italy, Japan and Latin America, hostel and work camp programs . Prices for steamship and airline transAtlantic passage are included .
 In addition, the brochures contain itineraries for each of the general NSA programs .
 These programs include East West Tours, NorthSouth Tours, Central European Tours, Southern European Tours and many others . Drive-It-Yourself Tour, the Wayfarer, the inexpensive Hobo Tour, short Whirlwind and the Sea-Sky Tour .
 A special highlight of each NSA program is a party with students living in every country which a group visits . Students living in each country will attend the party .
 NSF grants will offer free to J fied elementary teachers gen science institutes, which are eight weeks in length . Schools selected will receive grants to offer free education to teachers .
 Some elementary teachers, superv 1 and principals attended the j tutes last Dr. Dr. Martin Luther Luther King Jr. attended the last . Dr. Luther King Junior taught at elementary schools across the country .
 Own* Paul's Flowers Cut Flowers and Corsages Reasonably Priced . Paul's Flower Cut Flowers, Corsages and Cut Flowers are well priced .
 Stetson, Kuehnert, McNeill, Johnson, Greening, Gilbertson, Thiesen, Strassburger . Curphy. Curphy . en ny.
 Hih.-d. fraternity will be in charge Military* Ball, all advanced iOTC functions, and all social unctions of the ROTC department urado College . First formal initiation was t the Fort Carson Officer's Jlub.
 General Iward Dunn, Commander of Fort irsoii; President Benezet; . President Beneet; Dean lid; . Col. Col. Iward . Dunn: "Iward Dunn is a great soldier. He is a hero of the day"
 IMA Carol Sing Siated Thursday at 8:00 K in the parking lot just north *e Bemis Quad . The Independent Men's Associa)n of Colorado College will prent the Second Annual Christmas ""ol Sing"
 The sing will be an all-achooi ^""together around a bonfire to 'H carols before students leave ,r [ lie Holidays]
 Donald P Jenkins, CC choir *Mor, will be present to lead ""* singing, and I.M.A. will be »g hot chocolate for all . Donald Jenkins will lead the choir .
 Carl Orff's musical setting of the Christmas Story was a beautiful and moving production . Present Orff Work by Onica Friend .
 The medieval modes of the work, characteristic of Orff, are perfectly suited to the quietness, beauty, and mysteriousness of the birth of Christ .
 Campus Drinking Discussed In Coffee Hour Program . At the Rastall Coffee hour on Thursday afternoon, a panel of two professors discuss campus drinking . The panel includes two professors, Dr. Dr. Michael Schurman and Dr. Richard Schurmann .
 Sue Dare as the only lady was given the dubious honor of beginning the discussion . Sue Dare was the only woman to start the discussion. Sue Dare started the debate .
 Rastall Center aims to solve boredom problem by bringing more activities . Boredomites are hit hard with 'social drinking' when they arrive at the university .
 Drinking livens up a party, but often today it becomes a compulsive social drive . Drinking is still a social drive, but it can become a compulsion, says author .
 As they can no longer be held in the city parks, the danger of having to drive long distances is a serious one . The danger of driving long distances from the city is also a serious problem .
 Boyce suggested that we ""rent' the parks from the city as the city officials would probably welcome the money as long as our functions are scheduled events with planned agendas . Boyce suggests that we rent the city's parks from a fee of $1,000 .
 The reason is that this is a condition expressly stated in the college charter which Dr. Dr. Martin says is the reason for this . The college is now in operation .
 Lewis emphasized the legal problem involved if the administration were held responsible for the actions of inebriated individuals . Lewis also emphasized that the administration could not be held responsible .
 Colorado College spirit, it is a relief to find someone who has not forgotten the essence of the birth as it must have appeared to those present .
 Orff's shepherds represent Everyman, uncomprehending but awed by the splendor and mystery, and as such add the touch of realism so needed as man's view of the Event becomes more and more obscured .
 No longer do we have the simplicity to say, as did the Third Shepherd, "Get down on your knees, and honor him, the heavenly child,"" We can not see Mary the opulence of our society as it makes its yearly pilgrimage .
 The beauty and simplicity has been pushed far into the background, but this production of the Christmas Story has recaptured it at least momentarily momentarily .
 The instruments and the Madrigal Choir under Mr Donald Jenkins were nicely balanced and carried well through the Chapel . The speakers and soloists did an excellent job of projecting their parts .
 AH concerned are to be thanked for a moment of the true Christmas spirit . They are to thank them for the moment they were caught in the true spirit .
 The Colorado College French Club will present two one-act comedies at 8:15m. Tuesday .
 Both plays, to be acted by students of French, will be presented in original French .
 Wallace C Boyce, professor of French and chairman of the romance languages department, and members of the college's drama department are assisting in the production . The production is set to be held at the College of Art in Paris .
 Directing ""The School for Widows"" are Ruth Snodgrass, a senior from Flushing, Long Island, N.Y., and Herving Madruga, an assistant professor of French . Directing the school for widows is Ruth Snodegrass, an 18-
 Anyone who is interested in competing for this award should submit his plan, in as full a form as necessary to make it completely clear, to the librarian .
 Submissions will be judged on substance of the plan proposed and its practicality rather than on length or literary merit . Submissions are judged on the substance and practicality of the proposed plan .
 Rastall Center is sponsoring a photo contest from nqw until January 10 . The contest will run from January 10 to January 14 .
 It is open to all students, members of the faculty, and administration . The event will be open to students, faculty and staff .
 The black and white photos must be 8x10"" prints, and be in a white cardboard frame . Photos must be in black or white and white, and in a cardboard frame.
 Not more than four black and white prints and/or three slides in each class may be entered . The winner will be chosen from a selection of four prints and three slides .
 First, second and third places on each class will receive $10, $6, and $3 gift certificates from Stewart's Photo Shop . First and second place winners will receive gift certificates .
 Entries must be turned in no later than January 10 at Rastall Center Desk . Entries will be submitted at the center's Rastell Center desk .
 Another aspect of these 'picnics' which the sororities have considered is the possibility of serving food to act as a 'sponge' to beer .
 Those who don't drink should not expect to expect to be entertained but should bring their own fun, using imagination and games . Those who do not drink should also be entertained, say organisers .
 Cordy said that in our society of rigid social standards it gives an individual an 'excuse' to act crazy . In answer to a student's question of why a person will drink weekend after weekend despite an endless succession of 'sad Sundays' Cordy: "In our society
 The ti'iisioi of the wee k demauds a highly e nergeti fo m ol entortainm enturem ent .
 Nearly two hundred high school debaters and coaches took part in CC's annual invitational debate tournament last Saturday .
 Palmer took first place in the tournament, with Regis and Denver South taking second and third places . The tournament was directed by Professor Woodson Tyree, Professor Robin Rudolf, Chris Griffiths, Dave Furgason, and Skip Meis .
 Individual victories in the extemporaneous division were Jim Cavalar, Regis, first place; Dave Fisher, Lincoln, second place; and Ken Sandoral, La Junta, third place .
 Bob Knight of Lincoln placed first, Dominic Enrietta of Trinidad placed second, and Mike Albi of Regis took third . Bob Knight placed first in the oratory division .
 Caroline Crejke GaUHalporn, Terry Kidner, Dan Jnffe, Carol Sue Brackncy, Beth Fincke, Onica Friend. The GaU Halporn is a weekly feature on CNN.com Live .
 Reports have come out of Washington concerning Bowles conduct since Kennedy administration began . Bowles' conduct has been a problem since then .
 He bypassed Secretary Dean Rusk to present his new ideas to the President himself . He often snarls or counteracts the policies of the State Department .
 Conducting foreign policy is a complex day-to-day operation which requires new insights . Conducting our foreign policy requires not only new insights but also responsible, experienced administration. Conducting such a complex operation requires an experienced administration .
 The replacement of Chester Bowles with a proven and experienced administrator from within the State Department is a step forward in creating an effective foreign policy . The replacement is a first step forward to creating a successful foreign policy.
 "Some of these activities are much more valuable than others," says CNN.com . "We believe, at the outset, that some of the activities are very valuable."
 We would argue that a student benefits more from these activities by allotting his time well, and from devoting his extra-curricular efforts to a few substantive activities . Moreover, a student would benefit more from allotting time well by devoting time well .
 One student might believe that certain activities have such value, another not . One student, however, may believe that such activities have value .
 In any case, the point is simply that a value judgment is involved in selecting activities, and a student ought to make that judgment with some thought .
 A second facet of this value judgment is that of the time involved, the author says . The time involved is the time it takes to make a decision .
 We would contend that students suffer in either of two ways by misusing the time they set aside for extra-curricular activities . Students suffer either way of misusing time set aside to take part in extra curricular activities .
 They either give time to so many activities that they can participate fully or effectively in none, or they can get so involved in a single activity that they deprive themselves of any of the benefits of other activities .
 Our extra-curricular activities are an important part of our college experience . We are proud of our students' efforts to participate in extra curricular activities .
 In this class students would be expected to complete a full length book, poetry collection, or any of the other modes of creative writing .
 The only part of the work that would be done in the classroom would be that which the student desired to do; i.e., if a student should have some general or specific writing problem, we would be free to consult his professor at certain specified times; . In fact, the
 At the end of the first semester, the student would turn in his completed work for criticism . If this course was intended to run two semesters, the students working on shorter problems would revise their work . Those working on novels, or other extended assignments would spend the second semester finishing and
 The student enrolled in this course should be allowed complete freedom of choice in his selection of the type of writing he desired to do . However, an attempt should be made to limit the choice to include creative writing at which the professor was particularly proficient in explaining .
 The truly creative student does not need the enticement of credit and possible publication of his work to write . Students should not be enticed into writing, they say .
 Many students would take a course in creative writing feeling it would be a ""snap course,"" and would be in over their heads . Students would take the creative writing course in fear they would be over-over-run .
 It is true that many people are creative without added incentives, but it should not be necessary for a student to sacrifice time that could be used for a credit course in order to write .
 A creative writing class would make it possible for many students to discover talent they were not aware of, or develop a writing hobby into a writing career . Also, a creative writing course would help students discover talent and develop a career .
 "I feel that there are sufficient number of interested students on this campus to make such a course worth the college's time and effort," says Loyoy .
 It is up to those who read this article, and who are interested in such a plan, to make their wants known . Those who read the article should make their own wants known.
 Any member of the college community has the right to submit a case of student nonacademic misconduct to the Committee on Student Conduct . Jurisdiction A Any student can submit a student misconduct case to the committee on student conduct .
 Any student in college accused of nonacademic misconduct has the right to have his case heard by the Committee on Student Conduct . Jurisdiction Subcommittee composed of deans of men and women and the chairman and a duly appointed representative of the opposite sex .
 The jurisdiction which is not defined below over all cases of student nonacademic misconduct which might involve major disciplinary action shall be deeded by the Jurisdiction Subcommittee . C. C . C .
 D Same as paragraph B of the existing Section II, except that Inter-Hall Council should read IntraHall Council . Inter-hall Council should also be read by Intrahall Council .
 Jurisdiction Subcommittee will meet to discuss all cases handled by the respective deans of men and women since the last meeting . Each month during the school year, or more frequently if the subcommittee decides, the subcommittee will meet .
 For best results please submit all material double-spaced, | v written in written form to the TIGER bo material .
 All material will be r( with the above will help assurt in Rastall ned if >ur material of publication is published . All material from this article is published at the request of the author .
 Your coop eralj J Ttom the Chair by Chris Griffiths . We in college find ourselves in a unique social situation . We are in the midst of a social situation.
 A great deal of confusion arises when we feel that we are expected to act as adults and are treated as children . We are not expected to be treated as adults or children, says the author of the children's book .
 We often do not recognize ourselves as responsible members of a society . We often don't recognize themselves as responsible people, says author .
 Since we are not financially interdependent, we feel no social interdependence . Since we don't feel financial interdependency, we have no social  interdependency . We are not interdependent on each other .
 We live in close contact with one another and yet we do not recognize the need for social order . We live with each other but we don't recognize social order. We do not need social order, we need to be socialized .
 He is watching over us and our only responsibility is to avoid his all powerful hand . Our only responsibility to avoid him is avoiding him. He is looking over us, and we must avoid him .
 We are satisfied to let him run things until his all-powerful hand slaps our patties, the cry of oppression is sounded. We are perfectly satisfied to allow him to run things . We are happy to let them run things, until he slaps his hand on our p
 By recognizing society and by acting as resp oris ble members of it we can bec 0B j our own ""all-powerful" hand .
 The problem with ma these organizations is that many of their cases are refers to them from above that, disciplinary acts have the app ea ance of parental slaps on the ha when they are intended to be . from one of their peers .
 If we are to be treats riday, as adult members of society w Mes tl must become such, says the author . Mestl must be treated as such as children and adults, he says .
 It concerns a W ^son intimately, in his economic, Slltical, religious and personal and not just some ""religious" KRCC Presents ■ ■ ■■ Shove Chapel KRCC-FM 91.9 .
 KRCC-FM ill present a Christmas program insisting of five special transjibed programs from the British toadcasting System . MC Lau Perry will be MC Perry on the radio .
 Bedes Bedes the unique BBC tapes, a loudleaker over Rastall Center will Mideast traditional Christmas awls. Bedes . Bedes, a unique BBC tape, will be broadcast on BBC One on Christmas Day at 8.30 p.m. ET .
 Speech classes heard at 5:30 lily will discuss the various hristmas customs .
 Paul's Flowers Cut Flowers and Corsages Reasonably Priced at 1524 North Tejon MElrose .
 The awards are for persons preparing for careers in editorial journalism, mass communications research, and advertising and media research .
 This Sunday, December 10, Rastall Center is presenting ""The Beachcomber" with Charles Laughton and Elsa Lanchester . Center Activities will be featured at the center .
 Charles Laughton's portrayal of a troublemaking beachcomber on a Pacific Isle is masterful . Somerset Maugham story is a masterful accomplishment in this story . Laughton portrayed as a troublemaker on the beach .
 These records from, ballet, popular, and classical areas will be offered for sale starting today .
 The sales will be on the first come, first served basis, so come and build your own record collection at our expense .
 The Mountain Club will leave from the Rastall Center parking lot at 1:00m. tomorrow afternoon for its annual Christmas hike to Barr Camp . The hike will take place at Barr Camp in Barr Camp.
 Be sure to wear warm and waterproof clothing if you are interested in coming to the event .
 Watch for another Sun Down program next week if the snow permits us to go . Skiing program will continue next week .
 The first program was enjoyed by everyone and many people benefited from the free instruction offered . Many people were able to attend the program .
 There is always confusion about this time of year as to what happens when books fall due during Christmas vacation when students are not on campus . Students are not expected to be on campus at all times .
 January 5, 1962, if the book falls due during the Christinas vacation . Our policy is to consider a book due the first day after vacation, in this case January 5 .
 The Newspaper Fund wants to help promising undergraduate members of college newspaper staffs find summer news jobs . Summer news jobs will give them a chance to broaden their experiences .
 Each summer there are u number of attractive jobs for young men on top-quality, medium-sized newspapers .
 The Newspaper Fund offers to help students find the interested editors and will counsel them on how to apply . Students can also apply for the position of editor .
 This opportunity for summer work is primarily planned for sophomores and juniors who may have some interest in newspaper work, but who have not had a chance to make contacts in the newspaper field . This opportunity is intended for students who may be interested in journalism .
 Applications are sought especially from colleges where extensive journalism training has not ben available for the student . Applications for the position are sought . Applications are also sought from colleges with no journalism training available .
 A particular effort is being made to attract individuals who are now working on college newspapers . The effort is aimed at attracting individuals who work for college newspapers.
 The Newspaper Fund is supported by grants from The Wall Street Journal and has the cooperation of a number of newspapers in this effort to find summer newspaper jobs .
 AWS Christians party for the Spunish Mission Orphans on Saturday afternoon, December 9, from 1:110 to 3::t0 in Hemis Lounge .
 CHUCK HENSON, business major, cluss of 1902 won the Viceroy's Football contest for third week .
 Taking second and third prizes of $50.00, $25.00 respectively were John Kiescr and Cregg Smith . The winners of each prize were $100,000 .
 A carton of Viceroys to all students who got all the winners right, regardless of scores' 3 l December., 1 96 1 .
 The Tigers took the long trip last week to face a strong Bluejay squad . The Bluejay is on its way into the top ranks of the nation's cage teams .
 Even CC coach Bed Eastlack admits that the Tigers probably were 68 when they were 68 .
 The Tigers CHRISTMAS PARTY will be held December 10 from 2 to 4 for the children from Colorado Springs School for the Deaf & Blind .
 Colorado College bowling team will leave Sunday morning at 8:30 to compete against Pueblo Junior College team . Keglers will meet with junior college team to recover from recent losses .
 Members of the CC team are Bill Pelz, Dale Shaw, John Evans, Jim Talman, George Bumoster, and Chuck Rowland . The CC team is based in New York City, New Jersey .
 Eastlack's Tigers tangled with St. Louis loop loop team Wednesday night . St.M. Louis County lost to St. Mary's St. Paul in a rain-soaked game .
 The Cavaliers from Dodge City sport a fantastic height this year with most of their manpower towering over the 6 foot, 4 inch mark . Most of the Cavaliers are 6-foot, 4 inches tall .
 Eastlack felt that the Cavalier height would hurt his shorter squad but that the Tigers can make up the disadvantage with speed and hustle . The Tigers are looking to bounce back from a poor start to the season .
 "Of course, they were good last year too, and we split the two game series with them then,"" he noted. Of course, "Last year too"
 The Hop will be held from 8-11 m. on Friday, January 5 i Rastall Dining Room. Plan come to the all-college Sock Hop sponsored by the Freshman Class .
 Ae*ony Frasca's icemen performed in a manner that should a lce CC hockey fans sit up and take notice . Yet things weren't juite as bad as they looked, and even in the process of losing, the icemen did not look bad enough .
 DU ' n the Tigers off the ice imping into a four point lead in the first period . Duffus wring off Wilson, Sampson scornassisted, Lacomy hitting off lit and Art off Johnston and towhan. Lacomy hit off lit .
 CC goalie Art Warwick lanaged 11 saves in the first pei«l but was almost blanketed by barging DU blue-liners most of it time . CC scored twice and olded DU to one goal in the second half .
 Pioneer Emory Sampson while had hit once to keep the ung. obvious fact that loomed hough the two final periods was tat the Tigers were anything but i'e<l and that the entire attack 1 switched to the Denver desive zone .
 Frasca Tigers beat Pioneers 2-2 in final game of season . Archie Prestayko and Art Berglunri both scored in the final minute .
 Saturday's battle proved that they possess the type of hustle that topples thrones . With a little more polish, they can be a tough crew to heat . Saturday's win was the first time the U.S. team has won a game in seven years .
 The Twins face Minnesota at Minneapolis in a doubleheader on Dec.-16 . They'll play each other in the next two practice weeks before starting their road trip .
 Third South emerged the victor, edging out the close behind First South . Third South was the winner of the poll .
 Third South scored a total of 18 points to take first place honors . First North was a close second with 17 points . Third North scored 17 points to finish second .
 Intramural points were awarded to the various wings on a 5-3-1 basis for first, second, and third places respectively . Intramurial points were given to each of the wings for the first and second places .
 8 out of the 11 wings scored points during the meet . The team had conflicting events, such as chemistry and math tests the next day, such a good turnout .
 The table tennis table tennis will have been completed by the time of adjournment for the Christmas vacation . Table tennis will be completed at the end of the holiday period .
 It is now in the final stages of the second round, or the quarter finals, and should be finished soon . It should be in the quarter-finals of the World Cup .
 A Colorado College chemistry professor is using a high frequency oscillator to study reactions of certain acids and bases in a long-range research project . The project may provide chemists with new information they can use as a research ""tool"" in such areas as rocket fuel production .
 Eldon Hitchcock, assistant this that professor of chemistry, frequency oscillator to the of chemical problems. Eldon T Hitchcock was assistant this . Hitchcock was a teacher of chemistry at the University of Cambridge .
 The five megacycle frequency oscillator operates much like an FM radio transmitter . The Colorado College scientist uses the device to create a radio signal .
 It enables chemists to study reactions of certain acids and bases that could not be observed by more traditional laboratory methods .
 This electronic equipment is opening up a new field of chemical research, Dr. Dr. John Defterios says . He says the equipment will open up new fields of research .
 The high frequency oscillator enables the scientist to observe how compounds are formed . It helps him better understand the speed of chemical reactions, and aids him in substance analysis .
 Throughout the years, most chemical reactions have been carried out in water, he said . Most of the chemical reactions are carried out using water .
 Hitchcock has been conducting experiments in such liquids as benzene, acetic acid, and acetonitrite . Hitchcock has conducted experiments in benzene and acetetic acid .
 The advantage of these liquids is that they permit certain reactions to occur that could not take place in water . The advantage is that these liquids are liquids that allow certain reactions that can't be made in water, say scientists .
 Colorado College chemistry professor says acid-base reactions in water are limited because of the acidic and basic character of water itself .
 He has been observing the reactions of compounds such as aluminum chloride and stannic . He is attempting to apply the high tudy chloride with alcohols, ethers, and various nitrogen-containing compounds .
 Research chemists are concerned with compounds that can be used in controlling the speed of reactions . He noted that research chemists want to use compounds to control reactions .
 Susan Caudill received an award for third in the extemporaneous speaking of the tournament . Susan was awarded for third place in the speaking category .
 Max Power and Jo Heller finished the first day's rounds with a 3-0 record, but dropped some close ones on the second day of the powermatched tournament . In the debate division of the tournament, CC did well, as Max Power .
 Charles Puckett and Susan Caudill finished high on the list in terms of team and invidiual ratings . Though not finishing so well win-wise, the other senior division team of Charles and Susan finished high .
 This weekend Max Power and Chris Griffiths will represent CC at the Air Force Academy Tournament . Chicago Offers Sixty Senior Fellowships . Sixty fellowships ranging in amount from $500 to $2000 are available .
 The scholar-teacher program was developed with assistance from the Ford Foundation . The program integrates the study of theoretical concepts, extensive practice in the art of teaching .
 The twelve fields for which the program provides preparation are biology, chemistry, English, French, geography, German, history, mathematics, physics, Russian, Spanish, and social studies .
 Students with good records of preparation in the liberal arts are eligible to be considered . Students with sufficient concentration for graduate study in onL> of the twelve teaching fields are eligible for consideration . Students must also have good records in liberal arts and sufficient concentration in graduate study .
 Criteria for selection includes intellectual capacity, scholarly aptitudes, and assessment of personality and other characteristics relevant to effective teaching . Criteria also include intellectual capacity and scholarly aptitude .
 French Club members rehearsed for the French Club's production of "The Schc around durin ol of Widows" The production is based on the story of a group of widows . The French Club is currently on stage in London .
 CC students sing and decorate Ras+all C PIANO as they decorate Christmas tree . Students sing, decorate, play piano, play instruments and decor decorate the tree .
 All students are cordially invited to come to this discussion at 4:00 p.m. in room 203, Rastall Center .
 Sean O'Faolain is the personification of the gravely literate Irishman with charmingly burred speech a twinkle in his eye, a pipe in his mouth, and a bit of the leprechaun .
 Mr O'Faolain arrived suffering from food poisoning, but stayed to fulfill the promise of his poetry and short stories .
 Colorado College's sports center will be located at Colorado College . In talking to students, Mr O'Faolain said he communicated inobtrui .
 Cossitt reshmen to Hold Iromo-Seltzer Ball . New iports building, in the center is the new full size ice rink, at right is Rastall Center, and above is a new full rink .
 With few New Year's Eve only four days past, CC's students could be seritnsly affected by such a swift enriromental change .
 The dance will be held in the Rastall Dining Room at 8 to 11m. and will be open to CC students . It will take place in the dining room at 8 p.m.
 The party will include dinJ* and dancing to the music of the William Fisher Trio .
 A high point of the festivities will be an exchange f ""white elephant"" gifts . The Christmas tree with Dr. Dr. John Defterios will be a high point for the festivities .
 A maximum fund-raising effort to provide an ice skating rink and a modern tri-level sports building at CC was announced this week .
 The $1,200,000 sports center will be located to the west of Rastall Center, and to the south of Cossit Hall, CC's halfcentury-old physical education building, to form a unified recreation complex .
 Full-size outdoor rink, with artificial ice surface, will be located on the site of the old Cossit Hall ampitheater . The outdoor rink is located between the college union and the new sports center .
 The rink will afford both recreational skating and a practice rink for freshman and intramural hockey squads from November through March . The rink is expected to be used for both recreational and practice purposes .
 All home varsity hockey games will continue to be played at the Broadmoor World Arena .
 Colorado College has raised $250,000 for construction of new sports facility . Colorado College Campaign program has top priority in the coming year . $250k has already been raised .
 A keystone gift was made by Gerald Sehlessman, class of '17, and members of his family . Gerald L Sehelessman was a member of the class of class '17 .
 In addition to the ice rink, the sports center will contain an indoor swimming pool, a regulation varsity basketball court with a seating capacity of 3,000, a gymnastic area, a wrestlingboxing area, locker rooms, classrooms, and offices .
 For education in the sixties we now have superb facilities on their way in the Tutt Library, the Olin Science Hall and the renovations going on in other class buildings . We now have a superb library, science hall and science hall .
 The new sports building features a multi-valt roof . Colorado Springs is being designed by Colorado Springs architects Lusk and Wallace .
 The Olympic-sized, glass-enclosed swimming pool will be at the east end, near the outdoor ice rink . The pool is expected to be Olympic-size at the end of the Olympic swimming pool .
 Memorial gifts will be emphasized throughout the fund-raising campaign . Memorial gifts are being offered in support of the family .
 Names of contributors of more than one thousand dollars will be displayed on a special plaque in the sports center foyer .
 His literary sensitiviey was wittily expressed as he spoke of the attributes of various authors . He maintained that a true writer does not feel fulfilled unless he writes a little every day .
 The Irish author and critic's Thursday night lecture was entertaining, informative, and a welcome relief from the slightly aging onslaught of the New Criticism .
 Mr O'Faolain said his actual subject would be the role of pleasure as a critical tool, particularly in reference to the noval . While titling his talk ""Trial by Pleasure,"" or ""It's Good if You Like It,""
 He maintained that the arts were originally created from an impulse whose satisfaction gave the creator a sense of delight . The arts were created from a impulse that satisfied the creator's satisfaction .
 He then examined the extreme subjectivity which essentially limits this sense of delight . He said he then examined how it is possible to have a sense of joy .
 Just as one projects one's self into a painting, the reader ""dives"" into a novel to become immersed in a vicarious existence . Thus, just as one . projects one’s self into . a painting . The reader "dives" into a . novel to
 The experience is contained in ""a number of black dots on a white page,"" yet may become, for the moment, actual, actual . The fact that the experience is . contained in a number of . black dots is indicative of the illusory nature of art and the .
 Mr O'Faolain suggested that the modern reader, properly indoctrinated by analytic handbooks, judges a novel bifocally . The modern reader is unwilling to lay aside his rationalistic shield to let the work communicate emotionally .
 In order to project Ids ideas, the author must break through this ""filter"" composed of traditional concepts, .moral values, and religious and political ideas . Ids must also break through traditional concepts and moral values, to project ideas .
 O'Faolain accused the New Criticism of fostering this filter by attempting to impose the ""pure light of reason"" on emotional Impact . O' Faolain said the New Critical Criticism attempts to impose a filter on emotional impact .
 When the novel is placed on the dissecting table, the sum of its parts often does not equal tinwhole . The sum of the parts of the novel does not always equal tin whole .
 French novelists led the list of works which Mr O'Faolain felt pierced the filter . French novelistists were also included in the list .
 Malraux' Man's Fate, Provost's Munon Lescaut, and Laelos' Leu Liuisonw Dangereux . Included were The Red and the Black, Man the Black and Man the Fate, and The Man of the Black .
 James Joyce's Portrait of the Artist, by James Joyce, Maughm's Of Human Bondage, and Turgenev's Torrents of Spring comprised the remainder of the list .
 Mr O'Faolain later admitted that literary criticism is relevant and necessary, at least until one develops an inherent critical faculty . While seemingly denying the functional need of one facet of his profession, he later admitted to the need for literary criticism .
 Since comparisons are inevitable, the reader is advised to make his own . The reader is asked to share his own thoughts of the book .
 We would rather like to pose some serious questions to those who pause to read these columns . We ask: What do you think of the world's most powerful people?
 The real meaning of Christmas lies far deeper than just the event of Jesus' birth . The real Christmas is not just the birth of Jesus, it's the meaning of the Christmas Day itself .
 It lies in the panorama of human experience — joy, sadness, tragedy, tragedy and despair, despair, bitterness, and hope — through which Christ moved in the thirty-three years following the first Christmas . Christ moved through this panorama, through which he moved through the years following
 Christ and Christmas are meaningless unless the reality of human experience and the well-spring of hope, both inseparable part of the life, death, and rising of Jesus, are taken into account . Jesus' life and death are inseparable parts of his life, his death and his rise
 We suggest that the 'Christmas Spirit,' to the Christian, should not be manifested in a diversionary or abstract joy, but in reflection upon the whole meaning of Christ's coming .
 It should be rooted in the quiet hope of Bethlehem's winter night and of a certain dawn, some thirty-three years later, when three mourning women came to an empty tomb .
 Even if one doesn't accept the theology of Jesus' coming, he can still find, in the life and death of the carpenter from Galilee, much to ponder . The carpenter's life and the death of Jesus is a life of a carpenter .
 For that life and that death were not abstracted fairy-tale style to take place somewhere in the clouds, they were for that life . For that, for that, they would not have been abstracted .
 Jesus lived among men and shared their common experiences, dealing with them as a man . Jesus lived with men and dealt with them in a unique way of living with them .
 We might suggest to Christians and non-Christians alike that they explore the ""Christmas Spirit"" among men to see if there is within it some good, some enduring quality which offers hope .
 We seek only to pose questions here, not answers, in the hope that those who ponder these questions may find real meaning in this Christmas season . We seek to ask questions not answers but to seek real meaning .
 Proposed changes to Student Conduct Committee's constitution represent a sound achievement on the part of student government and a step forward in student-administration relations .
 First, they resolve the ambiguities and confusion over jurisdiction which have plagued CC's judicial system in the past . They resolve the ambiguity and confusion that have plagued the judicial system . The first step is to clear up the ambiguity of jurisdiction in the case .
 First, they give students more of a voice, accompanied by more responsibility, in handling disciplinary problems . Second, they also give students a voice in dealing with disciplinary problems. Third, they say students have a voice and responsibility for disciplinary issues .
 First, they take a realistic account of the powers, prerogatives, and qualifications of the college administration . Second, they say the college's powers should be taken into account .
 The changes, by being realistic and flexible, ought to serve the college community well for many years . Finally, the changes should serve the community well, as well as many others .
 We congratulate Commissioner Bob Kendall and his Judicial Committee, to the Student Conduct Committee and the Committee on Undergraduate Life . President Griffiths and the ASCC Executive Council also congratulate the Commissioner .
 All have made major contributions to these proposals, and the proposals represent a major contribution to better student government . All of the proposals have been made by students at the university .
 Examination of classes not included in this schedule should be arranged to suit the convenience of students and instructors, says Sunin . Exams should be held in Sunin this year . Examinations of classes are not included .
 Sunday is my usual letter-writing day, but it just occured to me that there is something about a deadline for newspapers . Somehow an anachronistic letter has no flavor, and that somehow an .achronistically .
 People who can afford heaters of Butane gas are considered well-to-do . The rest of us keep warm with the traditional charcoal braziers .
 The meals continue to be superb, although the diet would be too starchy for most Americans' taste . The meals are still superb, but the diet is too much starchy .
 The tomatoes and oranges are on the sour side, which is just the way T like them, and if California and Florida will forgive me, I still say there is nothing like a Valencian orange .
 The meal hours continue to be weird; breakfast when you get up, lunch any time after two and dinner after ten . Breakfast is breakfast when the person gets up, and lunch when the time is after two .
 There is a 2-3 hour break for lunch for the working people, and although it has been tried many times to put them on an ""American schedule,"" they continue stubbornly to be Spanish . The favorite pastime for the men continues to be going to the local barf
 Sometimes the problems of the world consist of playing dominoes or shooting dice . Sometimes the world consists of playing a domino or playing a dice game . Sometimes, the world's problems are solved by shooting dice and dominoing .
 The big day for the children is Epiphany, when the Three Kings come with their gifts . The Three Kings will come with gifts to the children at the age of 12 .
 Twelfth Night also has a special cake, with trinkets baked in, and if you get one, it's good luck . If you get a cake baked in it, it will be good luck for the rest of the year .
 New Year's Eve parties are where you eat twelve grapes at every stroke of midnight . The best ones are the private ones with small groups of friends . Then there are the best ones with private parties .
 Today is Assumption, a very important holiday in Spain, and because it preceeds a weekend which precedes a very short week before vacation, the students ""make a bridge,"" and go home now .
 The sixth year medical students were threatened with being flunked if they went home now — yes, they went . The sixth-year medical students went home after being threatened with flunking if they didn't .
 I hope you all have a good year in that faraway world over there .
 Boyce mentioned Homecoming in a letter, and I couldn't even imagine it . "I couldn't imagine it," Boyce says of the experience .
 "I do imagine you, and I want to wish all of you, but especially colleagues and those who have been my students, a very blessed Christmas and a happy holiday season"
 2 Students' Views On 'Oedipus Rex' [see page 4] BrtWHler Crnce. Sincerely, Laurie M Perry .
 Fifteen hours after leaving San Francisco my plane was settling me down in Tokyo . The strains of Japanese music were being broadcasted to the passengers .
 'The tall, blond, absurd creature' is a tall blond, blond and absurd creature . It's not the first time people have been awed by the tall, blonde creature .
 Acculturation problems are drowned in this urge to touch and feel all . Acculturism problems drown in the urge to 'touch and feel' all .
 I have set out to learn the language as rapidly as possible . Subsequently I have been trying to learn Spanish quickly . I hope to be able to use the language in the future .
 There will be a gap between reaching out and trying to grasp and actual grasp, in which there will be much discouragement and despair . Yet I am sure there will not be a . gap between my first . response and my actual grasp will be discouragement .
 Last night I visited the ""Ginza" (Tokyo's Broadway) and was overwhelmed with neon lights, displaying characters and lighting up the sky .
 Where I live and work, it is an endless maze of narrow streets, with shops, smoke, and again round faces . And yet where I live, work, there is still a maze of small streets and narrow streets .
 "I am very fortunate in that my living habits ' have been forcibly molded into Japanese style," she says of her Japanese upbringing .
 I even am finding myself using the few words of Japanese that I do know automatically . I even find myself using a few words that I know automatically.
 I never know when I might get on a wrong trolley and wind up miles from where I want to be . I'm not always sure when I'm going on a trolley, and I'm always going to get stuck in the wrong place .
 "In adapting to a new world I have left many things of the old world behind which are undesirable in any world," says author . In adapting to the new world, he has left many of the things he left behind are undesirable, he says .
 "I don't think about the same worn-out worries, and instead become totally absorbed in the new sights and life," she says of her new life .
 This week I am off to Kyoto and Osaka, but it is strictly, I'm afraid, business . This week's trip is strictly business, but I'm not sure what it is .
 I am going in order to introduce myself to workingcamp circles in those cities and there are all kinds of appointments to be kept which will prevent me from seeing the temple, etc. I'm going to meet people in those circles .
 Profs to Discuss Civil Defense Nee . Saturday till 6:00 p.m. Saturday . Nee will discuss civil defense in the nun age .
 Civil hc_h' has become a highly controvn^ question throughout the \jJ States . One alternative, Civil hC_h'. has become the subject of much of the nation's most controversial questions .
 Professors Bailey, Boderni off, Werner, and Wright will ri cuss the value and important Civil Defense . Lotoj Prof. Bailey will talk about the value of Civil Defense in his new book .
 Discussion being sponsored by Commitme, a student organization studying the implications of and alternatives nuclear war . Discussion will be held at 7 p.m. ET .
 Harris Sherman as President of a selected Mr Van Becker and j Gamer as sponsors . Harris Sherman is President of the selected Mr. Van Becker . Mr van Becker is selected as president of the chosen Mr Van Becker .
 Commitment^ will study disarmament in a serl of round table discussions tliroue out the year and sponsor vavln speakers to discuss the Cfuestion neuclear war and its alternatta .
 The choir, singing wi full, sustained harmony, present a program of wide diversity ran ing from Vivaldi to Brahms tn f traditional Christmas Carols .
 Richard Dering opened the prog and was followed by Viva ""Gloria"" for solo voices, clip and organ and clip . Viva was followed up by Richard Dering, who played solo voices .
 Brahms' Motet (Op., No) proved to be a beau work as the choir used delicate ba ance and near perfect hanm The concert culminated with traditional carols such to The World"" and ""Silent Nigh' to end a highly successful and e
 In regard to Mr Trushel's Con ment column published in the D* ember 8 edition of the Tiger, 1; in favor of the creative writin class proposed .
 Students polled faculty and all the male stuldents of Colorado College . Colorado College Tiger .
 At this time we wish to clarify a statement in the letter by Robert Goldman in the Tiger two weeks previous . The Tiger Tiger has been in the news for more than two weeks .
 It is incorrect that there was a two to one faculty vote against ROTC two years ago . The vote was overturned by a two-to-one vote .
 In actuality, the vote was much closer and differed only by a few votes . The vote was actually closer than the actual vote .
 It is the Tiger's hope that this poll will help clarify the positions of various campus groups . The poll will also help clarify positions of some campus groups, says Tiger .
 Sheraton Hotels are the best place to stay at a hotel in the world . Sheraton hotels are the most affordable hotels in the U.S.
 Group rates arranged for teams, clubs and other XV\ college groups on the move .
 I don't feel that this questionnaire deals with a large or serious subject . As a result, I feel it doesn't deal with any of the most serious subjects in the world . I'm not sure if this questionnaire is serious enough .
 It is virtually impossible to support the goals and ideals of a nation without leaders at the lower level . It's virtually impossible for a nation to support its goals without leaders in the lower levels, says author .
 A 4 year program of leadership development is vitally necessary to the preservation of our Nation and its ideals . Because we are forced into a position of defense, a 4-year program is essential to our nation's survival .
 This year's trieditors, Jerry Osborne, Marie Buulock and Ann Gourock, will be trieditors . Any questions may be directed to the trieditors of this year's tryitors .
 Bell System salesman introduces Bell System products and services to business executives . Today he is a salesman for Bell System .
 Loren Cergens and his sales staff have improved the communications efficiency of many firms by analyzing their operations and recommending advanced Bell System products and services . Loren Cargens has helped many firms improve their communications efficiency .
 Loren Gergens of Mountain States Telephone & Telegraph Company helps make your communications service the finest in the world . Loren's job is to make the world's finest communications service . Loren is a member of the staff at Bell Telephone Companies throughout the country .
 Sophocles' Tragedy Chosen As CC's First ""Guinea Pig"" by James H Fox . The rise and fall of the proud, dynamic heir to the curse on the House of Labdacus .
 Sohpocles is a simple production of Purcell's opera, but simplicity of production is the rule . The opera is set in a simple setting, with no extras and costumes .
 The backdrop sacrificed taste on the altar of artiness . The backdrop's glaring symbolism sacrificed taste for artiness.
 William Hochman almost redeemed his failure to fully express the title role's driving curiosity and enormous compassion and vanity . The film is set in New York, New York .
 He received a respectful applause from his fellow actors and the audience for creating an Oedipus of stature and intelligence .
 At least half of the chorus didn't understand what they were saying, nor that they were on stage during their periods of silence . I have mixed feelings about the chorus, including some who were not on stage .
 Donald Jenkins, dividing his voices into tenors and baritones, occasionally achieved striking effects, particularly in Ode II, "Let us all be reverent in the ways of right,"" before the entrance of the Corinthian Messenger. the production's impressi' climax.
 Roberts pushed his blocking dangerously close to overacting, but his energy and control kept the audience engrossed .
 In the bitter, ironic scene between Oedipus and Tiresias, Paul Barnard's blind prophet, powerful in vision, was delightfully human in fear, anger, and finally pity for the doomed ruler .
 John Lewis was only superficially Creon, a simple, direct, basically good man, who has no desire for the responsibilities of power . Although sufficiently logical and conservative, he was sufficiently conservative and conservative .
 She possessed the voice and appearance, but lacked sensitivity, as did the wooden, weak.gestured Priest, who almost suffocated the play's kick-off, and the nervous, flippant Palace Messenger .
 Kenneth Burton, as Choragus, for beautifully expressing devotion and some understanding of the protagonist's suffering . Laurels go to Kenneth Burton for beautifully, simply expressing devotion .
 David Hand's lighting design and well-proportioned and playable steps, pillars, and platforms added technical strength to the show . David Hand’s lighting design, delicately working from dawn to sunset, worked from dusk to sunset .
 Tocos & Pizza CC Greek Production Rated As ""Admirable"" Wednesday, Thursday and Friday of last week, CC witnessed a production of Sophocles' tragedy Oedipus Rex .
 Sophocles' powerful presentation of the workings of fate . Those who concentrated on the lines, the essence of the Greek drama, could not miss the play .
 The modern audience is oriented to the reality of action, not long dialogue, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The audience tended to become inattentive and thus lose much of the play's significance in spite of the good articulating of both actors and chorus . Therefore, especially during the choric odes, the audience tends to become distracted during the play .
 The translation itself was generally inferior and even ludicrous at times in its attempt to modernize the script . The play as a whole weakened the play as well as the translation itself . Also the fact that the translated itself was . generally inferior .
 Another factor which weakened this production was the cluttered appearance of the stage . The production was also criticised for being too cluttered .
 The general set design and lighting were very good, but there were too many people on the stage for its size . The set design was very good but there was too much room for the stage .
 Most easily dispensed with would have been the suppliants, whose floating and hovering about was very distracting and added nothing but confusion and clutter . Most easily . dispensed . from would have had to be removed from the scene .
 Dr. Hochman made a tragically imposing Oedipus (although he seemed .much older than his mother) The film was directed by Gene Seymour Seymour, who directed it in New York .
 Bernard was convincing at Tiresias the blind prophet; and Reverend Burton made a forceful Choragus . Reverend Burton also played a forceful role in the play . St. Bernard made a convincing performance at Tireias .
 The weakest character appeared at the end in the person of Dr. Dr. Martin . Unfortunately, the weakest character in the film was Dr. Jan .
 His FlashGordon appearance and excited delivery detracted from the double tragedy of Jocasta's death and Oedipus' selfbinding .
 The productio was a success, for it had the power to move those who understood it and appreciated it for what it was . Nevertheless, the productio a success .
 The winter issue of the Kinnikinnik will be out the second week in January . Winter Kinnikinik is out in the first week of the month .
 This issue will have about forty pages, and will be divided between art and poetry, with a few prose pieces . The issue will be published in April 2015 .
 Prizes of fifteen dollars each will be given for cover design, poetry, and art . Prizes will be announced in the issue of this issue .
 The Kinnikinnik spring issue plans a March 15 deadline on all contributions, with a publication date the first week in May . The spring issue will be published on March 15 .
 There will be no extension of deadline for this issue of this issue . If you have material you may want to submit, begin submitting it now .
 Prizes of fifteen dollars each will be awarded for cover design, art, photography, prose, and poetry, if the contributions received merit merit these awards .
 Art contributions turned in for the winter issue may be picked up in the Basic Design room at the Fine Arts Center . Art contributions may be turned in in the basic Design room .
 Becker's Radiator & Body Shop 16 E Bijou St. ME 3-0075 Call Radiator, Body & Fender Repairing and Painting . Becker's is located in the heart of the city .
 This contest is open to all third, and fourth-year students of accretf ited American Colleges and univerities .
 The philosophv of the founding fathers of the U.S. of the United States £ writing 1 the Constitution . The philosopher was the founder of the nation's constitution .
 The individual's obligation to a government which derives its just power from the consent of the governed is to consent to the governed . The individual must also be responsible for his or his actions .
 Can an individual's actions af. feet the fortunes of a nation?— Give an example from the last % years. Give a picture of the past % years . Can a person's actions affect a nation's fortunes? Give a photo of the last years?
 Give an example of a nation whose fortunes were adversely affected by general indifference to patriotic ideals . From the same period, give an example . Give a example of the nation's fortunes .
 Tf the above points are covered, the paper will be considered on their merits, even though the conclusions may not coincide with the society's concept of patriotism .
 The first and second award-winning papers will become the property of the society, with all rights reserved .
 She will be intelligent, attractive, and will typify collegiate women throughout America . She will also typify college women throughout the country .
 She will receive a trip to Europe as one of her prizes . She will also win an automobile, a diamond ring, and many other awards .
 St Mary's fresco coach Tony Frasca is ref fling his entire squad this >U as a result of a serious injury . W benched, for the season, one -This key players .
 R9-60 loss to St. Mary's of the Plains hoop squad Wednesday, December 6 . Cavaliers lost to R9/60 at home to Mary's .
 St. Mary's crew towered in the rare 6 foot, • r ) inch air on the average, it made little difference to Coach Red Eastlack's shorter, faster squad .
 In both contests, the Tigers will be staring down the mouth of a cannon . The Tigers will face each other in both contests .
 The Minnesota team is second only to the xemen with 19 points through the bucket and a 6 foot, 4 inch rebounding sophomore, Bill Bruke, 6 feet, 4 inches rebounding . The Minnesota men's basketball team won the game by a combined score of 19 .
 Tigers win their first home game of the season at Cossitt Hall . Tigers win first game of season and first win of season . Tigers' home game was their home game opener at home .
 Eastlack was able to substitute a full crew at a time if he cared to without any appreciable difference in scoring . The most impressive item to CC basketball fans was undoubtedly the fact that he could sub-subteam a full team of players .
 CC faces Colorado School of Mines in Rocky Mountain Conference play next week . The Denver Broncos won the NCAA title last year . CC faces Mines in the next round of play .
 CC Smith Wright Thompson Thompson Loosli Cabbiness Sabom Krell Burke Anthony Totals St.C. Cabbies .
 Mary's Hicks Harvey Desjardins go van Streit Kurtz Hudson Hopkins Totals FG Ff TP . Traveling to Minneapolis to tangle with their home-town university are wing Ken Hanson, goalie Pete Doyle, and wing John Simus .
 Senior defensonum Larry Gilbertson hails from Grand Forks, North Dakota, and will undoubtedly plav over his head against the Sioux . The senior will play for the U.S. against the Native Americans .
 Tony has been priming his Tigers for two weeks for the big meeting with Minnesota Friday and Saturday . The Tigers take on the Minnesota Twins in their first game of the season on Saturday and Sunday . The Twins are the Tigers' first game in the series .
 A practice session is set up al Minnesota Friday, The Tigers play there Friday night and Saturday night . The Tigers leave Minneapolis Sunday by train for Grand Forks, North Dakota, by train .
 Michigan and Michigan Tech trading losses for Michigan State and North Dakota . Michigan Tech and Michigan State also trading losses . North Dakota and North Carolina also traded losses . Michigan State is ranked No. 1 in the Big East .
 In the season opener, Denver twice beat CC, but won the second tilt by no . The outlook al Grand Forks indicates that the pressure might be lighter against the Sioux . In the first game of the season, the Denver team beat CC twice .
 North Dakota lias a team building program going this year, and, as a result, is faced with problems similar to CC's . North Dakota is facing similar problems this year .
 North Dakota is building most of their squad from last sensoli's freshman team . However, CC has IB returning lettermen to the CC icers . North Dakota has most of its squad from freshman squad .
 The Tigers will be hampered in both contests by a few injuries . The Tigers are expected to be without a few key players for both games .
 Front line center Garry Martin is out from a knee injury received in practice last week . Duke Dutkowsk'i, last year's high scorer, and Dan McGill will he nursing bad legs . Front line forward Garry Martin also out from knee injury .
 ZECHA& ADAMS CONOCO SERVICE STATION MEIrose 3-1219 Nevada Ave. at Cache La Poudr. at . Cache LaPoudr .
 The last word in fashion is "The Last Word in Fashion" St. Gregory Smith of CC goes for a quick two poir St. St.
 SPRINGS' House of WHEELS SCHWINN and RALEIGH BICYCLES PEAK AVENUE all TYPES ALTERATIONS AND REPAIRS 10% CASH AND CARRY 117/, E«>t Coche I Poudr
 You can read this world-famous doily newspaper for the next six months for $5.50, just half tha regular subscription rate . The Christian Science Monitor is now on sale at Hall Price at $5 .
 The Christian Sclenco Monitor P-CH One Norway St., Boston 15, is located in Boston, Massachusetts . Use the site to view the full content of this article .
 Colorado College has received grants totalling $170,000 from the National Science Foundation for three science institutes to be conducted next summer for high school teachers . NSF Grants $ 170,000 For Summer Institute .
 This the second such series of grants the college has received from the foundation . This is the second time the foundation has given the college grants .
 The faculty development grant is designed to encourage additional professional development of individual teachers at Colorado College . Colorado College will use the grant to help develop individual teachers .
 The grant to the three science departments is designed to "recognize the critical importance of teachers of engineering, mathematics, and the physical sciences,"" Upchurch said .
 Colorado College will present the internationally famous Alberneri Trio in a special concert on Thursday, January 18 at 8:15 in the Fine Arts Center . The concert will be held at Colorado College in Colorado .
 The violinist, Giorgio Ciompi, is well known to Colorado College and the community . He has been a member of the artist faculty in the last three Tryouts Arranged .
 Field Biology Insti,ute will be given at Aspen in cooperation with the Aspen Institute ■if Humanistic Studies . The field biology Insti.ute will also be given in cooperation .
 The institutes are designed to keep high school science teachers posted on recent dvelopments in the i i' fields and to help them improve classroom effectiveness .
 $88,000 was earmarked for the Institute in Science and Mathematics . About 70 high school teachers will be enrolled in the eight week course .
 Two-thirds of students will be participating in the college's three-summer program leading toward a master of arts ""> teaching degree . The students will study in the summer program .
 The Institute is open to qualified science and mathematics teachfl ^ in junior and senior high schools and in junior colleges . This Program is under the direction of Or, Beidleman .
 The National Science Foundation set aside $40,300 for a Chemistry Institute . The Chemistry Institute will be held on the campus of the University of Washington .
 The six-week-long Chemistry Institute is designed to provide chemistry teachers with new insights that will enable them to present chemistry from a fresh point of view when they return to their classrooms .
 40 high school chemistry teachers are scheduled to take the course . Lester A Michel, professor and chairman of the chemistry department, said 40 teachers will attend .
 Beidleman and Robert B Lewis co-directors of the new eight week Institute in Field Biology . NSF has appropriated $42,500 for the new institute .
 The program is open to 32 high school biology teachers with at least three years of experience on the high school level . The program includes 32 biology teachers at 32 high schools .
 Editor Sought Applications are M w open fo ■ Editor of the Student H indhook .
 Examination of classes not included in this should be arranged to suit the convenience of and instructors . Examine of classes that are not included must be arranged for convenience of instructors and students .
 Esso Gives $3,500 unrestricted grant from the Esso Education Foundation . Colorado College last week received a grant from Esso for CC Operations .
 The money will be used to help meet the educational operating needs at CC in the coming year .
 A check for the amount was presented to President Benezet by J B Wadell and William M Mayger, representatives of the Humble Oil and Refining Company, an affiliate of the Standard Oil Co.
 Alien Registration Deadline Revealed . Aliens in the United States will be required to report their addresses to the Attorney General within the near future .
 All aliens in the United States on January 1 each year must report their addresses by the end of the month . All aliens, with few exceptions, who are in the U.S. on New Year's Day must do so .
 Forms with which to make tinreport can be obtained from any Post Office or Immigration Office .
 The law provides penalties for failure to comply with the reporting requirement . Summer school sessions are required to take part in summer school sessions .
 Two members of the Albeneri Trio are among the top performers on their instruments . The two members had distinguished carers before joining' the Trio . They are now known for their performances .
 The Albeneri Trio was organized about twelve years ago, and is today accepted throughout America and Europe as perhaps the foremost piano trio . It is now accepted throughout the U.S. and Europe .
 The artists are performing in Denver the previous night, and it is only through a lucky circumstance that they could be presented in Colorado Springs between their other concert engagements .
 One major work by Beethoven and Brahms will be tin' special musical highlight . One of the biggest works by the world's greatest composers will be performed in a joint performance .
 Tickets to this event will be $1.75 and can be secured at Perkins Hall or at the Rastall Center desk . The event will take place in Perkins Hall and will be held on Friday night .
 Edalyn Burger, nationally acclaimed mezzo soprano, will give a voice recital at Perkins Hall January 14 . Burger is a nationally acclaimed singer .
 Her accompanist will be Charles Day, well-known Colorado Springs concert pianist and teacher . Charles Day is a well known Colorado Springs pianist .
 Miss Barbara Couey, a Colorado College sophomore from Trinidad, will be the co-artist . She will be joined by a Colorado college sophomore, who is a sophomore from Colorado College .
 Burger, a graduate of Colorado College, has called Colorado Springs home for the past 20 years . Burger has lived in Colorado Springs, Colorado Springs for 20 years. Burger: "I love Colorado Springs"
 She holds a master of musicdegree from the American Conservatory in Chicago .
 Tryouts for th, Spring; Musical, tiuys and Dolls, will he held on Perkins sln B e, J a nwry IS through through •20.20.
 A sigll-Up sheet will be posted this weekend on the bulletin hoard in Perkins Hall, Tlu.se . Anyone interested in singing or speaking should sign up for one of the tryout periods .
 The ""Rise and Pall of European Colonialism"" will be given by Dr. Lawrence F Hill . Dr. Hill will give a talk on the rise and fall of European colonialism .
 Official Colorado College Student Publication STAFF; Heather Kirk. Jim Dunlor. Heather Kirk . Heather Kirk is a junior at Colorado College and a senior at the University of Colorado College . Jim Dunor is a senior member of the Colorado College College of Education .
 The columns of the TIGER were responsible for awakening again the belabored, and at that time dormant, issue of ROTC on CC's campus . The columns were responsible .
 In the first place, an issue of this sort, in a community such as this with a very rapid turnover in its population, is never settled . In the second place, the issue is never finally settled, says the mayor .
 The issue must, it seems, be reassessed by eveiy passing college ""generation,"" and this is probably a good thing . The issue will be re-evaluated by the passing college "generation"
 A new insight has come out of columns, letters to the editor, student comments, and student comments which have appeared in these pages recently . But more importantly, a new insight, or perhaps a new emphasis, has come from the columns and letters .
 The realization has emerged that the question of ROTC is related to the larger questions which face our society . The realization of the question has emerged is that it is related .
 The United States is today faced with the necessity of maintaining a massive military establishment . The U.S. faces the need to maintain a military presence .
 Throughout history, the existence of such a military establishment has proven itself incompatible with constitutional democracy . The presence of such an armed military establishment is incompatible with democracy, it has said .
 Standing armies have always been kept at a size less than military thinking would term adequate . Those who developed our government in the U.S. have long recognized this to be true, he says .
 The mainstay of our defenses has been the reserves — the citizen-soldiers . The nation's defense has been in the hands of its citizens, the president says .
 The purpose of the ROTC program is to train officers for these reserves . The purpose is to prepare officers for the reserves .
 It's not aimed at shaping career officers, but rather at training men who can, after college, take time out from their civilian pursuits to help maintain our defense system .
 The alternative to reserve officers, trained in an arts and sciences background, is the leadership of all our armed forces by academy-trained, professional soldiers . Academy-trained soldiers should be trained in arts and science backgrounds .
 One need only look at the present situation in France, among others, to see how dangerous this can be to constitutional democracy . The situation is particularly dangerous for constitutional democracy, writes Andrew Hammond .
 College-trained citizenofficers over against a professional, elite officer corps, we see little choice . Given these two alternatives, college-trained citizens over against elite officers, it's little choice.
 The Department of the Army would not, under present regulations, maintain the ROTC program on our campus unless a certain number of students were guaranteed for the program . The program would not be maintained under regulations, according to the Army .
 The only way, at present, is to meet that guarantee is to make basic ROTC compulsory . It is not the only way to meet this guarantee .
 If ROTC continues on a compulsory basis, male students will be deprived of their ""academic freedom" to some degree, and they will be subjected to some unpleasantness, says Simon Tisdall .
 If the program is discontinued, those who want to serve as reserve officers will be deprived of their means to do so . The Army will lose a source of well-and liberally-educated officers .
 This kind of program is disturbing to most students at an institution where freedom is supposed to be maximized and distracting unpleasantness minimized . Students at the University of Columbia University say it's disturbing .
 The ROTC program has more value than the charges against it can overbalance, says the U.S. Army .
 This is not to say that there are not severe shortcomings in the ROTC program . The program has been criticized for its lack of oversight by the Army .
 We will soon offer some constructive criticisms and suggestions . We believe there are there are, and we hope there will be constructive criticisms .
 The WH IC KERBI LL is a Gift Including and Can a Silly Shop full of Happy Things — Looking Octopus Windbell. It is a gift including a gift from the author of the book .
 January 14, 1962 Sermon looking back on Christmas and discussing the conscience of the Christian .
 Plans for the Colorado College Choir's 1962 spring tour were announced last week by conductor Donald Jenkins, instructor in music .
 The 55-voice choir is scheduled to make 12 appearances during March and April . The choir will perform in 12 cities across the United States .
 Jenkins said programs are especially planned for presentation in churches during the Lenten and Faster seasons . Jenkins said the programs will be especially planned to be presented in churches .
 Sanders' Kentuc Icy Fried CHICKEN ""it's finge liclcin' good"" <r3§> Take-Home TTTt*^ Department .
 Colorado College Tiger 12, \1b1 CC Students Often Enter Professorships . Students at CC stand a better than average chance of becoming college or university professors, survey shows .
 Colorado College is one of two, and the only private college, in the entire eight-state Rocky Mountain region ranking amoung the nation's top fifty institutions in the production of college teachers . The college is ranked in the top fifty schools in the nation .
 An average of more than twenty-four out of every 1,000 students at Colorado College will become college or university teachers . The report shows that an average of 24 out of 1,100 students at the college will become teachers .
 Announcements Student Conduct Committee x\fter reviewing a case concerning the mutilation of library material, the decision was made that a $25.00 fine plus the cost of the defaced magazine was given to the individual .
 The committee felt that the destruction of library material was a flagrant abuse of our privileges . The committee asked student support in alleviating this problem .
 Skier's Evening III is slated for Sunday, January II at 7:30 in the WES Lounge . The show is scheduled for January 2 .
 The CC Skiers will report on the successful Sun Down Ski Program . Students had a chance to learn how to ski prior to the Christmas holiday .
 An announcement will be made about a approaching Alpine Ski Lodge party and about the first all-club trip to Monarch ski area . An announcement is expected to be made soon about the Alpine Ski lodge party .
 A club announcement board has second tloor ght outside Patronize TIGER Advertisers been located on of Rastall Cent the Student Activities Office .
 The violations occurred in the Department of History . sktevs wanting a ride or riders to a ski area and other items of interest to the skiing enthusiast .
 Photographed on the snow-clad, sun-bright slopes at Aspen, Colorado, in full color .
 Membership cards will be available at the door and the new CC ski club patches should be in . The club patches will also be in place .
 Somewhere out there, beyond the realm of man's present understanding, lies an idea . PIONEERI: "There is an idea that exists beyond man's understanding"
 Gradually, as it comes under the . concentration ot disciplined minds, it will become clear, refined, mastered . Gradually the . language will become clearer, refined and mastered. Gradually it will be clear and refined .
 Planning the use of satellites as vehicles for world-wide communications is one example . Planning to use them as vehicles is one of the biggest challenges in the world of communications .
 The Optical Gas Maser may allow a controlled beam of light to carry vast numbers of telephone calls, TV shows, and data messages . Another invention is the Optical Gas Saser, an invention which may allow the use of controlled beams of light in the future .
 Breakthroughs like these will one day bring exciting new telephone and communications service to you . The breakthroughs like this could one day lead to new communications services, say experts .
 The responsibility of providing these services will be in the hands of your local telephone company . Among them are engineering, administrative and operations personnel who make your telephone sendee the finest in the world .
 Colorado College President Louis T Benezet calls for American support for liberal arts colleges . Calls for Americans to ""take whatever steps needed"" to make sure colleges continue to provide an opportunity for top students from all backgrounds .
 President Benezet said the independent liberal arts college has three distinguishing features which make it a basic element if nut nut the strength of American higher education .
 CC Tigers still have not been able to get their hockey machinery operating smoothly this year . Kink leers lose lo Powerful Tech, Drop Two to Harvard, 5-4, 6-4 .
 They dropped four games over a five-day stretch at the Broadmoor World Arena during the Christmas break . They lost four games in five days over the festive period .
 Friday and Saturday night, December 29 and 30, they dropped a double-header to the powerful Michigan Tech Huskies, 7-4 on Friday night and 9-4 Saturday night . The Huskies beat the Huskies 7-3 on Friday, 9-2 on Saturday night and
 Opening the new year at the season opener against the CC Broadmoor, the Tigers led the A lumni 12-3 . The Tigers won the game 12-2 in the opening game .
 Crimson Tide of Harvard Univer. University beat the Crimson Tide . Tigers were on another road sity throughout most of the game .
 They gave up two goals in the final minutes of play to lose 5-4 . However, they gave up 2 goals in final minutes to give up 2-0 lead in final minute .
 Harvard came back stronger and led most of the way to win the game 6-4 . On the following night, Harvard came out stronger and won the match 6-3 .
 The complete series added another four losses to the hapless Tigers' losing streak . The Tigers have now lost another four games in a row .
 To date they have lost 12 games this season, winning only their non-scheduled trip this week to Michigan . To date, the team has lost only 12 games .
 ZECHA & ADAMS CONOCO SERVICE STATION MEI is located at 3-1219 Nevada Ave. at Cache La Poudre . The game was played on Saturday night .
 Colorado College basketball coach Leon ""Red"" Eastlack has been included in the ten finalists for the Colorado Springs Quarterback Club's sixth annual Sports Achievement Award . Coach Leon "Red ""Red ""Eastlack" has been named a finalist for the Sports Award .
 Eastlack has coached the Colorado College Tigers to two consecutive Rocky Mountain Conference championships . The coach has been coaching Tiger teams since 1969 .
 He came to CC from Trinidad Junior College where he coached for 10 years . He was coached at the school for ten years .
 The annual Sports Achievement Award will be presented sometime in January . The date of the award will be announced later .
 Former winners include Air Force Academy coach Ben Martin, two CU Ail-Americans Joe Romig and Bob Stansky .
 Slocum Hall will conclude it table teenis season this weeken, with the singles and doubles being featured during, half time exhibition for the Ccj CSC basketball game Friday nigh* The doubles long-pong will folloj Saturday night during half time of the Tigers
 T'ut.mity to see some great baskethall and also see a match between some of Slocum's finest table ten iris players .
 Slocum Hail will hold its first annual bowling tournament at Rastali Saturday, Jann.. uary 13 at 1:00m. Saturday, July 13 .
 The tourna m ■'nt will feature eleven teams each representating a wing of Slo cum . The tournament will feature teams representing each wing of the Sloce .
 The teams will volley for the bowling trophy to be awarded, but also to try to accumulate additional points . Slocum travelling trophy will be awarded at the end of the year to the wing which has accumulated the largest number of points throughout the season .
 1962 Symposium will take place February 27th through March 1st, 19662. Symposium Opens Feb., Features Prominent Panel . 1962 program is planned .
 Pub Board Acts Students ited to and faculty at CC are ttend a series of afteri teas"" this afternoon .
 Monday and Tuesday afternoons, from 3:30 to 5:00m. in Loomis Hall lounge lounge . The event will be held in the lounge from 3 to 5 a.m. on Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday .
 Puckett, a junior, was the only applicant for the editor's job considered by the Board .
 Hite was nominated for business after he and another applicant were interviewed of Santa Monica, California, California . Hite has been nominated for the position .
 Brodie is the author of many books and articles on the relationship between policy and strategy . Brodie has given particular attention to questions of naval and air strategy .
 Fred A Sondermann, associate professor of political science, is trying to answer through a carefully designed two-part research project . The project is believed to be the first of its kind in the Rocky Mountain region . It is based on research conducted by a professor at the University of
 Sondermann is measuring the amount of foreign news stories appearing in four locally-read newspapers . He is interviewing a cross-section of the city's population to get the results .
 Two Denver newspapers, the Post and the Rocky Mountain News, and two Colorado Springs newspapers, are trying to determine how much of the total news space is devoted to foreign news . For the first phase of the project, he is trying to find out how much foreign news is covered by the
 Student measures the quantity of news copy, photographs and captions, and headlines dealing with not only the quantity, but also the foreign news developments . Assisted by a number of undergraduate political science majors, he is measuring the amount of copy copy, photos, captions .
 Puckett brings a lengthy record of newspaper work, dating back to his early high school years, 'o his new position . Quality of the foreign news is being "" in accordance with the of the globe that are receivoverage .
 In addition, he is co-chairtnan for Parent's Weekend, and has held various offices in Phi Delta Theta . In addition to being a member of Phi Delta theta, he has been involved in various organizations .
 In addition to editing the TIGER, Puckett will continue to serve as vice-president of Slocum Hall . He is an active veteran of to CC Debate Team . He will also continue to edit the Tiger .
 Puckett and Hite will succeed tax leaders Tim Power and Tim Moe respectively, on February 1 .
 The terms f °r both editor and business manner run until the end of the fall Dniester in 1963 . The terms of the terms of editing and business .
 Arthur Rubenstein will perform with the Denver Symphony Orchestra on February 1 . Rubenstein is universally acknowledged as one of the master pianists of the world .
 The concert will be presented in the Auditorium Arena to accommodate the large numbers who wish to attend . The concert is set to be held in the auditorium to accommodate large numbers .
 Symphony management has announced that tickets are being sold rapidly and that the loge is already sold out . The loge has already been sold out and tickets are already being sold out.
 Season ticket holders will be assigned seats comparable to their regular holdings . Season ticket holder will be allocated seats in the stadium . Season tickets will be available to all season ticket holders .
 Rubenstein has elected to play the Mozart Piano Concerto in A Major and the Saint-Saens Piano Concert in G Major . Rubenstein will play the St. Saens and Mozart's G-Major Concerto .
 An opportunity will be afforded to hear the great virtuoso in two contrasting works . An opportunity to hear him in the two contrasting pieces .
 His book, POLITICS AMONG NATIONS, was a landmark in the evolltion of international relations as an academic lield of inquiry . The book, Politics of Nations, is a landmark international relations .
 The Symposium will begin Tuesday, February 27th, with an all-College Assembly, where the three participants will discuss basic assumptions concerning war or peace . The symposium will be held at the University of North Carolina .
 This will be followed in the afternoon by small-group meetings for further consideration of some of the points broached in the morning session . Small-groups meetings will also be held for further discussion of the issues .
 Professors Freed, Hochman, und Warner will lead a discussion on this film immediately after the showing . At 4:00m., Messrs. Freed, hochman and Warner will discuss the film at the same time .
 Brodie, Millis and Morgenthau will sit in on some small-group meetings to discuss the points raised in previous sessions and raise questions for forthcoming parts of Symposium program .
 The final day of the Symposium —Thursday, March 1st — will be marked by a tour and briefing of North American Air Defense Command for interested students . The wind-up session at 4:00m. at which participants will answer questions and make final statements .
 The program is being sponsored by the Committee on Undergraduate Life, under the direction of Dr. Dr. John Sutter .
 Fred A Sondermann, Associate Professor of Political Science, with a committee of faculty and students working on the project . The project is a collaboration between the University of Washington and Washington State University .
 All events are open to all students, faculty, administrators, administrators and interested citizens of the area . Works will be available at Suggested readings lists and refCoburn Library in early February .
 International Relations Club, in cooperation with the ""Commitment"" group on campus, will sponsor three follow-up meetings to discuss and further explore points raised during the symposium .
 Follow-up meetings will take place on three successive Thursday nights in March . The meetings will be held at Colorado College on March 1 .
 Colorado Spri ROTC — II: "We expressed the belief that the basic principles of the program and the alternatives to maintaining that program dictate that we continue it here at Colorado College" i Mnnamr.
 We believe that although compulsory ROTC may infringe on a student's academic freedom, it is not inconsistent with the classical concept of liberal education . We believe . that, although compulsory . ROTc may infringue on student's . academic freedom .
 In fact, this classical concept of liberal arts may often stand in conflict with a student's freedom of choice . The concept of a broad education may often conflict with students' freedom to choose . Students should be able to choose their own education, not just a liberal arts .
 It should strive to clear up misunderstandings which plague it and win the respect necessary for its proper and continued performance . Course material in ROTC classes should be carefully organized to better orient the student, to more adequately deal with the relation of the citizen to the military .
 We realize that these are general, unrevolutionary, and for the most part unintriguing comments, but we hope that they will cause some serious thought on the part of the college community and some serious re-evaluation .
 We see no reason why, given the opportunity, the ROTC program cannot evolve as a means for broadening the liberal base of a liberal education . The program provides future citizens with an insight into a military system over which they must retain ultimate control, we say .
 Three weeks from now, you will be reading a paper put together under the able direction of Charles Puckett . The paper will be published by the end of the month .
 We know that his first issue, and every successive one, will show great improvement over this issue and its predecessors . We also know that every successive issue of this year's issue will be better .
 The TIGER would be an impossible venture if it were left only to those who are paid to manage it .
 Without the untiring help of those people mentioned at the head of this column — our staff — we could never have produced a paper, let alone a paper worthy of student support . Without the help of staff, the paper would not be worthy of support .
 The College Public Information Office has been a valuable source of news . The College has been cooperative and helpful in the past . The college has a reputation for being cooperative and valuable sources of information .
 To all the people mentioned above, particularly our staff, and to those who have encouraged us and who have made suggestions and contributions to improve the TIGER, we want to express our gratitude .
 We ask all of you to continue your efforts for and your cooperation with the TIGER, in order that it may be a newspaper characterized by quality and comprehensiveness .
 Your cooperation with the above will help assure your material of publication . Submit all material double-spaced, Cutler says .
 I have in possession of a considerable amount of literature concerning summer work camps and job opportunities . I have a lot of literature about summer work camp opportunities, says author .
 These are, of course, mainly sponsored by agencies and they vary from projects where the participant has to make some contribution toward the cost to positions which pay a small renumeration .
 Most of them appear to be very interesting and with them are opportunities of study, discussion, and fellowship with fellow campers and the people of the community . Most of the campers are very interesting .
 If any student would like further information would he please contact me either at Shove Chapel or at Jackson House room 307 . There are projects in downtown areas of large cities and also in rural areas .
 A week ago Tuesday night (January 9) I happened to attend a meeting on Civil Defense sponsored by Commitment . The meeting was held on January 9, 2013 .
 A rather organized discussion was held which presented .both sides of the question and the views of the panel members . The panel was presented with both sides and views .
 Mr Kudoff and Mr Bodrman feel that CD is necessary as a deterrent force for avoiding nuclear war . CD is needed to avoid nuclear war, they say .
 Mr Van Becker feels that we should be spending the money we spend on CD for peace . The project of increasing our CD would make us familiar with warw ords and thoughts which could tend to make us become machines .
 Mr Bailey would like to go a step further and have unilateral disarmament . He wants to go further and disarm disarmament, he says .
 Mr Wright, serving as the moderator, kept the discussion within grasp of the audience's comprehension .
 I am not trying to contain the thoughts presented at the meeting in one paragraph, but I want to illustrate the diversity of opinion that was shown . I am also trying to show that there is a diversity of opinions from the meeting .
 I was disappointed that more students are not interested enough in their future to listen to a discussion of something that is affecting the budget of the nation, is playing a part in our relations with Russia and could possibly be vital to them in the event of war .
 Perhaps they know so much about CD that this kind of discussion would only waste their time . I wish this were the case, but I doubt that it is. Perhaps this is the case. I doubt it is .
 Commitment should be thanked for sponsoring such a discussion . In the second place, I think that Commitment . should be thank for sponsoring the discussion. In the first place, we should thank Commitment for sponsoring this discussion .
 I think many of us on campus have gotten the wrong idea about them. I am not a member of that group, but I would like to say that I think we should be careful of them . I'm not a part of the group. I'm glad that we're not.
 Commitment, as I see it, is actually a group of students interested in the intellectual activity of thinking . Commitment is actually an idea that students are interested in intellectual activity, he says .
 Their purpose is to promote activities which lead the participants into making a personal commitment to a specific side of a question . It doesn't matter what side as long as one reaches a definite conclusion based on rational endeavors .
 Red Top Drive In 1520 So. So. Ann Armstrong wrote about Civil Defense .
 The audience was mostly of townspeople, even though the two reeitaliatj are closely connected to CC, one being a student and the other a graduate . Regretably, however, the audience was com com. posed mostly of . people .
 The criticism of the program would ""\L the over-sentimentality of the W group of songs with the exception of ""What a Movie,"" which Wa , quite lively .
 Ji rs Berger's ability to portray emotions of her songs with a skillful combination of facial expres, sion and vocal technique . Character from the half-mad u sy to the captive falcon was beautifully delineated and complete .
 Edalyn Berger, is well known in Colorado Springs not only for her beautiful voice and acting ability, but also for her promulgation of the Colorado Springs Opera Society . She is also well known for her role as the founder of the opera society .
 Berger's talent was evidenced by a well-diversified program of opera arias and art songs . Berger's talents were evident in a variety of operas, art songs and arizes .
 She opened with ""Mio Fernando"" from Donizetti's La Favorita, which immediately showed the fullrich intensity of her .mezzo-soprano voice .
 She explained and partially translated the foreign language songs and arias of the first two parts of the program . Not having program notes, she explained and translated the songs .
 The singer's spoken voice provided an excellent transition for the various moods of the songs .
 Gretchaninoff's narrative of a young caged falcon, ""Le Captif,"" concluded the first part of the program . The program also featured a narrative from a young young falcon .
 Barbara Couey, well-known on campus for her piano artistry, was followed by Barbara Berger . Berger was followed up by Barbara Couy .
 Hageman's ""Music I Heard With You,"" Carpenter's ""The Sleep That Flits on Baby's Eyes,"" the Missouri folk song, ""Deaf Old Woman,"" and the aria ""What a Movie"" from Berstein's opera Trouble in Tahiti .
 The program as a whole was very enjoyable and showed the diverse artistry of the two recitalists . The audience enjoyed the recital performances .
 Colorado College received a restricted $1000 grant from the Carnation Company Foundation of Los Angeles on January 11 . Carnation adds grant to Mounting Receipts .
 Adams was accompanied by Armin B Barney, Chairman of the Colorado Board oi Trustees . Mr Barney was chairman of the board of trustees .
 ■rsdox of Christian faith pressed yi apears to he one side of the extremes . And yet, yet, the Catholic faith is at odds with some of the world's most extreme views .
 We know that Jesus a ,ne ""in the form of a servant"" ' n d that he humbled himself even jpto death . We know . that Jesus humbled . himself even after death . Jesus was a humble man .
 This sermon will examine the tare and claims of the Christian religion and its relationship to life and to other faiths . He was lowly and ■eJt, strong and gentle, and yet also asked of men that they forsake all else and follow i,
 There will be no worship service at Shove Chapel Sunday, January 28 . This service will be broadcast W KRCC at 1:00 . The service will also be broadcast on KRCC .
 The first service of the new semester will be on Sunday, Februry 28 at 11:00 . The preach■r will be the Reverend Professor Kenneth Burton and the worship leader will be Dr. Dr. Kenneth Burton .
 We are Completely Stocked with the Finest Ski Equipment SKI RENTALS NEW BOOTS AND POLES 5.50.50 SPECIAL PRICE FOR YOUR SEMESTER BREAK ICE SKATES SLEDS TOBOGGANS BUCK'S Sporting Goods Co.
 Susan Caudill, Charles Puckett, Max Power and Max Power will take part in debate . Chris Griffiths of over all team ratings will be the team leader .
 Chuck Gibson, a sophomore from Arvada, Colo., and Joanne Schmitz of Denver are co-chairmen of Rastail's Friday Afternoon Club . Both senior and president of ASCC. teams have scheduled matches with top teams from the Ah* Force .
 FAC will undertake very extensive programming that might very well include such events as an all school twist contest, a street dance, and a playmate party . FAC will also undertake an all-school twist contest and street dance competition .
 CC's two teams, Puckett and Caudill, and Power and Griffiths, particiapted last weekend in a regional tournament at Colorado State College at Greeley . CC's teams participated in the regional tournament .
 Power and Griffiths tied for first place with a 4-1 won-lost record, but took third on the basis Academy Academy in order to prepare for the gruelling Harvard competition .
 Caudill and Power have each won honors in Extemporaneous Speaking in the region this year . They will represent CC in the Exteinp divsion of the tournament as well a in the debate .
 Johnson and his squad plan to be on hand again when classes begin February 5 . Johnson: "It's been a great experience for the students"
 Today is Jim Olson's responsibility to look ahead and forecasl the communications needs of growing neighborhoods i Seattle, Washington . Olson: "I'm looking forward to the future of my life in Seattle"
 He anticipates what kind of com munications will be needed by new apartment buildings . He also determines the number of telephone lines and teephones that will be required along a new parkway .
 Northwest Bell Telephone Company, and the other young men like him, help bring the finest communications service in the world to the homes and businesses of a growing America .
 Colorado College Mountain Club will visit Four Corners Area of Arizona and Utah during semester break .
 The trip will span 10 days, lasting from January 25 to Sunday, February 4 .
 Monument Valley features towering pinnacles, Indian Ruins and natural arches . Monument Valley is one of the most popular attractions in the United States .
 This spire, which has been climbed only three times, is known to mountaineers throughout the world . The spire has only been climbed three times by climbers . It is the tallest spire in the world, and is only known to climbers throughout the globe .
 Rainbow Bridge is a natural arch located among the jumble of canyons that crease the Arizona-Utah border . A special feature of the trip will be a visit to Rainbow Bridge, a natural bridge .
 Among other places of outstanding interest in this region are the Navajo National Monument and the Canyon deChelly . Some members of the trip will visit some of the area .
 On the return trip many of the climbers will ascend Shiprock, a 1700 foot tall monolith in northwest New Mexico .
 The trip is open to anyone with hiking experience, although the club will not be able to furnish sleeping bags or other equipment except to members . The club will be unable to provide sleeping bags for members .
 Further information will be available at the CCMC meeting in the Berg Heil Room of Rastall Center .
 The Tiger kittens upset the DU frosh at the Broadmoor World Arena last Friday 3-2 . On a traveling trip to the DU ice palace, they dropped a hard-fought battle, 8-5, Monday .
 A special opportunity is being offered to all Outings Club Members who may be interested in taking the Standard Red Cross First Aid Course . Both games were tough tussles with freshmen icers showing nn amazing amount of students .
 The Intercollegiate Bridge Tournament will be held on Sunday February 18th at 2:30m. in Rastall Center's W.E.S. lounge .
 Last year's campus winners were Charles Beemer and Keith Warrenburg playing the North-South hands . Charles Greening and John Reynolds also won the regional East-West championship . Charles and Keith won the North and East-South .
 The Intercollegiate Billards Tournament also will be coming up in the near future . The tournament will take place in the fall .
 Any man or woman interested in this competition should contact Ben Lewis at Ext. Ben Lewis, Ext. Lewis .
 Friday's battle went scoreless (luring the first period with DU forging ahead via a goal by Jim Ross earlv in the second stanza . Friday's game was the first time DU had gone scoreless .
 The CC frosh returned the shot with a hack to back goals by Bob Magie and Steve Gustafson . The team then scored back-to-back goals in the second half .
 CC's Jeff Gover fired in the final tally late in the last period to give the game to the kittens . DU tied the score in the third, but the game ended in a 2-1 victory .
 Monday's tilt was a tighter game than the 8-5 score would indicate . Monday's game was a tight match, with the score being 8-4 .
 CC's frosh matched the favored DU icers goal for goal . The final period of the game ended in a 5-5 tie . The game went to the final period .
 A four minute penalty called on a CC deienseman left the Tiger kitens with only two defensemen to skate for the full four minutes . A 4-minute penalty left the Tigers without a full minute of ice time .
 The rugged pace took its tool, allowing DU to fire in three more goals to take the second game of the series, 8-5 . The game was the first of three in the series .
 CC freshman Hockey Coach Tom Brennan expressed satisfaction with his young icers after Monday's game . Brennan: "I'm happy with my young players. I'm happy to see them succeed"
 "That four minute penalty really hurt us and sort of took the skates out of under our two remaining defensemen," coach says . The penalty "really hurt us," says Daley .
 On February 2-3, they tangle with the hockey crew from Macalester College in St. Louis . The hockey crew will face each other from the college .
 Two suddendeath broomball games on the ice at the Broadmoor World Arena . Final examinations to take place after final examinations .
 Both faculty and students will select players this week to represent them on the ice . The mid-year vacation gets under way this week as the school holiday season begins .
 The principal differences between broomball and hockey are that brooms are used instead of hockey sticks and a volleyball replaces the puck . Broomball is similar to hockey .
 The two 10-minute breaks between periods will be lengthened to 15 minutes each to provide more time for the broom battles . The break breaks will be 15 minutes longer than 10 minutes between periods . The broom battles will also be extended to allow for more time to play .
 Robert Stabler, professor and chairman of the zoology department, will announce the two tilts . He can be counted on to enliven the performances with his observances about the playing of both students and fellow faculty members .
 A buyer from the largest book clearing house will be on hand to purchase all kinds of college textbooks . Monday and Tuesday Jan. 22 and 23 .
 Western State moved on top when CSC upset the 1961 conference champion Tigers 6G-65 in a fiercely contested battle in Cossit gym . Western State won the title in 1961 . The Tigers were the conference champion .
 After Hasting's game-winning shot, the Tigers had another chance but lost possession of the ball on a bad pass . The Tigers had a chance to win the game but lost the ball to a bad play .
 Larry Balman, 6'4"" CSC senior, hit 21 points-the game's high to carry the Bears to the point . Hastings' clutch basket settled the issue .
 CC took 21 less pop 5 at the basket than CSC which had a 39. percentage . CC had a 52. percentage on field shots, but took 21 fewer pop 5s at basket .
 SenKOTC cadets staged a Court .-rtial in order to give them a .King 'dea of how a . geneial flr t matrial under the Uniform nje of Military Justice would he . would he he would he say .
 The cast fur the case suplied by Department of the Army con> e( j of members of the .class e McNeal . McNeal was the defendant, was accused of staeling a diaf 0\ bracelet .
 It ilted as if NcNeal were guilty ,ti] his sharp counsel presented major loop-hole. His sharp counsel present major loop hole. It .
 Only one of the seven-man court, five McNeal's fraternity brothers, » walked out of the courtroom a verdict of not guilty . Al lerson, who was giving Perry i a run for his money, caught 'V flaw'
 The new approach was put forth by Fred Sonderman, associirofessor of political science, 3 lead chapter of a book callternational Politics and Forpj Policy, recently published .
 They neglect to study the dynamics of the inter.itional system itself, he said . But, they neglect to . study the and dynamics of . the interitional system, he continued .
 Colorado College professor iggested that the present trends 'study in the area of internationrelations are similiar to the atipt to study American governnt soley by reference to various 'Jitical parties and other group's'
 In the area of international regions, the political scientist suga takes a broader approach proving from the interaction pro^s itself, rather than solely from 'e point of view' in the process .
 Profesor Sonderman earned his 'D. at Yale and joined the facly at Colorado College in 1953 . ■ is the author of numerous arles in political science and coiforr of a book entitled The The Thefl and Practice of International Nations .
 Commitment Panel Debates United States Civil Defense Needs . Panel discussed morality and practicality of civil defense . Panel of five Colorado College professors debated the morality of the law .
 The discussion, sponsored by Commitment, was held in the WES room of Rastall Center . It drew a considerable number of people interested in this timely dilemma of whether the current emphasis (not to mention expense) on civil defense is an aid or detriment to national security .
 Commitment presents all factors concerning the*current national crises to those who will listen . Commitment aims to present all factors in the hope that better informed, they may be able to make intelligent decisions .
 The panel presented both sides of the Civil Defense question . The panel was evenly divided, pro and con .
 Dr. Wilbur Wright, professor of physics, serving as moderator, opened the discussion by stating that the theme was to be the morality and practicality of Civil Defense . He then turned the matter to Dr. Wright .
 In a nuclear war, the effectiveness of a shelter would be extremely limited . The effectiveness of the shelter in a war would be very limited .
 The money spent negatively on shelter should instead be used positively as aid for the helpless . The money should be spent on shelter instead of sheltering the homeless .
 Civil Defense and arms stockpiling are necessary to show our enemies that we are prepared and that their attack would bring only retaliation . The U.S. should be prepared to face an attack on its enemies .
 "We must show our allies that we are prepared to defend the freedom which we extol," says President Barack Obama .
 Money spent for CD diminishes the probability of attack and so is spent positively . Th money spent on CD reduces the likelihood of attack .
 Dr. David Van Becker, professor of English and Commitment's other unofficial advisor, sided with Dr. Van Becker . Mr Van Becker is a professor at the university .
 Bomb shelters, not fallout shelters, are necessary to survive a nuclear blast, experts say . Bomb shelters are necessary for survival in a nuclear bomb blast, they say .
 Radiation will continue to be dangerous for a month or longer . The recommended two-week food supply is insufficient, as radiation will continue for a longer period . Radiation is still dangerous in the area .
 It is impossible, either humanly or economically, to launch an adequate Civil Defense program as it would take an estimated ten years and a tripled national budget to launch .
 Living in shelters will reduce man to a survival machine in a de-humanized world, says John Sutter . Sutter: "Living in shelters reduces man to be reduced to a surviving machine"
 The fact that we assume war to be inevitable greatly increases its probability greatly increases the likelihood of war . We assume war is inevitable, but we also assume it is inevitable that it will be inevitable .
 Civil Defense is a program for national defense and unless it is taken, no one will be saved . Civil Defense programs are a national defense program . Civil defense is a national security program .
 We should save as many people as possible to carry on the purpose of those who died. We should be able to carry out the purpose that those died. It's a good idea to save as much as possible, he says .
 Wright reiterated the dangers of the number's game, making the point that there are so many indeterminate factors in an offensive attack (i.e., weather, detection, aim) that it is next to impossible to make any kind of a reliable estimate of possible destruction .
 An attempt at survival, even at the expense of dehumanization, is better than total destruction of the human race . An attempt to survive, even if it's better than the destruction of human race, is a good thing for the world .
 A realistic, ""intellectual"" fear is essential to combat complacency, but must not become mass hysteria . Fear is essential, but not mass hysteria, must not be mass hysteria. Fear must be realistic, 'intellectual'
 Money for shelters should go into the founding and operation of an international Peace Council to investigate means of maintaining peaceful co-existence . Money should instead go to the founding of the Peace Council .
 Money should continue to be spent on shelter research, as advanced technology could raise the survival percentage . Money should also be spent to improve the survival chances of animals .
 All panel members seemed to have a clear conception of the distinct possibility, and even probability, of nuclear war . All panelists, as well as members of the audience who participated in the open discussion following the panel debate, seemed to be aware of the possibility of war .
 They held that there was a middle ground between annihilation and Communist domination upon which we now stand and may continue to stand indefinitely if only we follow the correct path . But at the same time they held that . They held . that there is a . middle ground .
 Results of Photo Contest Revealed Rastall's first Photo Contest turned out to be a complete success . Results of photo contest revealed .
 Evan Heckel won 1st place in print division, Russ Sperry won 2nd place and Rusty Bastedo 3rd . In print division the winner of the print division is Evan Hckel .
 Bill Stafford took 1st place in the colored travel slide class . Harry Onufroclc took 2nd and Dale Hicks 3rd . Dale Hicks took 3rd place . Harry
 A Colorado College chemistry professor is working on a research project designed to help petrolem engineers recover more oil from underground deposits . Stafford took a 1st place for the second time in the open slide class .
 Lester A Michel, professor and chairman of the chemistry department, will be working with other scientists at the Ohio Oil Company's Denver Research Center until next June . Michel will work at the company's Denver research center .
 In these formations the pores soak up oil much as water in a sponge . In the Ohio Oil Company research project, physical chemists will apply their knowledge of surface chemistry to the oil found in the pores of certain rock formations .
 Gift certificates from Stewart's Photo Shop of $10, $5, and $3 were given for 1st, 2nd, and 3rd places respectively .
 Landon and Sam Vickerman, all of whom have won numerous awards for their own photography in the Colorado Springs area .
 Preparation of the entries for judging was handled by the Rastall Center Receptionist, Mrs. Mrs. Martha .
 Oil Pressure Loss oil out of the pores and to the surface drops as a result of the recovery process . Grace Dickson, who is an excellent photographer in her own right.
 The project is related to research that Professor Michel has .been conducting at CC for several years . Professor Michel is conducting research at the university .
 The scientist has been trying to make accurate determination of the vapor pressure of organic liquids . He has been working on a number of types of liquids in the world .
 He was employed as a technical advisor on the Manhattan Project . He previously worked as technical advisor for the Manhattan project .
 A Peace Race Committee was set up by Norman Cousins, editor of theSaturday Review .
 The purpose of the Peace Race Committee is to support Kennedy for the ideals he has so well expressed . The committee is to encourage strong public response to the president's proposals for the developing of United States peace-exploratory agencies .
 Peace Race Committee is to procure several million signatures on a letter congratulating President Kennedy's expressed desires for peace, disarmament under effective international control, and United Nations strengthening . The goal for the Peace Race committee is .
 The letter reflects the everincreasing concern of responsible U.S. citizens to the danger of continued arms buildup .
 The letter urges the president to strong action in his search for possible alternatives to world conflict . The letter does not represent pacifist attitudes alone, but rather urges strong action .
 Those interested in signing the letter are encouraged to see Herving Madruga . The letter is available to sign by emailing the author .
 Member of the Colorado regional office of AFSC will be in the next two weeks . Member of Colorado's regional office .
 Peace Race Race Letter congratulates Obama for his "courageous and inspiring" speech before the U.N. Letter .
 In a time of confusion and fear, you have invoked the underlying moderation and humanity of the U.S. people, Obama says . "I'm not going to be afraid. I'm not afraid," he says .
 We agree heartily that the issue of disarmament must be tied to the larger question of security for all nations . The issue must be linked to security for nations, we say .
 Each of us urges our friends and colleagues to support the general course you have charted for peace . The peace plan can only be implemented in an atmosphere of mutual interest, the authors say .
 Heirloom amethyst and crystal necklace, probably in vicinity of Colorado College, is found in Colorado .
 Howard M Olson, chairman of the Colorado College physics department, will take a halfyear sabbatical leave during the 1962 spring semester . Olson will take the half-year leave in the spring of 1962 .
 The physics department chairman said he plans to spend a part of his leave doing experimental work in the physics laboratory at Pomona College in Claremont California .
 Olson plan to leave Colorado College in the latter part of January and return before the opening of the 1962 summer session next June 18 . Olson plans to return to the college in June .
 Professor Olson said he wants to give some thought during his leave to improve instruction in this area . Stressing the importance of the laboratory work for physics students, he stressed the importance .
 He has been on the CC faculty since 1925 . With the exception of a year as a research physicist for the Hughes Aircraft Company in Los Angeles .
 GG Alumnus heads NSF in Washington . Former Colorado Springs resident and Colorado College graduate Dr. Dr. Bob Greene is a former GG alumnaudan .
 Coloradoan formerly headed the Foundation's planning group for Educational and International Activities . The Coloradoan previously headed the foundation's planning groups .
 His new duties will include developing experimental programs in international science . He will also oversee foundation offices in Paris and Tokyo, policymaking in Paris .
 Dr. Shearn Explores Environment, Nerves . EDDIE MACKS GARAGE 3l7l/ 2 N Tejon Dr. Dr. Tejon .
 Donald Shearn, assistant professor of psychology, is trying to determine how enviroment — such as the morning alarm clock, the sun's glare, or soft music — produces changes by recording variations in the electrical resistance of the skin .
 Professor Shearn conducts the program on a $2,000 grant from the U.S. Health, Education and Welfare Department's Public Health Service .
 The first phase of the research probably will be completed by midsummer . He said the first phase will probably be complete by mid-June .
 Electrodes are attached to the surface of the volunteer subject's skin to pick up' the electrical changes . Electrodes were attached to . the skin to monitor electrical changes in the skin .
 The electrodes lead to a meter which measures the amount of electricity passing through the skin . The electrodes are electrodes which lead to an electricity meter .
 During one experiment, the subject will listen to nervous system to activate the a noise . The subject will also listen to a noise that activates the nervous system .
 This may cause the central sweat glands, which in turn cause a marked reading on the meter . This may also cause the body temperature to rise .
 If this experiment is repeated often enough, the skin may become conditioned to change its resistance rapidly to stop an unpleasant noise . The skin may be conditioned to become conditioned by the noise .
 Shearn said he is attempting to control reactions by making certain events, such as sounds, occur as a consequence of, or as a reward for these changes in the nervous system . Shearn says he is trying to control reaction by making sounds occur as consequence of or as reward .
 Some fifty students, many of them psychology majors at CC have volunteered to serve as subjects during the experiments . The experiments will be conducted by students at CC .
 The foot prospector's opportui ties have grown so that they include not only the preci 0D metals, but a host of other stances as well, Professor p ea said . Professor p. ea .
 Hi writing and research have gj V( him special recognition from elevi countries on four continents . Hi writing has gjv V( received special recognition .
 The interview will be conducted in DenJanuary 27th, 29th and 30th, In terviews also will be held in Cheyenne, Wyoming, on Februar; i)th and 10th . Application Form SF 57, ""Ap plication for Federal Employment
 The purpose of the schools is ti provide stateside public school ei ucational opportunities, gradi through 12, to dependents of U.S. military and civilian personnel stationed overseas .
 Th schools are located in the Azore, Crete, Denmark, England, Germany, Italy, Labrador, Liby£ Morocco, Morocco, Netherlands, Newfound land, Pakistan, Norway, Pakistan and Norway .
 "The she-wolf of the publishing industry" is the author of a new book, "The She-Wolf" The book is published by Simon Cowell, a self-publishing giant .
 Numerous (0 nipanies and agencies) have sent lt information concerning job placeC merit, and many others will visit l1ttr campus for interviews . Many others will also visit lt campus to interview .
 February 9th Mountain States Telephone & Telegraph Company . February 19th Texaco, Inc. February 20th Texas Railroad Company. February 19st Texaco Inc.
 Interested students should sign .p for interviews immediately in D^an Mathias' office. February 23rd Montgomery Ward February 28th United States General Accounting Office . February 23th Montgomery Ward . February 28nd Montgomery Ward
 A listing of companies coming to Ihe campus in March will be posted soon . The Ihe Campus will be open to students and students .
 Engli Convocation will be held at 11:00 a.m. The all-college convocation was originally scheduled for Feb. 28 .
 Other CC students attending are Jo Heller in Discussion, Peter Trusi Oratory and Dramatic Interpretation . Susan Caudill, Max Power, and Charles Puckett Impromptu Speaking .
 Itie is one of Itie's largest tournaments in the Rocky Mountain Region . John Auston tournament is held in Rocky Mountain region .
 Colo'ado College Honor Council issued a first warning for a violation of lh e Colorado College Honor Sysl *m.m. on January 24, 1962 . Universities and colleges from throughcut the region will be in attendance .
 This violation occurred JanQ ary 16, 1962, on a final laboratory examination in the geology Apartment . The violation occurred on Jan. 16, 1963 .
 This fun-filled weekend 15 is being ably planned by Jean V.com and Bill Ward . The event is being hosted by Bill Ward and Jean Jean Jean .
 Coulling is an alumnus of Washington and Lee University . Coulling was an Assistant Professor of English at D.C. Lee . He returned to D. Lee after obtaining his Ph.D.
 Year in and .year out it has .been the honor system that has . placed the school in its distinguished position in American education . Year in . and year out it . has . been the honor . system .
 It is the honor system that has made possible much of the characteristic life of the college community . The honor system is a model of community life at the University of Cambridge .
 It is the honor system that has helped create an environment in which serious intellectual pursuits are possible and in which excellence is respected . The honor system has helped to create a serious intellectual pursuit in the U.S.
 It is the honor system that attracts more praise and more interest, among students and educators from New England to California, than anything else can be mentioned about the College .
 Our genuinely effective honor system is the one thing that is shared by only a handful of institutions in the nation . This is so because of all we can boast here, the nation can boast of all that it can boast .
 "We do not sufficiently appreciate the true importance of the honor system," he says . And yet in recent years he has increasingly sensed that we do not fully appreciate the importance of honor system .
 We are prone to regard it with complacency, to accept it as the natural course of things, to consider it as something else here that is old and traditional . We should be careful not to regard the situation as something that is traditional, says David Cameron .
 Too many of us are either unaware or forgetful of what exists were there no honor system . Too many people are unaware of or forget what exists .
 It can create an atmosphere of mutual hostility between faculty and students, and it can demoralize everyone by establishing a mood of cynicism and futility . It can sap the vitality of an institution, it can make the whole educational process, and create a sense of hostility between staff and students .
 Former students have developed, administered, supported, supported and maintained the honor system as a vital force on this campus . "Whatever may have been the inadequacies of our former students, they have at least made one great contribution that is the bedrock of everything else"
 If the present and future students wish to make a contribution, they can make no more significant one than continuing the same tradition . If you want to make an important contribution, you can continue the tradition of the school .
 It is not theirs alone; it belongs to every student who through the years has faithfully helped establish it as an integral part of our lives . It's not their alone, it's not the students alone; they have faithfully established it .
 The enjoyment of it is not simply a right and a privilege, but a solemn responsibility . For this reason, the enjoyment of this experience is not just a right but a serious responsibility . Enjoying the experience is a "privilege"
 The honor system is not ours to do with as we please; it is only ours to preserve . As Ruskin said of the architecture of the past, the honor system was not ours . It is only our to preserve.
 A lecture series highlighting dynamic changes in modern Africa will begin next Wednesday, February 14 .
 It is necessary to sign up before the 14th at the Reception Desk, Rastall Center . Sign up for the program is required to be in place before 14th July .
 Charles Blooah will open with a background study of native life in West Africa . He will talk about the native life of West Africa in a new book .
 The culture of the Djabo, a confederated group of tribes located in Southern Liberia, will be compared with other groups in Gold Coast, Congo and Nigeria . The Djabo is a confederation of tribes .
 Sir John Fletcher-Cooke, knighted just* a month ago, appears February 21 . He was knighted last month and knighted in February .
 He will analyze the relationships engendered by the multi-racial nature of several African states . He will also analyze the relationship between the two nations .
 Richard Pfaff of the political science department, C.U. at Boulder, will lecture on African nationalism and the search for political identity . Pfaff will speak on March 7 at the University of Boulder, Colorado .
 The concluding session, March 14, will examine foreign policy questions involving Africa and the U.S. The session will be held in Washington, DC .
 Lecturer will be Major Donald Galvin of the U.S. Air Force Academy Academy .
 Tonight is the night of the annual Gold Digger's Ball . The ball will take place in New York City . It's the first time the ball has been held in the U.S.
 Sadie Hawkins affair to be held to the music of Floyd Frame's band . Couples will dance at this Sadie's affair .
 From 9 to 12 Rastall Center will resound to his music as they twist, slop and maybe even dance . From nine to twelve will be available from 9pm to 12pm .
 The Ball is being sponsored by the Associated Women Students . The price is $1.00 per couple . The ball will be held in honor of students .
 The Gold Digger's Ball had been an annual affair, but due to lack of interest, last year's was cancelled . Prior to last year the annual affair had been a yearly affair .
 Colorado College tradition has been revived . The tradition was at the request of the male population of Colorado College . Colorado College will hold the tradition tonight .
 The next Peace Corps placement tests will be administered on Saturday, February 17, at 8:30 at the Colorado Springs Post Off .
 "It would mean my life if I were caught, and I, with three small children," she said . It would mean her life if caught, she said, and she had three children .
 Here was money to send my three kids through college and maybe add a fallout shelter to the house . Here was cash to send them through college, maybe add an emergency room to the home .
 I knew there would be no turning back once I had said ""yes,"" but I also knew that there was no choice . I knew I had to say yes, but also knew there had to be a yes . I wanted to be able to live with my family and friends in
 I Prepare for the Infiltration. I prepare for the infiltration. Returning to my office I stepped into the washroom .
 I sent the office boy to the construction next door to buy me a pair of dirty dungarees. I sent him to buy them from the building next door . The office boy bought them from a construction site .
 "I realized that if I could find a pair dirty and beat-up enough, half the battle was won," she says .
 He removed his other hand from his mouth as if to say, ""Here you are, boss,"" then he fell over . "Here you're boss," he said, then fell over. "Here's not the boss, boss"
 "With a deep breath I looked into the bag and found a pair of the filthiest pants I had ever seen," says the author . "I looked into a bag and looked into it and found it was the most disgusting pants I'd ever seen"
 "From the waist down I had it made. I slipped them on and realized, upon looking into the mirror, that . I realized that, upon . looking into . the mirror . I looked at the mirror and realized that from the waist . down, I had . it made."
 Fine Arts Center is located two blocks from the Colorado College campus . Colorado College is located in Colorado Springs, Colorado, Colorado .
 A light snow had fallen, and mine were the only footprints on the path leading to the entrance . Toward this morning 1 headed one brisk Colorado Morning, a light snow fell .
 I would wrangle an invitation to a party and, if I was lucky, get a chance to observe one of their orgies . Then I would . wrangle . invitation to party and get a . chance to watch one of them orgies. Then I . would wriggle an
 The Art Center in New York City is home to the largest art museum in the world . The center is located in the U.S. state of New York .
 "I tried not to appear a casual visitor, knowing that this might destroy my chances," she said . She said she was trying to appear casual visitor to the site, knowing it might destroy her chances .
 I acted as if I were any arty student and started strolling over to the gallery . Instead, I acted like a normal student and walked over to see the artworks .
 "On my way I tipped over one or two ashtrays to give the appearance that 1 was an old hand"
 I looked around until 1 found the picture that I thought was the best of the lot. It was taken from a photo taken in the same place as the other .
 20 pairs of eyes were directed at me as I walked up to the statue . I jauntily strolled up to it, knowing that at that very moment, 20 eyes were aimed at me . The statue was the first of its kind to be unveiled in London's Westminster Abbey .
 Twenty seconds later a girl with striking long hair came out from behind a pillar . Twenty seconds after she came out, she was spotted by a police officer . The incident happened in the early hours of the morning .
 She had been hiding there for the past 45 minutes but I had pretended I hadn't seen her . She was hiding in the dark for 45 minutes before I saw her again .
 This young lady, whom we shall call Jane X, was the emissary of the Set . Jane X was a young lady from the Set, and she was a member of the Order of the Kingdom .
 Nu doubt they felt they could sacrifice her if I prove to be a spy . I doubt they thought they felt she could be sacrificed if they found her .
 She meandered up to me with her hands behind her back as though she were ice skating . She held her hands in her arms as she walked up to her husband's side of the street .
 Before I could say anything they descended from all sides; from behind pictures, doors and through windows . They descended from behind doors and from behind windows . 'They descended on all sides,' she said. 'Before I could speak they descended on me'
 One had even disguised himself as a piece of modern statuary which I, upon first sight thought was rather poorly done .
 At first I thought it was a convention of freaks but then I regained my balance. At first, I thought I was at a convention, but I got back on my balance .
 "I realized that they were people like the rest of us . . . Only different. I realized that . they were like the . rest of . us . only different .
 "With an unmistakable horror, I realized that that was exactly what they were doing," she said . "They were doing what they did," she later said .
 It took approximately tw minutes to walk from the Fine Arts Center to the Hub of Campus Activity . A Tense Cup of Coffee at the Hub was a coffee cup .
 Just as we were about to enter the Hub, one of them called the group to a halt . The group was stopped by police officers in the area .
 Two closely-related items of particular note to every student of CC as he or she begins this new semester . Elsewhere in the TIGER will be found .
 One is an announcement of sently exists, a violation of CC's Honor System during the recent examination period . The other is a breach of the Honor System . The Honor System is designed to ensure the integrity of the system .
 Colorado College's Honor Council was asked to be included in this week's TIGER at the request of the Honor Council . The Honor Council is concerned with the honor system, but not Colorado College .
 It appears that as the semester passes, some of CC's students, particularly upperclassmen, forget we are operating under a voluntary system of student discipline and self-discipline .
 This system has been in effect at CC since 1948 as an example of student self-government, and an admission of the trust our administrators, faculty, and even our predecessors have in us . This system is in effect as part of a model for self-governability at the University of
 It did not come into being as an administration mandate, and the administration has no part in its utilization . The administration did not have any part in the creation of the program, officials say .
 As responsible students of Colorado College, it is totally ours to do with as we wish, says student . "As responsible students, it's totally ours," she says .
 As we start this new semester, much could be gained if we would read Dr. Dr. John Sutter's book .
 The Honor System is based on the constitution of our student handbooks . Go back to our handbooks and read our constitution of the Honor System, we say .
 This sermon originated while the preacher was reading a set book for the college ""Freedom and Authority"" course . The sermon originated from the preacher's reading of the book for a college course .
 So many mistaken statements were made in the book concerning the great reformers' teaching on the doctrine of election and predestination that the reader felt he had to look at their writings and that of the Bible again .
 The purpose of the sermon is to look briefly at something of what the .bible says concerning this subject . The sermon is a brief look at the Bible's teachings on this topic .
 This hopes to show that it is not such a forbidding and awful topic that people who have never properly read the reformers assert, and that the freedom of the will of man does have its place .
 The Doctrine is the ultimate expression of the evangelical doctrine of grace, says one theologian . It is hoped to show that the doctrine is an expression of grace .
 Another Rastall Center Movie, The Hunchback of Notre Dame"", 'ill be presented in Perkins Hall n Sunday, February 11, at 7:30 . This portrayal of Victor Hugo's classic novel about a deformed outcast of society in the fifteenth century Paris stars
 Colorado College has lost twenty-four straight games and is in the cellar in its league . The team is currently in the bottom of its league and has lost 24 straight games . There is something chronically wrong with the hockey program here at Colorado College .
 Resolving this problem to simplest form it becomes one of letting the opposition score more goals than we ourselves score . The question is then what are the factors that are contributing to this dilution .
 This at first might seem that I was stating the obvious and was over simplifying the problem, but upon closer examination such is not the case. This at least might seem to be an over simplification of the problem . The problem is not a problem, however, it is a problem
 With very few exceptions, our team this year has been able to score at least three goals against the competitors, thus conclusively proving that our team has the fundamental scoring ability . This year's team has scored at least 3 goals against any of the competitors .
 At the same time, the opposition has without exception been able to score more goals, thus demonstrating that our basic weakness in competition is our defense . The opposition have scored more goals without exception to scoring more .
 Time and again, in the home games this season (and presumably on the road trips too) the defense has not covered ""the man in front of the net"" and this opposing player has scored, not just once, but several times in the course of the usual evening .
 It is virtually, impossible for any goalie to stop a well placed shot from close in like this . The fantastic number of goals scored against us this year are deceptive of the ability of the goalies for this very reason .
 No matter how talented a goalie might be, he is only as good as the defense in front of him . Goalkeeper is a liability for goalies in the NHL .
 The second consistent error on the part of our defense is that eveyone tries to be a goal tender with devas . The WHICKERBILL is a Gift and Card Shop with a bamboo cricket good luck symbol of the wortd .
 Millers Miller Music Co. at WON Ert. KIOWA at the top of the magazine's list .
 Sherbet ME 5-2740 Kachina Lounge Alto Vista Hotel I 16 N Cascade Ave. tating results. Sherbet Me 5-2640 . Alto Vista hotel is located in the middle of the city .
 If we were to prevent the opposition from getting their shots off instead of blocking their shots, our defensive efforts would be much more effective . If the opposition cannot shoot, they cannot score, the defensive effort would be more effective for very obviously .
 Minnesota's defense was very ably demonstrated by the Minnesota defense last weekend . The Vikings defense is the perfect way to defend the NFL's top players .
 The third and last habitually obvious defensive mistake is the persistant obsession of going after the man instead of the puck . Go after the puck is the most obvious mistake in the NHL .
 So many times the CC team has ""checked"" the opposition, much to the pleasure of the crowd but failed to gain possession of the puck . The CC team have won't be able to find the puck in the game .
 Throughout the season, they have lacked a consistently ""fast breaking"" attack . The club have struggled to find a consistently consistent attack .
 Because of this they have failed to capitalize on the other teams' mistakes, they haven't been able to take advantage of the mistakes made by other teams . This is because of this, they have not taken advantage of other teams mistakes .
 We have also lacked an effective ""powerplay"" and have not demonstrated any repeated ability to score on the long, well-placed shot . We also lack an effective "powerplay"
 A note of marked improvement over last year is their passing coordination . The passing coordination is a key part of the success of their passing .
 A word of commendation must be extended to our goalies who in the face of blistering attacks have turned in some very good performances on several occasions . Goalies must also be commended for their performances in the past .
 This does not exclude the fact that they have given the opposing team more than their share of gift goals more than once . It is not the first time they have failed to score a single goal in their last five games .
 Because of the poor coaching, the coaches lack the respect of the players, the players say . The coaches lack respect of players, according to the players. Because of that, they lack respect for the players .
 This is the reason that the players have very little ""will to win"" which is a functional part of any team . This is a function of the players' performance . The players have little will to win, which is why they have little desire to win .
 Our coaching staff in the persons of Frasca and Brenin, fails to demand much from the players and as a result fails to command the needed respect needed of a successful team . The coaching staff failed to command respect needed for a successful side, says Frasca .
 A coach should be the team's number one critic as well as its number one supporter . A coach is a coach who should also be a supporter of the team, writes Sportsmail .
 This balance is nonexistent at CC and becomes obvious when our team plays, for the same mistakes are made game after game after match . This balance becomes obvious at CC, and becomes evident when the team plays .
 It would seem that it was p a J of the coach's job to inspire 1^ ership and team spirit among hij players . Look at his results. Look at the results .
 "The record of our hockey team speaks for itself and sun. ports this fact. The record of this fact is evident in the sun. It's a good thing that sun. I'm happy to have this sun, I'm sure it's a great thing for the sun .
 I ] ize that there are many problems and complications involved, but i sincerely question whether e effort has been made to create the biggest and best schedule possible . To this end I would suggest thai there are a number of teams that come down from Canada evetV year to play
 Why can't an arrangement be developed whereby both schools could p| av more of these teams that i i i south of the border? Why not an arrangement?
 The third and final mistake that I shall bring out on the part of the coaches is the recruiting system which can only be described as a catastrophic abortion . The recruiting system is only the third mistake that the coaches have made in the past, the recruitment system is the worst .
 It is a waste of talent and opportunity for those concerned, it points out the inefficient planning on the j of the coaches . It is not the only example of the waste of effort and opportunity .
 We have exceeded all realms of practicality in this respect . We have more than enough players vieing for the available positions on the team . It's desireable it is desireable to have more players .
 Paul's Flowers Cut Flowers and Corsages Reasonably Priced at 1524 North Tejon MElrose 2-0164 Col. Col. Tejon .
 "Rather than sake the fullest of the opportunity, :ve come to simply take it anted. Rather than sake . the fullest . of the . opportunity, rather than sake it fullest of . the opportunity .
 We are in the most lis hockey league in the U.S. and compete against jf the biggest state supporttools in the country . We compete against the biggest support tools in the state .
 ijid Ijid: "With the lid of the Broadmoor, Colorado [dlege has fielded the finest itams in the country in the past"
 I do not [eel that this is probable or possible] if our present coaching staff ■etained for future seasons . I don't think it would be possible or possible if our current coaching staff is retained for future season .
 The ilayers that are here today have the basic ability to compile a rentable record and be justly |roud of it, but they will never io it without leadership, the ""will in,"" team spirit, and cooperaail of which are lacking as ome to the
 Second row — Pat Smyth, Don Stouffer, Archie Prestayko, Ale* Yankovich, Art Berglund, John Simus, Wayne McAlpine, Dave Lewis . Freshman Coach Tom Brennan. Tom Brennan .
 Third row — Mike Minelli, Larry Gilbertson, Stan Moskal, Duke Dutkowski, Hen Hanson, Marv Parliament . Hen Hanson: "I'm glad to have been able to get back to the top of the world"
 Contestants will compete with other students from across the nation by means of duplicate bridge . Contestants must compete with each other by using duplicate bridge.
 Everyone who is interested in taking the Standard Red Cross First Aid Course is urged to attend . The Standard First Aid course will be held at the Red Cross's headquarters .
 The meeting will be devoted to organizing a time and meeting place agreeable to all interested .
 The course is 10 hours in length but may be taken in several combinations . The course may be 10 hours long and may take several combinations of courses .
 Recent changes in methods of artificial respiration and blood control make this a valuable course even for those who may have taken it in the past . The only cost involved is in the purchase of a book for 75c .
 This program is sponsored by the Outings Club and is being organized by Donald Oden, Student Activities Director of Rastall Center .
 Colorado College will be represented at the Intercollegiate Bowling Tournament by Bill Pelz, Dale Shaw, Tom Brindley, Bill Evans, Jeff Goulart and Bill Kranich . Colorado College is represented in the tournament .
 The regional section of the tournament will be held at Bowl-Mor Lanes here in Colorado Springs on February 16th and 17th .
 Competitors will be here from Colorado, Arizona, New Mexico, Utah, Utah and Wyoming . Competitors are expected to come from all over the country .
 Get the slouch, the beatific expression and, most important, look like you're the greatest person in there . Get a slouch or beatific face and look like the best in there.
 Make them eat cake, they chant, but 1 couldn't make out the words . They started to chant .
 The hardest part was over and I was getting closer to that big fat check . "The hardest part of the hardest part is over," she said . "I'm going to get close to that fat check"
 We walked in, and a hush fell over the room while everyone turned to look at us . We walked into the room, and everyone turned around to see what was happening .
 His adding ""black"" squelted a request for a little cream immediately . His adding "black" squelched a request from the doctor .
 "I quickly realized 1 wasn't with amateurs but smart and inspired artists, artists who knew well what art was all about," she says . "Art is all about. It's all about art," she writes .
 Fine cotton oxford has been tailored with utmost finesse to provide slimmer fit . Fine cotton . oxford is tailored to the utmost .
 I knew I had one friend among them; the girl with the long hair who, even now, was trying to engage me in a game of footsie . The girl with long hair tried to engage her friend with footsie, even though she had long hair .
 They all took paint brushes from their pockets and held them gingerly between the thumb and forefinger of both hands . They all held the brushes between their fingers and the thumb of each hand .
 The fellow at my right looked quickly at me and broke his brush in half (his name was Paul Y) I remembered him because he put salt on everything he ate. I remember him as a man who put salt in everything he had eaten .
 "With a little kick to my shin bone she put her brush down . . unbroken. With a little . kick to her shin bone . She put it down unbroken . With a kick to the shin bone, she put down .
 "This could mean college for my kiddies or . . or . the consequences were too horrible to consider," she said . "I'm not sure what the consequences will be," she wrote .
 They had been used by a workman during the construction of the Pamama Canal . They smelled like the Bolivian jungle and smelled like a jungle .
 My hair was set and my sneakers given a few more rips for good measure . was out to make a really good impression. was out for a good impression . The actor was set to make an appearance at the end of the day .
 As I entered, the first person I saw was my old friend, Jane X . She was wearing a paint pallet and looked alluring as hell, but I was there for business . Jane X was wearing an alluring, alluring pallet .
 There was a girl dressed in man's clothing and a man dressed in girl's clothing . Girl dressed in woman's clothing was dressed in a man's clothes .
 "I took a deep breath and gave the girl in the man's suit a great big kiss," she said . "I don't know what I really want to do," she added .
 She responded with a kick in the shins and ran off giggling to see her boyfriend who was cooking up some heroin for later . She responded .
 The other person, a fellow dressed as a girl, introduced himself as Clarence . Clarence. Clarence .
 "It was then and there that I realized what was meant by the Moment of Truth," she said . "I realized what I had to do," she added .
 "I quickly forgot the seriousness of the situation, I quickly forgot a witty quip, loosened my trousers and walked in," he said .
 The sight that flashed across my consciousness will laways be remembered in my nightmares . The sight will be remembered for the rest of my life as a child .
 He was smoking a thick black cigar and had two accounting majors at either side, fanning him . "He was smoking black smoke," he said. "I'm not going to let it slide," he added .
 A Nubian was peeling grapes and handing them to be tested to the girl who sat on his knee . The girl sat on her knee as he peeled the grapes .
 She was fantastically beautiful and had eyes that made me melt as if I were a pat of butter . She was a 'fantastically beautiful' and 'made me melt' as a 'pat of butter'
 He looked at his wonw and then at his fingernails, jj. finally looked at me. He looked back at his fingers and then looked at them again .
 The End of My Adventuu How 1 escaped I'll never know . The next thing I knew I was forcefully dragged from the Leader's quarters and tied to a gian totem pole .
 "A fire was lit at ni' feet and the entire Arty Se started to dance around me fra tically," says the author . A fire lit at Ni' feet, the Arty se started dancing around me .
 I found myself fight ing panic as I realized that n only chance for escape was lock up in a closet somewhere in thi vast oemplex that was Coloradi Springs . The only escape was to lock up a closet .
 The flames consumed her long flowing locks I thought fondl her faithfulness and love . A the flames consumed . Her long flowing . flowing locks . I thought . fondl she loved her love and faithfulness .
 The Aftermath I recounting these ad' tures on the patio of my lu.xurj apartment in Acapulco, Mexico . The excitement is over and I am safe .
 Colorado College Tiger . Colorado Springs, Colorado, February 16, 1962 Vol. Vol. 2: Colorado Springs' House of Wheels and Raleigh Bicycles .
 The second convocation of this school year was held Tuesday, February 13 at 11 in Shove Chapel . Benezet Views Campus Questions: Campus Questions .
 President Benezet spoke on ""Changes in the Wind" to inform the college community of the new developments in cumpus affairs . The College Choir under Mr Jenkins sang the ""Quoniam Tu Solus Sanctus" from Vivaldi's Gloria in D .
 One change he assured the -students would not take place is a rise in tuition . About room and board, however, there was n question .
 President Benezet also spoke about the fluctuation in the campus community itself . The president of the University of Columbia University spoke to students and students .
 This he attributed to an active faculty on fellowships and sabbatical leave ami involved in writing and research . This is due to active faculty members involved in the writing, research and writing .
 There are also 45 incoming students, some transferring, some off suspension . Some of the incoming students are also transferring or being suspended .
 Colorado College Winter Carnival will be in full swing this evening . Ski Races, Broomball, Hockey Faculty Team featured at Winter Carnival . CC Faculty Team will be featured .
 The two-day festival will include ski races, broomball games, interfraternity hockey games, crowning of the Hockey Queen, a skating exhibition, a twist party, and a Saturday night dance .
 Today's activities will start with a twist party at 4:45 m.m. in the Hub . Party will take place at 4.45 a.m., 4.30 a. m. in Hub .
 Next on tap is a skating exhibition to be performed by Lynn Carmichael, CC senior . The exhibition will be held at the end of the month .
 The culmination of the evening's activities will be the coronation of the Hockey Queen elected from the candidates representing each of the five sororities on campus . The coronation will take place at the end of the night .
 Saturday's program will get underway when top CC skiers compete on the east side of Cheyenne Mountain . Top CC skier will compete in the east part of the program on Saturday .
 The ski races will be held as a class competition for the, best time . Beginning at 1:00m., the ski races are held as part of the class competition .
 Winter Carnival Dance will be held in the Crystal Room of the Alamo Hotel from 9:00 to 12:30 Saturday night . Capping the festival will be the Winter Carnival dance, to be held Saturday night at the hotel .
 Chuck Gibson's eight piece student band will provide music for the event . The event will be held in honor of Chuck Gibson .
 The Winter Carnival promises to be one of the year's highlights . Organized under the eo-chairmanship of Bill Ward and Jean Torcom .
 The position of All-School Picnic Chairman is now open . Applicants are sought for the position . All-College Confab March 17 and 18 .
 Application forms are available at the Rastall Center desk and must he filed by March 5 . Application forms must be filed by the end of the month .
 Carnival Game Rules: The soroity broomball games shall be five minutes in length . The games are five minutes long .
 Using brooms and a large ball, the object of the game shall be to score by hitting the ball against the back boards of the opposing team . The object of this game is to score using a large, broom-shaped ball .
 In case of a tie or no score there will be an overtime until one team scores . In the case of an overtime, the game will go to an extra time .
 Students Form Russian Club Tuesdays . Alexy Malyschev, assistant professor of Russian, to form Russian Club .
 Marty Bonforte, president, Gloria Farha, vice-president; and Susan Merrell, secretary-treasurer . The organizational meeting concluded with the election of Marty Bon Fortforte as president .
 Constitutional and activity committees were formed, and events for the coming semester were discussed . The meeting also discussed plans for the upcoming semester .
 Proposed activities include a March tea for the Russian hockey players . March tea will be held for the players .
 A faculty hockey team is practicing this week to take on the winner of the interfraternity hockey competition in a 14-minute game during the Winter Carnival tonight at the Broadmoor Arena . Other meetings will take place in the near future .
 11 faculty men and one graduate student have volunteered to battle the fraternities' top team . Thus far 11 faculty members and one grad student have been volunteering .
 Coaching the squad is John O Howard, assistant to the business manager at the college . Coaches the squad at the College of Technology in Essex .
 Among those wearing the faculty colors will be William E Barton, instructor in business administration; J Alan Johnson, assistant professor of business administration and economics; Robert M Torrens, food service manager; Gerald C Carle, director of athletics and professor of physical education .
 E Robert Peterson, assistant professor of French; and James M Hanks, graduate student. Hanks is the author of the book .
 Ruth Snodgrass and David Logan will give the annual Phi Beta Kappa lectures on Tuesday, February 20, at 7:30m. in the WES Lounge of Rastall Center . The lectures will be held in the Rastell Center's WES lounge .
 Nobel Prize-winning chemist has recently been involved in controversy over his views on nuclear war and international affairs . Pauling is the Nobel Prize winner for his work on nuclear weapons .
 The meeting will be open to the public . Glenn Brooks, Phi Beta Kappa chapter president, will moderate the meeting .
 Those planning to attend are asked to notify Miss Lorna Berger, 204, by February 19 . Since refreshments will be served, refreshments are being served .
 In the past seven years the student body has increased only 10 per cent while the faculty has doubled . On enrollment, he emphasized the fact that such a college as CC appeals to ""limited clientele"" in the past .
 An informal poll of the ""ponderers" favored a maximum enrolment of 1,500 students within the next decade . The poll of senior administrators favors a maximum enrollment of 2,500 .
 The danger of admitting students merely on grades and test scores is that a ""new strain of bacteria"" may arise to leap over the College Board fence . The danger is that "American students are pretty good games-men"
 Wanted are students who have not only the mentality but also the potential profit from four years of a liberal education . Wanted: Students who have the mentality and potential profit potential from liberal education.
 Benezet stated the need for an objective view of the dissention in this country over time spent on study versus time spent in campus ""affairs"
 His major point was that students must, besides gaining knowledge, prepare for citizen ship in a future society . Students must also prepare for future society, he said .
 Council should, he believes, become the real arbiters of student conduct to free the deans for individual counseling . Council should free deans from individual counseling, he says, to free students from the college .
 The main problem with student affairs now is lack of centralization which causes conflict and planning gaps . Students say the main problem is not centralization, but centralization is a problem .
 President urged student participation in the upcoming All-College Conference March 17 and 18 . The conference is scheduled for March 17-18 .
 In athletics, a perennial question is what a small college such as CC can do to overcome increased professionalism i n inter collegiate sports since it has lost financial support from gate receipts .
 The answer is men willing to play without subsidy for the sport itself, a supporting student body and opponents willing to take our way . The answer to the question is that they should be able to play their way .
 As long as the student body wants inter-collegiate sports and as long as these games serve the college and not vice versa, CC will continue its scheduling schedule . CC will not change its scheduling policy .
 He also felt that it is CC's duty to bring back soccer and swiming . The new pool is to be completed late in 1963, and that we need more skiing instruction .
 Continuation of the hockey program depends 50 per cent on the acquisition of our own ice both for the team and for recreation, but student enthusiasm for the rink is needed to complete by next fall .
 With the completion of the new sports facilities there will probably be a return to required physical education for men .
 Benezet said that dissatisfaction came from changing needs to make the most of the academic year . The university says students need to make most of this year's academic season .
 The quarter and ""trisemesler"" systems were discredited as not strengthening the unity of a small liberal arts college . The quarter system was discredited in the 1980s .
 There is the possibility of ending the first semester before Christmas and bridging the time between semesters with a weeklong symposium . However, there is also a possibility of a Christmas symposium before Christmas .
 For the freshman class, Paul Carson, Sharon Shackleford and Cubby Welch are pictured . For the senior class, Jan Pry and Sue Hoyt are pictured here . For more photos, visit CNN.com/Heroes .
 A newly formed group on campus devoted to a discussion of current events met for the first time Tuesday . The group meets in the WfiS room in Rastall Center .
 The purpose of the group was to provide a forum for interested students and faculty who wished to discuss current affairs . Fred A Sondermann, Associate Professor of Political Science, explained that the purpose of this group is to provide an opportunity for current affairs.
 He suggested an informal organization that would meet every other Tuesday except durin K exams . He also proposed a time schedule of from 4:00 to 5:15 in the afternoon for the meetings .
 The group then turned to a debate over the proposed sending of two CC students to a peace conference in Washington . The group also discussed the relationship of France and Algeria .
 The discussion was first concerned about the use of ASCC funds for the trip . The discussion began with concerns about how the funds were used .
 This was discussed at length and then a more general interest in the conference itself captured the attention of the group . The group discussed the conference and the future of the conference .
 ASCC met to discuss the financial issue the following day . ASCC seemed iminent from the group's reaction to the decision .
 All interested students and faculty are urged to attend these meetings . The meetings will be open to all interested students .
 Subsequent meetings will be held on February 20, March 6, and April 10, April 24, and May 8 . The first meeting will be February 20 .
 The next meeting will be held at 4m. in the WF.S Lounge of Rastall Center . The meeting will take place at 4pm.
 The topic for discussion will be the pamphlet ""Westeren Values and Total War" The pamphlet is available for 25 cents at the Rastall desk .
 ASCC meeting of the 1961-fi2 school year tool< took place on February 7 . Probably the most important and well attended ASCC meet of the school year .
 Concerned was the request of two students, Myles Hormer and Harris Sherman, for ASCC funds to allow them to attend ;i Washington, D.C., convention . The two students requested funds to attend the convention .
 ASCC can't allocate funds for participation in or observation of demonstrations by minority groups . ASCC should not be able to allocate funds to participate in or observe demonstrations by minorities, says student bodv .
 Hopper and Sherman and their views, general participation and interest among students was the most lively and pertinent seen in recent ASCC meetings . Hopper, Sherman and Sherman were the speakers .
 The motion was defeated by a 9-4 vote, but a $100 allocation by the Assemblies Committee and contributions by individual members of the CC will allow these two students to attend the convention as observers .
 Despite the unusual and gratifying burst of zeal and interest among a student body usually devoid of such enthusiasm, two things have come to light. Notwithstanding the unusual . burst of enthusiasm, there are two things to be seen: enthusiasm and interest .
 First is recognition of a need to present CC students a look at world situations and minority views . First is the recognition of the need for students to learn about world situations .
 'Commitment' (Myles Hopper, vice-president, and Harris Sherman, president) has tried to do for the past year, he said . 'Their organization has often met with ridicule and rebuke and rebuke,' he added .
 CC students should wake up and look at the world outside . College isolation won't last forever. CC students need to wake up to look outside of campus .
 Washington conference is a start in this direction . Observation and consideration of such activities as the Washington conference will be a good start .
 Second, it became apparent that here is an area where ASCC is deficient . ASCC has a history of failing to adequately address the needs of the organization . The organization has been criticized for its lack of transparency in recent years .
 An informal committee has been formed to study a proposed constitutional amendment . This need has been recognized by Mr Griffiths, says Griffiths .
 This amendment would give ASCC jurisdiction over requests by political and minority groups . It would allow ASCC a review and allocation power over them which it now does not have . ASCC would be able to review and allocate power over requests .
 Tlie mechanizations of this proposal have not yet been worked out, but a step has been made . The proposal is a step in the right direction, but it's not yet worked out .
 He is a convinced Christian, and has some penetrating first-hand insights into the present political and religious situation in Central Africa .
 Mr Nkiwane has received much of his earlier education at a school run by a mission arm of the Congregational Churches of England and Wales .
 Colorado Colege has a new instructor in dance, Mr Larry Boyette . Mr Boyette to teach Ballet, Point Work Colorado Co. Colege Colege will hold a conference on March 17 and 18 .
 Mr Boyette, director of the Ballet Arts Center of Denver, will teach two classes this spring semester .
 The new dance instructor was a member of the Metropolitan Opera Ballet Company for nine years . She has danced on Broadway and television .
 Jim Hanks was crowned king of the Golddiggers' Ball last Friday night before a crowd of approximately 90 couples .
 Two important requirements are that he have the ability and have I a sincere desire to help the class contribute positively to I Colorado College . Fellow Freshmen — j
 They played a sistent, determined brand of j,. ketball, made few mistakes, walked off with a richly despnnn. victory . They played sistent and determined, played few mistakes .
 For the crowd to give the hor team an advantage is one thi] For them to hoot, mock ami if at the officials and members the opposing team is quite a . other . The crowd is one of the biggest factors in the game .
 I have participated in a f e varsity sporting events mys< throughout high school anil ci lege, and know the feeling of co fidence and desire to achieve f nerformnnre that is instilled by home crowd .
 It does not do the pla**ood to have the crowd constantly harassing and screaming at officials and opponents . But it does the . pla'ood to . have to have it constantly harassed and screamed at officials, opponents .
 It is point less and accomplishes nothint more than building a bad Hon for CC and having the offi cials lean more toward th sition on close calls . It's point less than building up a bad hon for CC .
 I adi officiating last Saturday w; But anyone who has a knowledg of basketball must also admit that the officials called as many ones against Western as the; against us. I ad i adi .
 Some of my good friends were I one whose conduct was the woi Mv point in writing the letter simply that I would once like ti see a CC basketball game at Cos sitt and not be embarrassed by some of the performances of some of low members of the CC studeiv
 It is my hope that this postponement will mean a better conference, anil not result in a lessened interest on the part of the student body . At the All College Conference the student, faculty and administration are given the opporti to gain a better understanding of the problems of
 I hope that the Conference will continue to have the support of all concerned. For this reason, I . hope that I hope . I hope this is the case for all concerned to continue to support .
 Symposium is tightly packed with panel discussions, lectures, discussion groups, luncheon discussions, and the like . The Symposium will feature three of the foremost authorities on the problems of nuclear war — Dr. Dr. Peter Bergen, Dr. David Cameron and Dr. Paul Wolfson
 All sessions will be pen, free of charge, to interested WEAPON and STRATEGY T students, faculty members, and residents of the area . Students, faculty and faculty members will be able to attend .
 The Symposium, which will deal with the problem of nuclear war and the international power struggle a s time permits, will be of immense intellectual import, according to its director, Dr. Dr. David Cameron . Dr. Cameron: "The Symposium will deal as many and varied aspects
 Sondermann has placed the booklet, ""Western Values and Total War" on sale at Rastall Desk .
 Coburn Library has many reserve materials available which deal with the questions of nuclear war . In addition, the bookstore has set up a large display of relevant paperbacks, and many reserve books .
 The three discussion leaders whose views will highlight the Symposium each have impressive backgrounds . The Symposium will be held in New York City, New York .
 Since that time he has held a number of academic positions, including a resident professorship at the National War College . He has also been a resident professor at the War College in London .
 He has served as Special Assistant to the Chief of Staff of the U.S. Air Force . He has also served as technical expert to the United States delegation to the UN Conference at San Francisco .
 He is presently a consultant and writer with the center for the Study of Democratic Institutions . He has published such studies as PERMANENT PEACE and A WORLD WITHOUT WAR under the Center's auspices .
 Morgenthau came to the U.S. in 1937 . He has an extensive background as lawyer and teacher in Europe .
 Morgenthau has taught at Brooklyn College, Kansas City, California, Harvard, Northwestern, Columbia, Yale, and Princeton . He also taught at Harvard, Columbia and Columbia .
 All three of the Symposium's guests are noted writers in their area of endeavor . The Symposium will be held in New York City .
 Also invited to take part in the Symposium was Senator Barry Goldwater . Senator Goldwater will be in Colorado March 1 .
 Louis T Benezet's invitation was extended by the president of the CC . He expressed his regrets at being unable to attend, and promised to try to visit CC in the near future .
 Reserve Officer Training Corps ceremony held Friday, January 26 . The ceremony was attended by family and friends .
 Arthur D Decker, a professor of military science and tactics at the college, administered the oath of office .
 Robert W Selig, Jr., of North Hollywood, California, has been assigned to the Artillery Branch of the Army and received a delay of two years in reporting for active duty to complete graduate work at the London School of Economics, London, England .
 The third Colorado College graduate receiving his commission as a second lieutenant is Charles C Allen . Allen is the third to receive his commission from Colorado College . Allen will be the first of three to receive a commission from the college .
 The oath will be administered by Army personnel at his home in La Danada, California, California .
 He has been assigned to the Quartermaster Corps . He will enter active duty on February 28, reporting to Ft. Ft. George Washington .
 Exchange Study in Holland is available for junior men .
 Applications are now being received for the student exchange program with the Netherlands College for Representation Abroad . The Foreign Student Committee lias announced that applications are being received .
 The college faculty voted overwhelmingly to replace the present system of reporting all mid-semester grades with a new system for reporting only D and F grades at the mid-term .
 Certain faculty members felt that reoprting grades four times a year puts an undue emphasis on grades as such and tends to perpetuate immaturity rather than to develop maturity .
 Dean Lloyd E Worner: "The wisdom of giving midsemester grades as we now give them has been questioned" "Several times during the past decade the wisdom of . giving mid-semesters grades has been . questioned,"" said Worner . Worner.
 Some faculty members took the view that mid-semester grades often have a harmful effect upon freshmen and their parents when they get a grade after seven weeks .
 It was also felt that the time spent recording all grades might be better spent on careful consideration of the students who appear to be in difficulty .
 The faculty voted to add a course in intermediate Russian and approved a junior year abroad . In other action, the faculty also approved the addition of a year abroad and proposed curriculum changes .
 The intermediate Russian course will be a continuation of the elementary Russian course started last fall . It will be offered in September .
 The course will review srammer and oral practice and reading in Ru; ture, civilization and science . The course is designed to help students with reading comprehension and vocabulary .
 Colorado College students now may participate in Wayne State at Munich and Freiburgh in Germany . Wayne State will conduct the program at Munich, Germany, in addition to Sweetbriar and Smith College .
 Also authorized was the addition of an anthropology course entitled The Cultural Area . Deadline for this information is March 3 .
 Specific questions should be directed to Bob Williams, who attended N.O.I.B. last year, or Ed Kuiper, the Dutch student at CC this year . Specific questions about the program should be answered by Bob Williams .
 A number of Dutch industrialists planned to establish the College . The College was established as a result of the recent war . It is the first college in the Netherlands to be established .
 Young men were trained to follow specific careers at home and abroad . They succeeded in persuading others that there was an urgent need in post-war Holland for young men .
 College opened in 1946 in an old castle, Nijenrode, about 15 miles from Amsterdam . Thanks to generous financial support of companies such as Lever Brothers and Shell, it was possible to open the College .
 Nijenrode is located along one of the oldest rivers of Holland . The castle, with its park, ponds, moats and bridges, was founded in the 13th century . It now serves as the main building in which all lectures are given .
 The stress lies to a great extent on student life . The study program includes many subjects (economics, business science, statistics, law psychology, philosophy, French, German, English, Spanish, Russian, Arabic, sociology, market research, banking, journalism .
 The Student Body, ""Nieuwe Compagnie van Verre,"" is a name commemorative of the old East India Company . The student body is a commemoration of the company . It is the name of the Student Body .
 Students fill a number of responsible positions in the Senate . As members of the Senate and of the various sub-committees, the students fill a variety of positions .
 All-Sun-Tanned teams play in various leagues . Sports also take a major role in the sport .
 B through direct exchanges with American colleges . Besides that, seven other countries are represented in the United States .
 The first throe months you will have trouble in understanding Dutch . Five hourly classes every week and especially the social contacts you make in the ""lounge"" in the castle, which is run by the students .
 All the courses are given in Dutch, but for examinations, special arrangements have been made for American students . Students write the examination either in English or compose a paper on a special subject .
 First, you get a good knowledge of Dutch, which will give you a good base for the study of another foreign language such as German .
 With your knowledge of Dutch you will have a better opportunity to learn more about the Dutch people . Learn Dutch from Dutch to help you understand the language .
 During the Christmas vacation, December 15 — February 5, there is a great opportunity to travel through Europe and see and feel the different atmosphere in every country .
 Many of the employees of THE SKI SHOP and of SPORT, INC. had the chance to watch the fun you had at Aspen and other places skiing between semesters .
 Several geria, books containing photographs of the French countryside, and a life of Postuer, have been deposited in the college library by Lu Bonne Volonte Franco-Americaine of Paris .
 The books were given to the college in recognition of its efforts in fostering French culture in the U.S. and encouraging mutual friendship between the two nations .
 Colorado College Tiger HO CHOON AND RUSSELL SPERRY, the the Slocum longpong championship . Colorado College Tigers Ho CHOON and Russ Sperry won the championship .
 If the new editor really thinks he belongs with the TIGER and not the Kinnikinnik, let him treat it like a newspaper . Let's hope that he will be able to get the job of the editor .
 The editor cut a story (gathered and written at pains by a staff member) publicizing the February 14 visit of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. "I am personally irate," he writes .
 Galvin asks CC students and others to join an experimental attack on mental illness . Galvin is asking CC students to join in an experiment on mental health .
 Volunteers will work in the state's institutions, helping inmates realize that they are still a part of society . Volunteers will also help the volunteers realize that the distinction is not so great between free citizens and those behind locked doors .
 The importance of Galvin's position and the importance of his program both give the CC community a right to expect news of his visit in the only source which is read by everybody . Galvin will be visiting the University of Cambridge on Saturday .
 Other faculty members, so I learn, ""lost"" stories to the editor's pencil. "Lost" stories are "lost"
 He devoted C>4 columninches, by rough measurement, to a feature satirizing the ""arty set"" which was keyed to no particular date . The feature is keyed at no particular time .
 Thirty-four inches went to criticize the hockey team, plus a picture 4 columns wide and 5:5 inches deep . Next week would have done as well .
 Fifteen inches on page one and 10 on the editorial page described an apprently excellent honor system at Washington and Lee .
 Only 38.8 column-inches were devoted to news of CC events which had just taken place or were about to .
 Paul Kutsche, Assistant Professor of Sociology and Anthropology, is an assistant professor of sociology and anthropology . He is a Sociology Assistant Professor at the University of Cambridge, England .
 Rasketball can be a great game when played well and officiated properly . However, thus far this season I have found that referees seem to detract a great deal from our home games with many of their idiotic calls .
 Please don't mistake what I am saying for a complaint about ouilosing a couple of games; this is not the case. Please don’t mistake what he is saying for being a complaint .
 I have seen calls made against both sides that are so ludicrous that I can't see how an official could make them . Further many flagrant violations have been made without any recognition of them . I have also seen calls that were made that were so ludicrous .
 "I think that if something is not done about them, people will become disgusted with the games, or they will come merely to bait, torment, and ridicule these men," she says .
 The answer is probably a mixture of the two, .but in either case I think that something must be done about the officials of our games . The answer to the question is probably the answer to it .
 Mr Richard A Johnson, a senior career Foreign Service Officer, will be on campus on February 23, to meet with the faculty and student body to discuss current information concerning careers in the U.S. Foreign Service .
 Johnson will meet with students in the WES Lounge, Rastall Center, at 3:30 for informal discussion . Mr Johnson will be available to meet students at the end of the evening .
 Mr Johnson entered the Foreign Service as an officer in 1040 . He has served in Naples, London, La Paz, Guadalajara, Cuidad Trujillo and more recently as Counselor for Political Affairs, American Embassy, Madrid .
 The next annual Foreign Service examination will be given September S. S, 1062 .
 Candidates must be at least 21 and under 31 years of age on July 1, 1962 . Candidates for the one-day examination must be 21 and 31 years old . The one day exam will be held on July 31, 1962.
 Those 20 years of age may apply if they are college graduates or if they have completed their junior year . Those 20-year-olds may also be eligible for the program . Applicants must be 20 years old or have completed junior year of college .
 They must have been citizens of the United States for at least nine years . They must be in the U.S. for a minimum nine years.
 Candidates successful in the one day examination will subsequently be examined orally by panels which will meet at regional points throughout the United States . Candidates will then be examined by panels that will meet in regional parts of the country .
 Starting salaries range from $5,625 to $6,755 plus allowances, leave, and other benefits . Starting salaries in the U.S. range between $4,500 and $6.75 .
 The Foreign Service requires officers with training in public and business administration, executive management, economics and related subjects . Officers with major course of study include poltical science, history, language and area studies .
 The completed application form must be received by the Board of Examiners not later than midnight, July 23, 1962 . The application form is required to be submitted by the board of examiners .
 If you are between 20 and 26, between 5'2"" and 5'8"" and single, you may qualify for this challenging and rewarding career .
 Stewardess Training Center in suburban Chicago is a new two million dollar training center . Train in the new two-million-dollar training facility . The new training center is located in Chicago .
 Recreational facil ities for trainees housed in the dormitory includes a year round pool . Recreational facilities include a year-round pool .
 Sanders' Kentucky Fried CHICKEN ""it's finge lickin' good"" ffZ3j> Take-Home TTTr^ Department Trrig> Open TTTr2y 1 1m. to Jj3^ 12m. or call jssis* ME 4
 Porter is an art major from janta Fe, New Mexico, whose photographs have appeared in "" "": ■ exhibitions in Rastall and the Kinnikinnik. Porter is a junior at the University of New Mexico . Porter's photographs have been published in ":  exhibitions in
 Exhibitions planned for display Rastall in the future include a huwing of paintings by Paul Garpaintings by David Dunlap .
 The Kinnikinnik staff announces that the deadline for material subitted for the spring issue will be Uarch 27 . The deadline is March 27 for material submitted .
 Prizes will be awarded A fifteen dollars each for prose, poetry, art, photography, photography and covriesign .
 The editors wish to acknowledge orman Liden as the author of the poems, ""Death of an Old Woman,"" and ""Festival Sketches,"" which appeared in the winter issue of the Kinnikinnik .
 The new copy editor of the linnikiniiik is Roseunn Brown and Buck is the new art editor . A limited number of copies of this issue are available at Rastall Desk .
 Fwo new members, Dan Jaffe and lames Fox, have been added to the Board of Review . Fwo members of the Fwo board have been named .
 G2 Intercollegiate Bridge tournament is sponsored by the Asftciation of College Unions . The tournament is held at G2 International Bridge Tournament .
 The ""mpetition will be held in RasWES Lounge on Sunday February 18th at 2:30m. The "mpetition" will take place in the RasWes Lounge .
 This is a contest and there■Te entrants are urged to form ^""tnerships before the actual con; t time . Contestants must form a partnership before they enter the contest .
 Traveling trophies and plaques will be given to the college participts winning the national titles . Campus winners will *eive certificates .
 Last year s Beemer, Charles Green% John Reynolds and Keith 'enburg were the local campus ers . Last year's Beemer was Beemer .
 The CC team piled un ten points to win the top honor . Competing against some 30 colleges and universities, mainly from the great plains region .
 Militarv Academy at eWst Point finished second with 7 points, and Buenn Vista College at Storm Lake, Iowa, finished third with 6 points . MilitarV Academy at iWst point finished second in Iowa with 7 .
 Colorado College won three first pl ace trophies and one second place in various events . Colorado College was awarded three first and two second place trophies . The college won three pl ace prizes and one first place placers .
 Mary Jo Heller, a freshman from Denver, was the top speaker in discussion . Susan Caudill, from Houston, Texas, was second .
 Heller and Caudill received the first place team trophy in discussion discussion discussion . The team received the team of discussion participants in discussion .
 Miss Caudill also won first place in Impromptu Speaking by capturing 7 first place decisions out of 7 in four rounds of competition . She also captured 7 first places in 4 rounds of contest .
 Max Power, junior from Denver, failed to make the finals in Impromptu but received three second place ballots in three preliminary rounds . Max Power is a junior at Denver High School .
 Competing in Debate will be Chris Griffiths, senior from Pueblo, Max Power, Charles Puckett, junior from Wilson, Oklahoma, Susan Caudill, David Ferguson and Jo Heller . David Helms, freshman from Shawnee Mission, Kansas, and Faith O'
 Jim Heiberger, Jim Talman and Dale Shaw, representing 3rd South, won 2nd place with a team total of 1442 . Jim Talmen, representing third South, came in at 1442, with a total of 1342 .
 Rounding out the top four teams were 1st North with a 1416 . 2nd South finished in fourth place with a respectable 1360 .
 There were 11 teams representing the various wings and idthougli the tournament was hampered by continual mechanical breakdowns . The tournament may have been a success, however, with the lack of mechanical problems .
 It is hoped that a tournament of this type may become a permanent part of the Slotfum Hall intramural program .
 The championship games in' both the singles longpong and regular doubles were featured at the half time of the CC-CSC basketball game . The games were played at half time during the game .
 The team compiling the most points in the tournament was 1st West who won the doubles regular, and were also able to place second in the singles longpong .
 Two third place honors to compile a total of 11 points, and thus win first place . In addition, the team also captured two third place prizes . The team also won two third and two third places .
 There was a tie for second place between 1st North and 4th North, both teams having 8 points . Both teams had 8 points. There was also an 8-point tie for 2nd place .
 Scoring was based on one point awarded to a team advancing in the bracket, the team winning a division would have advanced four times, thus being awarded four points, second place three, etc. Scoring based on a team winning division . Scoring for a division winning division was based
 The next event of the intramural season will commence tomorrow at 11:00m. when we have the tipoff of the basketball season . The basketball season will begin at the same time tomorrow .
 Tigers outscored Michigan 2-1 in the first period and 2-2 in the penalty-ridden third period . Tigers, although losing six key men as academic casualties, looked very much of a team as they beat Michigan .
 MU scored five quick goals to give them the game-winning lead in the second period . CC lost the game 5-2 to MU in the first period .
 The Sigma Chapter will present Captain L Gelas of the Air Force Academy . Captain Gelas will be a speaker at the Hastall Center .
 Saturday CC bounced back to a three point lead at halftime and, paced by Dave Herrington and Bill Pelz, found the range for a L5 point, going-away victory . Saturday CC bounce back from a three-point lead at half-time to a L.5 point
 Herrington, a freshman, topped the scoring with 21 points, including eight field goals . Herrington scored 21 points for the team .
 Western's leading scorer Phil Coulter was limited to 14 points . Pelz contributed 17 while Coulter was restricted to 14. Pelz added 17 points .
 Dave Krell collected 12 rebounds Friday and 13 Saturday to lead the board control for the WSC series . Krell also collected 13 rebounds on Saturday and Saturday .
 SiiilcColic Wl-hI. in Statuities . The WHICKERBILL is a gift and card shop . It's a gift shop .
 Good FIT is always in season firm line slacks . Slim, trim and tapered is the line for men who know a good thing in slacks. Slim trim, tapered slacks are the line .
 Pretzel Bender says he relaxes and has a Tareyton after the amphitheater . Pretzel says he has to relax after the show .
 Colorado College Tiger . February 16, 1962 . February 23, 1962 Vol. 2 . Colorado Springs, Colorado, Colorado .
 Symposium on War and Peace in the 60's irings together at Colorado College . Brodie, Mil lis, Morgenthau Featured in Symposium .
 This unusual college-wide seminar involves students, faculty, and stratify experts in a lively three days of discussion, debate, and lefinitive thought on the issue of survival in the Nuclear Age .
 BerI Brodie, a former Yale Uni.ity professor and an expert, is a missile and air strategy expert . Brodie is a former . Yale University professor .
 He is member of the Rand Corporam, a non-profit organization of ientists, humanists, and other gments of the intellectual, miliry and social community . The Rand Corporationam is engaged in actively seeking both imediate and long-range soluins to
 He is well known for his pragmatic and 'realistic' attitude toward world olitics . He is expected to defend a rather Hugh policy in world affairs .
 Millis of tt be Center for the Study of DemoI ratio Institutions, is a former 01 far correspondent and military ian . He is the author of Permanent Peace and A World flt I'ithout War .
 He is expected to present a thesis of Tactical peace and constructive teal ism. He will be presented at a conference in New York .
 The potentially challenging debate will begin when h speakers 'face-off' on Tuesgy, February 27, at 11:00 o'clock J an All College Assembly in p erkins Hall .
 At this initial lee^e, students will hear three varied statements about the United States and the world situation, and possible solutions to the larger problems . Students will hear a variety of statements about U.S. and world situation .
 55 interested students will be able to eat with lecturers and faculty to discuss the initial propositions . After this initial encounter, there will be a luncheon given in Rastall Center at which interested students can eat .
 Students interested in attending this luncheon should register at the Rastall Desk . Students should register for the luncheon for students at the school .
 The same afternoon, at 4m. in Rastall, small groups of students will be able to discuss their views with the three intellectuals . The event will be held at 4.30pm on Monday .
 Morgenthau will speak on ""Political Consequences of Nuclear Power" at an 8:15 lecture in Shove Chapel . Morgenthua will speak at 8:30pm .
 Dr. Morgenthau will discuss the ideas presented, or go home enraptured or intellectually ruptured to begin to contemplate man's role in the universe .
 At 4.m. there will be further discussion in Rastall Center of the various issues up to that point . At 4m. at 4m . at 4p. at the end of the discussion .
 On the heels of this di will come further debate from Dr. Dr. Mertz, discuss various ideas with the trio of intellectuals in attend .
 NORAD Headquarters is the nerve center of North American Air Defense . Students will be offered the opportunity to tour NORAD headquarters .
 All interested students are urged to register at the Rastall Desk . The tour will commence at 10m, and all interested students should register for the tour .
 The climax of the formal Symposium will be held at 4m. in Taylor Hall where the three antagonists will make concluding statements and resound to questions .
 The conclusion of this discussion will technically end the 1962 Symposium . The discussion was technically the end of the Symposium.
 To prepare students for the Symposium, a monstrous, but easily mastered reading list has been provided and posted in various centers of campus activity . The Symposium will be held at the University of North Carolina .
 A special display of reserve books has been established in the library . The library has also been set up to display reserve books in its collection .
 The real value of this Symposium will come from the dialectical exchanges, and the violent, but logical, arguments advanced by the participants . The symposium will focus on dialectical and violent exchanges between participants .
 The range of topics discussed will not be narrowly confined to technical aspects of nuclear war . The topics will be discussed not only about technical aspects .
 Topics include American Philosophy and Morality as well as world economic and social issues . Topics will allow the thoughtful student to deepen knowledge of the world .
 It is hoped that the Symposium will never really end, and that firm and thoughtful conclusions will only be reached when the participants vote and directly participate in pol itical affairs .
 Ski Club sponsors the Ski Bums' Ball at 9 p.m. March 2 . Rastall Center is sponsoring the ball .
 He has previously appeared at the Greek Week Dance and the Gold Diggers' Ball . He has also appeared at Greek Week dance and Gold Dancer Ball .
 The first discussion groups will begin at 2 in., Saturday, Saturday, and the weekend will end at 4 Sunday .
 All students are urged to spend the night at the camp, if at all possible . We believe that the group spirit will make for more cohesive, intense, ami rewarding discussions .
 The form of these discussions will be that of small panels whose duties will be to make short statements to channel the beginnings of the discussions, after which the meetings will be open to the audience, to arirue. or justify as they see fit .
 The idea of the conference is not to have formal speeches by faculty and students, but rather to have informal, free-wheeling discussions and exchange of ideas . The conference will be held in New York City, New Jersey .
 Are the college's reasons for our attendance (see catalog, 5) applicable to its students? Do we have responsibility only to our selves, or do we have an obligation to share our abilities? Are we have responsibilities only to ourselves, or not to others?
 Tickets for DU hockey game with DU Saturday night will be available at the Rastall Desk until noon tomorrow . Tickets for the hockey game are available at noon tomorrow.
 During lunch, tickets will be available at a table set up between the lunch lines . Tickets will also be available during the lunch .
 The rally will begin at 7:00 on the north patio of Rastall Center . Sponsored by the ASCC .
 The ideas mentioned underneath the topics are only preliminary guidelines . If you have new angles, proposals, or suggestions you are urged to attend .
 The All-College Conference Committee is Buffic Buffuam, Karen Mcllvaine, Jan Cosby and Rusty Bastedo; faculty advisor is Mr Oden .
 If you have suggestions or wish further explanation of the conference, please contact any of them, or leave a note in the conference mailbox at Rastall desk .
 Colorado College president Louis T. Benezet stated that Student enthusiasm for the skating rink, which can be completed by next fall, is necessary to raise the $150,000 minimum . The skating rink is needed to be finished by the fall .
 President Benezet again stressed the need for student interest and enthusiasm . The President of France stressed that students need to be involved in their studies .
 He mentioned that a rally is being planned for the last hockey game, and suggested that this would be an ideal time for the student body to demonstrate their enthusiasm for the sports center .
 Benezet suggested also that students can help through the local press, ""by writing news articles and features" on the expected contributions of the pool and skating rink, and on the ""other side of the coin"" in the hockey situation .
 A rink at Colorado College would do the same thing for skating that Broadmoor ski area did for that sport . Benezet feels that a rink would help popularize and create more interest in it .
 The architectural drawings for the center are being prepared now . Three of the drawings have been on display in Rastall Center this week .
 Benezet stated that the bidding should be completed by late spring, and the actual construction begun bv commencement by late summer .
 Construction on the ice rink will begin this June also, and should be completed by mid or late fall, 1962 . If enough funds are available, construction will begin in June .
 Twenty undergraduates and two graduate students were graduated from Colorado College at the end of the first semester . Colorado College is the largest college in the country and has a history of student success .
 The degrees will not be presented formally until commencement exercises in June . Graduation ceremonies will take place at the end of the month .
 Those approved by faculty action now are accorded all the privileges of graduates . However, those approved by the faculty action will not be allowed to graduate .
 Charles Coulson Allen, Ruth Shaw Black, Helen Jeanine Kocher Bramwell, Juanita Presley Caroom, Carol Joyce Hammond, Eugene LeRoy Higgins, Penelope Jane Walholm Hylbom and Penelope J. Hylmom .
 Joseph Michael Romero, Barbara Rae Brown Rowland, Robert William Sebg, Ruth Ann Snodgrass, George Michael Ulrich and James Robinson Wexels are among the Wexel .
 Four were approved for the degree of Bachelor of Arts in Business Administration and Banking . Four of the students were approved to graduate with a Bachelor of Business Administration degree .
 After a prolonged period of lethargy and laxness, enthusiasm is reawakening among the CC student body . enthusiasm is being reawakened among CC students .
 Some of the expletives and insults hurled at referees and players during recent CC hockey and basketball contests . Some of this lias been misdirected— for example, some of this .
 ASCC Enthusiasm Committee is sponsoring a rally tomorrow night before the DU hockey game . The committee also plans to send a bus or buses to Colorado State College on March 3 for CC's final 1962 basketball game .
 Cossitt filled when the Tigers plav at home, but only a disappointingly small number have been regularly attending the hockey games at the World Arena . Now, it is certainly refreshing to find Cossit filled .
 The ""We Ain't Down Yet"" rally was conceived in an attempt to fan the embers of enthusiasm and loyalty which linger on campus .
 Make an effort to attend the last home basketball game Monday and the last game of the saason Saturday . The last game will be Saturday .
 Professor Sondermann: "Luncheon with students" Rastall dining room 4:005 :30: Small-group discussions .
 Neale R Reinitz, English teacher, gives talk at Shove Chapel . Neale Reinitz is a professor of English at the University of Oxford .
 Wednesday, February 28, 1962 12:15— Lunch with faculty and administration . Lunch with staff and administration.
 Meet i Snulhwi'St SPCli( nvitation of Rastall dining room. n War and Peace."" Perkins led by Prof. Prof. Perkins .
 Small-group discussions — WES and room 203, Rastall Center. Subsequent discussio Freed, psychology; William O Werner, economics. - Small group discussions .
 March 1, 1962 — Meet in Rastall Center parking lot for briefing at NORAD Headquarters** 3:30 — Wind-up Symposium, WES lounge . Dean Lloyd E Worner attended NORAD headquarters .
 Please sign your name on a list at Rastall desk, on a first-come-come, first-served basis . Sign your name at the desk at the end of the day, on the first come and come .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter's weekly Newsquiz . Follow CNN Living on Facebook and Twitter . Visit CNN Living at 9 p.m. ET .
 I will allow my thoroughly blemished personal record to discount the former accusation . As for the latter, personally, personally I wouldn't iift a finger against City Hall .
 "I'm currently engaged in a vigorous campaign contributing to its destruction. This, however, will take some time," he says . "This will take a long time"
 Don't bother sending in any critical analyses of this column — I can't possibly tolerate any opinions which differ from my own . Oh, and by the way, don't bother to send in any . Don't be afraid of my own opinions .
 'This leaves me with an unexplainably bitter feeling towards all humanity', says author . 'Oh, I can get a cup of coffee plus one refill, all right, but this leaves me feeling bitter'
 You could also call me a selfish degenerate, an inconsiderate boor, or a greedy lout . Basically I'd guess you'd call me an abominable pig; you could also . call me . A selfish . degenerate . boor or a selfish . bo
 "I think I know just who this devious personality is. And in addition to the realization of this momentous revelation, I think I'm just a devious person," she says .
 Edward Carmichael, Lynn Cogswell, Marianna Dana, Arthur Dare, Susan Feasel, Richard Formby, John Fraser, Janet Gibbs, Joan Jorgenson, Don Logan, David Lusak, Cecilia Maffei, Salvatore Martin, Marian Min
 Deadline is March 27 15-3.40 H8-4.no . Snodgrass, Ruth Stevenson, Wilfred Street, James Tilley, Martha (Allan A ' Student fro Kinnikinnik)
 This will mark her 22nd consecutive summer as dance director at the independent liberal arts and sciences college . This summer marks her 22th consecutive summer at the college .
 Miss Holm, who received an honorary Doctor of Fine Arts degree from the college in 1960, organized the summer dance program on the campus in 1940 .
 Her 1962 summer class for both novice and advanced students, as well as teachers of dance, will start June 18 and continue through August 10 .
 "I'll sit here in the Hub until he slinks back, then I'll point him out to you . Meanwhile, would you buy me another cup of coffee — I've already had my two. I know him though; and I'll sit in the . Hub .
 McGrauu-Hil )rce f, Publishing Company, Micro-carijust, Foundation, Micro Photo, In ional Biscuit Company, Olin Math ieson Chemical Corporation, ney-Bowes, Inc., Reader's Di£ Time,
 Hans J Morgenthau, p. r , Bernard Brodie and Bernard . Brodie may indeed point the ay of some Symposium discusions . Mr. WalMillis may also point to some Sympospositions discusions.
 The successful Broadway musical, featuring Colorado College students and Colorado Springs area residents, will be performed in the Fine Arts Center on March 8, 9 and 10 . Colorado Springs residents and Colorado college students will also be performing .
 Ben Lyon, a sophomore, as the gambler Skv Masterson, and Marty Hylbom, a senior, as Nathan Detroit, as his buddy . Ben Lyon is a sophomore and a senior . Marty is a senior and a sophomore .
 The twin female leads went to Lynn Bradley, a sophomore from Boulder, and Genevieve Vaughn, a freshman from Port Morgan . Lynn Bradley is a junior from Boulder . Genevie Vaughn is also a freshman .
 Miss Bradley has been cast in the role of Miss Adelaide, and Miss Vaughn plays Sarah Brown . Miss Vaughn has also been cast as Miss Adelaide and Miss Adelaide .
 Dale Spall, a freshman, as Arvide Abernathv; Pennv Hylbom, a senior, as Agatha; and Larry Bowman, a junior, as Benny Southstreet . John Giannes, a sophomore, as Angie the Ox; Sunny Jam
 The committee suggests to all groups having town functions that they check over the area before leaving so that these incidents don't occur again . The committee also suggests that all groups with town functions should be checked over before leaving .
 Committee also discussed a case of misconduct during athletic functions . Committee members also discussed case of sexual misconduct .
 After a hearing, a letter of apology was written to the man who was offended, by the individual involved . The individual involved wrote a letter to apologise for the incident .
 Also the failure to check books and magazines out of the library was called to our attention .
 Some will work on Indian reservations or in villages of Southeast Alaska . Others will work in Alaska's Southeast Alaska villages .
 Others will aid in developing recreation projects in the old Spanish villages in New Mexico or community service programs in the Southern Mountains and Puerto Rico . Others will help develop recreation projects and community service projects .
 One hundred volunteers will work in Chicago settlement houses, churches, interracial centers, camps, and camps . Volunteers will work at settlement houses and churches .
 Work camps abroad will bring together young people of various racial, national, and denominational backgrounds from all over the world . Work camps are conducted under the sponsorship of the World Council of Churches .
 An eight piece band played at the Winter Carnival Dance, it was a campus group . One project will involve the construction of a medical and social center in Hualpencillo .
 Chuck Gibson, Dave Wahfeld, Frank Weible, Mike Orem, Norm Liden, tenor sax; Henry English, drums; Dick Brigham, bass and congas; Steve Gress, piano . The band also features a cornet, cornet and bassist .
 S.7. was recently ravaged by an earthquake . If anyone is interested, please contact Chuck Gibson, extension 2S7.7 .
 Students will aid Africa's new independent nations in construction, medical, and education programs . Students will also aid construction and medical facilities in Africa .
 Others will work in almost every European country, as well as Greece and Iceland . Still others will work with almost every other European country .
 Volunteers are generally expected to pay their own transportation costs . Volunteers are expected to have to pay for transportation to the event .
 Bell Telephone System is closer to wiping out the noise that sometimes interferes with telephone conversations . Steve Banks, who just two years ago was an undergraduate engineering student, was an engineering student . Banks is credited with helping to develop the system .
 Steve examined the noise levels that had ""leaked"" into telephone circuits in Colorado . Steve examined how noise levels had leaked into phone circuits .
 His findings shed new light on the source of noise, and on the important methods of measuring it . The findings shed light on how to measure noise .
 Steve Banks of Mountain Slates Telephone & Telegraph Company, and other young engineers like him in Bell Telephone Companies throughout the country, help make your communications service the finest in the world .
 "Meet the Netherlands" is sponsored by the Dutch private and governmental education agencies .
 The program lasted some five days in the beginning of November at a private hotel in the province of Utrecht .
 The schools represented were the Building and Architecture Center and the Economics College, both located in Rotterdam, the Technical School of Delft, the Agricultural School in Wageningen, and The Netherlands Institute for Representation Abroad .
 The program dealt with an introduction to Dutch history, modern architecture and art . It included an excursion to the DAF autoworks in Eindhoven in the south of the country .
 The Netherlands has experienced a great revival in painting since World War II, even greater than that in France . It's surprising for the foreigner to learn that the Dutch has had a great resurgence in painting .
 Dutch paintes are affected to a large extent by the artificial environment created by man in his effort to gain land from the sea . The lecturer at the conference pointed out that Dutch painters are affected .
 There were young men and women present from Argentina, Brazil, Ceylon, Columbia, Cyprus, Germany, Pakistan, Thailand, the USA, and the Netherlands .
 The make-up of the Foreign Student Committee and Colorado College must be much the same . Colorado College's foreign student committee is the same as the committee at Colorado College .
 A group of this type presents an opportunity, which is almost unequalled, to get to know the world we live in . A group . of this kind of group presents an . opportunity, it seems to . seem to me, to me . It seems to be an opportunity to get
 I observed this while standing in Holland, gaping at the enormous U.S. of America across the Atlantic . The Holland-born American is a nation of immigrants .
 I know clearly that there is a problem, adding that this understanding is the first step in solving it . Let is suffice to say that, if nothing else now, now I know . I know now that there are a problem. This understanding is first step to solving it.
 Dutch delegates thanked the Dutch for so ably organizing such a worthwhile event . The conference was closed and delegates thanked them for their efforts .
 Kenya right now is in the throes of political, economic and social adjustment; although pessimism is the order of the day on the behalf of the white settlers and other vested interests, I don't think that their worst fears will be realized .
 The trouble is that too many of the immigrants here just don't have a ""frontier"" spirit . The White Collar Civil Servant mentality insists upon written guarantees and assured recognition .
 On the whole East Africa is ideal if one can sympathize with the aspirations of the ""new"" African and has conditioned himself to respond to the abnormal . Anyone wanting routine and an ordered life (both mentally and physically) has no business in East Africa .
 I have finished the first two terms of my education training course at Makerere . I have also finished the second term of my university education training programme .
 This course, like all education courses, was unbelievably easy and low-paced . This course was like all of us, it was extremely easy to learn, and it was very low paced .
 In the third term, commencing January 22,  I will be practice teaching for eight weeks . In the first term, I will teach at least eight weeks a week in the classroom .
 I will ,be practice teaching at a Catholic mission school outside of Kampala, Uganda . I will . teach at a mission school in Uganda .
 "I asked to be sent there for this period just to see what the missionary life was like," she said . She said she wanted to learn about the life of a missionary in Africa .
 The Holy Trinity administrator, the American Priest and the Asian merchant. The American Priest. The Asian merchant . The American priest and the Chinese merchant.
 I have visited several Catholic missions now on my travels in and around EA and they always extend the long, warm hand of hospitality . I'm not afraid to travel to the UK, but I'm glad to see them in the UK .
 I have been posted to Tanganyika which appears so idyllic politically that I am sure I will be bored . I have a job in the country which appears to be idyllically politically .
 So far I have been designated for the government secondary school at Moshi, but this is subject to change . So far, this is the school at the Moshi school .
 The prospects are pleasing, but the ""life in the bush"" might have alternate attractions . The prospects of life in the 'bush' are pleasing .
 Some of the group are extremely chagrined at their posting, especially those going to the Southern Highlands of Tanganyika .
 After the lush life at Makerere many have lost their ""new frontiers"" ardor . Many have been left behind behind their "New frontiers"
 The overall feeling of his letter is of an exciting experience though he does not stint in a description of the possible drawbacks that might be encountered by some .
 If on balance his letter has created an interest within you, here is some more of the salient information about the program .
 Colorado College has been selected by the Union Carbide Edu^ cational Fund as the recipient of a $5,000 Physical Science Education Grant . Colorado College will receive a physical science education grant .
 The grant will go to the departments of chemistry, mathematics and physics . The grant is part of a partnership between the universities .
 When we began this program we were all prepared psychologically for the really rugged life, but then, as we kept failing to experience any hardships or anything remotely smacking of the strenuous life, the situation changed . The situation changed.
 One of the group did go home, though, after several weeks —never had been away from home before . "Never had had to go home before," says one .
 Did not like the food, the people and said Makerere's library was inadequate . Said the library is inadequate and that the food was too much to eat .
 Married couples who are having the time of their life are having time of the life . This is especially true of the married couples .
 There are so many opportunities in everything in everything that it seems foolish for people not to spend at least a few years here, he says . But there are many opportunities here in everything, he adds .
 If the American lust for great achievement still exists, this is the place to fulfill it, and in a pretty significant way too too . The U.S. needs to find a way to fulfill its lust for greatness, and it's a good start .
 The Winter Queen and her court are Deidre Jones, Lynn Miller, Barbara Couey, Susan Mer. rill, and Susan Kellog .
 Barb is a blond, blue-eyed sophomore who is majoring in music . Representing Kappa Kappa Gamma, she is a sophomore at the University of North Carolina .
 Senator Goldwater declines to speak at the Colorado Co Symposium . Goldwater has declined to speak .
 Republican Women at a luncheol and to speak at the U.S. Air Force Academy Academy . Republican Women were invited to a luncheon and a speech at the Academy .
 Richard A Johnson, Executive director of the Board of Examiners, U.S. Foreign Service Department of State, will speak at 4:00m. this afternoon in the WES Lounge .
 There will be a coffee hour to give students an opportunity to speak personally with Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Preceeding the meeting there will be an opportunity for students to speak to him personally .
 J of Winter Sports' equipment . All Wood Skis . All Ski Bindings . J After Ski Boots | Henke Ski Boots — Ski Racks . Men's and Ladies' Imported and Imported Imported .
 Unique features of the trip are an Adriatic Cruise along the Dalmation Coast from Venice to Athens and ffiother steamship cruises of the Greek Islands .
 A budget edition of this tour is available also available for the same price as the main itinerary in Europe . The budget edition omits London, Copenhagen, the Riviera and Madrid .
 Folders and complete details are available from Wakefield, Fortune, inc., World Travel .
 Alpha Phi: Nancv Bills, Janette French, Cathy Grant, Susie Halton, Anne Holmes, Sue Igelsrud, Donna Jones, Sue Kania, Sandy Marvin, Ann Miller, Sharon Polkinghorn, Judy Reid, Nancy Smith, Mary Tom Spring,
 Stu Brubaker, Bob Bdmiston, Tom Ethridge, George Henzel, Ed Kuiper, Tony McGinnis, Mike Mestek, Bud Mixon, Earl Wallingford and Lincoln Westcott are the winners of the series .
 Frank Buhler, Richard Conrad, Mike Covert, Kent Drummond, William Pelz, Jim Srhultz, Ron Sher, Ron Taylor, and Cubby Welch were interviewed .
 Robert Batley, Robert Bauer, Robert Bruce, Scott Bruntjen, Charles Deaver, James Frolick, Gilbert Graboski, Peter M Ramsey, Wallace M Schultz, David Smith, Russel M Veach, Dennis S Zepp, and Alex S Yankovich
 Thomas O Brandt will teach for the summer at the Middiebury College Deutsche Sommerschule in Middlebury, Vermont .
 Students at the school sign a pledge to speak only the language they are studying . Students pledge to only speak English in English .
 Albert Seay is on leave from CC on a Guggenhiem Fellowship doing research in the history of Italian music theory in the 14th and 15th centuries . Seay will return to the campus in June to direct the program in the ""Creative Arts""
 They will examine the tastes of Americans from the Civil War to World War I by examining the work of particular architects, artists, writers, and musicians . They will also examine work of American artists, musicians and architects .
 The project is designed to appeal to students in colleges where relatively little recruiting for newspaper careers has been done .
 Promising young men who thought they were interested in newspaper work, but lacked contacts with the field, were asked to apply for summer jobs . Promising men who lacked contacts in the newspaper industry were asked for jobs .
 Other applicants were encouraged to seek summer news jobs on their own initative . The initiative is a summer news job initiative .
 The individual newspapers made the final choice of the student and offered him a summer job . The student was offered the summer job by individual newspapers .
 The Fund, supported by grants from The Wall Street Journal, awarded each accepted applicant Alumnus of CC IN 'Hedda Gabler' Again a Colorado College alumnus is finding his place in the world, this time in the role of Tasman .
 Tasman will be played by Orest Kinasewich, who came to CC in the fall of 1956 from Edmonten, Alberta, to study business administration . Tasman is played by Kinaswich, a business student at the time .
 During his sophomore year drama seems to have overcome his business aspirations, and for the next two years he took all the drama courses offered and acted in almost every play produced .
 Kinasewich was able to enter the Chicago Art Institute's Goodmnn Theater in the second year of its three-year course . As a result of the drama courses he had taken as an undergraduate, Kinaswich entered the theater in his second year .
 He is now a graduate student and has just completed a run in Shaw's Joan of Arc, starring Francis Hyland .
 Tareyton ■ ,,S/:^ February 23, 1962 . Colorado College Tiger Mental Hospitals To Be Visi .
 The first will be to the home for retarded children at Ridge, which will leave from the north side of Rastall tomorrow morning .
 The second will leave at the same time from the same place Saturday, March 3 . The first time will be at same time Saturday .
 The visiting groups will be shown around the institutions by members of the administrations . The problems which these institutions face will be explained to visitors .
 Anyone who is interested in making one or both of these visits is welcome, whether or not he attended the orientation meeting on February 14 .
 Applications are now being accepted for membership on the Rastall Center Board . Applications taken for membership have been accepted .
 Each one of the seven available positions offers a unique opportunity for participation in student affairs . The positions include Chairman, Executive Secretary, Business Manager, Recreation and Special Events .
 The Chairman of the Rastall Board co-ordinates the Center activities as well as presiding at meetings . He is the chairman of the Board .
 Executive Secretary responsible for minutes, files, and correspondence . Executive Secretary is also in charge of display cases .
 Budget house development, and special promotions, are handled by the Business Manager .
 Cultural Affairs Chairman coordinates Rastall art displays and movies, movies, coffee hours, and music . Cultural Affairs chairman coordinates art displays, movies and coffee hours .
 Hospitality is concerned with the Visitors' Service, Rastall decorations, and necessary publications . Hospitality concerns with the visitors' Service and the Visitors Service .
 Recreation Chairman supervises Games Area, Craft Shop and Outings Club programs . Recreation chairman supervises the Games Area and Craft Shop .
 Outdoor activities such as ""Rally for the Keg"" and the annual Bicycle Race also fall under his jurisdiction . Outdoor events such as the annual bicycle race are also under his control .
 Term of office is for one year, and any student not graduating before next June is eligible . Students not graduating from next June will be eligible for the position .
 Applications remain flexible, and need not dictate the Board's eventual choice . Each applicant is asked to state a position preference, but applications remain flexible .
 Solomon Nkiwane, a Christian from Bulawayo in Southern Rhodesia, spoke at the 11m. service in Shove Chapel on the dying influence of the Church in his country .
 He noted that there was no corner of Southern Rhodesia where Christianity has not penetrated . He praised the missionaries for their efforts in achieving this .
 There is political unrest, and soldiers roam the streets and avenues of the African living quarters . There are political unrest in the country .
 The only difference between now and the pre-missionay times, is that instead of spears and clubs we use guns for fighting, and we no longer tolerate missionary interference, meditation, or comments in political disputes .
 He concluded on a note of hope, by suggesting that the church in Southern Rhodesia still has an opportunity to exert considerable influence in bringing about the right solution if it would only commit itself .
 Application forms are available at Rastall Desk, and must be turned in before March ninth . Board will individually interview the applicants, after which they will be individually interviewed .
 Travel agents have realized that you are a powerful economic force and are catering to your market . Travel agents and transportation companies have realized they are powerful economic forces . Travel agent: Travel agents, transportation companies are catering for your market.
 You are placed with a group of other aspiring world travellers . So that you get the most out of your travelling experiences, and they the most profit from your payment, you are placed .
 Tour prices include tourist transportation, food, and second-class lodging . Tour prices are included in tourist transport, food and lodging .
 Countries on both itineraries are England, Germany, Switzerland, Austria, Greece, Italy and France . The itineraries include Switzerland, Italy, Switzerland and Switzerland .
 American President Lines has special Economy Class boat rides to Honolulu (round trip $180) or a six-week special Manila and back with stops in Yokohama and Hong Kong .
 The student spirit is retained by dormitory living and lectures, as well as the usual shipboard games . Shipboard games and lectures are also included .
 Mr Roberts took his bachelor of arts degree in economics at Colorado College in 1908 .
 He was a member of the board of trustees of the college from 1920 to 1928, and again from 1933 to 1955 . He was chairman of the . board from 1949 to 1954 .
 The memorial lectureship calls for one public lecture each year to CC by a leading scientist .
 AFSG Peace Seminar Discusses Nuclear Age at YMCA camp in Estes Park . Colorado College students attended the seminar at the camp . Ann Armstrong and Alma Cremonesi attended the event .
 The purpose of this meeting was to bring together students interested in the peace movement from various Colorado campuses . The meeting, sponsored by the American Friends Service Committee, was to discuss peace techniques .
 In the opening session of the conference, each of the three areas was discussed by a faculty member .
 After dinner, the group reconvened to hear McClure McCombs, director of the AFSC Work and Study Program of the Chicago Regional Office, speak briefly .
 Two short films were produced by the AFSC concerning peace attitudes and possibilities concluded the Saturday session .
 Participants broke up into three groups to discuss peace education, action projects, and service projects in greater detail . Participants discussed the three areas of peace education .
 In the final afternoon session, each discussion group reported the results of its meeting . The final session of the session ended with a vote of approval .
 Participants decided to keep in contact with each other through two representatives on each campus and to use the AFSC's services when desired . The seminar ended with a decision by the participants to use AFSC services when necessary .
 On Friday classes will be opened to parents, followed by open houses in the afternoon . Parents will also be able to attend classes .
 Song Fest wit] be heh| j n Shove Chapel at 8:15, after which everyone is invited to a recep. tion in Rastall Center .
 Saturday's events will begin with President Benezet speaking a t an 11 :00 convocation . Saturday will be the first convocation of the French capital in Paris .
 Ground breaking for new buildings, choir concert, intramural activities, anil a tea are possible afternoon activities .
 A parent, faculty student dinner is ten. tatively scheduled for 6:15 Satur. day evening followed by the Blue Key Dance at 9:00 . The Blue Key dance is scheduled for 9:30am .
 The weekend will close on Sunday with a chuckwagon breakfast at 8:00 in the Garden of the Gods and a church service at 11:00 .
 It was agreed that part of the answer is in informing yourself about possible alternatives to w — helping out in the ""new science of human survival"" proposed bj the American Association for thi Advancement of Science proposed .
 Colorado College Tiger • February 23, 1962 ['1 Much Information On Graduate Study Available in Coburn — by Dan Jaffe Lately a great number of pamilets and fact sheets concerning ^aduate study have been received .
 This latter grant pays $2,000 first year and increases the each following year . The grant is a first-year grant for the first time and increases each year .
 An extra $400 per dependent. have described this par[• grant merely to exemplify (he extent that these grants take, and there are many more of this nrt in other fields. Also [here is an extra . $400 . per dependent .
 Colorado Col,ge has files on graduate opporinties in Coburn Library, but one jiing should be taken into consideration .
 Many of the better grants ,ave early expiration dates for ipplication, so if you are interred in some form of graduate pork you should begin to look into it now .
 Each experiment spends he first month as the ""son"" or 'daughter"" of a family in the itry visited . Each experiment takes place in the same place for the first month of each month .
 The United States experiment group plays ist to selected family members id friends on an informal tour hroughout the country . The second month (the United States Experiment group plays  to selected members of the public)
 The United States National delation is a confederation of CC Summer Workshop Studies Human Relations . A workshop in human relations is scheduled for the 1962 summer sesion .
 The three-week session is designed to help teachers, school administrators, industrial workers, community workers and other professional and volunteer personnel develop skill in dealing with problems .
 The study in human relations begins with learning how groups are formed and how they act upon each other .
 This knowledge leads to a concentrated study of misunderstanding between different races and religions in the community and the country as a whole .
 Students realize the bases for prejudice and discrimination between individuals and entire groups . Students learn how to deal with them more effectively .
 Some of the advantages of the NSA program are their inexpensive foreign programs because of its close relation to similar student union programs in Europe and its non-profit basis . The NSA program is based on a student union program in Europe .
 There is a considerable amount of time provided as an integral part of the program . Also there is a lot of time spent on the program as a result .
 Denver Symphony Orchestra Features Various Concerts . An exciting ballet, a concert version of an opera and several exciting soloists will be features of the final weeks of concers .
 The guest soloist will be Jean Casadesus, rising young pianist, who will be heard in the Tschaikowskv Piano Concerto in B minor .
 The Ballet Janine Charrat De France, an illustrious dancing group of 14 stars, will appear with the orchestra on Monday, March 5 . The orchestra will perform with the ballet on March 5.
 This event originally was scheduled for March 6, but has been moved up to accomodate the Theater Guild . The Theater Guild will hold a March 6 event .
 Tickets purchased for the original date will be honored for this performance . The show will be performed at the same venue as the original performance .
 Leonard Rose, celebrated cellist, will be a Ford Foundation Grant soloist . The guest artist will be Leonard Rose . Rose will be the featured cellist .
 Gloria Davy, sensational soprano, and Robert Nagy, gifted Metropolitan Opera tenor, will perform at the Metropolitan Opera .
 Also in the cast will be Arthur Schoep, tenor; Donna Janzen, mezzo soprano; Jerald Lepinski, baritone; Gino Leonetti, tenar, and others .
 I witnessed one of the most disappointing assemblies given since I've been at Palmer High School . Today I witnessed a disappointing assembly given .
 CC Variety Show presented by what was left after an epidemic of measles . CC Variety show was presented by the left after measles epidemic .
 This I realize was not at fault but I am condemming the overwhelming Uninhibited behavior displayed by some of the performers . I realize that I realize I am not at . fault . I am condemning the overwhelming uninhibited behaviour displayed by the performers. Some of the performances were not
 As I came across the patio to go to the assembly this morning, there was a group of boys, about six or seven, right outside the door smoking smoking .
 Smoking is strictly forbidden on the grounds by anyone, and I'm sure that any high school these boys may have attended more than likely endorsed this or a similar rule . Smoking is prohibited at any school, but smoking is strictly prohibited in the grounds .
 Performer group travels to Leadville, Colorado, to present their entertainment . Performers travel even as far as Leadville .
 There must be a better costume to wear on stage than blue jeans and sneakers, topped with a white shirt . There was a tough trade for a shabby sweatshirt .
 Colorado College is an excellent school with a fine background and high academic standards . The Colorado College has been described as an excellent institution .
 February 28, 1962 at 8:00 complete showing all types of Wedding Apparel and Trousseau Clothes . Free Admission — No Tickets Required .
 It is no wonder that older generations look upon this generation with scorn, with pity, with regret . Older generations now look upon them with scorn and with pity .
 I'm tired of being considered a part of the generation built on standards created by such ignorance. I am tired of . being considered . part of a generation built . on standards built on such ignorance, I said . I'm not ashamed of being a member of the . generation .
 The American College Poetry Society is pleased to announce its fifth semesterly anthology of outstanding college poetry is now being compiled for publication in May, 19(12)
 We would be very grateful if you would again alert the interested students on campus to this opportunity to have their work published .
 Contributions must be the original work of the student (who shall retain literary rights to the material), submitted to the undersigned, care of the Society, with the entrant's name, address, and school on each page . Entrant must retain literary right to retain the material .
 Poems, which may reflect any subject, should not exceed 48 linos, nor may any individual submit more than five poems . Poems should not be submitted more than 50 linos or more .
 Entries that are not accepted for publication will be returned if accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope . Entries not returned will be sent to the editor of this week's Daily Mail .
 The Society, this year, will oiler Recognition Awards of Five Dollars each, to the five outstanding college poets . This year, the Society will award five dollars each to the best college poet .
 The poems cannot be otherwise acknowledged, nor can the Society compensate students for work that is published .
 All entries must be postmarked not later than Thursday, April 12, 1962 to be considered .
 We are sincerely appreciative of your past and present cooperation, without which our younger poets could not have received the attention and acclamation that they have received through previous anthologies .
 20 page illustrated bulletin describes in detail the 7 week program . Includes courses offered, accommodations, travel arrangements, social and sightseeing events, complete costs and fees .
 Special Program rates for students and teachers residing in select apartment hotels in Mexico City start from as low as $451 .
 The bulletin, application forms and transportation availabilities may he received by writing to Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter's office is located in New York City .
 Three outstanding Denver musicians and prominent members of the Denver Symphony will be presented in the next Perkins Hall Concert which is scheduled for March 4, at 4:00m.
 This musical event will be free to the public as continuation of the Colorado College Winter Concert Series . Under the auspices of the Music Department .
 Richard Joiner, solo clarinetist of Denver Symphony, and his wife, Kathleen, official pianist of the same orchestra, will he the featured artists . The Denver Symphony is the home of the Denver Symphony .
 In the last number of their program, a Trio by Mozart, thev will be assisted by Lee Yeingst, violist of the Denver Symphony . The Denver Symphony will perform the Trio at the end of the program .
 Mr Joiner, a graduate of Eastman, is one of the finest clarinetists in this country today .
 Before coming to Denver in 1946, he was solo clarinetist of the National Svmphony Orchestra in Washington, D.C., and of the Marine Band, also during the war .
 Of his outstanding teachers it may suffice to mention the world-famous Reginald Kell. Kell .
 Pianist and musician of distinguished accomplishments . Joiner is one of the most outstanding graduates of the music department at Colorado College .
 She received her Bachelor of Arts degree here in 1943 and the Master of Master's degree in 1945 .
 In addition to her musical talent, she was sufficiently outstanding academically to become a Phi Beta Kappa . She was a Phi B Kappa Kappa .
 Kathleen is a mother of three healty boys . She teaches at Garland County Day School and is active in several charitable organizations . She also plays the piano at the Denver Symphony .
 Mozart Trio, Debussy, Milhaud and Cardew will perform rarely heard compositions for clarinet and piano . Colorado Springs composer Cecil Effinger composed a piece composed especially for the Joiners .
 The Colorado College chemistry department has received a $5,0(50 grant from the National Science Foundation to conduct its undergraduate science education program . Science Foundation Grants Chemistry Department $5.060 . Colorado College's chemistry department received the grant .
 The program gets under way during the 1962 summer session and continues during the calendar year . The program will be under the direction of Dr. Dr. John Dewey .
 Milton K Snyder, assistant professor and acting chairman of the chemistry department, is a chemistry professor . Milton K. Snyder is also an assistant professor at the University of Columbia .
 The undergraduate science education program is a combination of two older programs of undergraduate research participation and independent study . The program includes undergraduate independent study and research participation .
 Currently the chemistry department is operating a program of independent study under a previous National Science Foundation grant .
 The grant will support two students on research projects at the college during the summer of 19C2 . The new grant will be used to support students on projects at 19 C2 .
 It will provide opportunity for eight students to participate in the summer reading program in chemistry during the summer while away from the campus . It will aid in supporting four students on research projects .
 A number of college juniors, who are chemistry majors, will receive support in the junior independent study course offered by the department in establishing their technical libraries .
 The program is designed to furnish support for able undergraduates capable of becoming creative scientists or engineers . The program, now in its fourth year, is designed for undergraduates .
 The stress in the program is placed upon the need of the student to grow as an independent scholar, through activities characterized by freedom for the student . Students must demonstrate their capacity for creative enterprise with minimal supervision .
 Mike Emmett and Pete Krower will provid the sounds, and the snack bar will be open as usual . The snack bar is also open .
 Jay Lewis was high scorer of the game for 1st South, and top point man of the day with 22 points . John Gotto with 18 points and Terry Itosen with 15 led the losers . Jay Lewis also scored 22 points for the South, while Gotto scored 18 .
 Third North easily outscored 1st North 4723. Third North, paced by Stephen Gustafson and Dave Howland, with 16 and 15 points respectively . Third North scored 4723 .
 The Faculty fielded a very strong team, and in their victory over 3rd South displayed a form that makes them a definite contender for top honors in the tournament .
 2nd North defeated 4th North 5415 as Chuck Denver accounted for 16 points and was high scorer of the game . Chuck Denver scored 16 points in a one-sided match .
 At one point in the second half the Tigers went eight minutes without a bucket . The Tigers went from eight minutes to eight minutes in the first half .
 CC is 9-9 going into the WSC series while the Air Force Academy has won 13 and lost only 3 . With this loss, CC is now 9-7 going into WSC .
 Durir are from left to right; Sylvester C Goett. durir are behind the scenes in the battle for the Puck . durir .
 All men interested in trying out for the Varsity Golf Team are asked to attend a meeting Monday, February 26, 4:00 at the Athletic Department office . Refereeing are Norm Laurer '62 Golf Schedule .
 Colorado College was one of fifteen colleges and universities to enter the first face-to-face bowling tournament of its kind . Colorado College is one of the first college and university to enter a bowling tournament in its kind.
 Seventyfive men from a six-state area participated in the contest held at Bowl-Mor Lanes in Colorado Springs .
 CC was represented bv Tom Brindley, Bill Evans, Bill Kranich, Bill Pelz, and Dale Shaw . CC is represented by Bill Evans and Bill Evans .
 The A.C.U. hopes to have face-to-face tournaments throughout the country by next year . Participants enjoyed the competition and the Saturday luncheon held for participants .
 In the last thn minutes of the game, Westen State brought in their 1 but by then the game was out of reach of the Cagers . This loss set up a tense situation for Tuesday with Western State for on this game hinged thf league .
 Herrington with 16 and Thomp son with 15 points again led th CC scorers . Herrington also scored 16 and Herrington scored 16 points .
 CC was able to convert only six i 20 free-throws in the game . CC managed to convert just six free-throwers in total .
 The last game of the season ffi be plaved here at eight o'clock Cossitt on Monday, February 26 . The final game will be played at 8.30pm .
 ZECHA & ADAMS CONOCO SERVICE STATION is a gift and card shop . The WHICKERBILL a gift . shop . A gift and . card shop is a tea shop .
 Dr. Arthur Larson, ■ctor of the World Rule of Law Center at Duke Univer. Dr. Larson: "Rule of Law" is a violation of the Constitution . The Rule of the Law Center is based in New York City .
 Clinton Rossiter is a professor and chairman of the xtment of government at CorU Diversity . He is also a professor at the CorU University in Washington, DC .
 Muller will deliver the newstablished Harold D Roberts lorial Lectures in Science . Muller will open the series i'h (J) when he delivers the newestablished lecture series in science . Muller's lectures will be held at the University of Cambridge .
 This i reship was establ ished this in honor of the late Mr Rob) prominent Denver attorney 3 iid former chairman of the Colorado College board of trustees . Rob (Rob) was a prominent Denver lawyer and former Colorado College chairman .
 His special interests include mutation, the genetic efberj fects of radiation, human heredity, jnd the origin of life, and human genetics .
 L. Larson was director of the U.S. Information Agency during 1956 and 1957 . Larson was in charge of the United States Information Agency . Larson served as Director of the Agency between 1956 and 1958 .
 Larson served as undersecretary of labor from 1953 to 1956 id in 1957 was named assistant to President Eisenhower . Larson is a member of the American Bar Association and the Order of the Coif .
 Clinton Rossiter will give the uiual Abbott Memorial Lecture on May 14 . Rossiter's lecture will be broadcast at 8 p.m. ET .
 W Lewis Abbott was professor of busieconomics and sociology at Colorado College from 1920 to 1947 . Abbott was a professor of sociology at the college . Abbott died in 1947 .
 He has been a consultant to the Fund for the Republic, director of studies on American communism . He has also been a member of the Rockefeller Committee on Legal and Political Philosophy .
 The Visit' German Club to Present Play This Sunday at 7:30 in Shove Chapel, Friedrich Durrenmatfs . The Visit will be presented by the German deparment and the German Club of Colorado College .
 The Visit's message is made universal by certain patterns of action and specific parallels to the kinds of people one meets in everyday life . The Visit is based in New York, New York and London .
 Durrenmatt is talking about the significance of money and suggesting that it can cause self-respecting men to violate the Library Prize Given Spo Spo Spo.
 Chairman, Executive Secretary, less Manager, Cultural Affiis, Hospitality, Recreation, and Special-Events Chairmen . Hospitality and Recreation, Recreation and Special Events Chairmen.
 Experience on each of the seven Positions of Rastall Center offers a unique opportunity for student 'festivity' through a part in planpugl and programming .
 The Board is not .bound PS tradition, nor does it have a ; frict constitution . The Board does not have a .frict constitution, nor do it .
 Questions concerning Board Structure and areas of responsioility should be directed to preF&t board members . PreF&T board members should answer questions about board structure .
 Applicants pi be interviewed by the mem^rs, and new members will be lt, le to take office by the middle | March . code basic to the existence of the organization .
 He also questions the nature of justice — who should judge, what issues are subjec-t to judgement, and how it should be administered, he says . He i also questions whether or not justice should be handed out .
 The audience is given a picturesque presentation of countryfolk . Aside from insight into these moral questions, the audience was given a pictureque presentation .
 Democracy in action is vividly portrayed and horribly distorted in this small town . Democracy inaction in action portrayed and distorted in small town, says CNN.com .
 The cast of 24 has arrived at a meaningful interpretation of the drama . Under the expressionistic directing of Jim Fox, the cast of the show has come to terms .
 "This selfish and wicked old lady finally winds up her life's battle for the twisted kind of justice she demands," she writes .
 Alfred, III, played by Stefan Feyock, is the former lover upon whom Klara wrecks her vengeance . Alfred is played by Klara's former lover . Klara is played in the film .
 The character of this man, now resigned to family life and running a grocery store, is brought into question for an act performed many years past . "This man is a man who is now retired and living with his wife and children .
 The Burgermeister is the spokesman for the townspeople . Thomas O Brandt of the German department is played by Thomas .
 This mayor assumes for the town the burden of an enormous moral responsibility . This mayor assumed responsibility for the city, he says .
 The Lehrer (teacher) is unwilling to compromise to a position with the ideals of the Western world which he's been teaching for 20 years . Normal Colbert plays the Lehrer, played by Normal Colbert .
 K 1 a r a ' s butler, played by Edward Kuipers, is her symbolic and physical link to the townspeople .
 A letter regarding senior activity fees has been sent to all members of the Class of 1962 . Senior activity fees have been requested by all Class 1962 .
 If you are a senior, and did not receive one, or if you will be graduating in August, 1962, or February, 1963, and you wish to be included in the senior activities this Spring, please contact Jtn Fry, Ext.5, or Oscar Soule, Ext
 Stephen Spoonamore, '62, has won the award of $50 offered in December to a college student who submitted the best proposal to obtain better cooperation from the student body in the use of the library collections . Stephen's proposal was submitted in December .
 All of the proposals advised the installation of a check point at the main entrance of the library . Books and packages leaving the library would have to be submitted for inspection, to make sure that the books were properly checked out .
 The winner's proposal was superior to the others in its comprehensive analysis of the problem involved and the detailed list of recommendations for solving the problem . The winner of the proposal was selected from a panel of experts .
 The money for this award was contributed by two adult students at the college who wish to remain anonymous . They had become concerned at the large number of books missing from the library collections .
 The Mario Singers are currently featured at the Alamo in Colorado Springs, Colorado Springs . They are looking for vocal talent .
 Auditions will be held next week, Tuesday, March 6, at 10:30 . Those trying out are required to bring their own music, one operatic selection and one show tune .
 This job is not necessarily full time; it may be just a few nights a week but may continue through the summer . This job may not necessarily be a full time job . It may not be a job full time .
 The 1962 Symposium was opened Tuesday, February 27, in Shove Chapel by Professor Fred A Sondermann of the political science department . Brodie, Millis, Morganthau discuss the Probability of War .
 Sondermann stated that this year's subject, ""War or Peace in the 60's,"" was selected to provoke ""conscientious thinking"" on a problem affecting the shape and Russiaj but may occm , between duration of our lives .
 Brodie propositioned that no one consciously wants war, neither we nor the Russians . However, man's unpredictable nature is such that it may occur regardless, regardless .
 No one knows how much depends upon the internal motivations of individual esteem of individuals . Not only that, there is no way of finding out since it's impossible to tell .
 Red China, which does not have the means to wage a nuclear war, could possibly involve us with Russia . Another unknown factor is Red China which could involve us in nuclear war .
 2. Protection of retaliatory forces, which will lessen the inducement of a trigger-happy attack, and . Protection of retaliation forces, . which will . lessen the inducedment of an attack, 2.2.3 .
 Brodie stated that we must recognize that war is possible, and that it is not immoral to use all feasible methods to save lives . Brodie: War is possible and that all feasible means are used to save people's lives .
 Morgenthau enumerated the three current schools of thought concerning nuclear war and tried to find other elements to counter their pessimistic tendencies . Morgenthalau tried to counter the pessimistic tendencies of the current nuclear war schools .
 The current problems concerning Berlin and Germany are so insolvable that nuclear war is highly probable within this decade . Nuclear war is likely to be highly likely within the next decade, says Dr. Peter Bergen .
 The attack will not come within 10 years, but with growing technological and psychological problems, the possibility becomes acute each year . The threat of a terrorist attack is not likely to come within ten years .
 Neither the Soviets nor the Red Chinese have .short-range designs to take over the non-Communist world . At present neither . nor . the Red . Chinese have short-range . designs .
 A non-thermonuclear war is impossible between the U.S. and China and Formosa, Taiwan . The United States and China are at odds of a nuclear war .
 Conventional armies have been reduced to a police force useless in nuclear war . Conventional forces are reduced to police forces useless in such a nuclear war, experts say .
 Since war is no longer a part of diplomatic policy, the neutral one-third of the world must be won over by other means . The power balance will remain unchanged, regardless of which way the neutrals swing, the power balance .
 Morgenthau is a member of Mr Millis' first school, believing in the possibility of war within this decade . He believes the war could happen within the next decade .
 He stated that the position of force in foreign policy has changed in the course of history . He said that force has changed the way it has been used in the past few years .
 Once it was the rational means to the ends of foreign policy, the ends justifying the moans . Now it's the end justifying moans, the end justifies moans. Once it's been the end of the foreign policy .
 With the revolution of nuclear power as a means, force become irrational since the ends, not the ends of existing civilzation, would be obliterated . However, force would become irrational if nuclear power were to be used as a weapon .
 Morgeuthau concluded that we are playera in a Greek tragedy, approaching a catastrophe which no one wants, but .which no one can avert, . No one can . avert, Morgeethau said .
 Later he partially answered the problem by saying that the crux lay not in the military aspects but in the political . Later he said that he had no problem with the political aspects .
 The decentralization of military force merely adds to the probability,s the political differences remain unsettled . The decentralized military force will merely add to the possibility,s .
 The final CC hockey game will be played tonight at 8:15 at the Broadmoor World Arent against the Canadian National Team . Tickets are available at Cossitt Hall .
 Tuesday 'Turn Toward Peace' Assembly Scheduled March 6 . Harris Sherman and Myles Hopper will give their personal observations on the controversial movement .
 Program will include films, slides, and tape recording from actual demonstration . Program will be in Perkins Hall at 11:00 .
 Mr Hopper and Mr Sherman will then allow time for questions and discussion about the demonstration .
 Last Saturday night four buses and numerous cars full of students headed for the Broadmoor to cheer at CC's final conference game . Amonothe points considered at the faculty-student panel discussion during Greek Week last October was the lack of group student enthusiasm on the Colorado College campus .
 TheCC student body, by saying ""We Ain't Down Yet,;' displayed more than mere optimism and enthusiasm . This entailed the manifestation of a healthy spirit that has been conspicuously absent here. The student body displayed more . than mere . mere optimism .
 Our hockey team, or any team for that matter, plays immensly better when the crowd supports it . The crowd is better when it comes to a game, and the team plays better when there is a good crowd .
 Dear Rebellious Future College Student, I would like to pass along several comments . Why did we wait so long? I would ask .
 I am not speaking merely from a personal viewpoint; rather, this letter will be an index of the general reactions we students had to your missive . I am speaking out from the general reaction I received from other students, including myself .
 "Illness, marriages, and other superficial circumstances reduced our Variety Show" to the languid attempt which you witnessed at Palmer High .
 T suppose this impediment reckoned heavily in your opinion of the show . But since the outstanding task of your letter was to concentrate on the superficial, T suppose that impediment was to blame for your opinion .
 Tolstoy never changed his socks in War and Peace, says author . "I assume that you would place your harsh stamp of distaste upon War and . Peace" if you knew that he never changed socks, he says .
 "It would have been much more in order for you to criticize the quality of the acts themselves," he said. "In fact, it would have had to be much more"
 We are embarrassed for you, and our embarrassment is further compounded by pity; pity for the fact that you choose to judge a creative effort by the circumstances surrounding it . Now we are embarrassed .
 You apparently are as inept in the handling of superlatives as you are in working with negatives . Colorado College is ranked No. 1 in the nation's college rankings .
 This is a term which should not be applied to this institution, especially when based on cleverly planted rumor alone . This is not the case, but it should be a term that should be kept out of the headlines .
 We, the ones being represented by this letter, will continue to live as we do for as long as we wish, under the supposition that the college student need not recognize the social tomfoolery which ""they"" try to impose upon us, because it has no relevance to
 "We can only hope that you will eventually be able to shrug off this malignant legacy which we are creating for you. And we can only . hope that we will eventually . eventually . shrug off it," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Richard Brigham '64, '64: The poroxysms of trepidation which I experienced on my first readings of the ideals, goals, traditions, etc. of Colorado College can now be recalled with a rather ironic grimace . Richard Brigham'64: "The porox
 The catalogues and pamphelts, with their undulating paragraphs full of pretty ideas and corresponding pretty pictures, left me wondering whether a finite being could ever be anything but a burden to this voluptuous utopia .
 The apparent lack of room for student idealism in this ideal community is distressing . It is only the terribly naive person who expects any ideal, personal or institutional, to become reality .
 The Experimental Theater has been unable to obtain funds from ASCC, or a concession of some small, regular theater space from the administration . Mr Jim Fox's inability to obtain either funds or concessions from the ASCC .
 Hermann J Muller will deliver the first Harold J Roberts Memorial Lecture at Colorado College on Tuesday, March 6, at 8:15 m.m. in Shove Memorial Chapel . Muller's lecture will take place at 8 a.m., March 6 .
 Muller received the 1946 Nobel Prize in medicine for proving that radiation causes hereditary changes in living cells . Muller was awarded the Nobel Prize for his work on the subject of radiation therapy .
 Columbia awarded him an honorary degree in 1949 and the Alexander Hamilton Medal in 1961 . Columbia also awarded him a posthumous honour from the Hamilton Medal .
 Muller engaged in research and teaching under the late Thomas Hunt Morgan, famous zoologist and specialist in genetics . Muller spent most of his career in teaching under Morgan .
 Muller went to Rice Institute in Huston, Texas, as an instructor in biology, where he remained until 1918 . Muller was a biology instructor at the Rice Institute . Muller died in 1918 .
 From Germany, he went to Russia, where he served as senior geneticist at Institute of Genetics in Moscow .
 During his stay at Amherst, much of his time was spent in research in his chosen field . Much of his stay in the U.S. was spent researching in the field .
 Dan Armstrong, Peter Booth, Frank Boyden, John Clarke, Fred Davis, Jerry Dorsey, Peter Goodbody, Dave Hayes, Steve Livingston, Tom Malone, Dan Martin, Joe Moore, Rich Nichols and Rich Nichols, Geoff Rivers, Robbie Robinson, and Greg Wingate .
 Linda Burtschi, Marcia Irving, Judy Jaccard, Caroline Jacobsen, Kay Knudsen, and Kathy Mcintosh are featured .
 The Deak U PEAKS % By Rosenfeld . Suddenly I feel necessarily moved to remark on a subject which by now has probably been hacked and gouged beyond recognition .
 I will, however, dismiss this minute problem since my mind generally runs three to four hundred years behind the times, anyway, anyway . I will dismiss this moment as a matter of time .
 The curtain is drawn as a bent, obviously pained figure opens the door to his humble lodging . Presenting a three-act play in one act entitled — ""La Dolce Vita di la Basketball Referee""
 His left arm is carried in a sling and large, bluish lumps are making themselves evident about his beaten body . The left arm of the victim is carrying a sling, and his body is covered in bruises .
 He is greeted at the door by his faithful wife, Grizelda and their three brats, Spike, Lefty, and Isolde . He also has a faithful wife and three children .
 Maybe it's the wild, uncontrolled frenzy of the screaming fans — the knowledge that my life is held in their shaking, clenched fists — a bad decision, a lousy call, and it could all be over . Maybe it is the wild and uncontrolled frenzy the fans are in .
 "You know I can't stand to see you blubbering like that — it makes me edgy," she says . "I'm edgy. You know I don't like it. You're edgy."
 Reverend William g Lea, Rector of Christ Church, Winnetka, 111, will be the preacher this coming Sun<l a ; .
 He was formerly the dean the Denver Episcopal Cathedral and a leading churchman in Cok rado . He was also the dean of Denver's Cathedral .
 He is visiting his fori area of work to take part in National Science Foundation C ference at Aspen . The college is very fortunate to have him as their guest speakiShove Chapel .
 B will examine the question whetht modern scientific advance has bowed God out of His own and creation .
 Staff pictures for the Nuggett will be taken this evening at 5:15 in the TIGER office . Staff pictures will also be taken from the office of the Tiger .
 American Student Information Service, 22, Avenue de la Liberie, Luxembourg, is located in Luxembourg . The information service is based at the American Students Information Service .
 Men 3 Colorado College Tiger . Bring Your Laundry with Your Dry Cleaning Men .
 This tan best be done bv looking at SWEAR (Students Who Elect Atomic Retaliation), a little known group on campus . The group is known for its anti-nuclear rhetoric .
 A highpower nuclear explosion detonated high in our atmosphere would set six states afire . It has been said that a high-power nuclear blast would set up six states .
 Let's not believe any of these atomic just-so stories that can't be proved, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter.com .
 "We've heard a lot of stories about the Russians dropping a load of bombs on us and destroying our great nation," says President Obama . "We're not going to believe the Russians are going to destroy us," he says .
 "There aren't enough bombs in the world to destroy a great country such as ours," says President Obama . Obama: "There are not enough bombs to destroy America"
 In the past few years wt have continuously been losing neutral countries to the Commies. The Commies are losing neutral nations to them, writes CNN.com .
 Once we were strong in Cuba with great powers such as the United Fruit Company and Pepsi-Cola, Cuba's government says . We are now in a state of war with the government of Cuba .
 Give the Russians five days to get out of Cuba, and if they don't, drop an atom bomb on them, they will be bombed . If the Russians don't get out, the bomb will be dropped on Cuba .
 SWEAR believes that they are an unnecessary but natural tool for survival . SWEARS believes they are a tool that is necessary to survive in the wild .
 We will destroy our enemies before they can bomb us, says SWEAR . In the first place, they are totally unnecessary because they're totally unnecessary .
 In the second place, if we need fall-out shelters, it is justified by our evolutionary proeesses . In the first place, we need to protect ourselves from predators in the long-term . The first place is that we need a shelter, not a shelter .
 Russia tricked the United States into signing a disarmament treaty . Let us look at what would happen if the Russians tricked the U.S. into a treaty treaty .
 This would mean that the Ruskies would promise not to produce any more bombs . This would also mean that they would promise to stop producing more bombs in Russia .
 We know the Commies are shiftless, will lie, cheat, and use sabotage to gain their goal of world domination . We know that they will lie and cheat to gain world domination, but we also know they're shiftless .
 While they are cheating we, the honoi-able nation, would be defenseless. We would not be able to defend ourselves, says Ravi Agrawal . While they're cheating, we would be helpless, he says .
 All this means that, at Russia's will, we could be brought to our knees, says Vladimir Putin . Russia could bring us down, he says, at the will .
 "If we ever sign any disarmament agreement, we do not let it stand in the way of our strengthening our nuclear defenses," says President Obama . "We will strengthen our nuclear defense," says Obama .
 We do not believe in senseless, unproven ""facts"" but, instead, in man's God-given gift of what is right: — — common sense . We believe in common sense, not senseless facts, but in God's gift of "common sense"
 Applications for the April 17, 1962 administration of the Selective Service College Qualification Test are now available . The test is now available at Selective . Service System local boards throughout country .
 Eligible students who intend to take this test should apply at once to the nearest local board for an application and a bulletin .
 Applications for the April 17 test must be postmarked no later than midnight, March 27, 1%2 .
 Tareyton Product of Ufid, \j/m*-%iean J<i(iit£i?-f~i''na., March 2, 1962 .
 I was mistaken in thinking that the college's system of values would place theater above pep. "I was mistaken," she says .
 Perhaps the college considers the former to be precious, and the latter to be quasi-precious . The college considers it precious, perhaps more than precious .
 As circumstances stand at present, the people building the sets for Mr Fox's present production for the German Club will be forced to do their work outdoors .
 The purpose of this letter is not to wildly berate, but to indicate an area in which some changes are made . College can be more honest in posting both its explicit and implicit goals, the letter says .
 I read with interest and a certain amount of disgust, the article in last week's Tiger on the proposed skating rink in the Sports Center . Douglas Cowles: I read the article with interest .
 No, I have nothing against skating rinks, nor do I have anything against sports which I consider a necessary part of college life . I have no problem with skating, nor with sports, as I consider it a necessary life in college .
 "As far as I know, they have not been returned to their prior status of full tuition payment," says author of the book . "They have not returned to [their] prior status," she says .
 It was asked that students show interest in a skating rink before it could be built . Students were asked to show interest before the rink was built .
 "I told them that I felt a really dedicated professor would be interested in coming to CC under these conditions," she said . She said she felt a 'dedicated professor' would want to come to CC .
 After my last reply I am deluged with accusations that CC is fast becoming a rich-kid's school, and that in a few years they expect it to receive the title of the Country Club of the West .
 "Communism is being widely discussed in this country, but in most cases without the Communists," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Communism is being discussed in the U.S. but without Communists .
 This is not only unfair because Communists are most often the targets of attack at such discussion, but also it is un-American in tradition . This is also unfair because Communist Party is most often targeted at such attacks .
 It is like holding a trial without the defendant being present or having a hearing, it is said . It is not a hearing. It is a hearing without a hearing or a trial, it's not a trial .
 Many speakers on this topic are either professional anti-Communists or ill-informed persons whose material is .based on untrue, prejudiced, or outright reactionary sources .
 Such speakers create the atmosphere of the witch-hunt and help ultra-Right fascist elements to the detriment of peace and social progress . Such speakers created atmosphere of witch hunt and help fascist elements, says German politician .
 Communism is a philosophy and movement which is more than one hundred years old and has many millions of adherents throughout the world . Communism is an ideology and movement that has millions of advocators throughout the world .
 Communists have made heavy sacrifices in the course of these struggles . Communists have sacrificed their lives in order to keep fighting for their country .
 We wish to inform you that we have set up a Lecture Bureau to make speakers available who can speak with knowledge and authority on Communism . We are happy to provide information about Communism in the UK .
 The Reader's Digest and Story Magazine are sponsoring a short story writing contest to discover talented collegiate authors . They will give a truthful view of the Communists on such topics as Communism, Marxism .
 The contest is being, conducted by Story Magazine, and the prize money is being provided by the Reader's Digest Foundation .
 The second prize entry will receive $350, and the third prize will be $250 . The winner will be announced at the end of the week .
 Eligible to compete are students in any college or university, or members of the Armed Forces accredited to educational institutions anywhere in the world . Awards of $50 apiece will be received by the next eighteen winnings .
 Contestants are urged to prepare entries as soon as possible, noting that the deadline for entries is April 20, 1962 .
 Manuscripts should he from 1500 to 9000 words in length and must be certified by a faculty member . Manuscript must be from 1500-9,000 words long and must have been certified .
 Bob Nursbaum urges everyone to atend the Ski Bum's Ball tonight at 9 o'clock i i i Rastall Center . GANO DOWNS MEN'S CLOTHING — FUXNISHTNGS AND GIFTS BROADMOOR HOTEL
 It is entirely legal to have Communist speakers, as the Attorney General recently stated . The Attorney General has stated that it is not illegal to speak Communist speakers .
 March 10 Frosh Sponsor Slave Day . The emancipation proclamation will be temporarily re-visited by the freshman class on Saturday .
 Slaves will be sold to the highest bidders on Friday afternoon, March 9, at a twister in the Hub . Slaves are being auctioned off at the highest bidder .
 Twisting will begin at 4:30, and the selling will begin shortly thereafter . Twisting is set to begin at the end of the day .
 The purpose of this auction is, obviously, to raise money, which will be used by the freshmen on their class project; bringing foreign student from overseas . Bea Fertig, Linne; to attend Colorado College .
 People are already saving money, devising various chores to be performed by their slaves .
 Slocum will have an open house on March 10 from 2 until 5 p.m. The boys are making plans for spring cleaning . Slocums will be open to boys from 2 to 5pm .
 Since buyers will have their slaves from 8m. to 5m., there will be plenty of time for washing, ironing, washing cars, carrying books, and cleaning rooms .
 Karen Tucker, Sue Thompson, Sharon Shackleford, Norma Parker, Myrle Miller, Molly McNamara, Peggy Hoover, and Peggy Hoover all lie . Sue Erickson, Karen Tucker and Sue Thompson are among those who lie .
 Carrington, Pam Meredith, Mary Beth Bishop, Sue Moore, Jan Afton, Cheryl Betts, Roms Favrot, Natalie Gee, Judy Hooker, Tina Jackson, Mary Lou Meadow; Faith O'Reilly, Cindy Pate, Robi Taylor, Sandy Wood
 Gus Hart, Greg Wmgate, Tom Malone, Bud Mixon, Ror Taylor, Cubby Welch, Frank Boy den, Don Sprinkle, Paul Carson, Mike Mayer, Bill Mendenhull, Larry Franks, and Lee Mullei .
 Only cash will be accepted, so all prospective buy ers should cash monstrous check ahead of time .
 Saturday, March 10, all owners and slaves are to report to the Hub for a re-emancipation ancece . Owners and slaves to report for the event at the Hub on March 10 .
 The WH ICKERBILL a gift and card shop ... the latest Peanuts comic book . The latest comic book is the latest in a series of Peanuts comics .
 William Delano, General Counsel for the Peace Corps, will talk to interested students about possibilities of serving in Peace Corps . Tacos & Pizza will be available at 10:30 a.m.
 II meet with faculty at lunch, it 1:30m. in the WES Lounge ill show a movie on Peace Corps in Tanganyika, Africa, and from 2:20 to 3:15m. He will discuss the Peace Corps . Application, testippointments,
 The Peace Corps is looking for seniors and faculty members in English, French, Spanish, and Physical Science Departments . The most immediate interest of the Peace Corps . is to enlist seniors and . faculty members .
 Peace Corps is interested in students with YMCA experience or generalists who might be interested in the Peace Corps' community development projects . The Peace Corps will work with students with experience in community development .
 Mr Delano indicated that he will be happy to talk to other faculty members and itudents about the Peace Corps in general, and the opportunities for service .
 After college, he spent two years in Berlin with the American Friends SerCommittee, working with youth groups and on international seminars .
 In 1958, he was a member of the Bar Association's Special Committee on Passport Procedures which published ""Freedom to Travel" after ipleting its study . In 1958 he was member of a committee on passports .
 All interested students and faculty members are urged to avail themselves of the opportunity of meetingi Mr Delano and hearing his discussion on the Peace Corps . pply of material on Peace Corps will be available in the WES Lounge .
 The topic was the pamphlet, ""Western Values and Total War,"" and various alternative solutions to the current crisis in world politics were vigorously discussed .
 Next meeting of informal group will take place on Tuesday, March G, from 4:00 to 5:00 in the WES Lounge .
 The topic will be taken from the 1962 Symposium, with particular reference to the question of what opinions were changed by the new information and concepts that were developed by the participants in the Symposium .
 A 1 1 1 interested students, faculty members, and administration are cordially invited to participate in the event .
 Loren Gergens and his sales staff have improved the communications efficiency of many firms by analyzing their operations and recommending advanced Bell System products and services . Loren's sales staff has helped many firms improve their communications efficiency .
 Colorado College Tigers stormed out quickly Saturday night to take a 3-0 first period lead on two quick goals by Alex Yankovich and Wayne McAlpine . The Tigers were beaten 7-3 by Colorado College in the Conference Finale .
 The Tigers couldn't contain Denver's slashing attack and dropped their last game of the season, 6-3 . The Tigers lost their last Western Collegiate Hockey Association game of season .
 Leading 3-1 late in the opening period, the Tigers saw the DU Pioneers come roaring back to tie it up in the second period and then walk away with the game after a three-goal third period . The Pioneers scored three goals in the game .
 The loss was the Tigers' 21st of the 1961 season and the 18th league loss of the season . The Tigers lost their 18 league games in a row to the Tigers in 1961 .
 CC's final game will be played Saturday night at 8:16 against the Canadian National team . The game is the last of the tournament and will be Saturday night .
 CC, Yankovich 3:19; CC, CC, McAlpine 7:29; DU, Oftebro (Duffusl 11:03; Duffus 18:30) CC, Duffus 3:20; CC,. Yankovic 6:36;
 CC, Gilbertson (tripping) 4:16; CC, Frolick (illegal zone check) 12:04. CC: Gilberston (Tripping) 3:15; Frolicks (Illegal Zone Check) 2:14; Gilber
 Due to the lack of a pool on campus, the team has been working out at the local high schools, Wasson and Palmer . The team is currently training at the high schools .
 Colorado College's track coach, Frank Flood, sent his cindermen into action for the second consecutive time last Saturday . CC Thinclads begin their season with a win over the first day of action .
 The meet was held in the Mines' Fieldhouse with no official scores being kept . No official scores were kept .
 The biggest problem of the moment is to find some depth behind the top 10 trackmen . There is no depth behind top 10 men at the top of the podium .
 Dave Krell (discus, 440) and Ed Loosli (high jump) have been added to the team . Krell joins the team in addition to high jump and discus cagers Ed Looosli and Dave Loosli .
 At Golden, the big news was the two record vaults by CC men Jim Blair and Jack Schwella . The big news came at Golden, where the two men vaulted two records .
 Bob Broyles and Brian Bleakney were looking at the backs of jerseys Saturday, but ran respectable 50 yard times of 6.2 seconds .
 The only place winner in field events other than pole vault was Schwella's 5*8"" high jump for third . The only field event winner in the field events was the high jump .
 Professional Actress Vera Ward, a professional actress, will visit the Colorado College campus . Sponsored by the Religious Affairs Committee, Vera Ward will be a guest .
 This will be held at the home of Professor Kenneth Burton at 1223 Wood Avenue, at 7:30 m.m. on Sunday evening, March 11 .
 She has appeared in Summer Stock and is well knowr. in the Chicago area, where she and her husband had their own television program .
 She has appeared in plays with such well known actresses as Peggy Wood, Linda Darnell, and Marie MacDonald . Vincent Price, Edward Arnold, Helmut Dantine, and Gene Raymond have also appeared .
 Ward has also done a great deal of work in religious drama in the Chicago area . Ward has presented programs to clubs and groups interested in drama . She is very well known for her programs .
 On Broadway, ""Man of All Seasons" features the great English actor Paul Scholfield . The show is on Broadway .
 The 16th century English statesman, Sir Thomas More, and his resistance to the state of the state . It concerns man's consicence and the enroachments of the . state and the demands of the King upon the King .
 This play has been very well reviewed by a number of competent and seasoned critics . This play is a play that has been reviewed by many of the world's top critics .
 The victory moved the Tigeis into a tie with Colorado Mines for the league lead . Colorado Mines holds a lead in the percentage column, but does hold the percentage .
 The Tigers' title hopes now rest squarely on the outcome of the games with Colorado State College tonight and tomorrow night .
 Eastlack's cagers jumped off to a quick lead in the opening minutes of the first half Monday night . The team looked as if they were going to run away with the game .
 With less than six minutes gone, Farrell Thompson hit a 10 foot jump shot to give CC a 13-3 lead . The game went into the second half of the quarter .
 The Tigers made the lead stand up till just past the halfway point when ASC began to chip away at the edge . The Tigers led the ASC until just past half-hour mark .
 The Indians worked the margin to nine points and then went into a semi-stall which CC was able to take advantage of . The Indians went into the semi-stability and won the game 9-1 .
 CC went ahead on a Barrv Anthony tip-in with just 2:15 left . After stealing several passes, CC went on to steal several passes .
 President BENEZET addresses CC students at Saturday night's pep rally . President Benezet addresses students at the rally .
 March 15, 1962 is the deadline for submitting pictures to the 17th Annual National Collegiate Photo Competition sponsored by Kappa Alpha Mu, the photographic fraternity .
 Each portfolio entrant is eligible to apply for the §$500 Major Wm. Also eligible for the $500 major Wm prize .
 This application form is also enclosed with the entry form and rules for this year's competition . The application form for the competition is enclosed .
 Slacum Intramural held two basketball games last Saturday . Only two games were played in Slocum basketball games .
 Speech Tournament at the Univer-1 sity of Arizona, Tucson, with 1 ratings in debate and 2 firstl places in individual events . Speech Tournament was held at the University of Arizona University of Tucson .
 Susan Caudill was the double-winner in the tournament as she won first in both Women's Impromptu and Women's Exterap . Also entered in individual events were Jo Heller, Charles Puckett and Max Power .
 In Debate CC teams barely finished out oi the running, after losing ci with California schools . CC teams finished out of the running in debate competition .
 Anthony tipped it in to give the Tigers a final four point margin . Ed Loosli hit the first of two free shots, and when the second fell short, the Tigers won . Anthony tipped the ball in .
 Colorado College Tige March 2, 1962 I' bid nlorado College Springs, Colo . March 9, 1962 Vol. Vol. of the Tige .
 Prize-Winning Geneticist Muller Opens Roberts Lecture Series by Dennis Faulk . Nobel Prize-winning geneticist Muller inaugurated last Tuesday evening in Shove Chapel .
 The 71-year-old is the world's leading authority on the effects of radiation to genetic material . He was introduced by President Benezet as a leading authority .
 The secondary purpose was an attempt istigate an intensive all-school . of students was dissatisfied . The secondary . purpose was to try and find out why students were dissatisfied .
 One commented: "The lecturers treated us as if we were young and totally in the dark about the issues of the cold war. One said: "We were treated as if ... we were totally in ... the dark"
 One official stated that he felt the students should not have come because it would look abroad as if the U.S. didn't want peace . Another official said he felt it would be a mistake to invite the students to the United States .
 Mr Clark, Director of Information, felt that the students were extremely well versed in the problem and even understood some of the technical problems to an extent .
 1800 students attended a rally at Calvary Methodist Church on Friday . Congressional and Administrative impressions of TTP were discussed .
 Saturday's itinerary included visits to 60 embassies, including the Soviet and Indian . The trip includes visits to the Soviet, Indian and Soviet embassies .
 At the Soviet Embassy, an official informed the group that two students would be able to go to Moscow to talk to students there . The group was told they could go to the Soviet embassy to talk with students .
 Harris was part of the delegation of the TTP Student Council sent to the Indian Embassy . Harris was one of the delegates sent to India's Indian Embassy in Delhi . Harris is a member of TTP's Student Council . He is a graduate of the University of Pakistan Studies in Pakistan .
 The conversation centered around what neutralist powers could do in forcing the major blocs to agree to an arms control proposal .
 5000 students (the largest student demonstration in the history of the U.S.) began picketing in front of the White House Saturday morning .
 The picketeers program, ""Commitent,"" on the problems of nuclear mament and student campus :tnents.com, is a weekly program on campus .
 Myles explained that they had rtten involved in the project . Irough correspondence with one of its leaders .
 Funds for the trip were donated by the Assemblies littee and various individui campus members . Funds were raised by the assembly members and the students .
 The Turn Toward Peace movers started, Myles explained, group of Grinnell College Meats last Thanksgiving when they proclaimed a vigil and fast in rent of the White House .
 The wvement spread throughout the wntry, and a demand for organiition was registered . Wvement was registered in the wintry and was registered online .
 It also 'Huded many initiatives that the '■S. could take for securing a justed lasting peace' The U.S. should take steps to secure a lasting peace, it said .
 Folding these, visits were made by je T.T.P. council to various Exec[ 've and Administrative offices— fnong these, talks with McGeorge 'tidy, Special Assistant to the esident; Ted Sorenson, Technical 'isor to the President
 A large group of students gathre <l in an auditorium, where they J* lectured to by five State officials .
 Two juniors and 18 seniors have been elected to Phi Beta Kappa at Colorado College . They will be initiated into the scholastic honor society on April 19 . This group 20 to Be Initiated into Phi Bets Kappa .
 The 38th group to be initiated since the society was first established in 1904 . The following students represent the 38th students to have been initiated .
 The two juniors elected this year are Arthur Lane Dana, a physics major from Colorado Springs and Max S Power, a political science major from Denver . The two students elected are both physics and political science majors .
 Mrs. Benjamin Harrison, Indiana; Gay Donley Petzold, history, Mesa, Arizona; Archie William Prestayko, zoology, Dauphin, Manitoba, Canada; Mrs. George George, history and zoology . Mrs. Harrison, history; Gay Petz
 Sheldon Singer, humanities for elementary teachers, James Osborne Street, mathematics, Wilmette, Illinois; Karen Ann Williamson, english Denver. v]y elected who first B is honored .
 David Logan and Ruth Ann Snodgrass are two chemistry students at the University of Cambridge . They are David J Logan, a chemistry major and a philosophy major, respectively . They have been joined by a chemistry and philosophy major .
 Professor Amanda M Ellis of the English department named chairman of a committee in charge of arranging the Phi Beta Kappa initiation and banquet at the Broadmoor in April .
 Officers of the Colorado College chapter of Phi Beta Kappa for 1961-62 are Professor Glenn E Brooks, of the political science department, president . Professor Thomas W Ross of the English department, vice-president; and Miss Lorena Berger, secretary of the college, secretary-treasurer
 Other members of the executive committee are Professor Kenneth Curran, chairman of the economics department, and Professor Frank A Krutzke . Professor Kenneth J Curran is chairman of Economics and Englisr .
 Sam W Vickerman, Miss Grace G Berger, Professor Thomas H Rawles, Professor Douglas W Freed, Professor Margaret M Hans man, Professor John D Roberts, Professor Lewis M Knapp, and Professor Richard M Pearl. Professor Richard W Pearl.
 Interviews for Kastall Center Board applicants will be held on Sunday at 2:30m. Interviews will take place in Rastall Centre on Sunday . Interviews are scheduled for the board members .
 Professor Muller's solution calls for a sperm bank from which parents could select the sperm which they would like to have in their progeny . Parents could select sperm which would produce characteristics which they want in a child .
 The success of this idea pre-supposes a mass education which would awaken a sense of social responsibility to the maintenance of the human race at least at the level of genetic fitness .
 It would pre-suppose a means of genetic redistribution, and further, a program of genetic counseling . The program would also include genetic counseling and genetic redistribution .
 He admits that the incorporation of his program would take some time, but that the sooner something is done, the better . He says he hopes to incorporate his program will be incorporated into his program .
 The number of minus mutations is far above the number of olus mutations, and this fact must be corrected as soon as possihle. The good doctor showed that the good doctor .
 In the primitive environment, the minus mutations, the genetic unfitness, is no problem simply because the unfavorable mutant cannot survive . The minus mutations are no problem in primitive environments, simply because they cannot survive.
 Muller insists that the only way to save soft, super-civilized man from mental and biological deterioration is to provide sperm banks from which can be selected the desirable, genetically fit oharacteiistics . Muller says sperm banks will be used to select desirable genetically fit sperm banks .
 Professor holds that at least one-fifth of today's civilized population is genetically unfit . Professor says each generation produces a population, one- fifth of which is genetically unsuitable . Professor: At least one fifth of civilized population in each generation is genetically unfit .
 Muller offered several interesting bits of positive evidence, proving that such a solution would not dissolve family ties . Muller: "Such a solution is not a solution to the problem of family relations"
 Families are as close as though though the parents knew that their child was part of them . Yet these families are still close, as though they were as close .
 Artificial insemination has already been experimented with, and the ties of families so produced have shown evidence of being at least as strong as the ""genetic"" families .
 Muller provided a stimulating evening of mental challenge and entertainment . Muller provided an entertaining evening of musical entertainment .
 This was a truly fitting beginning for the Harold J Roberts Lecture Series, and on behalf of all the people interested it it, I sincerely thank the people who made this series possible .
 Applications for Nugget Editor and Business Manager and Student Handbook Editor are available at Rastall Center Desk till March 17 . Nugget editor and business manager applications are available for up to three positions .
 On Thursday, March 15, at 7:30 m.m. in the WES Lounge of Rastall Center, Dr. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. will speak . Dr. King will speak at 7.30 p.m., March 15 .
 On March 22, at the same time and place, there will be a general review session where ideas and plans for further consideration of the issues raised by the 1962 Symposium will be discussed .
 The Enthusiasm Committee of ASCC is now circulating petitions lor the building of the new ice skiiting rink . The committee is circulating petitions to build the rink .
 If there is enough student interest generated, the committee will begin a letter-writing campaign using the number of signatures as evidence of enthusiasm for the undertaking . CC students are urged to sign these petitions .
 Your support is necessary if we are to succeed in our goal of a new rink completed by next year . Therefore, YOUR support is needed for the project to succeed .
 Demonstrate your support by signing one of these petitions us as soon as possible .
 About forty CC students and faculty members under the direction of Mr James Fox presented Friedrick Durrematt's ""Der Besuch Der Alton Dame"" (or ""The Visit"" as it is titled in English] to an audience of two hundred and fifty .
 Original set'design, by Serena Hayden, and original music by Horace Work added much to the understanding and effect of the drama, as did the lighting effects . Original set design and music were added to the production .
 Shove Chapel's dramatic facilities are almost non-existent . These were particularly evident since the chapel's facilities are not available . The chapel is located in the heart of the city's downtown area .
 Character portrayal was generally good, with the best characterizations from Karen Kossuth, as Claire Zachanassian (die Alte Dame) and Ed Kuipers as the butler .
 This is almost inexcusable, and particularly so in acoustically abominable places, such as Shove is . This is especially so in a place such as the Shove, where it is almost impossible to hear .
 This problem was aggravated if audience members understood German only slightly, as many did . This was aggravated by the fact that many did not understand German .
 Pomona seems to be a beautifully landscaped graveyard, says author . Pomona, California, is a beautiful landscaped cemetery .
 The college itself is regarded by some as a temporary Limbo, where enthusiasm is officially banned . The students look so much alike day after day, where the college is regarded as the 'Limbo'
 Pomona appears to be a school sliding on the crest of a wave made long ago . Pomona looks like a new school on the rise of a new wave, but it's not new .
 "It would be ridiculous to say that the students here are not potentially enthusiastic about their environment," the student says . The students at the University of Cambridge say they are excited about the environment .
 The climate seems to be a habit into which even freshmen are soon drawn . The climate is a habit that even freshmen will soon be drawn into .
 If we accept Pomona as is, or look upon it as a place to get out of, then we are fools . Pomona should be regarded as an active and workable environment, one that can change, over which we have influence .
 One student was very enthusiastic about the Student Lectureship Committee . He was helping to establish the committee .
 Why don't students write the paper, say something, defend or criticize? Why not students write a paper, defend, criticize or criticize .
 "I have been told by several people that the literary magazine is going down hill. I have told them that several people have told me that this is not a good thing for the magazine's readers," says author .
 I would hate to be influenced by the decisions and actions that some of us will have to make at some point in our lives . I would like to see how people are influenced by their own decisions .
 Sometimes it is helpful just to generate enthusiasm and the interchange of ideas, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com editor .
 One professor told me that he did not agree with generating undirected enthusiasm . One professor said he didn't want to generate undirecting enthusiasm .
 Admitted not all proposals are valuable, that often controversies are not resolved . Admitted that not all plans are valuable and that many controversies were not resolved. Admitted .
 We should contribute by making it the center, the reflection of inert — not boredom . If we want an interesting paper, we must help to make it so, we should help make it interesting .
 We can all continue to go unerringly through our academically ritualistic lives — or we can take some initiative and play a more active part . We can play an active part in the education of young people in the UK .
 We have one big question to ask: 'What do you think of the student body?'
 There is plenty to do in Colorado Springs on a date — and for those who don't believe this, we say, just take a look at all the theaters, fine restaurants, and the Broadmoor ski slopes .
 Many activities that are available on and off campus are not 'being taken advantage of', say students . But it seems to us that the many activities available are not being 'taken advantage of'
 By now there may be cries of protest that, given a ""golden opportunity"" by the Gold Digger's Ball, most of the girls did NOT ask anyone to it .
 Many — far more men than were asked — would have been asked IF at some earlier date they had made even a small effort by taking the initiative themselves . However, far more . than . asked .
 There isn't a person on this campus who wouldn't admit that ours is a society in which it is the man's duty to take the first step . After all, there isn't one person on campus who would admit that .
 The general attitude at Colorado College has become warped, and the men sit around waiting for the girls. Somehow, however, the general attitude . Somehow, though, the . attitude at . Colorado College is warped, says the author .
 The girls are only too eager to rush out to the Air Force Academy, leaving CC men in the lurch . Another frequent complaint is that the girls rush out for the academy .
 There were few girls on this campus who wouldn't have much preferred to date a CC man . By now this may not be so far from the truth, but, during the major part of the first semester, there were .
 A blind date is not much fun for a girl who provides her own transportation to and from the Academy, often at her own expense, and then discovers that she has nothing to talk about .
 We are not trying to condemn the entire male student body, for there does exist a small minority who seem to be capable of taking matters into their own hands . We're not condemning the entire student body .
 Vera Ward to give a reading of the play ""A Man for All Seasons"" at my home this coming Sunday evening .
 May I crave the indulgence of your indulgence in your correspondence column so that I might remind your readers of this event . I crave indulgence, I might be reminded of this .
 This is a play about the conscience of Sir Thomas More and the pressures put upon it by King Henry VIII over the issue of Church and State in England . The play is about the pressure put on More and his conscience .
 This reading will be held at 1128 Wood Avenue at 7:30m. this coming Sunday evening, March 11 .
 In regard to last week's symposium : of the three guest speakers, I thought that Dr. Dr. John Defterios was the best speaker .
 Dr. Morgenthau was more profound, more succinct, and showed far more of a ""public personality"" than either Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. or Dr. George W. Rockefeller . Dr. Rockefeller was a "public personality"
 Morgenthau: Countries with incompatible goals cannot have successful disarmament negotiations . Morgenthaus: "Countries have incompatible goals. They must work together to reach agreement"
 He had quite a wit, and periodically the audience broke into laughter from his comments . The audience laughed from laughter from the audience .
 Morgenthau was considered by many to be the most pessimistic of the three speakers . He was considered a pessimist by many, but was considered to be a humorist .
 It seems to me that the one who captures that ever-elusive state of objectivity, even for a moment, cannot help but smile at man's attempts to solve problems largely brought upon himself .
 This is the time when the Christian examine his practice of the Christian lif ( and takes a good, long, hard look at his interior life . This ' time when . examine his . practice of . the Christian . life .
 The most deadly enemy of a religious petson is his self-centeredness, his own self-sufficience, and that means his pride . The most dangerous enemy is his own pride, the author says .
 The only way to work free of the clutches of this, the most deadly of the seven deadly sins, is by living not by one's own merit, but by the enabling Grace of God .
 The purpose of this sermon is to help the worshipper look at his own life, to see it foi what it is and to help him turn from his self-centeredness to the Love and Grace of God .
 John Stickney Named Ski Bum of the Yea . The Ski Club and Rastall Center held a ball in a beautiful ski lodge, formerly known as the dining hall .
 The celebrities were John Stickily, Ski Bum of 1962, and Sandy Lazzari, who won the door prize of a pair of ski poles . The celebrities included John Stickly, the ski bums of 1962 and John Stickley .
 The publicity for the dance was handled by Suki Arentz and Tish Amberg; decorations by BiilTie Buffum and Joanie Schmitz; food and set-up by John Stickney and Bob Kendall .
 Dave Bitters, 3rd North; Bob Carlson, 2nd West; Bob Edmiston, 1st North; Terry Fonville, 4th North; Jim Schultz, 1th West . Howard Smith, Howard Smith and Chuck White were named 1st South and 4th West
 GANO DOWNS MEN'S CLOTHING — FURNISHING AND GIFTS BROADMOOR HOTEL SKI BRECK Barney's Hotelary, Main Street, Breckenridge, is a great place to hang out at .
 Skiers' Dorm — New Deluxe Shower $5.00 ski package — lodging plus two meals Kachina Lounge . Alto Vista Hotel I 18 N Cascade Ave. is located on the slopes .
 Colorado College Tiger discussed in Symposium by Max S Power Dining . "War an'd Peace in the Ws,"" Dr. Max S. Power Dined .
 Bernard Brodie and Walter Millis addressed Colorado Springs community on various aspects of the strains and pects of preparedness for nuclear war .
 Mor[gnthau pointed out that there are less obvious consequences than war to nuclear buildup . Morgnthauer pointed out there are also less obvious effects of nuclear buildup than war .
 One [olds that nuclear power is differonly in quantity from eonvenial power. One [old] old thought nuclear power differed only in quantity, one says . Nuclear power is only a quantity of power .
 Morgen: "The great ira^nce of power now exists t^tween the government and the people" Morgen emphasized the importance of power to our domestic polIjcs .
 Revolt, noted the eminent ■ofessor, is no longer a reliable ■heck on our government . Revolt is now a reliable “heck’s on the government,” says the eminent professor .
 Secindly, the complexity of the nuage necessarily decreases the involvement of the people in p'oiiical discussions, for they feel inrompetent to make policy judgments, leaving these instead for the experts .
 Experts are finally faced ith making value judgments, not scientific decisions . After all, he pointed mt, he said, experts are now faced with making value judgements .
 He opened his remarks in this by pointing out that the inction of nuclear power is the first real revolution in international politics since the beginning of his .
 MorgenIhau. noted that former Secretary of State Dulles had lealized this to be true . Pointed to the examples of the Hberaof Eastern Europe, Morgenius. noted .
 There are serious and dangerous deficiencies in the newly emerging nationstates of Africa and Asia . Further, there are serious deficiencies in African nations, Asia and Africa .
 Morgenthau warned that if several nations build nuclear strike capabilities, the value of the deterent force will be lost . Morgenthua warned that several nations built nuclear strike capability will be a loss .
 The possession of nuclear weapons by several nations will make it impossible to place responsibility for a nuclear strike . In other words, the possession of . several nations makes it impossible for a . nuclear strike to be possible .
 Morgenthau said that nuclear power is only the most spectacular of our new technological advances . Morgenthalau said nuclear power was only the 'most spectacular' of our technological advances.
 As an officer, your military service will be a stimulating and rewarding experience, he said . He went on to point out that the only two great nation nations are America and Israel .
 Your military service can pay off handsomely in later life . You will enjoy the pay, the prestige, and the traditional privileges of an officer .
 ROTC can be tremendously helpful when a man starts his climb up the civilian ladder . For example, ROTc can be a tremendously helpful to a man starting his career .
 Few are born leaders; but leadership can be learned . Advanced ROTC is a great place to learn it . You can help keep America so strong the war the whole world dreads need never happen .
 During your 2-year Advanced Army ROTC course, there will be a subsistence allowance of $535 . During the course, the allowance will be $535 per student .
 There is a $117 allowance for your six-week summer camp training, plus travel allowance . There is also an allowance for $117 .
 Of COUrSe, there is the warm sense of accomplishment you will feel in June 1963 when the gold bars of a Second Lieutenant are pinned on your Army uniform . And then, of course, there are the warm feelings of accomplishment .
 'Aspects of nuclear have an adaptive effort commensurate with these advances,"" he warned . "Aspects have an ... adaptive effort," he said .
 Morgenthau made additional comments which were of a very substantive nature . He said: "Morgenthau's comments were very substantive and very serious"
 He said he had diagnosed the sickness but had no cure for the disease . He pointed out that he was reporting things as he saw them .
 The disarmament can come more easily if present political conflicts are settled, he says . He says disarmament will come easier if political conflicts have been settled .
 The nature of war has changed more than that of diplomacy, but this has brought several changes in diplomacy . Brodie: "Strains on Policy Making" has changed the nature of diplomacy more than diplomacy .
 Major powers are less willing to go to war than in earlier times, says CNN.com's John Defterios.com.com . Major powers in the Middle East have been at odds with each other in recent years .
 There has been a loss of goals— glory or territory — in foreign policy . Secondly, there has been the loss of success or territory, says David Cameron .
 Military power is still necessary, commented Brodie, but the need may well be out of accord with the force available . Brodie: Military power will still be necessary, but may not be in accord with available force .
 The rapidity of the technological changes in the military field has led to rapid technological changes, Dr. Dr. says . ‘The rapidity’ of the changes has been attributed to the rapidity in the field, he says .
 We are faced with shaking old views from entire organizations, or with upsetting delicately achieved military alliances, even though these must maintain their unity . We must shake old views .
 The problems we face are, at the outset, intellectually very baffling, and this has led to the introduction of civilian scientists into the military . The problems are at the beginning of the start of the military, and they are 'intellectually very bewildering'
 Mr Brodie closed his comments by noting that the coming of nuclear weapons has given offensive strength .
 Mr Millis first cautioned that we are in error when we assume that there is always one best policy . Speaking on disarmament, he said that we should not assume that always best policy is always best .
 He went on to point out that arms control and disarmament proposals have been contradictory and ineffective .
 Our present policy is to maintain a strong retaliatory force and conventional arms, says Mills Mills .
 If disarmament is achieved, it will be as a result of improved rational relations between the major powers, in which war has a decreasing place . War has decreasing place in the history of the world, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Two broad steps which precede disarmament are the maintenance of a balance of force while outstanding problems are resolved, and the abolition of war as an instrument of policy . The two broad steps to disarmament will be maintenance of the balance, while outstanding issues are resolved .
 I found myself under the forbidding glare of one of the Loomis Virginity Guardians . I was confronted by a member of the Guardians of the Virginity .
 "This is but one phase of an extensive, but subtle campaign designed to eliminate boy-girl relationships on this campus," says LZ Granderson .
 Red-blooded American boy finds it difficult to discourage sex, per se, in hallowed halls of residence .
 Instead of turning my problem, and yours, over to the psychiatrists, let's attempt a few theoretic solutions . Let's try a few theoretical solutions to it .
 This way, girls, you'll only have to wrestle with your conscience — not the resident matron and your date . This way of keeping your conscience at home, girls will have to deal with their own conscience .
 We might round up a bunch of romantic Chevalier types and distribute them, on weekends, among the ladies-in-waiting . A little preoccupation just might go a long way .
 I really think that our only solution lies in the mounting of a concentrated offensive . After some deliberation, though, I think that . I really . think that Our only solution is to mount an offensive, and that we need to be more aggressive .
 Let us reenter the fray, en masse, with such open ""displays of affection,"" that we will embarrass the enemy back to their lace-covered trenches . Let us return to the fray en masse. Let us . We will embarrass .
 Paul's Flowers Cut Flowers and Corsages Reasonably Priced at 1524 North Tejon MElrose, ME .
 Sigma Chi has two new pledges; Pete Krowwer and Ron Rishagen . Sigma Chi also has two pledges for the next year . Pete and Ron are both pledges .
 The Sigs had their annual Apache dance Saturday night at the Hackney House . The Apache dance was held Saturday night .
 Beta Theta Pi recently pledged John Gross, Dave George, and Farrell Thompson . John Gross and Dave George pledged to pledge to Phi Phi Phi Kappa Kappa .
 Kappa Sigma pledged Dave Harrington, Joe Bercquist, Jullius Fenderman, and Chris Flower for second semester . Kappa Sigma pledges Dave Harrington and Joe .
 Phi Delta Theta recently pledged Ray Mithun, Chris Wadsworth, and Lee Hunt . Theta has pledged three members of the Phi Delta theta . The pledge ceremony will be held in New York City .
 Sue Phelps, Sue Hardy, Sue Gillespie, Phyllis Nolting, Claudia Elkins, Mary Collier, Shirley McCullough, and Jane Hilton . Sue Phelps: Sue Hardy: Sue Gillespie: "Sue Gillespie"
 Tonight the Thetas will have their ""Theta Man Dance"" at the Alamo Hotel . The Theta Man dance will take place at the hotel tonight .
 Julie Bohke, Piegi Benham and Bobbie Tolley elected officers . Other officers elected were Julie Bohkke, . Piegi . Benham, Bobbie . Tolley .
 Alpha Phi pledged Lynn Sipple, Mary Ann Bishop, Nancy Stauffer, J.'inet Okamura, Marilyn Maier, Marilyn . Maier and Carla Nelson pledged .
 Tonight the Alpha Phi's are having a costume party with the Gamma Phi's . The Gamma Phi Phi's will be having a Halloween party .
 Kappa Kappa Gamma has pledged Chris Archangeli, Gloria Borowski, and Norma Parker . The pledge is part of a national effort to raise awareness of women's rights .
 Lucia Bates, Barbara Couey, Lucy Cristy, Linda Dunkin, Sara Harrell, Marsha Holden, Mary Ann Hubbell, Pam Meredith.
 Madlyn Millimet, Chrissie Moon, Sharon Shackleford, Nancy Shoup, Flint Smith and Flint Smith are among the writers .
 Kappa Kappa's new officers, installed March 5th, include President Kay Matthews, Vice President — Kay Anderson, Pledge trainer — Jan Sartor, Scholarship — Suky Arentz, Efficiency — Linda Pierce, Jann Rowley, Public Relations—Linda Dunkin, and
 The Miami Triad Dance for Beta Theta Pi, Phi Delta Theta Theta, and Sigma Chi will be held March 16 . The event will take place in Miami .
 Tentative entertainment plans for Saturday night call for 1) Dixieland combo and 2) a banjo or guitarpicker to liven up the proceedings . "We are hopeful of being able to provide good, informal entertainment for those who can spend Saturday night at the Camp
 Information on topics can be had by reading the information sheets which are with the registration sheets at Rastall Desk . Topic guide sheets will be sent to those who register by March 15, the deadline date for registration, except for discussion groups .
 Suggested time of departure from campus for La Foret. Saturday, March 17, 1962 12:30-1:00 Suggested . time of arrival from campus . March 17 is March 17 .
 Sunday, March 18, 1962 8:30 Breakfast 10:00 Chapel Service at La Foret Dr. Dr. The service was held in honor of President Kennedy Kennedy Kennedy .
 There will be a coffee-hour in Rastall Center, next Thursday, March 15, at 4:00m. The President of the University of Cambridge will close the event .
 First place went to O lorado Mines, white WSC and jp joined the Tigers in second place . First place was O.Lorado mines .
 Barry Anthony led e Tigers with 18 points, followed by Dave Harrington with 16 . Dave Harrington followed by Barry Anthony with 16 and ,e Krell with 11 . Barry Anthony leads e Tigers in the first game .
 The Tigers' shooting percentage was incfeato 51 percent with the addiof 45 points in the second [If, this was not enough to close the gap on the Bears, who showed impressive shooting .
 Farrell Thompson and ave Krell both scored points each in Colorado's final game .
 The team has put out a Mil effort even with the loss of uf members due to eligibility . The results will count d the determination of team ■iitions on the squad .
 Gordon Aamoth, captain and iree year letterman, and letterian Don Stouffer, will lead the squad . Heading the squad will be vetfans Gordon Aaamoth and Don Stourffer .
 Freshman class is expected to roduee the best prospects . Several transfers are expected to be part of the team .
 Hunt gdahy and Bob Magie finish one-two in the ural golf tournament last all, head the list of men . The team plays its first latch against the Colorado School "" Mines team at the Broadmoor f Club .
 The Tenth Annual Military Ball will be held March 24th at the Broadmoor International Center . The Ball is the tenth annual ROTC Ball for the U.S. Military Drill Instructors .
 The Military Ball, under the general chairmanship of Cadet Major Tim Moe, is being organized bv the Cadet Legion . The event will take place at the end of the month .
 The 179th Army Band from Fort Carson will provide the music for the event . This year's event will be held at Fort Carson, California .
 Colorado College's Military Ball is the one very formal dance of the year at Colorado College . The Military Ball was held at Colorado's College of Technology's annual dance .
 Dress for the event will be long formal gowns for the girls and the ROTC uniform for the Cadets .
 Earlier this week all Cadets voted for Honorary Cadet Lieutenant Colonel . Earlier in the week, the students voted for the honourary role of Lieutenant Colonel.
 Misses Norma Parker, Sharon Shackleford, Isabel Williams, Bobbie Tolley and Myrle Miller are among the candidates for Misses .
 Besides the Honorary Cadet Lieutenant, there will be a sponsor for each Company . There will be sponsors for each company .
 After the last basketball games, there are still two undefeated teams, the faculty and 2nd North . Slocum Intramural is still undefeated after the last two basketball games .
 Several of the CC tankers picked up 5th places in their respective events . Several of these tankers were able to pick up a 5th place in each event .
 All the swimmers are either freshmen or sophomores . CC hopes to give Mines and CSC a real race for that top spot .
 Next year it is hoped that the swim team will have a little longer training period than the two weeks of practice before the meet this year . It is hoped next year it will also have a long training period .
 Cache La Poudre CC track team has nucleus of a winning team . The track team this year seems to have a nucleus of winning team. MEIrose 3-1219 a *
 Bryan Bleakney ran 9.3m three years ago in conference competition . Bryan Bleekney is the first runner to run 9.5m in a conference competition since 2009 .
 Mike Durphee didn't win the conference championship last year . But he beat all the best runners in it in individual meets in the SS0.0 .
 In the mile Tony McGinnis and Dave Smith have been pleasing Coach Flood with their early workouts . Coach Flood has been impressed with the pair's early workouts so far .
 In the field events we've shown good strength in the pole vault and broad jump . We have shown strength in pole vault, broad jump and pole vault . We are looking to improve in the future of our young people .
 Jim Blair, last year's conference champ in the pole vault, and Jack Schwella both broke Colorado Mines Field House record at 12.5 meters in a meet last week . Jim Blair's pole vault record was 12.3 meters . Jack Schwewea's pole pole vault
 Abiodun Afonja made a surprisingly good early season broad jump of 21.3 inches in the same meet . Abioduna Afonjobi made an impressive 21.4 inches in broad jump .
 Dave Krell should also score strongly for the Tigers as he was champion in the discus in conference competition last year . Krell was also champion in discus last year, and was champion last year in conference .
 March 17 — CU indoor Meet at Boulder March 24 — Rocky Mountain Indoor Conference Meet at Golden March 31 — Outdoor Meet at Pueblo . April 14 — Triangle Meet with Western State & Adams State, at home at 1:30 April 21 — Dual Meet here between CSC and
 CC Cadet Clark Denny has been awarded a citation by the National Board for the Promotion of Rifle Practice for his participation in rifle competition at the National Matches .
 This rifle team was sponsored and coached by the Fifth Army Advanced Marksman Unit . The team is sponsored by the Army's Fifth Army .
 Selection of the members for the team came from 3500 ROTC cadets attending a six-week summer camp at Fort Riley, Kansas, and Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri . Selection was made by 3500 cadets who attended a camp in Kansas and Missouri .
 This is the first time a student from Colorado College has represented Colorado College at the National Matches . This was also the first student from CC has represented the college .
 Cadet Denny placed in awards at Camp Perry, in the Marine Corps Cup Match, and in the 1961 National Service Rifle Championship, an aggregate of total score from the President's Match, . The Navy Cup Match was the Navy's .
 CC's Tigers finished off a disappointing season with a respectable performance against Canada's National Team . CC's Hockey Team Loses Canadian Game 11-1 .
 Tigers play one of their most solid games of the year in 1 1-1 decision . Tigers were short end of a 1-0 decision against the Yankees . Tigers have been in a losing streak of three straight games .
 Art Warwick had a good game and without a few of his great saves, the score gap could have been much wider . Art Warwick was the man of the match in goal .
 Tin' defense played as well as ever, and the forwards hustled all the way . The win was a comfortable victory for the Tin' team .
 There was a point midway through the first period when the game looked as if it could go either way . The result was a 1-1 draw at the start of the second period .
 Sales and Sales Management Training Program is designed to develop young men for careers in life insurance sales and sales management . The program is available for men in the United States and abroad .
 The training period provides an initial training period of 3 months before the men move into full sales work .
 Those trainees who are found qualified for management responsibility are assured of ample opportunity to move on to such work in either our field offices or in the Home Office after initial period .
 Aggressive expansion plans provide unusual opportunities for the limited number of men accepted each year . The only men accepted into the program are men who are accepted into it .
 Colorado College Tiger 'Hopper and Sherman' surrounded Lafayette Park, an area equal to a city block . Another group formed a line stretching from one end of the White House to the end of Executive Department buildings .
 On Monday and Tuesday, Myles and Harris continued with their Congressional and Administrative visits .
 Representative Chenoweth ""received us heartily and then proceeded to explain the dangers of such activities as TTP and Commitment" Representative Chenowseth said: "I'm not afraid to be afraid to go out of the country"
 Chenoweth admitted he hadn't read the TTP platform and wasn't sure whether Communists were involved or not . He said he didn't know whether Communists are involved in the Communist Party .
 Myles felt that the most productive visit was the one made to the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency . Myles said that he felt most productive was the visit to the U.S. arms control agency .
 Mr Fisher stated that the agency has no common policy, but instead, discussed individual ideas and proposals .
 It was strongly advised that disarmament be discussed on campus, and that letters be written to Congressmen and to his agency .
 Myles and Harris discuss their Washington trip . Harris and Myles discuss their impressions of the leaders, students and various visits .
 Students who visited agencies and officials had an intelligent view of the platform . They could not have called experts on such questions as Civil Defense and nuclear testing . Hams.
 Rep*ir. Rodgers (D-Colorado) called the TTP movement a Jay's Bicycle Shop 19 E DOWA ME 4-4733 .
 Senator Carroll said students should take a firm stand with the government and write letters to Congressmen and maintain open minds when considering someone alse's opinion .
 Myles stated that it reminded him of a statement made by a student which he felt applied to the delegation in general . Myles said that it was a statement that he felt the delegation should be more careful of .
 Harris said the demonstration accomplished its main purpose — it received very good publicity, both here and abroad . Considering its accomplishments, Harris mentioned that the demonstration achieved its main goal .
 Two of the leads rehear their parts in "Guys and Dolls" being presented at the Fine Arts Center this weekend .
 Says Boom-Boom, "Tareyton is one filter cigarette that really delivers de gustibus" The cigarette is a one filter filter cigarette .
 Registration for the All-College Conference topics will be possible j 3 y and at La Poret Camp tomorrow and Sunday . Tareyton Colorado College Tiger is a junior at Colorado College .
 Saturday and Sunday at 10 a.m. jpday; return trips will be made after the discussions for those who want to return to campus .
 Saturday night's entertainment features a Dixieland jazz band and vera I banjos and guitars for group folk-singing . Refreshments will be ■ovided, and we hope you'll stay for all the fun .
 Colorado College is one of eight colleges and universities a six-state Rocky Mountain area having fellowship winners . A total of nine students at four Colorado colleges were honth the grants which proPenrose Pathologist To Speak Here Tues.
 On March 20 the faculty PreMedical Advisory Committee is sponsoring a meeting for all students interested in medicine as a profession . The meeting will be held on March 20 .
 The meeting will take place at 7:30m. in the WES Lounge of Rastall Centei\ Dr. Dr. Rastell Centei . The meeting is scheduled to take place in the  Lounge of the Rastel Centei-Centei-Dr.
 Morgan Berthrong, pathologist at Penrose Hospital, will speak on studying for a medical profession . He will give a presentation on how to prepare for the profession .
 The meeting is open to all, and refreshments will follow a question and answer period . The meeting will be held at 7:30 a.m. ET .
 Elections for the new officers of the Associated Women Students of Colorado College were held for three days last week .
 The girls who were elected will take over from the old officers in two weeks . After a brief training period, they will be able to take over as officers . The girls will be sworn in as new officers after a training period .
 President Alice Brooks is the president of the Women's Political Action Committee . The committee is comprised of women and men who serve as women of color in the United States .
 Flint Smith full year's tuition and fees, lus a $1,500 cost of living alwance . Flint Smith is a junior at the University of Cambridge .
 Colorado College has had eight footlrow Wilson Fellowship wines — five men and three women — the past three years . Colorado College's Wilson Fellowship wine program has been held at Colorado College .
 Dennis C r, an economics major, and A Williamson, an English iajor. They are Dennis C . Williamson and A . Williamson, a junior at the University of Cambridge, Massachusetts .
 President Benezet suggested that students may be withdrawing from the college community partly because they feel the academic work has grown too tough to take the time to do anything else .
 Most students for social or personal reasons came with blocks between themselves and genuine absorption into ideas . Most students came with real blocks between them and a genuine absorption in ideas . Students for social, personal reasons were often blocked from absorbing ideas .
 Great teachers have always managed to be in love with both . As evidence continues to come in from studies of college education, more faculty should be persuaded to join them .
 This is not the sole job of the deans, the president, or the student union director, it says . It's not the only job of deans or the president of the university, it's the job of student leaders and union directors .
 President Benezet suggested that if the community part of the college has declined it is because its opportunities for education have been missed . He said that if it had declined it was because of the opportunities it had missed .
 Teachers must convert students to the reasons for a life of reason, he says . Noting a current hostility in the world to the precepts of the intellectual life, he said this may change .
 President Benezet: "It appears to me that the very difficulty of our task makes it less certain it can be accomplished through speed-up methods, teaching gadgets, and growing impersonality"
 The pattern we still think of as the American college is "now being frayed at the edges, if not threatened with being cut to shreds,"" President Benezet said .
 Thomas O Brandt has been named managing editor of The German Quarterly . Brandt is chairman of the German department at Colorado College . He is the editor of the American Association of Teachers of German .
 The lfiO-page quarterly contains articles in English for college and university and high school teachers of German . The quarterly issue is written in German and English .
 Professor Brandt will continue teaching assignments at Colorado College . Prof. Brandt is following the resignation of Prof. Richard Brandt .
 The Colorado College German professor was notified of his appointment by Prof. Prof. Michael Schubert . The professor was a German professor at Colorado College .
 Werner Neuse is editor-in-chief of the quarterly and director of the Deutsche Soniincrschule at Middlebury College . He will teach during the 19G2 summer session . Neuse will also teach at the college .
 Professor Brandt is the author of the novel Dor Frohllche Gnsthof or The Ga y [mi . He writes on the American scene, literature and art for numerous German cultural and literary inagaiznes .
 As a result of the appointment, Professor Brandt automatically becomes a member of the executive council of the American Association of Teachers of German of German .
 Professor Brandt was senior master at the Lakeside Preparatory School in Seattle, Wash., an instructor at Oregon State College, research assistant in German literature at the College of William and Mary .
 Rastall Center Board Chooses 7 new members from 2'J candidates for offices . The board chose 7 members from candidates for office .
 All applicants filled out an application and were interviewed by the present Board on the basis of their interest, ability, and enthusiasm . All the applicants were interviewed for the first time .
 These people will serve for a year on the Board . They will have two faculty advisors, the Student Activities Advisor, and the Director of Rastall Center to assist them .
 ASCC appropriations policy for various campus activities faces the possibility of major change in the very near future . I olorado SnrmrF. "I'm looking forward to a very exciting future in the U.S. college of engineering engineering engineering .
 At the present time, the primary consideration of the ASCC Finance Committee in its budget hearings is the number of students to be benefited, both directly and indirectly, by an appropriation from the fund . The primary consideration in the committee's budget hearings will be students to benefit from an appropriation .
 ASCC allotment comes directly from fees paid by each individual CC student . This is considered primary since it comes from student fees paid for each individual student .
 The Finance Committee considers the request of other campus organizations, the uses for these proposed appropriations, and their utility to the student body . After this major portion of the budget is budgeted, the Finance Committee will consider the requests of other organizations .
 The only position clarified is the precedent resulting from a recent refusal of the ""Turn Toward Peace"" delegation . The delegation's position has not been clarified .
 Three persons (Bill Stafford, Susan Caudill, and Betsy Gaskill) will attempt to clarify the situation and propose some specific changes . Bill Stafford will be the first person to propose changes to the law .
 "The way in which allotments arise leads to a value judgment which is very hard to make," says David Cameron . "It's very difficult to make. It's the only way to make a value judgement," he says .
 One suggestion that deserves attention is a direct appropriation only to certain key organizations (Nugget, Kinnikinnik, Tiger, Foreign Student Committee, Enthusiasm Committee) and a program fund for all the rest which make requests .
 This fund would be under direct ASCC supervision . It would be used to support activities currently under Citizenship Club, International Relations Club, and others currently in the ASCC budget .
 This proposal would have the merit of including activities currently omitted, although value judgments would still have to be made . The proposal would also include activities that are currently omitted from the list .
 It would also alleviate the practice by organizations currently receiving funds from ASCC, of requesting too much, thereby freezing ASCC resources till the school term ends, then returning the surplus to the Reserve Fund . ASCC funds would also be returned to the reserve fund .
 The in-between season is when tailors have some time lo spare . If your suit, slacks or jacket needs a bit of expert repairs, now is the time to do it .
 1 also feel it a necessity to point out that I bear no grudges for the pittance, equivalent to 73c an hour, which I received as a member of that hardy, courageous group of white-coated financial martyrs, known simply as hashers. We
 "I consider even that paltry recompense more than adequate for the amount of labor extracted from me," he says . "Even that is more than enough for the time I spent," he adds .
 I now have a few suggestions : Offer in an attempt to quell or forestall a planned lynching which will only cause the college a lot uf unneeded bad publicity . Offend a plan to try and quell the lynching of the college students . Offer an offer in
 This is one of those costbalancer meals served after a culinary extravaganza such as Sweet and Sour Pork or Potatoes and Ham au Gratin . The mental picture of that anemic weeny, quietly resting on a bun twice its size, is more than one can bear
 The CC hot-dog is in dire need of immediate revamping . Resembling a withered octogenarian fading fast in his immaculate hospital bed, it tastes like old hoe handles from an overworked cotton plantation in Alabama .
 When applied to a defenseless hot-dog, these anomalies rub my palate wrong way . Now I'll go along with a tough fillet mignon, a shrunken chateau briand, or a dry prime rib of beef, but these anomalies .
 No matter how implausible this scheme may sound, cooking of the hot-dogs must, I repeat, must be attempted . Since all else has obviously failed, it must be tried .
 Hot-dogs must then be purchased from an accredited meat wholesaler . The idea of dealing with nomad butchers instills in me little cause for an appetite .
 Hashers must be given more protective covering than starched white jackets . Hashers need to be covered in more protective clothing, says CNN.com .
 Fencing masks, bullet proof vests, and Thompson sub-machine guns are definitely called for, if order is to be maintained in the dining halls . Fencing maskes and bulletproof vests are definitely needed .
 The preacher will address himself to the concept of sin and evil in the life of the individual man . Mr William Powell will continue to address the concept .
 This concept of sin is one that greatly troubles and also repulses the modem man . This concept is one of sin's greatest problems and repulsiones .
 This is due to a lurid false presentation on the part of certain versions of the Christian faith and also to a misunderstanding of this concept by our censorship contemporaries . This is because of a lack of understanding of the concept by censors, he says .
 It may be true, as one thinker put it, that modern man is no longer troubled by his sins . Modern man may no longer be troubled by sins, but he is troubled by the sins of the past .
 The statistics on mental health and also from reading much modem literature, it would seem seem seem that man is troubled by something . However, judging by the statistics on . mental health, it seems that man seems troubled by . something .
 This vague sense of guilt pervades much of our social life and underlies much of man's attitude towards the world . The Christian attitude towards sin would seem to be much less healthy than that of the Christian attitude to sin .
 The theme of this sermon deals with this morbid quality which seems to possess many people and much literature . It looks at it in the light of the Christian revelation of the love of God toward man as a sinful being .
 Jan Afton, Linda Dunkin, Catherine Grant, Judy Jaccard, Norma Parker, Sue Phillips and Sue Phillips are featured in this week's show .
 Alpha Lambda Delta is still offering the Tutoring System . Students may contact Judy Clark for a list of available courses .
 This can easily be done by having the upper echelon of the food service appear every Saturday afternoon, publicly eating their own stuff . This is not the only way to improve the food department .
 If carried out, I will personally guarantee a virtual elimination of all student rioting, he says . 'Sadistic as this may be, if it is carried out,' he adds .
 "I particularly enjoyed the immense profoundness expressed by the eminent Dr. Dr. John Sutter," he said .
 In the next month, Rastall Center will hold four events which will be of interest to the student body . Skirts and Tops $3.50 up Friday Evenings .
 Applications for NUGGET editor, business manager, and STUDENT HANDBOOK editor close March 17 . March 23 — Ladies night in the games March 24 — Leathercraft workshop April 17 — Poster workshop April 24 — Photo workshop April 25 — Photo workshops April 24 .
 Applications available at Rastall Center desk, and all questions may be referred t Dave Fuigason, chairman of Publi cations Board . Applications are available at the center desk .
 Colorado College's lone entry of Susan Caudill and Charles Puckett trailed the winning Colorado State College team by a point . Only two undefeated teams sur vived the four round, power matched debate division .
 Direction of the tournament wa; under the supervision of the Colorado College Debate Club .
 Mai Power was in charge of scheduling the impromptu speaking ami original oratory competitions . Christopher Griffiths and Nancy Dehlin scheduled and directed the debate division . The debate division was also set up .
 Colorado College faculty mem bers assisting in the judging fa eluded professors James A. Johrr son, Robin Rudoff, William Barton, and Captain Louis Pistone . Professor Pistone is a former member of the faculty at Colorado College .
 Fill out the form Below and Join with SeniW Barry Goldwater, Senaloi Strom Tnurm. Join with Goldwater and Sen. Strom . Sen. Goldwater was a Democrat in the House of Representatives .
 Score Releases Score With 'Guys and Dolls' Taste, Energy, Nostalgia . Colorado College Tiger • March 16, 1962 .
 Colorado College Player's production of "Guys and Dolls" was p smashing success . If so, then I can safely say that the production was a success .
 The CC Players produced the best show ever put on | the CC Players . taMillen, Jenkins, and Cornick jr e to be congratulated for their abilities .
 The off-type casting afforded :ome of the best laughs of the j 10 w; Bill Stafford as the sightgfers guide, Don Oden as the punch-drunk prizefighter, Chris ■friths as gangster Harry the Horse, Peigi Benham
 Such a ""tough"" looking bunch of gangsters has never before been ■een by the students in, and residents of Colorado Springs, Colorado Springs .
 As ie sang, the audience remained lerfectly still — I didn't hear a cough . As I sang I sang, I sang: 'As I sing, I'm singing, I don't think I'll cough'
 The only word that I use to describe the dancers themselves, and especially Mr Cornick and his Cynthia Lamb, is supple . The dancers themselves are supple, says Ms Cornick .
 These two pushed and fulled themselves in directions in rfrieh I'm sure the human body not be pushed or pulled. These two pushes and fulls themselves in ways in rrieh .
 Genevieve Vaughn's beauliuil soprano voice rang out as as that bell she sang about. i mission doll,"""She said, and lie was an excellent one. Iiss Genevie Vaughn's voice was excellent .
 During the scene in which she slipped became slightly tipsy was convincing due to Miss Vaughn's acting . The role of Sky Masterson, )ir. was convincing .
 Whenhe sang, the audience sat almost transfixed, as that mellow tenor filled the Fine Arts Center Theatre . He sang, as he sang, "whenhe sang"
 Lynn Bradley was just Plain wonderful in the part of Adelaide, the girl who had been ed for 14 years . He looked and acted the art of a not-really-so-tough guy .
 The audience just couldn't ough of her singing, on the whole, ""Guys and Wis"" was terrific .
 The first act *as fast moving, and I have noth*ff but compliments for it. The first part of the first act is "fast moving," and the first part will be "slow moving"
 The jKond act, while still good, seemed little bit slower at first; howBr, it picked up during the ""Rock 2 Boat"" number .
 Special rates for students and teachers for the six week > Summer Session Tour program begin as low as $555.00 .
 This price includes round-trip jet air travel from West Coast to Waikiki Beach . Full schedule of 22 planned activities, including sightseeing trips and tours .
 Air and steamship accomodations to handle the hundreds of Mainland students and teachers matriculating to the Islands for summer study and fun have been set on all major airlines .
 At the Fine Arts Center last weekend, eighty-three ""guys and dolls"" provided a refreshing break from increasing academic pressure . Ownoi By James H Fox .
 The musical end of the production was a solid, first rate job . Under the creative direction of Donald Jenkins, Donald Jenkins was the musical end .
 Some of the comic writing clicked, and some was of the ""something funny happened to me on the way to the studio"" type . Some of this comic writing is of the type of comic writing that clicks .
 Frank Loesser's score varies from the sentimental More 1 Can Not Wish You to the spirited, slightly nostalgic title song . The score is never dull, dusty, or unpleasant listening .
 An example of Loesser's imagination is his Fuge for Tinhorns performed competently by a trio of ""guys" The evening's most delightful performance was enjoyed in Lynn Bradley's ""well-known fyancee,"" Adelaide .
 She was at once vulgar and naive, dumb and shrewd, selfpitying and noble in her devotion for good, old, unreliable, fourteen year-old Nathan . Nathan .
 Miss Bradley's characterization of Runyonese hoofer was aided by Jean McMilten's extravagant garb . The film was released in October 2013 .
 Sky Masterson, the fly-by-night gambler and professional ""doll catcher"" was sung with precision ' and maturity by Ben Lyons . Ben Lyons was born in New York City .
 The leading man's roundness of tone and resonant projection complemented the sharp, sincere expression of Genevieve Vaughn as ""Sister Sahruh"" in their two balladlike duets I'll Know and I've Never Been in Love Before .
 Dale Spall, as Sarah's grandfather, lacked the voice of Mr Lyon's . The More I Can Not Wish You was tenderly expressed and he seemed an appealing old soul saver .
 Norman Cornick's sensual and disciplined choreography was a wild spectacle . The ballet was directed by Cornick and directed by the choreographer .
 His Cubans performed with Latin lust, his Hotbox girls were vivacious, and his crapshooters moved like acrobats . "His Cubans perform with Latin Lust," he said .
 The boyish, hut rather thinly performed Nicely-Nicelyly Johnson led most of the cast in a mocking, high pitched harmonic rendition of Sit Down You're Rockin' the Boat .
 David Hand's simple, flexible sets were moved swiftly with coordination by Roger McKee's stage hands, but the ""lighting was occasionally sloppy in execution"
 Seniors ere not at the eeting can be measured for caps and gowfl by Mrs. Senior; Tuesda. Senior . Seniors can't wear caps or gowns .
 Beidleman, Hitchcock serve on proposal evaluation panel in San Francisco . Two Colorado College professors invited to serve on the NSF panel . Panel was held yesterday and today .
 Two Colorado College scientists will help evaluate proposals to the NSF for grants for undergraduate science education equipment . The two will evaluate proposals for grants to be awarded to students in science education .
 Students attending Colorado College's 1962 summer session will have an opportunity to acquire a full year's credit in a foreign lansion . The eight-week summer session gets under way next week .
 This is just one of several special being offered during the ir session .
 The special courses will be offered in three areas of general studies and in French, German, Russian, and Spanish .
 A special brochure has been prepared and mailed directly to 7,500 students now attending liberal arts colleges not having summer sessions . The brochure will be sent directly to students attending colleges with summer sessions not happening .
 J Victor Hopper, director of the summer session, prepared to answer a number of questions regarding special classes and basic courses .
 In the foreign language program, ii student may take a full year's work in first year French, German, Russian, and Spanish . :i full year in intermediate French, Spanish, and French, and intermediate French .
 Wallace C Royce, professor of French, chairman of the romance language department . Hervtng Mudruga, assistant professor French; Alexey N Malyshev, assistant Russian; and Mrs, Hertha T Feyock, instructor in German .
 Coblirn Library has received various directories and announcements of summer jobs for 19U2 across the nation and around the world . Coblorn Library received various . directories and . announcements of . summer jobs . for 19.U2 .
 Although most of the group had never participated in a work camp, it proved to be a most interesting and profitable experience for everyone involved . The camp was the first of its kind to take place in the summer .
 The group spent three days working on a reservation Chapter House and school, put new Course Offered At CC Summer Session ting in a lawn and laying flagstone walks with Navajo children .
 One day was spent at the Gallup Indian Community Center, where the group was staying, painting, washing, gardening, and generally cleaning up the whole place .
 The work accomplished was certainly not of earth shaking significance, but the experience with the Navajos and their children was most rewarding .
 The nights were spent in talking with Navajo leaders and learning about some of the many problems that the Indians face in trying to acculturate with the non-Indian societies . Navajo leaders also learned something of their native crafts and culture .
 The group visited Window Rock to see what the U.S. government is doing for the Indians . During the other days the group visited Canyon de Chetley and Window Rock . The group also took a side trip to Canyon deChetley .
 One special adventure was watching the spring fertility dances of the Zuni Indians . The Zuni dancers were part of the annual Zuni Festival .
 Of course, all of the experiences cannot be related here, but there was a general impression of having begun to understand the Navajos and their often misunderstood culture .
 This spring vacation, another work camp for ten students has been arranged through the efforts of John Stickney and Dr. Dr. Martin Stickney . The camp will be held for 10 students .
 Paul Kutsche, professor of Anthropology and Sociology at Colorado College, with the Navajo Indians . Kutsche is a professor of anthropology and sociology .
 The Navajo community of Sawmill is not far north of Gallup on the Navajo Indian Reservation . This year's ceremony will be held in Sawmill, which is located in the Navajo community .
 The proposed projects include improving a rodeo ground, landscaping a reservation Chapter House, and planning and helping prepare a meal for Navajo dignitaries and guests .
 The itinerary will be similar to that of last year, with opportunities to talk with government and Navajo leaders and to visit points of interest in the neighboring region while not participating on the actual work projects .
 Paul Kutsche and his wife have offered to chaperone, and will be of considerable help because of their knowledge and experience with other Indian tribes . Paul K Deutsche and his . wife have also offered to help because they have .
 The students will be asked to pay for part of their travel and board expenses . Students will also have to pay part of the travel costs .
 A new course on the ""Teaching of Earth Science"" will be introduced this summer at Colorado College . Paul's Flowers Cut Flowers and Corsages Reasonably Priced .
 It is designed primarily for elementary school and secondary general science teachers . It was designed for elementary and secondary science teachers.
 The new study will aid in the effective teaching of earth science . It will emphasize a survey of rocks, crystals, gems and gems . The new course will emphasize the study of rocks and minerals .
 The geology course will meet Monday through Friday, June 18 through July 13 . William A Fischer, chairman of the college geology department, will teach the course .
 Another summer course which has proved popular in the past takes advantage of the geologic wealth of the region . The course is designed to take in the geology of the area .
 "Geology of the Pikes Peak Region" will be repeated this summer with Professor Fischer as the instructor . Professor Fischer will be in charge of the program .
 Students will take field trips to augment their classroom study of the southern part of the Front Range . Students will explore the structual features, topography, rocks, minerals, and fossils of the south .
 The new four-week course answers the needs of teachers eligible for graduate-level work in education . The Pikes Peak region course is designed for undergraduate study .
 Carlton Mineral Exhibit Given 'Special' Award at the 14th annual Gem and Mineral Show in Phoenix, Arizona . Carlton Collection of some GO specimens of Cripple Creek gold ore won a ""special"" award .
 Colorado College appointed John Wolcott Stewart of Santa Barbara, California, as a member of the board of trustees . Colorado College Appoints Trustee March 3rd, Colorado College appoints Stewart .
 Mr Stewart is the son of the late Philip B Stewart, who was a member of the college's board of trustees from 1900 to 1954 . He is also a former trustee at the college .
 Philip B Stewart contributed to the development of Washburn Field and coached basketball at the college . Stewart was one of Colorado Springs' leading citizens .
 His library, containing many rare editions, was given to the college after his death . His library contains rare editions .
 John Stewart moved to Colorado with his family as a youth and attended school in Colorado Springs . Stewart is a native of Boston and moved to the state as a child .
 Cutler Academy was a preparatory school operated by Colorado College until 1914 . He was a student for two years at Cutler Academy .
 The new Colorado College trustee was graduated from Yale in 1919 following two years in the army . The new president of Colorado College was graduated in 1919 from Yale .
 A pilot, he enlisted as a private and rose through the ranks to captain . Following college, he became a newspaper reporter for what now .s the Spokane Spokesman Review .
 During his seven years as a newspaperman, lie served as a reporter, rewriteman, sports writer and finally night news editor . Lie served as an editor, rewriter and sports writer .
 In the midninnineteen twenties Stewart moved to Santa Barbara, California, where he has been a rancher . Stewart has been an avid rancher since his twenties .
 For the past few years he has been in commercial real estate investments . He has also invested in real estate projects .
 The new college trustee has two sons, Philip B in Chicago and Robert F in San Francisco, both stock brokers . He has two daughters, Mrs. Mrs. B, and two sons in Chicago .
 Special emphasis may be put on Germany, Russia, and American labor this year . Study of general systems development, a highly specialized subject, will be continued .
 Freshman Slave Day Auction was held at Tacos & Pizza last week . Tacos and Pizza was the venue for the auction .
 SI Greek News Serenades and World Championjip hockey teams dominated the ;re ek scene this week . World Champion Jip team dominated the hockey scene .
 Monday jpjit, the Delta Gamma's and Sig]S Chi's honored Ginny Metcalf n d Russ Veach at the DG house, jso Monday, Lynne O'Malley and jiuck Lawrence were serenaded , the Kappa house by the Kappa's �
 Beta Theta played host to hockey teams for the World Championships this week . The Sigs n d Kappas will honor Chuck Corand Kristin Wallace .
 The Delta Gamma's ■ted as hostesses for the affair, 'ed Wednesday night the Betas again ,layed hosts, this time for the Vest Germans . The Vest Germans were also the hosts for the event .
 The CC chapter of ligma Chi was well represented at All-Sig Day in Denver last night .
 Alpha Phi's scholarlip dinner will be held Sunday ight at the Swiss Chalet . Alpha Phi will be celebrating Alpha Phi members' birthday .
 The Kappa's ill be hosted by the Betas at a reakfast on the 25th; One of the big social events, the nnual Miami Triad Beer Bust and given by the Phi Delts, jetas, and Sigma Chis, will be today .
 Each degree candidate will complete his thesis research ""in the field"" on a three-month academic tour of Asia . In addition to the thesis, each student will also complete his research research in the field .
 Plans for next September are for students from many countries and areas in Asia and the Pacific to participate . Students from Asia and Pacific will be able to participate in the program .
 Candidate eligibility is based on high academic achievement, excellent health, ability to relate to Asians, and demonstrated interest in contributing to the objectives of the Center . Candidates are required to be in good health, have demonstrated interest to contribute to Center's objectives .
 The Center for Cultural Interchange Between East and West was established by the U.S. Congress and the State of Hawaii in 1960 . It was established to promote mutual understanding by bringing students together for study, interchange of ideas, and cultural exchange .
 SPRINGS' House of WHEELS SCHWINN and RALEIGH BICYCLES EXPERT SERVICE ALL MAKES ""ISO ""ST PIKES /3V PEAK AVENUE service with international organizations, agencies of the government, or private institutions and industries
 Central Airlines will extend the special Youth Fare Program half fares offer to young people between 1 2 and 22 years of age . Central Airlines is offering half fares for young people aged 1 to 22 years old .
 Under the Youth Fare Program, anyone between 12 and 22 may purchase a ticket in advance, but must make reservations at a ticket office in person no sooner than three hours before flight departure .
 Central's special fares are in effect seven days u week and are suited for students who want to fly home for the weekend . Students and servicemen on leave are also eligible for the special fares .
 The Kinnikinnik is apt to fall If yon do not get on the ball, it may be rather small . It may be a rather small.
 We think the lit set mainly parties, And depended on the Spring to grow wit. We think it was mainly parties .
 It seems that now that March has come All Muses' voices have been struck dumb . It seems they are struck dumb.
 No Eliotic benediction Will grace this fast-declining Action, Between (he potential) And the Reality Falls the Shadow. No El Eliotic Benediction .
 Bill Pigott graduated from college with an engineering degree six years ago . Pigott: "Six years ago, I was proud of my engineering degree" Pigott says he is proud of his engineering degree .
 Bell Telephone Company engineers help bring the finest communications service in the world to the homes and businesses of a growing America . Bill Pigott and other young engineers like him helped bring the best communications service .
 Colorado College Tiger IntramuralS. After the last games there were three teams with three wins and no losses .
 They will be joined in a tournament by one of the three teams with a two and one record . One of the teams with one and one records will play in the tournament .
 This added team will be picked either by a flip of a coin or in an elimination game . The added team must be picked by a coin toss or by elimination game or a coin flip . It will be decided by either coin tosses or by an elimination match .
 North Weymouth 2, Edmiston 1, Kranich 20, Mansfield 1, Howland 22, Gustafson 13, Gress 16, Bitters 1 . North Thompson 2, Croodbody 23, Cooper 7, Grant 5, Howe 2, Sauve
 Farrell Thompson elected this week to the Rocky Mountain Conference All League Team . Senior Farrell Thompson was elected to the RMC All-League Team .
 Farrell said he wasn't anticipating the honor, but was naturally pleased . When asked how he felt about this honor, Farrell said it wasn't a surprise .
 FarrelPs only regret was that CC was unable to capture the Rocky Mountain Conference crown for the second year . After the loss of six men because of ineligibility, it was hard to regroup a cohesive team unit .
 The other members of the All League Team are Phil Coulter, Western State; Alonzo Porter, Adams State; Bob Ruffin, Colorado State College; Steve Harvey, Colorado School of Mines; and Charles Hastings . Charles Hastings is also on the team .
 Thorn Verhave, a reasearch psychologist at the Presbyterian Medical Center in San Francisco, will give two talks at Colorado College on March 20 . Verhave will also give talks at the college .
 American Psychological Association's visiting scientist to Colorado College this year will discuss 'Values and Preferences' at 11m. in Perkins Hall .
 At 4m. he will talk about ""Psycho-Pharmachology"" in Rastall Center to members of the local chapter of Delta Epsilon, the honorary science society .
 He recently joined the staff of the Eye Research Institute at the Institute of Medical Sciences of the Presbyterian Medical Center in San Francisco . Previously was with the Eli Lilly Research Laboratories in Indianapolis .
 CC Mountain Club will attempt a first winter ascent of the Elfingwood Ridge of La Plata Peak . Club to Attempt Climb of LaPlata Peak. Club to attempt first winter climb .
 It is the fourth highest mountain in our state and the sixth highest in the Continental United States, excluding Alaska . The mountain is the tallest mountain in the United States .
 Most of the climbing routes on La Plata are not difficult, but one route, the Ellington Ridge, offers interesting climbing throughout the year . Most of these climbing routes are not very difficult .
 When encrusted with snow, the climbing difficulties are increased . Winter also brings low temperatures, high winds and the ever present avalanche danger .
 There have been frequent attempts to make a winter ascent of La Plata via this ridge . All of them have met with failure because of storms, avalanches, equipment failures and logistical problems .
 Dale Spall, John Kuglin and Ron Bierstedt will try a late-season attempt this weekend . CCMC faculty advisor Ron Biersstedt says it will be the last one of the winter's winter .
 They plan to leave Colorado Springs very early Friday morning . By the time you are reading this article, they should be ascending the first section of the ridge .
 The early start is prompted by the avalance danger which is always present during the first section of the climb . The avalanche danger always present in the first part of the mountain climb .
 Once past the avalance basin, they will proceed to the low point on the ridge where they will erect camp . The group will then move to a low point in order to erect camp at the summit .
 They will attempt the final section of the climb which involves extensive rock climbing . After fidgiting under and inch or so of goose down during the night, they will leave the support party headed by Dan Bemstien and attempt to climb .
 They hope to start back from the summit Saturday afternoon, and may return to the Springs in time for Monday classes . They hope they will start back Saturday afternoon .
 Tony Frasca named a member of this year's three man NCAA hockey selection committee . Frasca is the head coach of the Colorado College Tigers . He has been named a three-man committee for this year .
 Daily The FIVE QUEEN CANDIDATES and their Milita remind CC students of the March 24 event .
 The Colorado Springs chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union will hold its regular winter membership meeting on March 19 . The meeting will be held in the WES Room at Eastall Center .
 Ellsworth is co-author of right-wing writings, The American Right-Wing, published in 1962 by the Public Affairs Press . Ellsworth co-authored the book The American right-Wing .
 This work was the result of more than ten year's research, which has included considerable correspondence with right-wing organizations since World War II . It was a period during a period when many right-wings were being formed in this country .
 The next meeting of the Current Events Discussion group will take place Tuesday, March 20, from 4 to 5 in WES lounge, Rastall Center .
 ZECHA& ADAMS CONOCO SERVICE STATION MElrose 3-1219 Nevada Ave. at Cache La Poudre Carle's Hardballers Begin Practice Mon. Mon. at the Cache LaPoudre .
 Baseball practice for the CC Tigers starts in earnest on Monday — come snow, shine or storm — ■ according to Athletic director, Jerry Carle .
 Carle, who will be the coach of the CC hardballers, has been gathering his forces during the past month . Carle expects to have almost 30 prospects on hand for Monday's initial turnout .
 This will be cut to a travelling squad for the tightly-scheduled CC baseball season after the first week of the season . The travelling squad is expected to be cut after the season's first week .
 Colorado College baseball season opens with a clash with the Air Force Academy at Colorado College on April 18 . The CC baseball season begins with a game against the Academy at the Colorado College campus .
 Tigers often play two and three games per week in the next five weeks . The Tigers will play two or three games a week during the remaining five weeks of their schedule .
 The French hockey team will be welcomed at a reception given by the F r e 11 c h Club . The reception will be held in the Gamma Phi Beta sorority house .
 This year has been epitomized by good beginnings in sports that have proved abortive . However, in these weeks when I frantic sport activity is in abev-1 ance, I think it would be fitting to make a short recap of the past I season .
 After a first game loss in football, the Tigers jelled and seemed to be heading for a league championship . Onh to be crushed by Adams State ij a decisive game ij .
 Can a suit liberal arts college afford the fi ancial burden of big time footbal . 1 will try to answer this questii in my editorial next week .
 Basketball and hockey, the oth two sports this year, both turned out worse than had been predicted . Hockey and basketball are the other two sports in the world that have been bad news .
 Inelligibility climaxed six of our players. Easketball was a dissappointnient because inelligibility . E basketball was a major disappointment .
 The disturbing thing about hockey was that we were not completely ineffective, and in short spurts seemed to have the nucleus of a good team . The disturbing things about hockey were that we weren't completely ineffective . We're not a complete team, but we have a good nucleus of good players
 Why we were unable to use onr potential effectively is another question that should be answered before this past season is considered merely history is considered history .
 Another seemingly endemic problem of this school is the lack of school support, especially of the spring sports . The school has been criticized for lack of support for spring sports in recent years .
 I feel this is anfortunate, for both track and baseball are good spectator sports and we should have pretty good teams this year . I feel that this is unfortunate, for track teams to have a good team this season .
 Zeta team of Bill Evans, Dale Shaw, Jim Heiberger, Bill Kranich, and Jim Talman had won with a total pin score of 2495 . Zeta won the tournament with a score of 2495 .
 Phi Gamma Delta 2432 Beta Theta Pi 2295 Kappa Sigma 2230 Phi Delta Thetha 2117 Sigma Chi 2113 Red Top Drive In 1520 So.
 Glenn Brooks, Buft'e Buffam, Tom Rivers, Lani Markisen, and Chris Griffiths are featured in this week's iReporters' weekly feature program .
 Williams started with a read statement delineating ""legise"" and ""administrative"" positions of campus leadership . Williams is the first president of the University of Columbia College of Technology .
 Leadership must be judged on the basis of goals to ecomplished, says Brooks . Brooks says leadership is not id in itself, and must be measured on the success of a successful campaign .
 Brooks also said that there are various linds of leadership which must be sessed differently . Brooks also :omommented that there were various lydings of leadership . Brooks said that leadership must be defined differently .
 At this point in the discussion, Buffe Buffum, the panel moderator, asked the group of approxily 90 students and faculty members what should .be done to achieve more desirable leadership .
 There is a lack of communicant between student government ami the students, says student government . Students say there is a 'lack of communication' between government and students .
 The lack of communication is Jue largely to a lack of student interest in student government, Jue says . Jue is concerned about communication between students and their government .
 The lack ' of student interest in student government is due to the fact that most issues with which it deals are not important to the students . Most of the issues that student government deals with are not really important to students, says the writer .
 Any interested person can take irt in the committee meetings of ASCC and in its regular meetings . ASCC is a non-profit organization dedicated to the welfare of the community .
 The administration stifles student interest by limiting the area which students may influence policy . Students should be able to influence policy, says the administration .
 ASCC is currently more representative than most special-group Student government systems . ASCC currently has a more representative student body than most other special-groups .
 The College, by centralizing certain management functions in fraternities, has reduced Leadership training . The College has centralized certain management .
 Greek organizations should exercise leadership by sponsoring ■ams dealing with topics of comm unity interest . Greek organizations must exercise leadership to exercise leadership .
 These are condensations of some of the main ideas which were expressed in a lengthy, discontinuous ■nd sometimes circular discussion . The most important I these ideas are included here .
 In addition, the class is planning a rummage sale to help finance their final activities at the college .
 These activities include a senior sneak picnic for the faculty, a senior class dance, a swim party and a senior dinner . The senior class dinner will take place at the end of the year .
 The senior class gift to the college will be announced at the dinner on June 2 . President Louis T Benezet will speak at the event .
 Eight Colorado College professors have been promoted and three given tenure . Board of trustees grants three professors tenure . Eighf Profs Promoted, Three Given Tenures .
 Trustees' action was taken on recommendations by Dean Lloyd E Worner . Trustees took action after the trustees took action against the trustees' recommendations .
 Faculty members receiving tenure or promotions were notified by President Louis T Benezet .
 Tenure was granted to Miss Margaret Saunders, assistant professor of education . Eldon Hitchcock, assistant profesor of chemistry; and Milton K Snyder, assistant . professor of chemistry . Miss Saunders was also granted tenure .
 Professor Pearl Pearl joined the faculty at Colorado College in 1946 . He is the author of IS books in the field of geology . He joined the college faculty in 1946 and is now retired .
 Those promoted from assistant professor to associate professor were Paul Bernard of the history department, Douglas Freed of the psychology department, Milton K Snyder of the chemistry department, and Wilson Gately of the mathematics depai'tment .
 Promoted from instructor to assistant professor were William E Barton of the economics department, John Lewis of the geology department, and Miss Martha Jane Cauvel of the philosophy department .
 Trustees approve first increase in board and room rates at college in six years . Trustees also approve increase in room and board board rates .
 The increase, effective next September, will be for $50 for the academic year . The increase will be effective in September .
 This will bring the total cost of room and board from $800 to $850 for the nine-month year . Room and board will cost $850 per person for nine months .
 Students buying books for second semester courses should buy them before or immediately after spring break . Students should buy books before or after spring breaks .
 Next year CC Adopts New Calendar which will create a midyear Symposium Week and enable students to take fall semester final examinations before Christmas vacations . CC has put the capstone on a major overhaul of its academic program .
 The action was taken by the faculty Monday in an overwhelming vote to adopt the calendar . The calendar is scheduled to go into effect next September .
 Other major academic changes taken by the college during the past year include adoption of a four-course curriculum . New honors program for selected freshmen and sophomores added to existing honors program .
 Under the traditional academic calendar students go home for Christmas vacation and return to the campus for what has been termed a two-week ""lame duck"" session before semester final examinations . Students return to campus for two weeks before final exams .
 This is followed by another week of vacation before the opening of the second semester . The second semester will be followed by a week of holiday .
 President Louis T, Benezet told the faculty ""independent colleges are changing their calendars because they must change to keep their place. Independent colleges must change their calendars .
 We have set ourselves a course of getting extra results in education from better-than-average prospects . We have been set up to get extra results from better than average prospects .
 These are external though though important reasons for considering a new approach to presenting our instructional program. These are . important reasons .
 The program accomplishes at last the concentration of firstterm studies into one unbroken period . It has a feature which offers many new possibilities, a Symposium one week long to begin .
 The prospects of such a symposium to rally the academic community can stimulate us each year, President Benezet said . "The prospect of such an academic symposium can stimulate"
 Symposium Week will be designed to serve as an additional focus on college intellectual life . Symposium week will focus on the importance of intellectual life in college .
 Authorities will spend the week lecturing and holding discussions with students and faculty . Designed to cover a key issue, it will feature a number of authorities who will spend a week on campus .
 The faculty felt that by elimination certain tests, duplicated by the College Board examinations, it would be possible to shorten new student week . Students would be brought into the classroom on Friday and Saturday of the first week .
 This would be a more meaningful introduction to CC than the social events which have been traditional during the first week of the new school year .
 With such a schedule it is likely that few students would have more than one examination on one particular day .
 Faculty would also have more leisure to grado their final examinations than under the present calendar . Faculty would be able to graduate from the current calendar .
 The reading periods in both semesters would permit review of the work of the semester's work, or perhaps the entire year, depending upon the nature of the course . The reading period would allow students to review their work in both quarters .
 The second semester reading period would provide time for faculty members to make greater use of oral examinations as part of the departmental comprehensive . In addition the second semester .
 Tn the paBt too many faculty members have had to administer departmental comprehensives, grade them, and carry out oral examinations, while teaching their regular course load .
 Dennis Faulk chosen as Holland Fxchunge Student for next year . Faulk has been chosen to study in Holland . Dennis E Faulk will be studying in Holland next year.
 He was selected by the Colorado Colege foreign student committee from nine applicants . The student was selected from a list of nine applicants from nine .
 The final choice was made on the basis of an autobiography, letters of recommendation, and a personal interview with the committee .
 He transferred to CC this semester, after attending Pueblo College and Colorado State College . He transferred this semester after attending two colleges .
 The future foreign student will attend the Netherlands School for Representation Abroad in Haarlem . He will attend a Dutch school for representation abroad in the Netherlands .
 Mr Faulk's first objective will be getting to know Holland, Holland, its people, its culture, and its language, he says .
 62-63 will be the 7th year CC has sent an exchange student to Holland . CC's exchange program with this particular school in Holland is financed by the administration and contributors from various campus organizations .
 Colorado College's academic calendar has seen several major changes in the last year or so . A freshman knows program, deferred rush, addition of four-hour courses to the curriculum, no midsemester grades other than failures (beginning next year)
 New schedule (going into effect next September) will not be all a bed of roses . New schedule will go into effect in September 2015 .
 The current two week lag after Christmas vacation will be abolished . The final examination period will be finished before Christmas vacation begins .
 By early November many students will be ready for some respite . Christmas vacation will still be more than a month and a half away .
 I have long maintained that vacations should not be cluttered with formal assignments . Perhaps this is as it should be, perhaps this should be . I have always maintained that vacation should not have been cluttered .
 A one month layoff from disciplined study may have a retarding effect on work in the early weeks of the second semester . Language courses, art and music courses may have an impact on work .
 For, unless great effort is spent funding excellent speakers and an extremely vital or interesting subject, many CC students will be found on the ski slopes at symposium time . For, great effort must be spent funding speakers and interesting subjects .
 On the bright side of the change are the reading periods preceding final examinations and the extended final examination periods . The reading periods before final examinations will also be extended, says the Education Commission .
 At the recent All-College Conference I suggested making ""Dead Week"" really dead — no classes at all . At the conference I suggested "Dead Week" really dead .
 The reading periods should prove quite advantageous — in the first semester as both a breathing period and a review period, and as a much-needed time for retrospection and summary before second semester finals . The reading period should be quite advantageous .
 The long exam period will alleviate common problem of two critical exams falling on the same day, allowing little time to sufficiently prepare for either exam . Long exam period means students will have more time to prepare for both exams .
 Early completion of school term will give CC students a jump on other summer job applicants . Another advantage will be the early completion of the school term .
 CEP Social Coordinating Committee Constitution 1.1.2.3.4.5. The new system is designed to allow people to make use of the new system . It is the first time the system has been used in the U.S.
 One upperclass man and one upperclass woman acting as freshman coordinators . They will be selected from applicants by the Social Coordinating Committee and may be aproved by Executive Council .
 Each member of the committee shall have one vote with the exception of the advisor . The advisor will be the only person to vote on the committee .
 To call the social chairmen of each social organization on campus, including clubs and governing bodies, and the Director of Rastall Center, at least once each year . To call a meeting of the social chairs of each . social organizations on campus .
 To recommend to the Executive Council chairmen for ASCC sponsored events, and to be responsible for the effective execution of these events, ASCC Executive Council Chairmen will be responsible . ASCC Chairmen are responsible for most of ASCC events .
 To discuss the social activities on campus and the improvement of these activities, visit http://www.dailymailonline.com/social-activism.com . To discuss these social activities, please visit the social events on campus.com to see what you want to do .
 The chairman shall be responsible for the execution of the duties of this committee . The chairman is responsible for executing the duties .
 Parents' Weekend peaks Events Scheduled By Rosenfeld . Ireland would have been proud of the antics displayd by her CC transplants this weekend .
 I will be mystified, yea even dumbfounded, if the Lord Mayor doesn't issue a campus citation for meritorious effort in surpassing all the requirements of Irish devilry . In fact, I will not be surprised if he doesn't get a citation . He says he will
 The Dean of Men was aroused from peaceful slumber no less than three times, at the urgent request of the gendarmes . A few of our academic contemporaries wei'e under the mistaken notion that Slocum had set up shop down at City Hall .
 An entire squadron of propellor-smellers was nearly eliminated from active participation in the cold war when they invaded the ""K"" sans blue zoot-suits . After due consideration, the CC honor guard allowed them to taxi off in peace .
 An angry young man began breaking Coke bottles near the oneeyed monster . The man was apparently disgusted with television .
 He was reprimanded for attempting to hurl himself through a large plate glass window . Luckily his projectile path was a good 20 degrees off and he landed on a solid mahogany guard bar .
 All in all, the ""drinkin' o' the brew"" produced a weekend overflowing with highly creative destruction .
 Blood donors are requested for Michael Mingus, CC student currently in Penrose Hospital . Mingus is a student at Penrose College and is being treated at the hospital .
 American Student Information Service, 22, Avenue de [a Liberie, Luxembourg, is located in Luxembourg .
 Barney's Hotelary, Main Street, Breckenridge, is located in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg . Cily, Luxembourg, is the birthplace of the Luxembourg kingdom .
 Don't forget to remind your parents of this annual event while you are home for Spring Vacation . Remember your parents' annual spring Vacation is a great way to keep up with them .
 Highlights of the Weekend are Song Fest, the Chuckwagon breakfast in the Garden of the Gods, and the two days of open classes .
 Two letters have been sent to parents notifying them of this event, and in one there was enclosed a reply card which they are encouraged to use . Two letters were sent to the parents of this incident .
 These cards should be returned by March 31, if it is possible, but will not be accepted after this date .
 The entire campus has arranged activities for these four days of the Weekend around the parents' visit . Activities are planned for the weekend .
 Remind your folks and urge them to come for a weekend of wonderful fun . Remind you folks that it's a great weekend of fun for them .
 The average man is the typical man, the man-in-the-street; behaviorists tell us how he develops, and advertisers are interested in him for obvious reasons .
 We also hear a lot about what it takes to be a real man, in terms of physical fitness, or response to women, or military prowess . We also talk about what men should be able to do in the military .
 The Bible, and the Church, in talking of real humanity and true manhood turn in quite a different direction and point to Jesus . Yet the Bible and Church turn in to Jesus, the author says .
 Bailey will preach a sermon on Jesus as the real man, who shows us, in a fashion almost diametrically opposed to that of the behaviorists, what is — and what is not — true humanity . Bailey: Jesus shows us how we should lead our lives .
 The Rastall Center Board of thj year and last met last Tuesrja evening at the Hackney House . The board meets at the annual Rastal Center Boar, recognition dinner .
 The group was privileged to hear an address from Mr Quigley, ^ Union Director of the Colom^ Memorial Center .
 He spoke about phases of Union philosophy . He presented a very interesting talk to both students and guests .
 Instruction will be given ti all interested in cutting pre-cutting stones for bracelets, medall and other jewelry .
 All College Conference topic two was not presented at the proper time . As an added attraction free refreshments will be ser as well as several free games, This is a real opportunity f or the gals to make use of the game .
 Entries will not be eccepted packages must be submitted ii your 5 and 10 point packages closing time . Entries must also be submitted to the owner of the package package .
 As a recent alumnus of Colorado College, I cannot leave unchallenged the undocumented aspersions cast at the College by student contributors in the TIGER Letters Section .
 Contributor Brigham, in particular, inferred that CC students were permanently beyond censure, but that ""the institution"" as such deserves no praise .
 He did not make clear just what faults were present, e.g., bad food, insufficient academic challenge, inept professors, shabby buildings, or what.g. was present, he said .
 I should imagine that anyone as urbane and glib as Mr Brigham knows that unsupported innuendo is intellectually dishonest . Mr Brigham is a glib glib, glib and witty, but he should know he's intellectually dishonest, he says .
 His sort of smug, unbased, 3 nd rlleeting insinuations seem to reflect more upon him as an observer than upon the object observed . His smug and unbased insinuations reflect more on him as a observer than on the object .
 All available space normally used for this sort of thing was full, says Mr Cowles . College's goals and ideals have been seriously tarnished, he says .
 Contributor Cowles seems irretrievably submerged in his disillusionment with College brochures . I find this state of affairs (i.e., so much cultural activity that it cannot be properly housed) singularly encouraging .
 In spite of this, Miss MeConnell seems to resent going into debt to subsidize a portion of her education, thinking that it should come free . She says she wants her education to be free .
 The worth of a Colorado College degree is substantially greater than the average . O00 above what she could have earned in a lifetime without it, she says .
 More importantly, there are rewards from it which cannot be measured in dollars . The rewards from the project are not measured in monetary value .
 Miss MeConnell thinks that the College is fast becoming a ""Country Club,"" but it is a strange Country Club which has so many of its members waiting on tables, mopping floors at night, oitending the lawns .
 I would invite the critics to match the alumni of CC with those of any other college or university in the country in wits, income, position, position and most importantly, in major contribution to society on all levels .
 "I would also invite the critics to match CC itself with any other in the country in terms of academic challenge, diversity of student body, close relationships between faculty and student, brilliance and dedication of the faculty, together with a nottoo-austere social opportunity .
 It would be novel to see the critics support their views, with some verifiable evidence, with evidence .
 If it has become stickily sentimental or unfashionable to express pride in one's college, then I prefer to remain in the ranks of the obsolete . If it is too fashionable, I would rather remain in ranks of obsolete .
 Nothing is more helpful than a blazing, documented attack with concrete proposals for innovation, but vague castigation has always seemed unworthy of any serious consideration . Nothing more helpful is more .
 One of our students asked Dr. Bob Waymire to share his knowledge of his work with students .
 Mr. Morganthau was asked to comment on a quotation which was read from a sheet of excerpts from the writings of Messrs. Morganthalau . He was read by a member of the British Parliament .
 This sheet had been compiled on the basis of the reading of some of my students, and did not contain identification of sources . Brodie, Millis, and Morganthau had been distributed prior to the Symposium .
 Morganthau disclaimed having written the sentences in question; he felt they represented neither his style nor his thought . Morganthanau felt the sentences represented neither style nor thought . He disclaimed to have written them, saying they were not his style .
 I had been concerned about this matter ever since, but just recently found the time to check into it . "I had had a lot of time to think about it," she says of the matter .
 I think it's perfectly understandable that a person who does as much writing as Dr. John Sutter is writing as much as he does . Dr. Sutter: "I think it is perfectly understandable" that a writer who does so much writing is writing so much is writing .
 Morganthau does may very well forget this or that specific sentence or paragraph, particularly when confronted with it for the first time in over two years . He may forget it all, especially when confronted by it's first time he's confronted by the book's author .
 Jacques Rivard, Larry Gilbertson, Ken Hanson, Garry Martin Wayne McAlpine, Dan McGill, Mike Min.lli Dan McGill Reno Van Puttcn Totals 0|>|i.
 "It is a way of life that holds the unsurpassed satisfactions that come with service to country," he says . And it is the way to life, he says. And it's a way to live that comes with service .
 Officer Training School provides an opportunity to qualify for a variety of vitally needed jobs in the Aerospace Age . If you have not completed Air Force ROTC, you can apply for a wide variety of jobs . The Air Force is proud to offer the opportunity to serve in the Air Force
 A graduate of the three month course earns a commission as a second lieutenant . The course is three months long .
 See the Air Force Selection Team when it visits your college . Graduate degrees can be obtained at Air Force expense . See the selection team at your college for more information .
 Burton headed the program with comments on his impressions of Colortdo College . Burton: "Colortdo is a great place to go to college"
 His remarks were straightforward, and many of his observations demonstrated his acute awareness of the conditions which do exist on the campus . His remarks are straightforward, but many of them were straightforward .
 He was followed by a combo which played a variety of selecc if m “state laws and local ordintions . He was then followed up by a combination which played state laws .
 The spinet was then quickly converted into a honky-tonk piano . Al Peterson presented a numon ber of arrangements . The Spinet was quickly converted to a honkey-tonight piano .
 The program th« was concluded by a Sing Along thi with the Admissions Office . The program was concluded with a sing Along .
 He stated that the college should prepare intellectual and social leaders and that it should attempt to establish a social climate . He said it should aim to prepare intellectual, social leaders .
 He felt perhaps CC goes overboard in the number of carefully planned social events which exist . He felt that perhaps perhaps perhaps . perhaps goes overboard . He also felt that maybe . perhaps CC . goes overboard with social events .
 An attempt is made to publicize events, but no number of signs can take the place of some discussion of events prior to their happening . An attempt at publicizing events is made, but it is not the first time they are made public .
 Perhaps of events could be organized on a more informal basis some of the difficulties which exist could be alleviated, perhaps of events being held on a less formal basis .
 He found a definite gap according to his definition of the purpose of a social life . He found it to be difficult to find a way to spend time with others .
 The students have bred a complacency by simply pointing to the social calendar which is packed with events. The social calendar has been packed with social events. Students should be aware of their social calendar, say organisers .
 Mr Blackburn feels that we need to create an atmosphere for social mixing in an informal situation . Mr Blackburn said that he wants to create a social atmosphere .
 The small college atmosphere, shyness or lack of opportunity on the part of both men and women students, are reasons for this . The attitude of men students that the women want to get too serious is also a factor .
 Social functions which can include freshmen students will have to .be held on the all-college level . Social functions must be held at the same college level .
 Perhaps this would keep more of the girls on campus, instead of attempting to fill their social gap at the institution not far to the north . Perhaps this is a good idea .
 The number of cars among freshmen students would probably be quite low if they were allowed . This decision was made by the administration, and the number of vehicles among freshmen is probably low .
 A statement that the boys are to possessive was countered by a comment that the girls hang on to tightly . A statement was made by a statement that boys are not possessive . A comment was made about the girls hanging on to each other .
 A committee was formed to look into the possibility of finding a setting not far from compus where informal gatherings could be held .
 This location should be able to attain a dance license and a 3.5 license . The location should also have a 3-year dance license, according to the owner .
 Eric Herder, chairman, Mr Blackburn, Jo Heller, Bill Hybl, Mr Lewis, Karen Mcllvaine, Skip Meis, and Clay Sorrick are members of the board .
 The discussion concluded with a realization that social life is secondary to academics, but that it plays an important part in our education . Social life was secondary to academic life, but it was important part of the discussion .
 Mr Oden, as moderator, informed the group that this discussion was to be a spontaneous brainstorming session . The group then took part in a spontaneous discussion .
 Mr Brossman handled two topics, including new men's housing and a new health center . The new housing center will be open to the public .
 Some of the ideas presented were to have suites, to separate study facilities from the sleeping area, to increase storage space, to have better soundproofing, and to have co-educational dorms .
 Mr Brossman then proceeded to his second area of concern, a new health center . The health center is one of his two areas of concern .
 This new structure should have a full time staff, a TV lounge area, study area, flexible space which could be converted to meet the needs, and a pharmaceutical supply . The new structure will have a television lounge area and study area .
 Other suggestions included a student liaison between the students and the classroom, emergency facilities, and an opportunity for pre-med expei'ience .
 This proposal contains the idea that classes should begin earlier, so that finals could be concluded before Christmas . This proposal is based on the idea of classes starting earlier .
 There would be a period devoted to reading for finals and an increased period for exams so that a student would not have more than one exam per day . Students would be able to have more exams per day, according to the proposal .
 This proposal would allow classes to get out a week earlier in the summer also . The proposal would also allow students to leave school a week early in summer .
 Many felt that the above proposal was good, but there were some additional ideas brought forth . The proposal was a good idea, but more needed to be added to the proposal .
 Perhaps we could consider a trimester system, coordinate vacations with other schools, and take an emphasis off the cut policy before and after vacation . The faculty could plan the scheduling of tests and exams to avoid conflicts .
 Benezet in the closing address stated that the students should become a more effective body in perpetuating action in these areas . The students were encouraged to become more effective .
 New we have the responsibility and privilege of attempting to solve them . New we also have responsibility to try and solve them. New we are responsible for the problems we face .
 This is a challenge which can and must be met by the student body as a whole . This is the challenge which must be faced by the students, says student body . The student body must meet this challenge as well as other students .
 This was not the final challenge which faced some of the participants at the conference .
 This challenge was met and solved by connecting the spark plugs which had been disconnected during the conference . The spark plugs were connected by connecting them to each other .
 The symptoms were clear, and the problem was met without much difficulty . The symptoms of the problem were clear and were met with little difficulty .
 It is the hope of those who attended the conference that the problems which were brought forth can be dealt with in this manner . It is hoped that this will be the case for the future .
 Berlin in the short run and the cessation of atomic tests in the long run are the most urgent issues . Berlin is the most important issue for the U.S. and the world's most powerful nations, says President Obama .
 By virtue of their urgency, they ought to be settled now, and by virtue of the intrinsic natinp they can, they can be settled . The urgency of these matters is urgent, and they should be settled right now, as well .
 The cold war threatens to become hot because the unsolved political issues serve as a tangible focus upon which the fears and suspicions of the cold war can concentrate, seeking release in armed conflict .
 "Fear and suspicion there would still be, but of a different sort of sort," says author of the book "Cold War"
 "There would be fear and suspicion of ourselves, rather than of the other fellow," he said . "We would be afraid of ourselves," he added. "We wouldn't be fearful of ourselves."
 We would fear lest our vision and ingenuity not equal to the task upon whose achievement the fate of the world depends, we would fear . We would not be able to fail to achieve the task on our vision .
 We suspect that we might not possess the determination and courage required . We would suspect that they might not have the courage and courage to tackle the task .
 Cold war would then have become a contest between two conceptions of man, two principles of social and political organization, two visions of mankind's future . For the cold war would have become what it has always been primarily; a contest .
 It will be settled, after negotiations have done their work on the political plane, by the nobler and weightier act of performance, says Simon Tisdall .
 Choir members have been preparing the music to present since last fall . The choir members have prepared the music for last year .
 Mr Jenkins feels the group has a greater potential to present an enjoyable musical experience at each performance the tour . Mr Jenkins says the tour will be a success .
 Some of the finest choral works appropriate for the Lenten season have been selected . Choral works are selected for Lenten Lenten .
 The principal work is Handel's Utrecht Jubilate . It was written in celebration of the Peace of Uredecht which marked the end of the War of Spanish Succession .
 This work includes an alto solo, sung by Cheryl Betts, a duet for 3 lto and baritone, and a trio . The work includes several choruses . This work also includes a tenor solo and a solo trio .
 Organist Ben Gayhart, from Colorado Springs, will travel with the choir as a special accompanist for this ffork .
 Gibbons plays traditional Easter Hymn, Agnus Dei and a Welsh Carol, Now April Come . A 17th Century German work, Ehre Sei Dir, Christe by Heinrich Schutz, is a German work .
 One of the highlights of the choir will come when the choir presents a concert at Pomona College in Claremont, California .
 Pomona, a small liberal arts school much like Colorado College extend invitation to Mr Jenkins last year when the tour choir was California .
 The choir members will stay with Pomona students in the dorms of Pomona . The Pomona choir members are expected to stay with the Pomona University students in dorms .
 Free :iiiie in Los Angeles, San Francisco and Salt Lake will afford a' welcome relief from the otherwise rigorous schedule . Free :iiie in LA, SF, LA and San Francisco will offer a welcome relief .
 The Chandler Community Methodist Church is located in Albuquerque, New Mexico . The church will meet at the end of the month .
 The Pariah of Saint Augustine by the K ° ° ° m ol ° — v; •< P 7f O ad a o a b » g h CA, QSantt . The Parahah of Saint Augustinian is the parahah .
 Colorado College Tiger Phi Gams, Zetas Cop Opening Bouts . Preliminary elimination bouts for intramural wrestling opened .
 Russia's tennis team is slowly shaping into a cohesive unit . Under the competent coaching of Robert E Peterson the tennis team are slowly shaping up .
 A number of good players from last year have returned to the tennis team . The team's prospects are particularly bright thanks to the return of a number of players .
 Russ Sperry, Rusty Bastedo, David Whiting, Jim Heiberger, Dale Shaw are among the stars of the day . Russ and Rusty are known for their work in NASCAR .
 Alan Anisgard, who ,was all-state in tennis in Montana, and Tom Etheridge, who was all-State in tennis . Notable among these are Alan AnIsgard, . who was . all-time in tennis, in Montana . and Tom . Etheridge
 Coach Peterson is also hoping to have some mixed doubles this year utilizing the better female tennis players on campus . Coach Peterson hopes to use some of the better women tennis players .
 In the five periods Dorsey seemed to show a superior comand of holds . But Knapp's persistance and physical stamina were the deciding factors . Dorsey and Knapp took the fight to a close finish .
 C o n a n Cantrwell . ,^57 lbs. Ron Taylor in a series of unorthodox holds, notable of which were the ""body slam"" and ""the Arkansas hog flip,"" Careened his way to a decisive victory over the game, but inexperienced, C o
 Dan Martin , in a 'closely contested match with Dbn' Kintz illustrated the illMffects of poor stamina and inexperience, when the latter eom^Jijjing irom behind pushed '"""" to a final period f)h""i. i
 Second West and Third West won through forfiets from First West and Fourth North . Second West won by forfietes from Second West, Third West . First West, Fourth North won by third West and Second West .
 Playoffs start this Saturday and will be completed before Spring vacation . The playoffs start Saturday .
 CC Skiers and WAA are co-sponsoring ski races, open to all CC students, this Sunday, March 25 . The races will be open to students from all of the university .
 Classification will be held at 11:00m. and the races will begin at 2:30m. Race starts at 2.00m .
 The winners of the Women's division will contribute toward intermural standings . The winners will also contribute to intermurial standings .
 For rides or riders, use the ride board on the Skiers Bulletin Board located in Rastall Center at the East end of the second floor hall . Use the board to ride or riders .
 First brash spasm cost him the contest . Fine for dri wrong way on campus streets has been increased to $5.00 .
 The victorious Dan r ^ Kaltenbach in his oppon£ ent's words, , had everything in his favor but a) knowledge of wrestling holds .
 There will be room for one of . the highl Y ght , bouts of ' the , UnlimiM , Jeff wiley (Ph i Gam indoor court, and tennis players Pvening . made j se i f /the -four ' l will be able to
 The club's hospitality will be extended to the 8 men who survive the cut . The club will also extend the hospitality to those who survive . The 8 men will be given the chance to play for the club .
 No men will be allowed in the Games Area in Rastall Center tonight from 7:30 to 9:30m. V Pauls Flowers Cut Flowers and Corsages Reasonably Priced at 1524 North Tejon .
 Only the female population of the cam. pus will be admitted to bowl, p] av billiards, bridge, and ping-pong .
 Tli er er will also be Billiards instructed for interested in learning the principles of hhe game .
 Alice Brooks, Alice Brooks and Lani Maukisen are president, treasurer, secretary, social chairman and social chairman . Alice Brooks is president, Alice Eisele is junior representative and Carol Wright is corresponding secretary . Carol Wright, Mary Ellen Collier, recording secretary and L. L
 William E McMillen's voluntary directing class has chosen this poetic drama of the Nineties as its semester project . The class chose this poetry drama as its project for its project .
 Theodora Brodin, Joan Carter and James Fox feel that to successfully express the dark, twisted beauty of Allemonde and create the ""Belgian Shakespeare's"" earthly, personable characters will be an exciting challenge .
 The bottom of the park's marble fountain ""is as deep as the sea,"" the grotto, ""full of blue darks,"" is formed ""with stalactites that look like plants and men" The corridors, vaults, and towers of King Arkel's ancient
 Joan Carter's settings will be constructed by the stage hands of David Hale Hand . Joan Carter will be joined by the set-setters of the show .
 All students are warmly invited to the 2:30 tryout this Saturday at Perkins Hall .
 Golaud's son, a spoilt, perceptive weakling, and Arkel, the ten-year-old's blind, gloomy great grandfather are interesting minor parts . Several timorous maids, sharing an important scene in the last act, are important .
 Goluaud, the warrior and hunter, is an honest savage, ""made of iron and blood,"" and insensitive to the romantic excursions of his younger half-brother, Pelleas .
 Melisande, the tiny nymph who is the hypotenuse of the triangle cannot control her passion for the child-like brother of her bear-like husband . The play is based on the relationship between Melisand and her husband .
 The doomed lovers perish in their obsession, Genevieve, the rival's mother, sees life as an undistinguishing gray, resulting in a garrulous prattle . The film verges on the mystical, quickly undercut by insipid, parenthetical remarks .
 During this period all students are to meet with their faculty advisors to plan a schedule for the first semester of the 1962-63 academic year .
 Students advised to obtain mid-semester grades from their faculty advisors during the week of April 9 . Students also advised to make appointments for pre-registration conferences .
 The p're-registration card when completed should be promptly returned to the Registrar's Office by the student .
 Students may pre-register during the period, Monday, April 16, through Tuesday, May 1, without payment of a fee . Students can pre- register during that period without payment .
 Students pre-registering during the last three days of the pre-registration period, Wednesday, May 2, Thursday, May 3, or Friday, May 4, will be required topay a fee of $3.00 . Students can pre-sign up at least once a
 Students who do not preregister before May 4 will be required to pay a fee of $10.00 . Students who don't pre-register will need to pay the fee to register .
 Any students needing texthooks from the bookstore should purchase them by Monday, April 16 . Students need to buy them by the end of April .
 Crown and Lance is holding its sixth annual ""Vegas Nite"" in the Install Center at S o'clock tomorrow night .
 Candidates for Miss Lady Luck are Susie Patterson, Alpha Phi; Miss Linda Hamilton, Gamma Phi Beta; Miss Nancy Schorling, Delta Gamma; Miss Molly Mac Namara, Kappa Alpha Theta; and Miss Glenne Eisele, Kappa Kappa Gamma .
 A cultured pearl necklace will be given to the candidate who wins the title of Miss Lady Luck . The winner of the title will be crowned at the end of September .
 Vegas Nite winners will bid at the end of the evening for prizes . Prizes include sport shirts from Gano-Downs, tennis racket from Elick's, a $10 gift certificate from the ""K" and free dinners .
 All told, there are over $450 worth of prizes, many of which could not fit in the show cases in Rastall Center . Many of the prizes were too small to fit into show cases .
 The German Club held its fifth meeting of the year in the WES lounge on April 12 .
 The highlight of the program wias a film, ""Berlin, The City Which Everybody Loves,"" which described present-day life in Berlin . The highlight was a film called "Berlin," which described the city .
 Also shown was a short film entitled, ""Sports Events,"" after which refreshments were served . The event was held in honor of President Obama .
 The next and final meeting of the German Club for this school year will be the annual spring picnic, scheduled for May 6 .
 Freshman Class is sponsoring a PIZZA SALE on Sundays April 15, 29 and May 13, from 4:30 to 9:00m. The Freshman class will be selling pizza at the sale .
 Second in a series of three, the lecture will be presented free of charge in Shove Memorial Chapel . The lecture is the second of three to be presented in the chapel . It will be the first free lecture in the series of lectures to be held in the Chapel .
 Ellsworth Mason, librarian; Ann D Armstrong, student member of faculty library committee; and Bradford Chase, vice pesident of the junior class . Bradford Chase is the vice-presidential vice-prestident of junior class. Ann D. Armstrong is a member of the faculty
 The tentative move is scheduled for May 16 . Depending on the availability of steel racks for the four-level library, the tentative move may be scheduled for next month .
 The move, to be carried out by the student body, is expected to take half a day .
 Glennie Eisele, Kappa Kappa Gamma; Lynn Hamilton, Gamma Phi Beta; Suiie Patterson, Alpha Phi; Nancy Schorling, Delta Gamma; and Molly MacNamara, Kappa Alpha Theta . The panelists are from Kappa Kappa Phi and Kappa Kappa Theta
 Research grants have been awarded to twelve Colorado College professors in the past two weeks . CC Professors Receive Grants .
 These were announced by Professor Carl Roberts, chairman of the psychology department and the Faculty Research Committee . Professor Roberts announced the findings at the University of Cambridge .
 Professor Paul Bernard plans to go to Vienna to undertake a preliminary study of the reign of the Austrian Emperor Joseph I . He expects this to be the first step in a major long-range research project .
 Research on the nature of the ndreno Middle English poem will take Professor Ross to London, Oxford and Edinburgh .
 Entitled ""On the Evil Times of Edward II,"" the poem exists in three manuscripts in the British Museum, the Bod* leian Library, and the National Library of Scotland .
 Professor Snyder will undertake a study of programmed instruction for college general chemistry . The study will be conducted by Professor Snyder .
 He is also studying the complex compounds formed between ions and tluoglycerol, a new compound which appears to bond strongly to metal ions .
 He is being assisted in the project, which got under way last September, by Max Taylor, a junior .
 Professor Kutsche plans to spend the summer checking over a bibliography of sources on the Eastern Cherokee . The bibliography was amassed by himself and several colleagues .
 Professor Beidleman has been taking motion pictures in the held to analyze the social behavior of birds . For more than a year, he has taken motion pictures to analyze birds' behavior .
 He hopes to colorband members of several species association groups to enable him -to analyze the position of each individual bird in the group and to see if the groups remain together .
 English Professor Van Becker is planning to visit the Huntington Library at San Marino, California, to consult the Larpent Collection of Manuscripts of 18th Century Drama . Van Becker plans to consult a collection of manuscripts from the Huntington library .
 Professor Ornies is studying and mapping the locations of railroad grades in Colorado, eastern Utah and part of New Mexico . Ornies' book on other aspects of the railroad history of Colorado is scheduled for publication in June .
 Professor William A FlBcher of the geology department will investigate the underground resources of tinPikes Peal< urea . Professor Louis G Geigur, chairman of the history department, will conduct a historical study of liigher education in the Plains and Rocky Mountain stales
 George Benigsen, pastor of the Transfiguration of Christ Kasteru Orthodox Church, will discuss the ""Russian Icon, Us History and Meaning"" before a Colorado College student-faculty assembly .
 He subsequently was ordained a priest in the Eastern Church, and came to the United States in 1950 . He was ordained as a priest and later became a priest .
 It should be de-emphasized because it has failed to show itself to be a meaningful aspect on campus, and it is becoming an economic drag . It should not be a significant aspect of the university, and should be removed from campus, says the author .
 Football in a business sense is pricing itself out of its market . Dean Juan Reid in an article ""That 'Big Game' Costs Big Money,"" showed that football in a . business sense was pricing itself . out of a market .
 This situation has been created by ever-increasing costs, which keep coaches away from their other coaching assignments, and ""big time" standards . The situation is created by increasing costs, and only ""small time"
 Colorado College's geopraphic location isolates it from other colleges of its type . There seems to be no ready-made solution for Colorado College, except to continue to exert its influence on the other members of the Rocky Mountain Conference .
 Dean Reid's stopgap solution is, however, only tenable if varsity football is an important factor of campus life that must be saved . I feel that Dean Reid is not a tenable solution .
 "Here people might be thinking that I am trying to elevate the intellectual or the grind to pre-eminence on campus," she says . "Here I'm trying to raise the intellectual," she adds .
 The football player on this campus just doesn't lit this image. Quite to the contrary, I am interested in the well-rounded student, but the football player is just a football player, he says .
 In place of varsity football, we should have a strong emphasis on physical education . Physical education will keep people from molding in the dorms, coach says .
 Exercise through the vehicle of physical education is important enough to merit compulsory participation . People in good physical condition work better, according to experts .
 Varsity sports on a liberal arts campus should only be as important as the students want it . The college should only have sports on campus as much as it's important to students want them .
 Jaffe ASCC Constifuion Amendment Ed. Ed. Jaffe: "That this can't be implemented is seen by the successful soccer team which was created and run by student interest alone"
 The Dean of Men and the Dean of Women acting as advisors, one member from the executive council acting as chairman, the presidents of the Associated Women Students, Honor Council, Interfraternity Council, Intrahall Council, Panhellenic Council, and Chairman of the Student Conduct Committee .
 To formulate the non-academic policies and regulations of Colorado College. to review the policies and . regulations of the Associated Women Students Judicial Board, Interfraternity Council, Intrahall Council, Panhellenic Council, and the Student Conduct Committee .
 All non-academic policies and regulations of Colorado College pertaining to the student. Colorado College . Colorado College students are required to comply with the college’s student policy .
 A list of the judicial bodies, the general areas of their jurisdiction, and a complete list of their members . The judicial bodies are based in the United States .
 To meet at least once each month and consider, in addition to the above, effective means by which student social behavior could be improved, consider .
 The Executive Council has the power to veto any general non-academic policy or regulation, but not a regulation of the Associated Women Students Judicial Board, Interfrater> nity Council, Intrahall Council, Panhellenic Council, Honor Council, or any related policy-making
 The President or Deans ot the College shall have veto power over any regulation of policy . The President of the College will be able to veto any regulation .
 Monday took second only to Eraser, Colo., as far as icy bitterness goes . Eraser is a Colorado town known only for its bitter winters . Monday was the bitterest Monday in history .
 My eyes fell upon an ominous pile of textbooks, and immediately a wave of nausea covered me like a bag of dirty laundry . "I'm not going to go to college. I'm going to college," she said .
 Attila the Hun was not primarily known for his Christian idealism . He was not known for being Christian idealist .
 I stood up (a Herculean feat in itself), and momentarily felt like six feet of lumpy oatmeal . Not a pretty feeling, to be sure, but it was not a pretty thing .
 I plodded to the John, barefooted, in the hopes of stepping on broken glass, but, regretably, the treacherous journey was completed in relative safety .
 I brushed my teeth with Bay Rum, making my gums bleed in the process, washed my face with Ajax, dried myself with a heavily starched towel, and swallowed three asprin for the headache 1 had planned for 9:30 .
 1 limped back to the bedroom, having left three quarters of an inch"" big toe on the lower left hand corner of the John door . I neglected to shave, figuring a large nose was better than none at all . 1 .
 After downing two glasses of concentrated grapefruit juice, just to make me mean, I went forth to do battle with humanity .
 This is simply to remind seniors that the job information is still rolling in and that representatives are still asking to visit our campus . This is just to remind all seniors that job information remains rolling in . The job information has been rolling in, and representatives have been asked to visit campus .
 Interested in Engineering and Business Majors at ARMCO STEEL CORPORation . Students will study engineering and business at the company .
 Specific questions should be directed to Mr Don Oden, acting on Placement Placement . Specific questions are directed to him .
 The Religious Affairs Committee of the college wou like to point out to interested students and faculty the a rangements that are being made for this Easter time .
 Although Friday, April 20, is Good Friday, there is of course no holiday on the campus . The campus is closed on Good Friday .
 There will be a short period of quiet meditation and worship in the Pi] grim Chapel on Friday at twelve noon .
 This will be led by the minister of Shove Memorial Chapel, the Reverend Kenneth Burton . The funeral service will be held at the funeral home of the deceased . The service is expected to be held in the Chapel on Saturday .
 On Easter Sunday, the Religous Affairs Committee is pleased to announce, there will be a corporate campus celebration of Holy Communion in the Chapel at f) So far as we know, this is the first time that a college celebration . will have been held in recent years in the
 Bailey, an Episcopalian, and Mr Burton, a Congregational ist, will share in the conduct of this service . Bailey and Burton will be joined by the congregation .
 It is hoped that the Liturgy for Holy Communion for the Church of South India will be used . For this occasion, it is hoped .
 The Church of South India is the first Union in Protestant Church history of the Episcopalian and non-Episcopalia section of the Church . The Church is the South Indian branch of the Protestant Church .
 This Liturgy combines many different church traditions, including that of the Mar Thoma Church which was traditionally founded by the Apostle Thomas . The Liturgy is a very moving and wonderful one .
 It has also within it Episcopalian emphasis and reformed emphasis and some customs peculiar to the Church of India . The Church of Indian origin is based in India .
 Christian students at Colorado College will celebrate ecumenical event on campus . Colorado College is a Christian college in the heart of Christian students .
 It is hoped that this service will be enriched by some choral music and instrumental music . It is also hoped that some of the music will also be enriched .
 The preacher will be the minister of the College Chapel, and the College Choir will help lead the Easter worship as they sing some great music .
 It is hoped that many of the Colorado College students will avail themselves of this opportunity to worship at this, the greatest of Christian festivals .
 Burton Sunday, April 15, is the Last Sunday of the Lenten season before the festival of Easter . Palm Sunday is known in the Christian year as Palm Sunday .
 This Sunday commemorates the entry of Jesus with his disciples into Jerusalem for the week of his betrayal and death, culminating in the joy of the resurrection . This Sunday particularly commemorates Jesus' entry of Jerusalem .
 This sermon wishes to tell simply the story of Jesus coming into Jerusalem for the last time during his earthly life . This sermon attempts to look at the significance of this event .
 The sermon will look at the meaning of the original prophecy, Jesus' intention in using it, and its significance for us who worship and inquire about him in the twentieth century .
 Alumnus of Colorado College dismayed to see the litter which abounds on the campus .
 In the vicinity of Rastall Center there are bottles, cans, papers and cigarette butts ,by the thouands .
 The authorities are not to blame for this situation, but only the students who should have, one would think, more pride in their college and its environment . The authorities should not be blamed for the situation, says the author .
 We try to do some education at the Junior and High School levels about beautification, but it hardly seems that is should be at the college level . "We hardly seem that is . should be in college level," says the mayor .
 Friday Afternooi Club fill reconvene this afternoon n In Hub . Ml be on hand but be pi epared for a surprise .
 Rastall Cente Movii the Movie Co mpulsio ill br shown in Perki is Hal a 7 30 m. m. ( n April 15. 2015)
 Miss Ellen Claydon of the Colorado College Spanish Department came up with some interestingthoughts on theories of literary criticism and literature of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries .
 This approach has been applied chiefly to the Renaissance and que periods in literary hisperiods which formerly were not clearly distinguished . The Renaissance and Queque periods are thought to be the most important periods in literature .
 In Spain, the span of time from 1516 to 1680 was simply called The Golden Age . The span of the time between 1516 and 1680 is known as 'The Golden Age' In Spain it was known as the Golden Age.
 We now see two very different cultural atmospheres iluring the 10th and 17th centuries . We see a very different culture between the two centuries .
 We have now realized that a high degree of ornamentation, lack of clarity, intense contrast and desequilibriconstituted an artistic theory which reflected the taste and feelings of the times . We have . now ■ to realize that . an ornamentation . lack of . clarity
 We in the 20th century are much more capable uf accepting the desirability of this aesthetic as we we have de■eloped tastes similar to those of the 17th century . We are more capable of accepting this aesthetic than those of 17th .
 The classic aesthetic is considered the onl y aesthetic of the Greco-Roman cultures . Critics have been arguing it for centuries — as far back as the Middle Ages and certainly in the k and Roman cultures .
 Let us examine briefly and :ontrast of these two aesthetics on i very schematic level . The two aesthetics are very different and very schematic on a schematic level.
 It proposes that man is perfect, or at least apable of reachingperfection . It proposes man is apable to reach perfection, or to be perfect .
 Even man's body is potentially a perfect, beautiful structure . He s, after all, created after the image of God; he has a divine soul i approximates God's divinity .
 This attitude of acceptance and even ennoblement of man produces a serenity and an optimism . We have only to look at a Renaissance painting to see this dearly. This attitude .
 There is a sense of balance, equilibrium, and serenity in ■ h a painting . The painting was created in the 1930s and 1940s in New York .
 The human figure is nearly perfect and so is the world in which he is pictured . The human figures are nearly perfect, and so are the world around him .
 The artistic technique itself is conceived in the light of perfection, as formulas and theories are developed and written down which pretend to have worked out the perfect art form .
 Weste m man rebels against a rational concept of himself and a restricof his creativity into rigid forms . The Weste man rebeles against a . rational concept .
 In the BatQ quo period, the principal conflict, due to the great religious druggies of the day, became sensuality versus spirituality . The principal conflict was sensuality vs. spirituality .
 It was accepted fact that the only real id important thing in the life of man was the salvation of his ■soul . Yet irrationaly, man could not avoid being sensual being and thus enjoying the world .
 There was intense concern with moral conduct, for while there was an accepted standard, one had only to look around to see that no one adhered to it . There was an intense concern for moral conduct .
 The world was falling apart, for this was the period of the Thirty Years War in Germany in which nearly every European nation was participating and ill .
 Kings and courtiers lived in extreme luxury and selfindulgence while the populace was dying of starvation . Kings and their courtiers . lived in . extreme luxury while the . populace died of starvation while the population was dying .
 Man struggled to avoid viewing himself as an animal or a base being in spite of the reality which would convince him otherwise . He struggled to see himself as a human or a human being .
 Sometimes he succeeded, other times he sank into a bitter cynicism which at least afforded him some defense against despair . Sometimes he failed to succeed, sometimes he did, sometimes his cynicism allowed him to be cynical .
 They manifest themselves in great contrasts among characters — the noble lord and the materialistic, sensula servant — in contrasts of ideals within the character . Love versus loyalty and loyalty are contrasts between tragedy and comedy within the same work .
 'Multiple plots' appear in the form of a multiple plot which produces confusion in the reader or the audience . The same confusion which life produced on those who live in the 17th century .
 The artist may even take refuge from a depressing reality in an attitude of 'art for art's sake' where the content of his art is of no significance, but the art feeds on itself .
 Colorado College will broaden its Russian program in September by adding a course in intermediate Russian language . CC's Russian history course will be extended to two semesters .
 The two courses are not combined into an area study program . The history course will be offered by the history department, the language by the department of German and Russian .
 Alexy N Malyshev, formerly a United States State Department and United Nations interpreter, was formerly an interpreter for the U.S. State Department . He is now a Russian interpreter .
 As the first full time instructor of Russian, Malyshev joined the faculty last fall . He took the first step toward launching its first regular cirriculum in Russian literature and language .
 The college plans to offer a major in Russian within the next few years . Thomas Brandt, chairman of the German and Russian department, says that the college is looking at offering a major .
 The first semester of the history course will trace the development of Russia from its beginnings to World War I . The second semester will deal with prerevolutionary life, the revolution and the establishment of the Soviet regime .
 If it does... you can win 4 four -piece place settings of your favorite sterling design by Gorham . It's easy. Giveaway includes four four-piece sterling place settings .
 All you have to do is tell us what order these ten lovely Gorham patterns appeal to you . The patterns are designed by Gorham and are available for sale on Amazon .
 The Gorham design is your first choice at Gorham . Then tear out this ad and mail it to us, with a short (25 words or less) statement about why you first choice is your favorite .
 If your taste matches that of the decorators, you may win a head start on a gracious home . The decorating process is a step-by-step away from a home .
 Conto st is open only o fomaio students attending the which ih s newspaper is published . Conto St is open to students attending a fomio school which iih s students attend .
 Entrl swill swill bo|udgod pr late no s, clarity and in agination of staten ont. fudges' doc Won will properly ol The Gorham Company, Providence, Rhode Island, R |“”‚ .
 Automatic Retailers Grant Scholarships and Fellowships . Program aimed at encouraging academic research at many levels in rapidly growing segment of the American economy .
 Foundation will grant to institutions of higher learning the privilege of publicly displaying rare historic documents . Rare historic American documents will be made available to the Foundation .
 Six awards will be given for the best papers pertaining to the general topic of automatic mei chandising . The awards will also be awarded for best papers relating to the topic .
 Any student, either graduate or undergraduate, in any college or university may participate in the event .
 First award will be of of §1,000 and five Excellence awards of §200 each will be given for the next five best papers . First award of of $1,00 is of . 1,000, five Excellence Awards of $200 each are given for each paper .
 Deadline for entries is June 20, 1962, and winners will be announced prior to September 15, 1962 . Winners will receive a prize of up to $100,000 .
 Automatic Retailers of America Education Foundation Scholarship Awards will be given out at the discretion of recipient institutions . These grants will be used for Automatic Retailer of America education foundation Scholarship Awards .
 The Foundation plans to award a limited number of fellowships up to $4,000 each per academic year for doctoral candidates . The Foundation also plans to give fellowships to doctoral candidates in the fall .
 Awards will be made to graduate students conducting research projects in* the field of automatic merchandising .
 Research proposals may be submitted by any graduate student of a domestic or foreign university . Research proposals are submitted by students of domestic and foreign universities . For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 909090 or visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details .
 Applications for the academic year commencing September 1962 must be received by April 1, 1962, and announcements of grants will be made prior to May 15, 1962 . Applications must be submitted before May 15th, 1962.
 Details concerning this program may be obtained by writing to the Foundation, Suite 223, 1741 North Ivar Avenue, I.os Angeles 28, California .
 Colleges or universities desiring information concerning the outstanding collection of American documents and artifacts available for display .
 Among the exhibits are such prized items as personaL and official letters of American Presidents, as well as historic documents such as an Emancipation Proclamation signed by Abraham Lincoln .
 CC Phi Delts Will Work At Child Day Care Center Sunday has been set aside as Community Service Day . Sunday will be set aside by the Phi . Delts will work at a child day care center Sunday .
 Phi Delta Theta chapters engage in a civic service on the local level . This is a specified day in which all chapters of Phi Delta theta engage in civic service .
 In all, there are one hundred and eighteen other Phi Delt chapters participating in the Seventh Annual Community Service Day, working on behalf of some worthy and needy group in each chapter's borne city .
 Phi Delts of Colorado Cnllege will work at the Colorado Springs Child Day Care Center . This year, they will work in Colorado Springs at a Colorado Springs child day care center .
 The work will involve washing windows, repairing and painting toys, painting furniture, cabinets, window frames, and doors . It will also include washing windows and repairing toys .
 This also entails reconditioning and enlarging the parking lot by spreading sand . The parking lot is also being expanded by sand and sand .
 This work was arranged "" for by co-chairmen Alex Johnson and Ed Lorson . This work is arranged for by the co-chairs of the board .
 They will be on hand at eight-thrity Sunday morning to supervise the day's activities .
 Colorado Springs Child Day Care Center is a non-profit organization . The Colorado Springs child day care center is based in Colorado Springs, Colorado .
 Its purpose is to care for children whose parents must work during the day . The children's care is intended to be for those whose parents have to work in the daytime .
 DU's Dr. Snyder Addresses IRG and Commitment . "Dr. Snyder" addresses IRG on March 15th .
 This spring, he will publish a second book, Stralcgy, Politics, and Defense Budgets. A Theoretical Study of ILS National Security Policy .
 Snyder: "Little danger of immediate total war ... it is most likely to result from the escalation of a limited war" Snyder: War likely to end in escalation of limited war .
 He then went on to outline the ""Sword and Shield"" concept, the present NATO strategy . He then outlined the "sword and Shield" concept .
 The ""Shield"" acts as a trip-wire, triggering the ""Sword,"" which is the in ost effective deterrent-defense system . The ""Sword" is the most effective deterrent system we have .
 He then proceeded to discuss in some detail the relative merits of the various alternative strategies under study .
 The Florsheim Shoe Shop is pleased to announce that Mr Dave Lewis has been added to our sales staff . Dave Lewis is a new member of the sales staff at the store .
 Lincoln Bloomfield of M.I.T.T., Thomas Schilling and Morton Halperin of Harvard, Harold Stassen, William R Frye of the Christian Science Monitor, Walter Millis, Andrew Marshall of Rand Corp. and others .
 Assembly's goal was a final report representing a consensus of student opinion on possible methods of implementing U.S. disarmament and arms control program . The Assembly was created by students at the University of Washington State University .
 The task filled twelve hours of small group discussions, small groups of small groups . Harold Stassen, Ernest Lefever of the Institute of Defense Analysis, and a panel of authorities .
 The keynote address was delivered by Harold Stassen, former Governor of Minnesota, who served from 1055-58 with cabinet rank as special assistant on disarmament to President Eisenhower .
 Mr Stassen maintained that pursuit of ""narrow nationalism" would fall short of America's basic ideological commitment toward man's fullest development .
 In this context he examined various proposals for dealing with Russia in the nuclear age . He also examined proposals for how to deal with Russia .
 Forseeing the possibility of carefully controlled partial disarmament, Stassen advocated the establishment of two arms control zones . The realization of the second dependent upon success in the first, the first .
 United Nations inspection-detection stations would be installed and manned bv both the United States and U.S.R. and members of the United Nations No nuclear weapons and a reduction of armed forces and their armaments would be agreed upon .
 Stassen: Air inspection with open skies, aerial photography and aerial photography would be established . Backing these controls, he said: "efficient unfailing communications methods"
 An arms deal would be only a "beginning of" the begin, niilg"" in arms agreements, but for each nation it would be an important first step . To be sure, this would be the beginning of a new arms agreement .
 The geographic area would include a portion of the Ukraine, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Eastern Germany, portions of Denmark, West Germany and France . All of Berlin and all of Berlin would be included .
 With these two areas established, other zones, both geographic and substantive, could be established . Other zones could also be established, including geographical and substantive .
 Stassen argued that small, seemingly immaterial gains must be realized before other more encompassing agreements are possible . In short, he said that small gains can't be realized without other agreements .
 He saw the 1957 disarmament talks plus his own personal experience with the Russians as good evidence of possible acceptance . Supported the possibility of these limited zoned agreements .
 Such an agreement would not limit national security because of the possibility of continuing military activity in outside zones . Such as agreement would also not limit military activity outside zones, officials say .
 In a Batik jacket tailoring makes the difference, and ours are tailored with the sam workmanship you find in your better sportcoats . Batik jackets are made from the same material as Batik shirts .
 Examinations for classes not included in this schedule should be arranged to suit convenience of students and instructors . Students and instructors should be able to schedule exams for convenience . Examineations should also be arranged for convenience, says instructor .
 All Senior Grades Due at Noon June 2 — Saturday Final Examinations end June 3 — Sunday Baccalaureate June 4 — Monday Commencement June 7 . All grades due in Registrar's Office by noon June 18 — Monday Registration for Summer SesPhi Beta Kappa
 The 18 seniors and two juniors who were recently elected to Phi Beta Kappa will receive their keys and membership certificates . The initiation ceremony will be held at the Broadmoor on April 19 .
 Invitations for a dinner and a ceremony are being mailed to all Phi Beta Kappa members in this area . Invitations will be mailed to members in the area . The ceremony will be held at the University of North Carolina .
 Those who have not received invitations are urged to contact Miss Amanda Ellis, chairman of the dinner at Colorado College .
 Officers of the Colorado College chapter of Phi Beta Kappa for 1961-62 are professor Glenn E Brooks of the political science department, president; . Professor Thomas W Ross of the English department , vice-president; and Lorena Berger, secretary for the college, secretary-treasurer .
 Other 'embers of the executive committee are Professor Kenneth J CurJan, chairman of the economics department, and Professor Frank A Krutzke . Professor Kenneth CurJan is the economics and English department's chairman .
 Thorn Verhave is a scientist at the Presbyterian Institute of Medical Sciences in San Francisco . He gave a series of talks recently at Colorado College .
 Verhave has made significant contributions to psychology in the area of avoidance conditioning . He is most famous for his success with using pigeons as instruments for detecting defective capsules .
 Verhave's lecture at Perkins Hall on March 20th was his more recent work with ""values and preferences"" of pigeons . Verhave was speaking about his work with pigeons in his lecture .
 In spite of his future plans to use human babies in experimentation, many students appeared to be skeptical of the application of information derived from "pigeon" experiments to human beings .
 Verhave avoided making philosophical interpretations of ""dynamic equilibrium"" in human behavior . Verhave also avoided making philosophical interpretations of the "dynamic equilibrium"
 Such statements would have been far removed from research psychology, but more important, such statements could never accurately describe the problems with which Dr. Dr. John Defterios has dealt with . Such statements are far from accurate and far from the psychology of research psychology .
 Snyder presented the facts on each of these concepts, and noted the advantages and disadvantages of each . Snyder also discussed the advantages of each of the concepts . Snyder: "It's a good thing to say 'Yes'
 Snyder maintained his personal view of favoring the ""limited retaliation"" strategy . Snyder maintained that he favored the "limited retaliation" strategy .
 This calls for nuclear retaliation which is equal to the destructive yield of the first strike .
 It is felt that this slow motion total war would bring great pressure on the antagonistic powers to stop and negotiate the differences .
 Snyder suggested that there are parallels between philosophical questions which have been asked for centuries about the ""nature of man"" and experimental questions asked in modern psychology . Snyder explained that this is by far the most feasible idea, especially in consideration of what he described as ""the declining credibility of United States
 Student applicants must submit a manuscript and recommendations from writing teachers to the Conference Committee . Applicants must submit manuscripts and recommendations .
 High school teachers may apply on the recommendations of their principals . High school staff members may apply based on recommendations of principals .
 The Conference will take place in Boulder July 22 to August 10 . The deadline is May 1, May 1 .
 Six CC Young Republicans will attend the annual convention of the College Young Republican League of Colorado . Six YRs Attend League Convention in Ft.C. Colorado .
 The CC delegation, led by CC YR Chairman, Jean Torcom, will nominate Charles White, CC freshman, for League office . Charles White will be nominated for the League office by the YR Committee .
 Among the events which will highlight the convention are an address by U.S. Rep. Tom Coburn .
 Peter Domiriick. who has announced his candidacy for the Republican nomination for Senator from Colorado, will run for the Democratic nomination for the U.S. House of Representatives in November .
 Ol her CC delegates are Martn Phipp's, Bill Hunter, Kay Anderson, and Charles White . Kay Anderson is a member of the CC .
 This weekend a questionaire will be distributed to the students of Colorado College concerning the proposed ;S,2 beer parlor near the campus . The questionaire is being distributed to students .
 The committee organized at the All College Conference to make a definite proposal to the administration . It in necessary that we Know the opinion of a representative group of students . Therefore, regardless of your opinion, please fill out this tiuestiouniie .
 Every student at Colorado College is requested . Enthusiasm on the part of the student body is the major factor in promoting an affirmative response from the college administration .
 A nation's complex of weapons can no longer be fully disclosed through inspection . This is coupled with the fact that a nation's . complex of . weapons can . no longer . fully disclose through inspection through inspection. This is . coupled with . the . fact that . a . nation's
 Only limited disarmament in Stassen's mind is more feasible in increasing the stability and security of nations, he says .
 He did not deny that even in a limited program risks are not involved . However, he did say that even if there is no risk, risks were not involved in it .
 The point which demands consideration here is what will happen if, in fact, no agreement is reached . The point of concern is that no agreement has been reached .
 Governor Stassen was articulate in his criticisms of other proposed programs . Governor was critical of the proposed program .
 Stassen noted that in 1817 an arms control agreement was reached between America and England in an atmosphere of distrust . To those who argue ""no agreements with Russia are possible because of past history and ideological bipolarity,"" Stassens said .
 Under the agreement, cancelation could come in six months; it never did . The cancellation of the deal never happened .
 To those who maintain Russia breaks agreements at will, Stassen recalled the Austrian and Finnish peaces, settlements in Iran, and acceptance of the United Nations charter .
 Some theorize that internal explosions in Russian rule would result if exploited by external pressures . Russia's internal explosions could be caused by internal pressures .
 Governor Stassen noted there is little historical evidence that Russia would yield under external pressure . To this analysis, he noted there are little historical .
 Internal explosions might, in the end, involve the whole world . More serious, however, is the possibility that internal explosions might involve the entire world .
 Neither does he have any regard for the unilateral disarmament advocate . He has no respect for unilateral disarmaments advocates .
 To those who suggest Ghandi's approach, Stassen would only remind them of Tibet and Hungary . The Dutchman's approach to the world's first war zone would be reminiscent of Tibet .
 Four approaches to arms control have been suggested in the Assembly's panel addresses .
 Addison Lanier, Walter Millis and Thomas Schelling of the Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions at Harvard speak . The panelists also discuss the role of the Secretary of Defense for National Security Affairs . The group also includes Walter Schelling and William It.
 Lanier criticized U.S. past proposals as but reshuffuffuffled rearrangements of prejudices .
 Little effective governmental machinery is operational with all disarmament efforts being carried on outside the Departments of State and Defense . Not only do we lack originality anil sincerity but also lack sincerity, but little effective government machinery .
 Mr Lanier also suggested we would do well to look at arms control approaches as a national policy instead of approaching the question with divergent, specific measures .
 Mr Millis' approach to disarmament had not changed since his appearance at Colorado College, only his phrasing was different . As presupposed, he said: "As with the world, disarmament is a matter of principle"
 Maintaining that disarmament is not a practical goal, Mr Millis felt any conference, no matter how conclusive, will attain no desired objectives . Maintains that any conference will attain any desired objectives, he said .
 At present only a stabilization of forces is possible, and desirable . To be sure, however, disarmament is not ultimately impossible, but at present only stabilization is possible .
 Before complete disarmament can be attained, ""demilitarization" must accompany such a procedure . For, before complete disarmament can't be achieved, "demilitary activity" must be completed .
 He defined demilitarization as concerned with policy, power, and governmental relations . He defined it as concerned about policy and power, policy, and relations .
 The danger in Millis' mind is the possibility of attaining control of weapons without demilitarization, he says . Millis says the danger in his mind is that the danger is that it could be achieved without disarmament . The U.S. should not be allowed to
 As we know, he regards war as obsolete and unrelated to the interest of today's states . War is not a matter of national interest, he says .
 He concluded that realistic proposals must be drawn in the contest of the cold war . Thus he concluded that . realistic proposals should be drawn .
 Schelling believed that a diplomacy in arms can be attained under which each nation stabilizes its deterrent forces . Schelling believes that each nation's deterrent forces can be stabilised under a diplomatic agreement .
 Becker's Radiator & Body Shop is located at E Bijou St. Call ME 3-0075 Radiator, Body & Fender Repairing and Painting Repairing & Painting .
 Schelling's analysis was that even complete disarmament would not erase future redevelopment of weapons . Schelling said knowledge cannot he destroyed short of universal brain surgery .
 He also noted that, when a situation arises making negotiation possible, a dilemma also arises, that of whether to be accommodating or tough .
 Schelling reached no conclusion on this point other than that one should be accommodating when the Russians are and tough when they are . Schelling: "One should be accommodated when Russia is and likewise tough when it is."
 It was left to the next speaker to analyze past approaches to agreement . The next speaker will discuss the future of the U.S. government .
 William R Frye has covered the U.N. for a decade . He has grown to know Soviet maneuvers as well as our own . Frye: "I'm not surprised by the way the United States has behaved in the past."
 He is critical of past U.S. maneuvers of making disarmament proposals with ""built-in jokers"" which make Russians agreement impossible . For example, he says, he is critical .
 Russian denial of the proposal has meant they take the ""blame"" for the Cold War . Subsequent Russian denial means they take responsibility for the 'Cold War' The proposal was rejected by the Russian government .
 Frye criticized not only our insincerity in negotiation, but also our lack of knowledge as to the implication of some U.S. policies . Frye also criticized the insincerity of our negotiations, and also our ignorance of some United States policies .
 If the Russians would have accepted we would have been deprived of any deterrent force in Europe against the Soviet Army . The Russians would not have accepted, he says .
 The Reverend John A Bailey is resigning his post as assistant professor of religion at Colorado College . Bailey will accept a position on the faculty of St. St. Louis University . Bailey is an assistant professor at the college .
 Bailey, an ordained Episcopal priest, is being sent to the interdenominational seminary by the American Episcopal Church . Bailey is an ordained priest and will be sent to a seminary for the American Anglican Church .
 Bailey will he one of two Americans on the faculty . Bailey says he is looking forward to the challenge in the three-year assignment . Bailey will be one of only two Americans to be on faculty .
 WAGER, Own, Paul's Flowers Cut Flowers and Corsages Reasonably Priced . Miss Sharon Shacldeford as Honorary Lieutenant Colonel .
 Application period for three 19H2-G3 European study programs will open April 2 . Institute of European Studies will offer three programs offered by Colorado College .
 The programs, located in Vienna, Austria, Paris, France, an r d Freiburg, West Germany, are limited to undergraduates . The programs are located in Austria, France and West Germany .
 Classes taught in German and English for those without facility in that language . Classes are taught in English and German .
 Three study trips, covering England, France, Belgium, Luxembourg, Switzerland, Austria, Germany, Italy, and Spain, are included .
 The program in Paris is limited to sophomores and juniors with some ability in French . The program is an ""honors program"" limited to students with some French ability .
 Two study trips take students throughout the Low Countries, France and Italy . Intensive language sessions are conducted in Paris before classes open .
 German fluency is required for ""das Deutsche Jahr,"" the Institute's program in Freilburg, Germany .
 Students visit various cities and historical landmarks in West Germany, on an introductory ""field-study" trip . Students visit historical landmarks on the trip .
 The events are timed to occur during the normal vacation periods of European universities . They are timed for when they occur during university holidays .
 While in Europe, students live in private homes and dine either in Institute dining rooms or in student restaurants . Students dine in Institute's private dining rooms .
 Costs include round-trip ocean transportation, tuition, room, board and study trips . Costs range from about .$$2,000 to about $2,5500 .
 The Institute selects applicants for enrollment on the basis of their academic achievement, intellectual and emotional maturity, and recommendations by faculty members of the American college or university . Applicants are selected for enrollment based on academic achievement and intellectual maturity, according to the Institute .
 The Institute is a non-profit educational organization which had been conducting overseas study programs since 15*50 . The Institute has conducted overseas studies programs since the beginning of the century .
 The choir was the guest of the Pomona College Glee Clubs whose director extended the invitation last year . Additional information can be obtained from the Institute of European Studies .
 Director of the Colorado College Chior thanks Pomona audience for their warm reception . He invited their choir to sing here next year .
 The program includes Renaissance motets, Easter carols, Spirituals, and works by Georg Schumann and Darius Milhaud . The program will also feature works by German composer and composer Alexander Schumann .
 The principal work is Handel's ""Utrecht Jubilate,"" a 20-minute cantata written in celebration of the ending of the War of the Spanish Succession in 1818 . Handel wrote the cantata in celebration for the end of the war .
 The group went with the purpose of becoming better acquainted with the indigeious segment of America— the people and their way of life .
 The group left CC at 6.40 m, on Tuesday morning, on March 2! Members of the group were Or. Or . After packing an odd assortment of sleepingbags, cameras, . and lumpy laundry bags, groceries, and ten people into two cars and a Volkswagen,
 Paul Kutsche, Associate Professor of Sociology/Anthropology, Abiodun Afonja, Ann Armstrong, Jane Grothaus, Barbara Morgan, Vijay Sampat, John Stickney, Joe Wilcox, and gurachit Wang-Lee. Paul K Deutsche
 Friday was spent in orientation sessions acquainting us with Navajo ■ustoms and tribal organizations . The Navajo people were introduced to the Navajo people .
 The Navajo Arts and Crafts Guild, Cross Canyon ruins, Canyon de Chelly and White House ruins . The weekend was spent in trips to surrounding places of interest, such as Hubbell's Trading Post and Natural Bridge .
 The major work project of the following week was going to individual homes and installing water storage units . Water storage units were installed in individual homes .
 This consisted of building a stand for the water tank and sink and digging a ditch and large pit for the drainage pipe and barrel . It was built for the sink and sink, and a large pit was dug for drainage .
 The trip was made especially interesting by coinciding with certain events and people . The trip is a very interesting time for the family .
 We were lucky enough to witness a Fire Dance and an all-night ceremonial held in order to cure a sick person . The ceremonial was held in a bid to cure sick people .
 We were invited to a chapter meeting, a community meeting which is open to every member of the community . We were also invited to the chapter meeting .
 This particular meeting proved to be very exciting because of heated debate between the sawmille laborers and its Anglo manager . The meeting was attended by a group of laborers and the manager .
 The girls spent the afternoon in an Indian woman's home learning how to grind corn and how to took traditional Navajo foods such as mush, mutton stew and fry bread .
 All of the people that came into contact with the group were very interested in who we were and what we had come for . The group's mission was to raise awareness of the project and raise money for a charity .
 A Navajo Ranger, Sam Begay, was also indispensable for sacrificing his precious time in order to show us around . Begay was indispensable for showing us around the world .
 Half of the value of the work camp was the satisfaction derived from working as a group together, the campers said . The campers were able to dig, cook, or change a flat tire .
 Anne and Barbara were the unofficial head cooks . Everyone took his part in cooking and cleaning UP . Even Dr. Dr. Barbara was involved in cleaning .
 The meals were all very good — well planned and well prepared, even if put together in the back seat of a car . The meals all were well planned, well prepared .
 We would never have been able to make lunches if it hadn't been for that five pound jar of peanut butter . The peanut butter was the key to making lunches for many of us .
 Group endeavor was always accompanied by singing; and due to foreign student representation, one would be as likely to hear an African chant or an East Tndian song as anything else .
 We realized what a different culture the Navajo have and therefore can more easily see the difficulties that will have to be overcome in order for them to gain a place for themselves in American life . The Navajo have a very different culture .
 The Navajo are not an isolated and stagnant group of sudbued people, but are growing and developing constantly . One of the most important things that we brought back with us is the knowledge that the Navajo people are not isolated and .
 "It's not as easy to determine what we took with us and left at the reservation. It's not easy to figure out what we left with us," says CNN.com's Rob Greene .
 This is due largely to the present trend towards education and consequent respect on the reservation for college students . This is largely due to the fact that the reservation is being given to college students in the state .
 It is hoped that we left with the Indians a recognition of the fact that many young people in America are interested in them and in their welfare . We have contributed in some way, small as it may be, to establishing better relations between their culture and ours.
 Jar Ave Joyc, a prominent British author and speaker, will address the International Relations Club at Colorado College on the subject, The United Nations in the 1%0's . Joyc will be a guest speaker at the college .
 All interested persons on campus and in the community are cordially invited to attend . The event will be held at the University of Cambridge .
 Joyce Joyce is a well-known educator who has made many visits to the United States to lecture on world problems, British affairs, and legal and educational topics . Joyce is. a well known educator, who has visited the U.S. many times to lecture .
 The tlii fol session to the 19(12 Symposium on ""War and Peace in the GO's"" was held on March 22nd in the WES Lounge . The final session was held at the end of the Symposium .
 The value of the Symposium was considered in light of what good it did for students beyond an attainment of personal knowledge on the problems and implications of the arms race .
 The discussion was led by a four member panel comprised of Rusty Bastedo, John Levis, Stephanie Row and Stephanie Row . Harris Sherman, moderator, led the discussion .
 The concensus of the meeting seemed to be that students at Colorado College should make an effort to express their serious concern over crucial world problems .
 There was not a unanimous opinion of how this goal was to be achieved . But there were not unanimous opinions of how to achieve it .
 Those in attendance felt one should familiarize himself with the problem and then be prepared to support one view or another .
 There seemed to be a call for more student participation in events such as debates, lectures and demonstrations . Colorado College lags far behind such schools as Antioch, Carleton, Grinnel, Harvard, Yale, and many others .
 Some students pointed to campus issues that need to be accentuated, such as the validity of the KOTC program . Others pointed to the differences of opinion between the Young Democrats and Young Republicans .
 In conclusion, most students felt there was a great need to initiate student group which would solely tackle tlie problem of stirring up interest at the College not only on questions concerning nuclear war .
 Rocky Mountain area college and university students will have a chance to work side by side with the political pros in the coming Colorado election campaign . Area College Students are given opportunity to work in the election .
 The Rocky Mountain Center for Education in Politics is offering six internships worth $500 each . Three internships are offered for each major political party, three each party .
 Students will spend 10 weeks working in state party headquarters or on the campaign trail with candidates . They are for students to work in 10 weeks at state party HQs .
 Two $4,000 fellowships are offered to law students, young instructors, nnd political science graduate students for an eight-month period beginning June 14 . The fellowships will be available for eight months .
 The Center, formerly known as the Rocky Mountain Citizenship Clearing House, is supported by the Ford and Faulk Foundations . The Center is also known as The Rocky Mountain Center for Citizenship .
 Citizenship Clearing House was organized nationally in 1947 and in this region in 1954 . It was organized nationwide in 1947, and in 1954 in the U.S. It was later organized in the United States and Canada .
 Formed strictly on a bi-partisan basis, its goals are to improve understanding of the American political process, encourage participation in political affairs .
 Colorado College Tiger Phi Delts to Hold Turtle Race Sat. Sat. April 13, 1962 . Colorado college Tiger Phi delts to hold turtle race .
 On Wednesday night, the queens were invited to dinner at the Phi Delt House . Lynn Miller, Alpha Phi; Natalie Gee, Delta Gamma; Dee Dee Jones, Gamma Phi Beta; Nancy Petit, Kappa Alpha Theta .
 Tomorrow, sororities, their queens, and their turtles will assemble at the Phi Delt House . The sorority sisters will meet at Phi Delta House .
 The sorority possessing the winning turtle is invited to attend a picnic with the Phi Delts following the race .
 There will be dancing, an open house, and refreshments preceeding the race . The race will take place on Saturday .
 The Turtle Race is an annual event at Phi Delt Chapters throughout the country . The Turtle race is held every year at Phi Delta Chapters throughout America .
 More than 3,000 books were contributed to the sale, held in Bemis Hall on the college campus . The sale was held on the campus of the College of Technology .
 The bulk of the books were contributed by members of the group . Louis T Benezet, president of the organization, said the bulk of them contributed .
 All books not sold were to be given to the Veteran's Administration Hospital at Fort Lyons, Colo. All books were donated to the VA Hospital .
 Mason talked about the college's new $1,250,000 Charles Learning Tutt Library, scheduled to open soon . Mason: The library will be the first of its kind in the state of the country .
 The tea and sale was organized jointly by the Project and Tea Committees of the WES . The WES has made many contributions to the college .
 Petitions for 1962-68 ASCC President are due Monday, April 16 . ASGG Petitions Due . Petitions are due to be submitted to the ASCC .
 Candidates for president must be members of the junior class, have completed at least 80 semester hours, and have maintained a 2.00 average for the semester preceding the election . Candidates must be students who have completed more than 80 hours of classes .
 Petitions for vice president, secretary, and treasurer are due April 20 . The election will be May 11 and 12 .
 Petitions for commissioners are due April 26 and the election will be May 17 and 18 . The election will take place on May 17, 18 .
 Tournament of Cycles to be held on a p'aved course winding two and one half miles through the Garden of the Gods . April 28 as part of the Parents' Weekend .
 The Junkie Classic is open to all single speed bicycles including tandems and unicycles . The event will consist of three races, the first of which will be held in a single speed bike race .
 Following the classic will be a one lap race for bicycles with three speeds or less . The race will take place in a one-lap race for cyclists with three or less speeds .
 Highlighting the afternoon of racing will be a three lap, seven and one-half mile event . The event is open 'to all cyclists' and is open to all cyclists .
 The Tournament of Cycles has been sanctioned by the Colorado Springs Park and Recreation Department .
 Results will be placed in the hands of the Bicycle Institute of America— the organization endorsing such contests . Results of the contest will be decided by the bicycle institute .
 There will be a meeting of all competitors in the WES lounge at 7:30m. on Tuesday, April 24 .
 The performance, sponsored by CC French Club, is open to the public free of charge . The performance is sponsored by the CC French club, which is free to watch .
 Cache La Poudre CC Tiger Trackmen off to fast start in Rocky Mountain Conference track competition . Tiger trackmen walloped all comers during the First Annual Invitational Meet in Steinhauer Fieldhouse at the Colorado School of Mines in Golden .
 Colorado College nailed down 43% points for the meet, three points above the second-place contender, Colorado State College, with 40% points . The meet was held at Colorado College College in Colorado .
 Adams State College with a final count of 29 and Colorado School of Mines with a 27-point tally . Adams State State College also ran with 29 points . Colorado school of Mines had 27 points .
 Colorado College trackmen placed first in five events and broke two Steinhauer Fieldhouse records and one record in the process . CC's trackmen also broke a record for the first time at the meet . The meet was held in Boulder, Colorado .
 Jim Blair of the Tigers sailed 13 feet, one-half inch to take first place in the pole vault . Blair broke the previous fieldhouse record of 12 feet, 8 and one-and-one-half inches set by himself and Jack Schwella of Colorado College .
 Track Coach Frank Flood's crack athlete, Abiodun Afonja, nailed down the first place in the broad jump with a 20 foot, 10 and one half inch leap . Track Coach Flood’s crack athlete took the gold medal .
 Bruce Boyd placed first in the shot put, slinging the iron 45 feet, SVj inches to break the old Colorado College record . Boyd broke the old record of 45 feet and S. inches .
 The eight-lap relay team of Bob Broyles, Dave Krell, Norm Liden and Dale Me Neal made the run in 3 minutes, 45. seconds . Another first place for the Tigers went to the eight lap relay team .
 Tigers trackmen placed in all but one event of Saturday's meet . The team placed in every event of the meet .
 Ed Loosli tied with Colorado State College's Plummer for second in the high jump . Looosli and Plummer were tied for second place in the world's most prestigious event .
 CC's Tony McGinnis, Don Kintz, and Dave Smith took second, third and fourth respectively in the two-mile run . Taking second and third in the race were CC's Don Kintsz, Dave Smith and Tony McGinis .
 DU here at Monday, AFA there at 3 Wedn day, and a doubleheader here Saturday against New Mex Highlanders in the morning a CSC in the afternoon .
 Doug Corley, a 1S‘CC grad, and Joe Moll, a Sr. CC grad, were trampled by a local team on March 24 and 25 . They included former national jun runner-up and 1S'CC grads .
 Heiberger took a set fro Joe Moll, and Sperry went to 6-3, 6-2 loss to Corley . Sperperry lost to Joe Corley 6-4, 7-6, 6.5 .
 Gordon Davis, former ly no. behind Alex Olmedo at USC, defeats Sperry 6-3, 6-2 in first round . Davis is a former No. 1 seed at the US Open .
 Bastedo and Sper then lost a close doubles, 6-3, 7-,, C-4, which put them out of tlip imnnament . The pair then lost their last match in a straight sets, which was 6-4 .
 There are also plans for a mixed doubles exhibitioi match, followed by an allschool mixed doubles tournament in which everyone is urged to participate .
 Any girls interested in exhibition matches are urged to contact Mr Peterson at his office in Hayes House to arrange for partners and practice .
 The slide slide is a short series of slides which he took last summer while he was climbing in the Alps . The slides were taken while he climbed in the mountains .
 Lille Lake, Colorado, is the name of a famous lake in Colorado . It was published in 1962 .
 Conduct Committee Nominates candidates for the Student Conduct Committee . Conduct Committee will hold its election for the coming year this month .
 Suzanne Armstrong, Nan Burroughs, Buffie Buffam, John Collins, Mike Diirfee, Steve Frink, Walter Hecox, John Levis, Matt Rilev, Stephanie Row, Jean Torcom, and Carol Wright .
 Colorado College history majors given fellowships and scholarhips for graduate work in the sciences . CC Seniors given Fellowships . CC history majors have been given scholarhips .
 Recently ilected to Phi Beta Kappa, Colorado College candidate for ""distinction in ilstory"" at Colorado College . Beemer candidate for "distinction" in "ilstory" at college .
 He is a member of Phi Delta Theta U|i raternity . He has been on the lean's list several times .
 Last sealie on, he won the Rocky Mountain jolf Championship for the college . College golfer wins Rocky Mountain Championship for college .
 Miss Martin has been sectary of the Foreign Students jommittee and a member of the Jappa Kappa Gamma sorority . iheplans to enter the Master of (rts in Teaching History program .
 Hanks has received a fellowship Community Activities for ad;anced work in social science at lolorado State College . Hanks received the award for his work at the college .
 Hanks is a member of the Kappa Sigma fraternity and the Blue Key rational honor fraternity at Colorado College . Hanks was voted 'most valuable layer"" on both she baseball and basketball teams eason .
 Anthropologist Delivers Lecture 'Many modern anthropologists ieel that man is at a point in time shere it is possible for him to be able to predict his own future evolution' Possible advantages to selec..human breeding are intriguing, but the inherent disadvantages are chilling and
 Professor Paul Kutsche of the department of sociology and _ an"" I'opology, will present his views this timely subject in an illustrated lecture entitled ""Man Himself,"" or ""Man's Hand Own Evolution.""
 Dr. Kutsche will give his own answers to Dr. ;r*s views and will, in part, strong issue with them . Dr. . Kutsche gives his own answer to the questions .
 As a freshman at Colorado College, he was initiated into the Phi Gamma Delta fraternity . He ran for the Sophomore Class Commissioner at the college .
 As a sophomore, he served on the Winter Carnival steering committee, was social chairman of his fraterity . He also participated in the Student Guide Service, and was on the Sophomore Nucleus Committee .
 Brad is vice-president of the Junior Class, and thus a member of ASCC . He participates in the Student Guide Service, is chairman of the All-School Picnic, was co-chairman of the ""We Ain't Down Yet"" Hockey Rally, serves on the Constitution
 The ASCC presidential election will be held in 2015 . ASCC will hold a presidential election in 2016 . The election will take place in October 2015 .
 An assembly will be held on May 1, at which time the candidates will be introduced .
 Each candidate .11 then speak for 10 or 15 minutes, followed by the present ASCC president, Chris Griffiths .
 Candidates will stay in the halls to answer questions from interested parties . After their speeches, the candidates will stay at the end of their speeches .
 From 4:00 to 5:30 on May 3, a coffee hour, sponsored by the Cultural Affairs Committee, will feature a moderated panel discussion .
 The person asking a question will direct it to the individual candidate . The person asked the question will be directed to the candidate .
 The campaign managers of the two presidential candidates, Bradford Chase and Max Power, are arranging meetings in the women's dorms . Both candidates will participate in one other event in which both will participate .
 The Spanish Club of CC is giving a dinner-dance for all past and present Spanish students .
 Spanish and Mexican speciality dishes will be served and a floor show of Spanish dances and songs will be given . The event will take place at the end of the month .
 As a freshman at Colorado College, he served as the chairman of the CC Young Republicans, participated in the International Relations Club, and served on the Debate Team . As a student, he also served as a member of the debate team .
 Max served as chairman of the CC Young Republicans, was on the Debate Team, participated in Westminister Club, and was elected State Chairman of the College Young Republicans . Max is a sophomore at the University of Maryland .
 This year, he served as editor of the TIGER during the first semester . He headed the Debate Team, participated in the Student Guide Service . He also served on the Symposium Committee, and on the Senior Council .
 Dennis C Mueller, a senior at Colorado College, has been awarded a National Science Foundation graduate fellowship . Mueller received the fellowship for the 196263 academic year of 2014 .
 Mueller plans to work toward a Ph.D. and teach economics in a liberal arts college . Mueller is an economics major and plans to study economics at college .
 For two consecutive years, Mueller has been awarded the college's Perkins Prize for autstanding academic achievement . Mueller has won the award for two years .
 Mueller was a Barnes Chemistry Scholarship student throughout his career at liberal arts college . He studied engineering and mathmatics before settling on economics . Mueller is an economics major at Yale University .
 Ronald Biondini plans to work toward a Ph.D in theoretical physics . Janet Fraser and Karen Minn also plan to undertake graduate work for teaching mathmatics in college .
 All four of the CC seniors have been elected to Phi Beta Kappa, the honorary scholastic society, and all four plan to teach on the college level when they graduate .
 NSF graduate fellowships were awarded to 1,760 students in America . NSF is one of the three major national fellowships in the country . The NSF fellowships are recognized as one of America's top three major fellowships .
 The four seniors are Gordie Aamoth, Mariana Cogswell; Sue Holt; Tom Rivers; Anne Armstrong, Erv Hinds, Steve Lamb, and Leigh Rainey . The four juniors are Anne Armstrong and Erv . Hinds are Anne . Armstrong,
 The faculty members on the committee include Dr. Moon, dean Reid, dean Juhas, assistant Professor of Music, and Dr. J. Moon . The committee is comprised of faculty members .
 The purpose of this committee is to handle any case of misconduct which occurs during the school year which brings discredit on the individual and/or the college . The committee will handle any misconduct during the year .
 Students have an opportunity to present their case and then be judged by a combination of students and faculty members . What gives value to this committee is the fact that students have a chance to present case .
 The potential scope of this Committee makes it one of the most important student governing organizations on campus . The Committee will be a student governing organization on our campus .
 Based on the fine work done this year, a great deal can be done to improve the school, says Carol Wright . "A great deal must be done" to improve student attitude and conduct, she says .
 The effectiveness of the Student Conduct Committee ' has been questioned because it deals with offenses only after they have occurred . Students have been accused of sexual misconduct in the past .
 I believe the committee can and should serve a useful purpose, I would like to see it become a more preventive and more positive force, says Suzanne Armstrong . Armstrong: I think the committee should be used to make sure people are safe and secure .
 The Student Conduct Committee can play an important part in providing a forum for student leadership and responsibility . The committee can play a role in providing students with a forum to discuss their conduct .
 If elected, I would try always to consider the interests of the individual student without losing sight of the welfare of the whole college community . — Jean Torcum. "I would try to always consider the interest of ... individual student," she says .
 The changes on the CC campus' social life are destined to bring before the Student Conduct Committee a variety of cases that have been previously non-existent on the campus . The changes will bring some cases before the committee . The committee is expected to bring in a wide range of cases .
 Committee members must be firm, an accurate appraisal of both sides of the case, not influenced by Administration's monotonous red tape, or influenced by personalities of the individuals involved .
 Steve Frink says he should be pleased to serve the campus and work on the non-academic judicial body of our student government . He says he is "pleased to serve" the campus, "and work"
 Student Conduct Committe must set certain standards of conduct by which it can judge student behavior . Student body should consider personal conduct of candidates in choosing members of the committee .
 Matt Railey would like to be considered for a position on this committee in this light and, if elected, will do my best to perform well. I would Like to be included in this position .
 Student conduct committee has a most difficult task: It must judge the behavior of students who have tremendously varying basis for their actions . Committee must judge students' behavior .
 Mike Durfee: "I recognize this problem, and would do my best to understand each student's action and reason for action" Durfee says he would do his best to help students understand their actions . Durfee has been criticized for his lack of transparency in the past .
 It is an honor and a privilege to be nominated to the Student Conduct Committee . It is a privilege and a honor to nominate a member of the committee .
 CC Tour Choir presented a concert of ""Sacred Music for the Easter Season,"" which truly showed depth and insight; into the material being performed . I realize the Easter Program CC Choir Shows Depth and Insight .
 Emphasis was placed where it ought to be — on the thoughtful interpretation of the music rather than on having a polished professional-like performance .
 I'm by no means suggesting that there was anything sloppy about the presentation . Yet I am by no . means that there were any sloppy moments in the presentation. Yet I'm not saying that there is anything sloppy .
 It is a precise alert choir, able to produce a good choral sound which is always fitting to the stylo of tlie music being sung .
 Slow tempo of Thomas Morley's ""Agnus Dei,"" did not drag due to the rich choral sound and the effective use of dynamics . For example, the slow tempo of the slow . tempo of "Agnas Dei" was not dragged .
 Mr Jenkins managed to manipulate these dynamics and sounds to fit in with every element of the piece as they came, resulting in a beautiful performance which was over quickly .
 "Babylon,"" by Darius Milhaud, whose difficult and almost encophonus harmonies were ably handeled by Mr Jenkins and the choir . Another high spot was ""Babylyla,"" which was a difficult piece by the composer . The choir was
 The words, telling of the fall of the majestic city of Babylon, are well suited to the musical style . The choir showed that it was well aware of this relationship in its majestice and convicted approach .
 This pice showed the depth and sensitivity of Mr Jenkins' approach and the responsiveness of the choir to understand their conductor . It was the first time the choir had ever heard a performance of such a performance .
 The only unfortunate part of the concert was that the largest and most ambitous effort of the choir had to be sung from the choir loft for technical reasons, and some of the magnificense of the work was lost .
 The choir did not demonstrate the strong conviction of the choir as did the rest of the program, probably due to the difficulty of projecting focused and delicate choral sound from the loft .
 There is no more satisfying artistic experience than hearing a group of musicians dedicated to expressing the meaningful essence of the music being performed rather than appearing polished .
 CC Tour Choir projected sensitively a very meaningful program . The latter often leads to brash impersonal results, while the latter often results impersonal .
 On March 6, a first warning was issued for a violation of the Honor System . The violation occurred on March 1 in the Division of the Social Sciences . ttA* Official Colorado College Student Publication Blnnl Parry, Jim Fox.
 TIGER is a look at a formidable group of proposed changes in the ASCC Constitution . Elsewhere in this week's TIGer is a group of proposals for changes to ASCC's constitution .
 The Student Policy Committee amendment and Social Coordinating Committee amendment of past weeks, and several additional changes to come, should effectively clear up the existing constitution . These, coupled with the Student Policy . Committee amendment, and other changes to the . constitution, are expected to effectively clear . up the
 Many of the problems include ambiguous wording in several sections, faulty or unrealistic delegation of responsibility, and lack of responsibility .
 The changes to be voted on next Monday (those found in the TIGER this week) have been drafted by Bill Greeley's Constitution Committee with these areas in mind . The changes will be voted next Monday .
 Among the changes are shifts in responsibility among members of the Executive Council . The introduction of a budgeting clause has been introduced .
 Max Power, ""63, and Ed DeGeorge, "64, were recently elected members of the Honor Council to fill vacancies occurring at the start of the second semester . It's housecleaning time on ASCC Executive Council .
 The Honor Council is currently at work on its program of re-orientation of the student body . Honor Council members are currently working on a reorientation program for students .
 Applications are due May 2 for photographic editor of the campus publications . Applications are also due to be accepted by the University of Wisconsin .
 There will be a meeting this afternoon at fivem. in the Nugget office for those students interested in working on the IWA Nugget . Students will be asked to attend the meeting .
 The ASCC Constitution will be voted on Monday . ASCC will vote on changes to the Constitution .
 Serve as the official representative of the student body and assume the broad responsibility of maintaining good public relations between the Executive Council and students .
 No change . Be chairman of the Social Coordinating Committee of the Executive Council . Omit from Section 3 and move to Section 4 . Omits from Section 2 .
 The Ilk When It's Muric It's Millers Miller Music Co. Be responsible for all ll|Hls cations concerning the Ilk
 Be responsible to present to the official campus newspaper at least once a month, or more often if necessary, a summary report of issues and decisions pertinent to the college community . Be responsible for presenting a summary of issues to the campus newspaper .
 Executive Council shall not budget funds to any organization which it does not officially recognize . Executive Council will not fund funds to organizations which are not officially recognized .
 In order to be ■ccognized an organization shall submit its constitution and by-laws to its approval . The subsequent appropriation of funds shall be littec with approval of the Executive . The Finance Coi Coi :il.
 Amendments to this Constitution may be introduced by recommendations of the ASCC petition signed by twenty-five and action of the Executive Co 1 Constitutional Committee, members of each class .
 Each member of the Executive Council shall serve on at least one committee . No member shall concurrently serve on more than three committees . Each committee member must serve on one committee at a time .
 All committee chairmen shall be appointed no later than the second meeting of the new Executive Council by the President of Ihe Executive Council . Committee chairmen will be appointed by the president of the Ihe executive council .
 If a member of the Executive Council misses more than three unexcused meetings during his term, his position shall be declared vacant . The vacancy shall be filled in accordance with Article 1, Section 5, of the By-Laws .
 The ASCC Constitution and By-Laws shall be kept in a permanent book in the ASCC file . A complete record of proposed amendments to the Constitution and by-law will be kept .
 These amendments shall be accompanied by a record of the results of the voting for each proposed amendment and signed by the President and the Chairman of the Constitution Committee . The amendments should also be signed by President and Chairman of Constitution Committee.
 All proposed amendments to the ASCC Constitution and By-Laws shall be filed with the Secretary of the Executive Council . The ASCC constitution and by-law will be filed .
 A proposed amendment shall be presented before the Executive Council for first reading and shall be printed in the Tiger the Friday succeeding this reading . The amendment is proposed for the first reading of the Tiger .
 The poem exists in three m scripts located in Cambridge, tbd Bodleian Library, and the National Library of Scotland . The poem was written in three scripts, one in Cambridge .
 The poem should throw soma light on the reign of Edward ]| and provide a better understanding of Middle English . The poem was written in Middle English by Edward VII .
 There will be a short service of meditation upon the Cross in the Pilgrim Chapel in Shove Chapel . This will be held at twelve noon .
 Easter Sunday, April 22, will be Easter Sunday . Holy Communion will be held in the Pilgrim Chapel .
 Liturgy to be used is that of the Church of South India, incorporating many traditions of the church Order . Liturgy will be used for the first time .
 Bailey and Mr Burton will share in the conduct of this service . A special quartet of singers from the College Choir, directed by Mr Jenkins, will help lead this festival worship . Bailey and Burton will conduct the service .
 The event of the resurrection is the cornerstone of the whole story of man's redemption by God through the person of His son Jesus Christ . Burnt Thi£ event of resurrection is cornerstone of story of God's redemption .
 It is pivotal in that it tells us whether Christ's death and passion has meaning, significance or is nonsense being ""sound and fury"" signifying nothing .
 This sermon expounds the significance of this great and good news which speaks of the triumph of lover over sin and hate, and life over death .
 It will try to say that amidst the perplexities of life and the threat of meaninglessness there is meaning and significant direction for human life . The film is based in New York City, New York .
 At this service of praise the College Choir will sing, directed by Mr Jenkins . The College choir will sing .
 Nugget office will be open all day tomorrow for picture sale . Nugget will also be open for pictures tomorrow for sale .
 About two thousand pictures from the last few years of the yearbook will be sold for ten cents each . The yearbook yearbook is being sold for 10 cents each.
 SINCE 1 B7 2 SCHOOL AND OFFICE SUPPLIES out west rRIHTtHG & STATIONERY . School and office supplies out west are out west .
 The following exam is a comprehensive evaluation of your accumulated knowledge throughout four years of extensive, rigorous studying . The exam will evaluate your knowledge throughout the course of four years .
 It is to be taken in the presence of jovial, congenial company, one or more iced six-packs, and warm, soothing sunshine . Preferably, it is taken in iced 6packs, one of the most relaxing drinks in the world .
 CU French Department Presents Rhinoceros by Jay Hemingway . Inesco's RHINOCEROS is a difficult play to perform .
 C.U.'s attempt at the production is maddening to an infant making an effort to articulate . For that reason I am sympathetic with C.A.U.’s attempt to stage the production .
 C.C.U.'s Berenger fostered an inflexible pathetic' drone, author says . "Even in the final act when relief from his overbearing timidity is planned, he remained encrusted in effeminacy"
 Perhaps he confused timidity with naivety, perhaps the factor above all others that could have distinguished him from those who succumbed, and redeemed him from their fate . "Authenticite" may have been the key to distinguishing him from the others .
 Despite all of Berenger's pathetic qualities and the absurdity of the setting, one does, as does Ionesco, sympathize with his agony, his awareness of bis incompatibility with the environment, and with the incontrolability of the evolutionary trend .
 Mr Neely barely suggested the tragic authenticity; let Berenger ride as monotonous and ridiculous pathos . The film is set in New York City, New York .
 Jean Jean, Daisy, Le Vieux, Le Logician, and M Papillon should likewise be complimented . Le Logicians, Le Vignon, and Le Vieaux are also complimented for their work .
 Le Logicien dominated the scene through little if any fault of his own, since the part asks to be overplayed . The role was overplayed, but it was not his fault .
 Instead of balancing his majestic hamuiiness with rapid conversation, Jean and Berenger seemed to be hesitantly awaiting their cues, as if unsure what was to come .
 Richard M Pearl of the Colorado College geology department has had his latest book published . Pearl is a geologist at Colorado College .
 The distinctive fea'ture of this book is that, in addition to telling about various rocks and minerals, it is the only book that describes three incidents of children making important discoveries in this field .
 Thirteen of these books fall under the heading of tradebooks written for the general public . Thirteen tradebooks are written in the form of trade books for the public .
 He did his graduate work at Harvard and has been teaching at Harvard for 16 years . He did not graduate at Harvard but has taught at Harvard since 2000 .
 Current Events Disi group will deal with the topic of President Kennedy's program for medical care for the aged at its next meeting Tuesday, April 24th at 4m. in Rastall Center .
 This issue, which is now before Congress, envisages a program to help defray medical expenses, which will be handled through the present Social Security program, by raising the Social Security rates somewhat . This issue is now .
 The American Medical Association is vigorously opposed to it . It is a very controversial program, the AMA says . The program is a controversial program .
 It is hoped that at next Tuesday's discussion, both the pro and con points of view will be represented . All interested students and faculty members are cordially invited to attend .
 Independent Mens Association of Colorado College, wishes to thank Colorado Springs merchants for their generous help in making our annual Las Vegas Night a complete success .
 Colorado Springs Symphony I mJ # I * * Conduct Committee Nominates Candidates . Conduct Committee is conducting a symphony orchestra in Colorado Springs .
 Were it not for his high pitched scratchy voice Le Vieux Monsieur would have been more successful . The French singer's voice was more successful in France than the UK .
 Besides Berenger's ineptness, this unnaturalness inhibited and slowed down the play . Berengers' ineptness inhibited the play, but also slowed down play .
 RHINOCEROS is spottily successful; that in itself being erroneous . Though avoided by the laudable efforts of M Papillon, Daisy, and Duard C.U.'S. U.C.U.’s RHINocEROS .
 The setting for Act I was refreshing in a quaint, unpressed Chagalian way . The quilted setting for the play was refreshingly unpressressed .
 The sets for Acts II and III were, if anything, simple and functional . Though as with a sigh of accomplishment the set designer's efforts ended there .
 The costumes were neither spectacular nor inoffensive, and properly so . The costumes are neither spectacular or inoffensive .
 The Logicien may have appeared more absurd had his dress conformed with that of Le Vieux Monsieur . The only exception was the Logicien .
 Le Vieux Monsieur and Jean was either crude or too damn casual . The make-up on the other hand, of the pair was either too casual or crude .
 Jean's metamorphosis while it could have been visually hysterical, it seemed unnecessarily reserved and awkwardly allusive . Jean's transformation was awkward, awkward and awkward .
 Poor timing between the two pianos hampered the somewhat romanticized second movement, and it was not until Babin rallied with some exceptionally clean-cut counterpoint in the third movement fugue .
 The strings performed their simple tasks adequately throughout the concerto . The strings did not disappoint .
 The first of the four movements spent most of its time passing out solos all around the orchestra to a simple string accompaniment . The first movement of the symphony was played by the orchestra in four movements .
 The whole effect was somewhat disjointed and monotonous due to the many repetitions of the melodic material . The sound of the album was somewhat monotonial .
 The second movement held together a little better because of the persistent beat in the background . It ran into troubles with the orchestra stumbling over itself in the attempt to hang onto the tortuous rhythm .
 The short nocturnal third movement attempted to relv on orchestral color for its appeal . It would have become tedious if it had been any longer .
 The fourth movement began with some busy-sounding but fairly obvious counterpoint . The piece was composed of four pieces .
 An attempt toward the end to blend in some material from the third movement was rough and flared rather badly . An attempt to blend into the music was rough, flared badly .
 The writing for the two pianos was somewhat more interesting than most of the rest . Throughout the concerto the writing was more interesting .
 Airline played a Brazilian Dance by Milhaud and an Italian Polka by Rachmaninoff . The video was sent to the Denver airport in Colorado .
 The former is a stupid little piece with Latin rhythms and a melody, of sorts, in octaves . The former was a bit of a staid little piece .
 The Rachmaninoff sounded like bad ragtime, with an oom-pah bass and melody in thirds . It was like bad Ragtime with a bass bass and a melody of thirds .
 The orchestra alone then played New Dance by Wallingford Riegger and Vienna Life by Johann Strauss . The orchestra then played the two pieces by Strauss .
 The usual sore of concert humdrum was well performed except for some ragged entrances in the strings . It was well-performed but some of the strings were ragged .
 This performance was remarkably good on the whole, but suffered from occasional slippiness in the woodwind ensemble, unevenness in some of the string dynamics, and too fast a tempo .
 The Committee arranges for all Tuesday morning assemblies during the year . It takes care of publicity for these, and also introductions if necessary . The Committee also takes care for additional programs .
 Person interested in doing publicity should apply . Standard rates are paid for publicity work done for publicity .
 The Committee will notify new members of their decision . job is an important one and that it necessitates an unbiased attitude and fair judgment . The committee will notify members of the committee of its decision .
 If I am elected I shall fulfill these qualifications to the very best of my ability, and I have the time and the desire to serve in this office and see that decisions are made and carried out judiciously .
 The Student Conduct Committee is a self-governing body at Colorado College . Student conduct committee is one of the most self-governed bodies in the college's history .
 I feel the Committee to be a mark of maturity in its serious handling of student discipline . I feel this is a sign of maturity for the Committee .
 "I am quite interested in keeping the Committee an alive and meaningful function of student government. Its power and responsibility draw much respect from the student body," she says .
 A mockery can easily be made of discipline, says Row . Row warns against the danger of letting a body like the Committee de-energize and fall into misuse . Row. Row.
 As a member of the Committee on Undergraduate Life, I had the opportunity to discuss the importance and value of the Student Conduct Committee and to participate in the decision .
 The present members have made a good start in clarifying and defining the jurisdiction of the group and in publicizing the activities and decisions of the committee . I am interested in continuing their efforts. I am looking to continue their efforts .
 The discipline of student conduct must be handled with maturity and fairness by fellow students . The discipline must be dealt with with maturity, fairness by students .
 The Student Conduct Committee is an integral and necessary part of campus life . It is, I feel, a special honor to be nominated for it. The committee is a vital part of our campus life, she says .
 The Committee is responsible for making broadminded and just decisions in the best interests of the student body . The Committee will make broadminded, just decisions .
 If I am placed on this Committee, I shall strive to my utmost ability to be fair, thoughtful, and objective, and always to maintain the highest standards of which I am capable . BurTie Buffum.
 It's the function of this organization to try, and, if necessary, mete-out punishment to fellow students accused of misconduct in the college community . It jg . The function of the organization is to try and mete out punishment to those accused of wrongdoing .
 The member must be representative of the student body and must rise above personal fee . Student body member must rise over personal fee to function effectively .
 The Student Conduct Committee has exhibited effective handling of various matters on campus . The committee must continue to be a responsible body, the committee says .
 The Student Conduct Committee must continue to exhibit effective handling of student conduct questions on out campus . The committee must also continue to be able to answer students' questions .
 It is the intelligence and objectivity of decisions of tlie members of this committee that will determine the effectiveness of this group at CC. — John Levis .
 The Student Conduct Committee is one of the best chances for students to show their responsibility and integrity . Student conduct committee is a chance to show your responsibility, integrity .
 Each member of the committee must lay aside any personal prejudices and base his decision on rational and impartial consideration of the facts . Faced with the task of judging a fellow student, each member of a committee must be impartial .
 Only when the committee makes this type of decision will its judgments be accepted by students, administration, and community alike as the work of a group of adults interested in the welfare of the college community . — Walt Hecox .
 Colorado College's fifth annual Parents' Weekend will be held at Colorado College . Colorado College will host a variety of events at Colorado's campus .
 Norman Whitney, a well known Quaker thinker and speaker, will give an informal talk on the Society of Friends at Rastall Center on April 20th at 8:00m.
 April 20, 1962 College Young Republican Convention Held at CSU . CSU's small delegation to the convention .
 The delegates were jlax Power, who has acted as chairman of the League for the past year, Bill Hunter, Kay Anderson; and Marta Phipps, candidate [or secretary] Marta .
 After a short intermission, the delegations headed for a dinin one of CSU's tremendous banquet halls . The delegations went to a banquet hall .
 We were very privileged to have as speaker Mr Peter Dominick, Republican hopeful for United States Senate . Dominick is a former Republican candidate for the Senate .
 After brief discussions with candidates for State and National offices, the delegations returned to the motel, where they began holding caucuses .
 It was a late night, and most of us didn't get to bed until 4:00 or later . The caucuses seemed very successful, so none of us really minded the late hour . Most of us got to bed .
 Feeling little worse for the wear, began the following morning with coffee, centrated campaigning, and re coffee .
 Committee reports were passed, the convention began work on ;ries of resolutions . Committee reports and resolutions passed .
 After a few well fought battles, it was lime for the meeting to recess for neon . The meeting recessed for a few minutes .
 Mr Howard Probst, State RepresentaDavie Hammill, gubernatorial hopeful; and Mr Norman Enfield, candidate for State Treasnative of El Paso County . Norman Enfields is a candidate for state Treas native of the county . Mr Probst is a State Representative for
 Following a delicious meal and fascinating speeches, we resumed the meeting . The meeting was adjourned .
 The resolution which had been on the floor when recessed was finally passed er a long drawn out fight . The resolution was passed after a long and difficult fight .
 Next the agenda was the selection of the outstanding College Young Republican and Outstanding College the League . The winner of the award was selected by the League of the College Republicans .
 Percy Cambell of Western State College, and ViceChairman for the year was elected outstanding individual, and Colo"" State College was elected jnost outstanding College .
 Mr Keith Freeman from A.S.C. and past treasurer was elected vice chairman . Mr Freeman is the current chairman of the A.C.'s board of trustees .
 The first .ballot 'as almost an even split, with the Nominee having the most votes wly two ahead of the third' The first ballot was almost even split .
 This Sunday, after the 11:00 service at Shove Chapel, the Rastall Center Board cordially invites you to come to a coffee in the study .
 Riis coffee is to further unite the allege community on Easter Sunday and also to honor Dr. Riis . The coffee is intended to unite the alleged community and also honor the doctor . Riis Coffee is a popular coffee shop in New York City .
 Even though you may attend your **n church, we would like to entourage you to stop by for a cup of coffee . We would rather entourage yourself to a cup B coffee .
 According to convention rules, the third ballot included only the top two candidates . The third ballot was the third of the convention .
 Mr Bill Treverton of C.U. became treasurer . Mr Treverstton was an almost uncontested election .
 Ted Lupe officially closed the convention after a standing ovation of thanks for retiring officers . The convention was closed by Lupe .
 The Colorado College delegation headed for home . After promising support to the newly elected officers, the delegation headed back to campus .
 It had been an experience which those who had never before attended will never forget . It was the first time we had been invited to such an event in the UK .
 "We all felt that next year we would have tremendous support from many colleges. And though the campaign was unsuccessful, we all felt . next year, we would be having tremendous support," she said .
 All of us look forward to next year's convention with great expectation, and anticipate many opportunities to meet with and help all the members of the League .
 Wesley Posvar, chairman of the political science department at the U.S. Air Force Academy, was president of the organization during the past year . Posvar is the current chairman of political science .
 Applications for committees for Rastall Center Board will be open from April 20, through April 27 . RASTALL CENTER BOARD applications for committees are open April 20-27 .
 Senior and Junior Panhellenic Councils joined forces to hold a breakfast for fraternity and sorority housemothers . Housemother's breakfast was held for fraternities and sororities .
 JOHN FARR, winner of the ""Las Vegas Night"" ca and Lynn Hamilton, Miss Lady Luck check on dealer Dr. Dr. Lynn Hamilton . Dr. John Farr won the "LAS Vegas Night" tournament .
 Tareyton rVw/urt of i/A J'fmAAijcan <JoC<ije£&-KirTwanu — rJt/Vtvax/ it TIGER CINDERMAN JACK SCHWELLA fli< CC
 Jim Heiberger of Peoria, 111., is a junior who is developing, after only two years of playing, into a good player . Playing at third position is Jim Heibger, a junior at 111, who is also a junior .
 Alan Anisgard recently moved from Montana, where he was ranked third among the juniors . Number four is a freshman who was ranked No. 4 in the team .
 Dale Shaw, a junior from Greeley, and Harris Sherman, a senior from Denver, complete the ladder at fifth and sixth . Filling out the ladder is junior from Denver and senior from Greely .
 All of these positions are tentative; as the season progresses the ladder is certain to change . All of the positions are provisional, as are those of the players on the ladder .
 There are several players, notably Tom Etheridge, a freshman from El Paso, Tex., Dave Helms and Bob Pittaway, a junior from Cambridge, Mass., who may move up as the season progresses .
 Wednesday, CC played the Air Force Academy, and will have two matches tomorrow, Saturday, Saturday . CC played New Mexico Highlands in the morning and Colorado State College in the afternoon .
 Both matches are at the Monument Park courts and spectators are welcome . Both matches will be held at Monument Park .
 Colorado College golf team dominated by six freshmen defeated the Colorado School of Mines golf team 9% to % at the Broadmoor Golf Club .
 Schultz, Jim, tied McKennon Ciadahy and SchulU won the foursome Nichols. Nichols.
 Firmine, Rick, defeated Quick 2 and 1 Nichols and Firmine won the foursome J and 3 . Firmine and Nichols also defeated Quick, Rick and Nichols in foursome foursome .
 Tigers were only able to take three firsts -- one of these was a disputed tie in the 440 . Tigers only managed to take one of the firsts, one of which was disputed . Tigers were unable to take any of the other firsts .
 Four days later, Colorado College atoned for this lapse by romping over Western State . Colorado College defeated Western State 4-2 in the same game .
 Ed Loosli with three first and Tony McGinnis with two first and two firsts . Ed Loisli led by three firsts and two seconds for the Lions .
 Tony McGinnis is beginning to realize his potential as he took the one and two mile runs in 4:50 and 10:52 respectively . He ran the one mile and the two mile in four minutes and 10 minutes .
 Dave Smith was followed closely across the wire in each of these races by Dave Smith . Dave Smith won each of the three races .
 Jack Schwella took the pole vault, Dave Krell, the discuss, and Bruce Boyd, the broad jump, respectively . CC had an impressive day in the field events . The team also won the discuss and broad jump .
 Last year CC"" beat CSC by 9 points and the teams are about as evenly matched again this year; so it should certainly be worth coming out to see . Last year CSC won the game 9 points .
 Colorado College's 1962 Tournament of Cycles will be held April 28 at the Garden of the Gods . The event will have several new features that should make it even greater spectacle than last year's .
 Tournament of Cycles to include all bicycles with three-speeds or less . First race for junkies, second race for bikes with three speeds or less, while final event for all bicycles is open to all .
 The first two events will be one-lap races over the two and one-half mile course . The third will be a three-lap, seven and a half mile race . The first race will be three-laps over a two-and-one-half-mile course
 Beginning this year, the first two races will begin with special LeMans starts . The cyclists will dash across the width of the road to their bicycles and begin the race .
 Campus organization or group of people may enter one or more three-man teams . Overall team prize will be added to the individual winner's trophies .
 The winning team will be the team with the lowest number of points, and the points are the sum of the numerical position in which each team member finishes . The points will be summed up by the team's numerical position each player finishes .
 Before each race, team members must identify themselves as such to the race registrars .
 Each competitor should pay the 50 cent entry fee to the race registrar when the bicycle are lined up before an event . The fee should be paid by the registrar at the start of the event .
 The first race begins at 1:30 m. A truck to carry competitors' bicycles to and from the Garden of the Gods will leave in front of Rastall at 12:30 a.m.
 Some transportation will be furnished for spectators and competitors to and from the event . Also, some transportation is provided .
 The course will be described at the meeting for all competitors scheduled for 7:30 m„ April 24, in the WES room .
 Those who plan to participate in the tournament are advised to register at the Rastall Center desk as soon as possible . Competitors in the first two races will be lined in the order of their registration .
 A girl taking thai from the dining room will be forced to pay for the amount she took .
 These t\v boys have been placed on disciplinary probation until the end of the semester . The boys were placed on the probation .
 Disciplinary proha. tiou means that if they are in. volved in one more incident of inisconduct, they will automatically . automatically h L . suspended pending a hearing of the council . If they are found guilty of misconduct, they can be suspended indefinitely .
 Colorado College baseball team has a heavy week of practice before starting the regular baseball schedule . Colorado College Baseball Team Opens Schedule this week .
 Tigris opened their scheule against the Air Force Academy Falcons at Memorial Field on Wednesday April 18 . The Tigris will face the Falcons in their opening game of the season .
 Coach Carle has been driving the team all week because the players have had only a short week anil a half following spring vacation to prepare for the clash with the Falcons . The players have only had only one week and a half of the spring vacation .
 The Tigers will be at least two deep in every position, coach says . Tigers will stand five deep on the mound, Carle says .
 Barry Anthony, Jeff Sauer, Gary Sparkman, Alex Yank-Yank-itch, and Don Jorgensen. Pitchers: Barry Anthony . Jeff . Sauer . Jeff. Sauer. Gary Sparkmen, Alex . Alex . Yankmitch . Don J
 Joe Berquist, Larry Bowman, Gus Hart, Reno Van Putten, and Farrell Thompson are on the panel . The panel is comprised of seven men and women .
 Finally the complicated basketball situation in Slocum Hall has cleared . Finally the basketball situation has cleared. S NTRAMURAL: Finally, the situation is over .
 Fourth West and third South play for the championship . Third North and fourth West will play for third place . Fourth West, third South and third West play for championship .
 These final matches were reached after a number of extremely close games . The final matches will be played in a series of close-fought games .
 Jim Hanks' 13-point lead in the first half of the Golden Globes . Hanks was bold enough to bold himself up to 13 points .
 On the issue of girls' dorm hours, Mr Power feels that ASCC should gather information from other schools that have made, or have tried to make adjustments, to see what their problems were .
 The problems and possibilities concerning the proposed 3. beer >r should also be investigated . The opinions of both students and ■ents should be considered, and way in which other schools have contended with this type of issue should he investigated .
 To improve ASCC, Mr Power feels that a committee similar to the newly formed social coordinating committee should be created to coordinate non-social activities such as coffee hours .
 Communications between ASCC and the student body could be improved by letting people know ■ho the chairmen of the various jmmittees are and how to get in touch with them . More extensive coverage in the TIGER of ASCC meetings and important events going on in the committees .
 ASCC, Mr Power feels, should take the responsibility to make the students more alive and alert . ASCC should take responsibility to build school spit-it .
 This may be accomplished by holding pep rallies in support of the athletic teams, but more important, by making students aware of the growth of the school and the influence they have on the direction in which this growth will take .
 This identifies the student body with the needs of CC — its objectives and where it is going . This identifies student body . CC identifies the needs and objectives of CC . CC students will be able to learn more about their experiences .
 Mr Power feels that athletics are an important part of the liberal arts atmosphere . Mr Power also feels that they are important to the Liberal Arts .
 Care must be taken to see that CC'ers are not thrown into competition -with semi-professionals . CC's are the basis for building a certain amount of school spirit .
 All students interested in applying for Rastall Center committees should turn in applications by 5:00 today .
 Marion McClaughry will be in charge of coffee hours put on by the Cultural Affairs Committee . Dave Holdorf will be responsible for special events in the area of recreation . Sue Moore will take charge of the craft shop and its activities. Sue Moore is responsible for Rastall Center's
 There will be a Friday Afternoon Club in the Hub at 4:45 .
 This is a special PAC for Parents' Weekend, so bring your folks and join the fun . This is the first time we've seen a PAC for parents' Weekend .
 The constitution has been very effectively revised— now it's time to move, says President Obama . The constitution was effectively revised, says Obama .
 Mr Chase firmly believes that the president should take stands on the various issues present now, and the ones that will come up next year . Mr Chase: "President should take a stand on the issues present and future."
 By doing this, he feels people will either get behind him, or else get mad, he said . He said he hopes people will support him and not get mad .
 Mr Chase feels that a body similar to the Cabinet of the United States President would be a valuable addition to the workings of student government . Mr Chase says a body like that of the U.S. President's Cabinet would be valuable addition .
 The people on this ""cabinet"" would have nothing other than this to do with ASCC, but would be representatives of the various factions of student thought on campus . The people would be representative of various factions on campus, not ASCC .
 Mr Chase would meet with Mr Chase say once a week, so that each would know what the other was doing .
 In 1 this way, Mr Chase feels, communications between ASCC and the student would be greatly improved . Mr Chase says ASCC would be better to communicate with students .
 Mr Chase would submit weekly reports to the TIGER, not only concerning what issues were being discussed, but also stating how he feels about these issues, and campus activity in general . Also along the line of improvement of communications, Mr Chase .
 Mr Chase feels that school and group' participation in off-campus events should be encouraged .
 On the question of girls' dorm hours, Mr Chase wonders why, if they would like a senior honors dorm, the upperclasswomen in Loomis voted themselves off the honor system .
 He is definitely in favor of a 3.0 beer parlor, and doesn't see why it should detract from Rastall Center activities . He says he doesn't think it will detract from activities at the center .
 He feels that the activities of Rastall Center should all be coordinated under ASCC leadership . The activities of the center should also be coordinated by ASCC .
 Mr Chase feels he would be an effective leader, especially that in ASCC, Mr Chase said .
 "Because of his experience on various committees, he knows whom he can count on to work," he says . "I'm not afraid to work. Because of my experience, I know whom I can trust," he adds .
 Don't miss the Tournament of Cycles, Saturday, April 28, in the Garden of the Gods . Linda Rood Old Servant Lucy Smith is the winner of the Tournament .
 The Experimental Theater's production of Pelleas and Melisande is on Broadway at the Experimental Theater in New York .
 The older generation of wisdom with ""both feet on the ground,"" will be acted by Margaret Newman and Jay Heminway . Margaret Newman will lead the show .
 Linda Rood was cast as Yniold. the frightened little boy, full of dream and unexplainable anguish . Linda was cast in the original version of the show .
 Lucy Smith, Patricia Sohl, and Susan Auer share a servant scene, objectively viewing the horrible events in Arkel's castle . Auer and Smith share the scene .
 When Melisande has fulfilled her destiny, Henry English as the Physician announces her departure . Henry English is the physician at the end of the play .
 Song Fest will be held tonight at 8:15 in Shove Memorial Chapel as a part of Parent's Weekend activities . Song Fest is part of parent's weekend activities .
 This dance is designed to coincide with Parents' Weekend, and all parents will be welcome . This dance will be held at the end of the weekend .
 Highlights of the dance will be the tapping of 14 sophomores and juniors into Blue Key and crowning of the queen who will reign . Refreshments will be served, and dancing will be from 9 to 1.
 Tickets are available from all Blue Key members and at the Rastall Center desk through Saturday afternoon . Tickets for the show are available for Blue Key membership .
 The Colorado College Junior Panhellic has been reorganized for the second semester . It is now composed of delegates from each of the new sorority pledge classes .
 Debbie West, Delta Gamma, president; Bev Carrington, Kappa Alpha Theta, vice president; Jane Hilton, Gamma Phi Beta, secretary, . and Norma Parker, Kappa Kappa Gamma, treasurer . Debbie West is Delta Gamma's president . Bev . Carrington is Kappa
 Junior Panhellic is to foster cooperation among pledge classes through exchange of ideas and suggestions . The main purpose of the program is to encourage cooperation among Pledge classes . The program is designed to foster ideas and ideas .
 It serves as a pledge counselling body and cooperates with Senior Panhellic in campus service . It is also a pledge counsellor body .
 Junior Panhellic plans an oncampus car wash for some weekend in the near future . The event will take place on campus at the end of the weekend .
 CC Hosts Open House For Parents Weekend . The student body, faculty, and administration extend a most sincere welcome .
 It is our hope that these activities, supplemented by the numerous places of interest in and around Colorado Springs, will provide a most rewarding experience . Colorado Springs is a tourist destination for the first time .
 Scheduled activities will begin this afternoon with a formal open house for all from 3 to 5. The event will be held at 3 p.m.
 The dorms, fraternity houses and sorority houses will welcome your visit . Visit the dorms and sororority houses in the U.S.
 Parents are also cordially invited to attend the FAC at 4:46 in the Hub at Rastall Center .
 If you don't know how to do the ""twist"" and the ""UT,"" or you have never seen the ""mashed potatoe,"" please come . Please come to the show .
 Friday evening, Greek organizations on campus will participate in a songfest . The event will be held in honor of students and their families .
 At 2:15 a hike will be led by Mr Ormes, the Slocum Hall Intramurals will begin, and the ""Tournament of Cycles and Junkie Classic"" will get underway . The event will take place at 2:30pm .
 The Parent, Faculty, Student Dinner will start the evening's activities at 6:15 in Rastall Center .
 The best acts from the CC Variety Show will be repeated especially for our visitors in Perkins Hall at the dinner . The show will be shown at Perkins Hall for visitors .
 Everyone is invited to attend the Blue Key Dance at 0:00 in Bemis-Taylor Dining Hall . The Blue Key dance will be held at the end of the evening .
 Sunday breakfast from 8-10 in the Garden of the Gods will be held in the magnificent Garden of The Gods .
 The Sunday morning service will be held at 11 in Shove Chapel as usual . The service will take place at 11 a.m. Sunday morning .
 The registration desk also can provide visitors with many suggestions of places to nee and things to do in Colorado Springs if the activities on campus don't occupy the time .
 Two art students from the Colorado College Colorado Springs Fine Arts Center Art School have been awarded prizes in the seventh annual Colorado Inter-collegiate Art Exhibit . Art students take honors in Colorado College's seventh annual show .
 The ""Best of Show" award went to Dean Byerly for his untitled steel sculpture . The ""best of Show"" award went on to go on to win the Best of Show .
 This is the second successive year that a Colorado College-Fine Arts Center Art School student has won this award . The award was given to the Colorado College Fine Arts Center art school student .
 Byerly, a resident of Liberal, Kansas, has been studying at the Art Center for the past year . He has been in the art center for a year and is studying in Kansas .
 It started with the intention of running a thud candidate for ASCC president, perhaps on a write-in campaign . It was intended to run a candidate for the ASCC presidency, perhaps even on a 'thud candidate'
 A nucleus of students involved is pressing for the formation of a college political party . This has been ruled unconstitutional, so a nucleus of the students involved are pressing for a new party .
 Perhaps this movement will wither from apathy, perhaps it will mushroom — it's too early to talk . Perhaps this is too soon to talk. Perhaps, perhaps this is the beginning of a movement that will mushroom .
 Such a political party would be a vital addition to campus government, the TIGER welcomes it . The party is a key part of campus government .
 Less than five years ago CC had a party system in active student government . The party system died, not a violent death, but a gradual one, in recent years .
 The time is now ripe — during this spring's elections — for a resurrection of the Democratic Party . The time should be ripe for a revival of the U.S. House of Representatives .
 The most obvious advantage would be a sounding board on campus affairs . The university would like to have a strong voice in campus affairs, according to the president .
 It is extremely difficult for members of ASCC to continueallv spawn new ideas concerning CC students . ASCC members are extremely difficult to continue to spawn ideas about students .
 Members of the ASCC Executive Council should be representatives of the student body . ASCC is a student body body that represents students . The student body should be represented by the students of the university .
 In the past there have been very few interested (interested enough to voice opinions) students to turn to . However, in the past few students have turned to students to voice their opinions .
 Attendance at class meetings and the regular Monday meetings of ASCC has been undeniably poor . Attendance has been extremely low at ASCC meetings .
 Only freshmen have made an attempt at seeking participation in meetings, only freshmen . Attendance is dwindling as the year progresses, the school says .
 One interested party or group of students could do much to alleviate this vacuum of interest . Two parties could eliminate it by providing effective presentation of differing views on vital questions to ASCC council members .
 The second, and most important currently, would be the creation of interest in campus elections, and the drawing up of platforms for those elections . Campus elections would also be the focus of campus elections .
 They have also objected that neither Mr Power nor Mr Chase have made any specific proposals for next year . They say Mr Power and Chase have not made specific proposals .
 The fault in this area lies mostly with the CC students and not with the candidates . And yet, the fault in the area lies mainly with the students, not with candidates .
 The suggested candidates for writein did not. They were interested enough and had enough foresight to petition . They were the ones interested enough to petition for the writein .
 This sort of presentation cannot be very dynamic unless the candidates know what CC students want . The candidates must know what students want. This is not the first time they have been asked to present .
 "Hopefully a genuine interest in the campus rather than an underlying affinity for controversy at any cost is the basis for the recent interest," says the author of the book .
 The Finance Committee shall be composed of two members of the Executive Council and the Treasurer of ASCC who hall serve as chairman . ASCC is the largest body of the organization in the world .
 The Finance Committee shall require itemized budgets from all student organizations that apply to the Executive Council for funds . Student organizations qualify for funds under Article IV Section 5 of the Constitution .
 The primary consideration of the Finance Committee in the budget hearings shall be the number of students to be benefited by an appropriation . The committee's primary consideration is to determine how many students will benefit from the appropriation .
 The Publications Board shall be composed of . . . and the Editor and Business Manager or Co-Editors of the Kinnikinnik . The Publications board shall be made up of . the Editor, Business Manager and Business .
 The Enthusiasm Committee shall be composed of two members of the Executive Council; one who shall serve as chairman and the chairman of the Athletic Committee . The head cheerleader is a representative of Blue Kay, the presidents of the various Pep organizations (Black and Gold, Tiger Club, Tig
 Committee to act as a coordinating body for the various organizations represented on the committee .
 To provide direction and incentive and the plan, as a committee, combined functions in which all or several pep organizations would participate . The committee would provide direction, incentive and plan to provide direction .
 To direct responsibility and encourage students to actively support any events that are designed to stimulate sudent interest, both wihin and outside the realm of athletics .
 Freshman Week Committee is formed after the election of the New Executive Council each Spring . Committee is held by the chairman of the Enthusiasm Committee presiding .
 Committee will work with Admissions Office and the Administraton of the College n setting up and varrying out Freshman Orientation Week . Committee will be working with the Admissions office .
 Black & Gold and Tiger Club working in conjunction with the up per classmen and the sophomores . It will be the responsibility of this special committee to provide an agitation period after Orientation Week which will be under the direction of the Black and Gold & Tiger Club .
 To periodically re-examine the constitutions of the pep organizations under the jurisdiction of this committee as a means to see that these organizations are making a continual effort to function properly and to strive .
 The Assemblies Committee shall be composed of three members from the faculty, six students-at-large, one member from the Rastall Center Board, and one member of the Executive Council who shall serve as chairman .
 Membership of the six students-at-large will be done through applications and selection will be at the discretion of the old committee . Selection will be made through applications .
 One assembly each month shall be set aside for class meetings which will be at the discretion of the chairman . The chairman of the school will be responsible for the outcome of the meetings .
 The Communications Committee shall be composed of the Secretary of the Executive Council who shall serve as chairman, the editor of the Tiger and one student-at-large chosen by the chairman . The committee will also be selected by the secretary of the executive council .
 To inform the student body at large about pertinent issues discussed in the Executive Council and faculty meetings . To inform students of pertinent issues, the executive council will meet with faculty and staff .
 To compile by the second week of May an annual summary report of the concerns and achievements of the various ASCC Committees and the accomplishments and direction taken by the Executive Council . The ASCC Executive Council will report by the end of May .
 The Constitution Committee shall be composed of two members of the Executive Council, one who shall serve as chairman, the editor of the Tiger, and a member from each class . The committee will also be made up of members of each class of the executive council .
 The Student Academic Committee shall be composed of one member of the Executive Council who shall serve as chairman, one student member from each departmental division, one freshman and sophomore, and a member from the faculty curriculum committee . The committee will be chosen at the discretion of the chairman .
 To serve as an intermediary body between faculty and students, advise the faculty and administration about course programs that students have constructively criticized .
 To propject an interest to the student body on academic issues, keeping them correctly informed . No change to the school system .
 Shove Chapel Parents' Weekend Su day, April 29 'Mary — the Blessed Serm> Blessed Mother' Shove chapel parents' weekend .
 There will be a Parents' Weekend Service in Shove Chapel this coming Sunday morning .
 The triumphant events of Easter are past, and the church has celebrated the victory over sin and death wrought by Jesus Christ . This Easter is a time to celebrate the victory of sin over sin .
 In the figure of Mary, the mother of Jesus, we see an example of one who humbly lived by the Word of God spoken to her through her own Son . We see a example of a humbly humbled woman who lived by her own Word .
 On this Parents' Weekend, and with Mothers' Day fast approaching, it was thought appropriate to speak about the mother of Christ .
 It appears to the preacher that certain serctions of the church have over-emphasized the importance of Mary, and that other sections of church have not given her enough attention and importance .
 She is an example to us of one who put first things first and of one . One who acted as an agent of the will of God in the world, she said .
 He was appointed for a one-year term at the 13th annual meeting of the conference held in Chicago .
 He was a teacher and public school administrator in Illinois and San Francisco . He joined the faculty at Colorado College as an assistant professor in 1951 .
 Art School and FAG Exhibit Student Work during the month of May . Art School of Colorado College and Fine Arts Center will exhibit current student works .
 May 3, 1 8:00 to 10:00 at the Fine Arts Center to which every person is invited . May 3 is May 3 at 8pm to 10pm .
 Colorado Coir lege has again won the best of show award in competition wit"" the 12 leading colleges and universities in the state . The exhibition was held at the University of Colorado .
 CC won the top award last year when it submitted entries to the Intercoms' iate Exhibition for the first time . CC won an award for its entries in Intercom's iate exhibition for first time last year .
 Dean Byerly was gi ven the leading award for his sculpture, and Sally Snead won second prize in painting . This year's winners include Dean Byeerly, who won the sculpture award .
 Countless others are the authors of articles in magazines, and scientific and scholarly journals . Countless other writers of articles have written in magazines and scientific journals .
 The library has in its shelves nearly 70 books written by the 2f> members of the faculty ""and administration ""and . administration .
 Six of these are by professors emeriti who spend a part of their time on the campus . Six of this are by professor emeriti . Six professors emerititi spend a lot of time on campus .
 180,000 books scheduled to be moved into the college's new $1,250,000 Charles Learning Tutt Library in the near future . The library is set to be expanded to accommodate 180,500 books and more .
 Prof. Emeritus of physics Paul E Boucher, Prof. emeritus of politics Paul E . Boucher . Edith Brahall, Edith . Brahall and Prof. Paul E. Boucher were also present at the event .
 Prof. J Glenn Gray of the philosophy department and Assistant Librarian Alexander F Karoiyi of the University of Cambridge . Prof. Glenn Gray is the author of the book, which was published in 2007 .
 Dr. Emeritus of history Carroll B Malone, Librarian Ellsworth G Mason, Mr George Claremont Professor To Visit CG Campus Dr. Dr. Claremont will visit CG Campus . Dr. Malone is a professor of history at the CG Campus in California .
 Robert Meyner, Associate Professor of Ethics at Claremont Men's College, California, will visit the Colorado College campus on Tuesday, May 1 . He will be a guest at Colorado College, Colorado .
 He has taken part in a special study of the place of a College Church on the campus of the Pomona group of colleges, sponsored by the Danforth Foundation .
 This book is a very exciting and stimulating discussion of this subject . The book is available on Amazon.com.com .
 Light refreshments will be served from 3:30 to 4:00 a.m. Room, Rastall Center . The event will be held at the center of the center's annual conference .
 Becker's Radiator & Body Shop is located at 16 E Bijou St. Body S Fender Repairing and Painting is located on the corner of the street .
 International Relations Club of Colorado College will discuss the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development on May 3rd .
 He served on the staff of the LITERARY DIGEST and PATHFINDER Magazine . In 1939, he was director of the Princeton Listening Center, which was a project for the reception of foreign radio broadcasts .
 From 1941 to 1943 he served as assistant to the director of the Foreign Broadcast Intelligence Service of the Federal Communications Commission in Washington .
 During the war, Mr Graves served with the United States Navy . He was assigned to the Office of Strategic Services as an operational planning officer .
 He joined the staff of the Bank in July 1950 and was appointed Director of Information on November 21 of that year . He joined from July 1950 .
 Intemational Bank is one of the specialized agencies of the United Nations . It was organized in 1944 and was one of its most specialized agencies .
 Each member state subscribes to the stock of the Bank for an amount based on its wealth and trade . Most of the nations of the world are members, and each member state pays for membership .
 The Bank loans funds for development and other projects in member states . The Bank is based in the United States .
 One example of a project using Bank funds is the Damodar Valley Corporation in India, a development similar to the TVA .
 This project has stimulated many kinds of private and local enterprise, and the new wealth it has created raises the living standards of large masses of people . The new wealth has raised the living standard of many people, says the author of the book .
 Last week's TIGER carried a review by Joseph Wilcox of the final symphony concert, with the well known pianists, Vronsky and Babin, as soloists .
 "I believe this review has limited validity, because the writer appears to be an extremist in matters of musical taste and judgment," says the reviewer .
 Wilcox gives his own, mostly negative account of the concert without reporting the very enthusiastic reaction of the audience . Mr Wilcox also fails to report the audience's enthusiastic reaction .
 The tone of the review does not reflect the opinions and attitudes of the music faculty . Finally, I wish to emphasize that the tone is that of the staff .
 It reflects only the fact that we do believe in freedom of expression and that we welcome and encourage independent thinking . It reflects that we believe in free speech and we welcome independent thinking, the BBC says .
 Mr Wilcox is a junior music major with undeniable talent as a composer of experimental, ""avante garde"" tendencies .
 His originality and intellectual independence are valuable assets for artistic selfexpression, but limit his qualifications as a music critic . He says his originality is valuable assets, but his intellectual independence limits his qualifications for a critic .
 "He is forced to measure and evaluate by his own standards, with all his strong personal prejudices, likes and dislikes, which are rather unique," he says .
 The Bach concerto with which the symphony program opened opened is Bach's first solo concerto . "I have performed several times" Bach's "Bach concerto" has been played by the orchestra .
 With the exception of a minor slip in the beginning (which can happen to every artist) I found the performance delightful and highly artistic .
 Babin's concerto for two pianos and orchestra is 'brilliantly written work with deep insight into this complicated medium'
 "It employs a moderately modern idiom, unmistakably contemporary, and very effective," says the author .
 It is a composition which speaks to heart, soul and emotions rather than to the brain . It's a composition that speaks to the heart and emotions, rather than the brain, it's said .
 The result of the performance was a near-ovation for Mr Babin, something that does not happen often to contemporary composers . The result was the performance of the composer's first piece, which he has since composed .
 Mr Eisenberg and the orchestra deserve much praise for staying together in the extremely difficult second movement . The orchestra deserves much praise from the composer .
 A movement to run a write-in campaign for a third party in the election of ASCC president failed, not bocause enthusiasm and support were lacking, but because such a move is not sanctioned by the ASCC .
 This movement arose from the fnct that at Inst some students are trying to meet the problems of apathy and the lack of objective leadership on campus head on . Inst students say they want to meet these problems head on. This movement is a movement that arose from a discussion of the lack
 All previous talk of combating apathy and certain ""isolationist" tendencies of various campus groups has fallen aside . But ail that is spoken of above will fall by the way much like all previous talk has fallen away .
 The solution lies in only one path, namely, to make ASCC the effective representative organ of the entire campus that it should and must be . ASCC should be an effective representative of the campus, rather than a representative of campus .
 ASCC cannot do this without the support of and the recognition of its legitimate powers by all the various ""individual interest" groups on campus . ASCC will not be able to continue to run ASCC without recognition from all the other students .
 Each group must be represented on ASCC and must submit to the complete ruling of ASCC on all-campus matters . But each group must therefore submit to ASCC's complete ruling on all campus matters .
 First, there would be a total reorganization of ASCC to include more organizations on the campus . First, the reorganization would include more groups on campus .
 This would allow more divergent groups to meet on equal grounds to discuss common problems . Second, this would allow them to meet more diverging groups to discuss problems .
 The president of ASCC must .be recognized by the students and faculty and administration as the head of the student body . Lastly, the president of the ASCC should . be recognized by . students .
 It may be argued that certain changes in the ASCC constitution have laid the ground work for all that has been said above . The ASCC has been criticised for its constitution changes .
 It will unfold all over campus because students are acting on what they say and feel, not just talking . Students will be acting on their feelings and actions, not talking, says CNN.com's Rob Greene .
 It is a complete lack of faith in democratic principles when only one man runs for the office of treasurer of the student body . Only one man ran for the position of treasurer .
 Let's get out and vote, but be sure you vote for the man of issues, not face and charm . Let's vote for a man of character, strength and leadership, not a face and charisma .
 Nothing can be done about the presidency, but be sure to follow through in the other positions . Follows through in other positions, including the presidency .
 Jim Knapp has been trying to enter the ASCC presidential election . Knapp is a member of the American College of Design and Design Designate .
 The precise subject concerns the disunity and resulting limited interest In the college as a whole, and the possible solution of some of these limitations . In the future, the college will be able to find a solution to some of its limitations .
 The term segregation may be used because of the apparent parallels of ignorance and bigotry which cause both racial and group differences . Segregation may also be seen as a sign of ignorance or bigotry .
 On Sunday night a meeting was organized in order to initiate an understanding between antagonistic individuals . The meeting was held in an attempt to start an understanding .
 Present at the meeting were Myles Hopper, Harris Sherman, Mike Grace, John Stickney, John Simus, Wayne Deutscher, Jerry Hillhouse, and Al Church . The meeting was also attended by Harris Sherman .
 The meeting initially was to dispell some of the misunderstandings between the individuals and to create a common basis of communication . The meeting was initially intended to dispelling some misunderstandings .
 As the meeting progressed and the individuals exuressed their personal opinions, it was clear that an understanding and a healthy respect for other views was reached .
 The unanimity of feeling was astounding, particularly considering the preconceived ideas of the participants . "The unanimity was astounding," the author says .
 A true educational process and experience had taken place and the group began to feel that it might be to the good to have other such discussions to promote the understanding of opposing views .
 The conclusion was that groups, whether loosely or tightly organized, were the main reason for segregation and restriction of communication . Group groups were the reason for the segregation, the study found .
 The feeling was that these groups tended to think that they thought that they were more important than the college as a whole . The feeling of these groups was that they had more important to the college .
 "An antagonistic segregation occurs without either of the individuals attempting to understand one another," says author .
 The discussion next led to specifically how this spirit and interest in communication could be initiated .
 An eventually proposed solution was to possibly run a candidate or candidates for ASCC positions . The ASCC has been criticized for not running candidates for the position .
 Candidates would run on specific platforms which would cause discussion among individuals of divergent views . These candidates would run for specific platforms . Candidates will run on platforms that would cause debate among people with divergent opinions .
 Campus factions would begin to understand one another more fully, and could begin to benefit from, rather than restrict, each other . Thus diverse campus factions would benefit from each other more fully .
 Twenty Colorado College students conduct a survey of the political history and attitude toward politics of elected county officials, state representatives, and county party chairmen in eight Colorado counties .
 CC students are interviewing officials in El Paso, Lincoln, Otero, Huerfano, Custer, Crowley, Teller, and Pueblo counties . The students are working under the direction of political science professor Glenn E Brooks .
 Colorado College is one of five colleges and universities in the state conducting the state-wide survey . The Rocky Mountain Center for Education in Politics is conducting the survey .
 The survey is designed to provide political scientists with raw material for possible research, and to give the students experience in the field of practiced politics . The survey was designed to give political scientists the raw material to possible research .
 Colorado College students participating in the semester-long project are members of Professor Brooks' course in State and Local Goverment .
 Results of the survey will be reported by Professor Brooks at the May 5 meeting of the Rocky Mountain Social Science Association at Ft. Ft. Mesa .
 Students are asking questions concerning education, income, how interest in politics was developed, offices held, extent of political party activity, and future in politics . The students are asking for answers concerning education and income .
 The Colorado College students are working together in four and five-man teams . The students are at Colorado College in Colorado .
 Students in Custer and Crowley Counties are Jane Dawson, Gerald Dorsey, DeCourcey Graham, William B Greeley, II, and Traer Sulley . Students in Crowley and Custer Counties will be students in the fall .
 In Otero and Huerfano Counties are Mary C Bardone, Nan B Burroughs, Sylvia J Buffam, and Mary E Jones . Nan Burrough, Sylvia Buffam and Mary J Jones are also in the county .
 Five students carrying out the study in Teller and Pueblo Counties are John Bluck, Rebecca Dunbar, Ann T Herlihy, William J Hybl, and John G Levity .
 All the members of the discussion knew of him and therefore his name was presented as a dissenting or protest candidate . All the . members of . the . discussion knew . of him, therefore his . name was . presented as . a dissenting . candidate .
 The purpose was to create more interest in the election and thereby motivate differing individuals to discuss issues . The purpose of the event was to encourage people to vote for the president .
 If his running or attempted write-in could or would not be successful in itself, at least it would arouse some interest and controversy moving towards campus unity . — Al Church. Church .
 International Settlements Through International Law by Max S Power . Dr. Power: "International Settlements through International Law"
 His talk was liberally interspersed with specific examples and even Biblical references . His talk began by distinguishing two kinds of disputes .
 Law is the "practical translation of the morals, customs, and experiences of human beings" into workable principles, Dr. Dr. John Defterios says .
 A dispute involving both political and legal questions can be much more easily solved if the legal issues are settled first by legal means and the political issues are then solved by political means . He went on to say that such a dispute can be easily solved by both legal and political issues .
 Larson contended that there are at least four reasons why this approach can be more effective . Larson: There are four reasons that this approach is more effective. Larson: It's a good idea to use the same approach as the other .
 The second reason is that a party certain of its legal rights in a dispute is not going to give in to political attempts to take away those rights . The parties are certain of their legal rights and will not give in on political efforts to take them away .
 The parties realize that if the negotiations fail there will be an authoritative decision on the merits . The third reason is that negotiations over present rights will be more serious and productive .
 Larson went on to point out that we now have the building blocks of an international legal system . Larson: We now have a building block of a global legal system. Larson: It's a good step forward for the future of the world .
 The last of these is currently the object of much research on the part of Dr. Dr. John Defterios of the U.S.
 The second basis for international law is the machinery to apply that law . The machinery is the basis for applying that law, the second basis is the law itself .
 Larson said the International Court of Justice at the Hague presently provides that machinery . Larson said that the Hague is providing that machinery. Larson said he hopes the court will be able to hear the case .
 It has 15 distinguished jurists, including many of the world's leading international lawyers .
 Larson assured the audience that the influx of Communists on the court is negligible . Larson: "The influx of Communist Communists is negligible"
 He contended that this is entirely possible and pointed to a number of historical examples to back up his statement .
 Many nations have not accepted the jurisdiction of the world court, Larson said .
 Larson launched on a convincing argument for the repeal of our Connally Ammendment . Larson says the amendment was repealed by a repeal of the law . Larson: "It's a good idea to repeal the law"
 Larson says all treaties should include "compromissory clauses" in which parties to the treaty agree that disputes about the treaty will be referred to the World Court . Larson: All treaties should have 'compromisory clauses' in which the parties agree they will refer disputes to the
 Restaurant Motel de Ville 1411 South Nevada MEIrose 4-8848 Colorado Springs, Colo. MeIrose is located in Colorado Springs .
 The operetta is a parody of English court life with its ridiculous etiquette and its outmoded laws . But actually, it's a parody . The play is set in London, England, with a title for everyone ("Lord High Everything Else")
 Yum-Yum is plighted to KoKo, albeit against her will . It seems, however, that she is plighting to the KoKo .
 As things begin to brighten, and it seems that Nanki-Poo and YumYum will be united, an ugly hag appears named Katisha (Edalyn Berger), who claims her ""purgeved lover,"" NankiPoo .
 The members of the Tiger Club chose those who will serve as officers for the coming year . 37 PEAK AVENUE Tigers Elect in a recent election .
 Gretchen Feroe, president; Buffie Buffum. vice-president; Kathy Berthrong, secretary; Karen Bessesen, treasurer; Nancy Bowers, publicity chairman . Isabel Williams, Campus Chest chairman; and Matry Breternitz, order chairman .
 To find out the ingenious end to this fast moving operetta, you may re-read a more complete synopsis . We recommend attending the Fine Arts Center production, for . attending the production .
 Professor Paul Kutsche of the Colorado College sociology and anthropology department has received a $1,000 grant from the American Philosophical Society . Kutsche has received the grant for travel, study funds .
 The grant will be used for travel in compiling a complete annotated bibliography on the Cherokee Indians . The grant is used to travel to compile a bibliographical bibliography .
 The American Philosophical grant supplements a faculty research grant given by Colorado College . The grant is funded by the college .
 He taught anthropology at Franklin and Marshall College . Previous to that he was a newsman with United Press in London, England . He was a reporter for United Press .
 He earned his PhD at the Unievrsity of Pennsylvania and bachelor's and master's degrees at Harvard and Michigan .
 Tournament of Cycles Saturday, April 28 Patronize TIGER Advertisers . All TYPES ALTERATIONS AND REPAIRS 10% CASH AND CARRY 1171/ E..t Cell.
 Colorado college Tiger Tiger Thinclads travel to Golden For RMC Relays . CC's trackmen make a hopeful bid for Conference honors Saturday .
 Coach Frank Flood is placing his principal hopes in the Tigers' even distribution of overall strength . Coach Flood is hoping for victories in four crucial events in the Conference .
 Bruce Boyd has broken the school shot-put record at each of the last three meets, most recently with a cast of 46 ft, 8 in. in . In the field events, the shot put and broad jump, he has highest hopes .
 Abioden Afonja appears more than able to carry the day for CC in the broad jump . Flood looks to Bob Bruce and senior Jim Blair for support in this event .
 Blair seems likely to stand the Tigers in good stead in the high jump as well . He will be vying with sophomore Ed Loosli and senior Farrell Thompson for top honors .
 Loosli's efforts stand only 3/4 inch from the school record of 6-foot, 3-4 in. Looslli's school record is 6-3-5 in.
 Blair and Thompson join Jack Schwella in carrying pole vault aspirations . The discus throw sees Dave Krell, Bruce Boyd, and Dale McNeal seeking a triumph . Blair joins Jack Schwewewea in the pole vault .
 In the track events, thinclads expect strongest performances in the 2-mile relay and distance medley . Thinclads are expected to be strong in 2-m relay and 3-m medley events .
 Tony McGinnis, whose endurance aided Tiger success in the past, will anchor the team of Peter Webster, Dave Smith, and Bob Grant . In the latter freshman Tony McGinis is an endurance veteran who has helped Tiger success . Peter Webster and Dave Smith will anchor a team of
 In the 2mile relay the possibilities for a CC victory are pretty good with the strong team of Mike Durfee, junior Pete Webster, Don Kintz, and Dale McNeal . The team is strong enough to win in the relay . In the relay the team will be strong enough
 Third South managed a eomefrom-behind victory over Fourth West in Slocum Hall basketball playoff . L^ l ^L To Slow Start In the championship game of the Slocrum Hall .
 After trailing by as much as eight points in the third period Third South put on a fine offensive drive while at the same time virtually stopped their opponents from scoring . Third South came from behind eight points down to win .
 In the consolation game, the faculty team had too much power for First West . First West defeated First West 1-0 in the first round .
 Broyles, Dave Krell, Liden, and McNeal will carry the mile relay baton . Broyles will carry a mile baton for the relay team .
 Flood looks for particularly strong opposition from Colorado State and the Adams State Indians . Flood says he is optimistic for a good showing for the Tigers .
 CC finished second by only 3 points last year in the Relays . This year, CC looks with a hopeful eye toward achieving a first place in the Golden sun .
 Baseball has had a rather jolting beginning in CC this year . MElrose 3-7472 Baseball is back in action .
 Though playing reasonably well, the team has been unable to restrain the opposing teams from having that one big inning which has been enough to send us to defeat .
 CC split practice doubleheader with State Penitentiary at Canon City . Then lost to the Air Force Academy 15-4 in first game of the season .
 Barry Anthony was bombed out in the first inning when he met with a six run barrage . Barry Anthony had a 6-0 lead in the opening inning . Barry was hit by a six-run barrage .
 Jeff Sauer replaced him and held the Air Force Academy Academy pretty much in check until the eighth inning . The team exploded again for five more runs in the eighth .
 CC lost both ends of a double header to Colorado Mines up at Golden . Still unable to find winning form, CC lost all three games .
 Don ojrgenson was met with what was becoming a perennial disastrous first inning as Mines scored six runs in the first inning . The game ended in a 6-2 victory over the Minnesoties .
 Barry Anthony pitched beautiful ball from there and CC began to score, but this was not enough to offset the first inning . The final score read 8-5, and the game ended in an 8-4 victory .
 Jeff Sauer started the next game as if he wouldn't let Mines get a hit . Sauer held them hitless 'till the fifth inning . The next game he held Mines hitless .
 CC let in three unearned runs and lost again 3-2 in the last two innings . CC lost again in the second innings .
 Colorado College tennis team swept doubleheader from New Mexico Highlands and Colorado State College last Saturday . CC Tennis Team Sweeps Opponents for first wins of the season .
 In the morning's matches against New Mexico, CC went into the doubles on the short end of a 4-2 score . In the doubles, CC lost to New Mexico in the morning matches .
 The Tigers doubles teams of Sperry and Bastedo, Anisgard and Ethridge, and Heiberger and Sherman took all three doubles matches for a narrow 5-4 win . However, the Tigers lost all three of their doubles matches .
 The Tigers defeated Fort Carson on Monday, losing only one of the matches played . The victory skein was added to on Monday as the Tigers beat Fort Carson .
 This weeks matches are against Regis, Regis and Colorado School of Mines . This week's matches will be on Friday and Saturday .
 Both matches will be played on the Monument Volley courts, and spectators are welcome . Both matches are scheduled to be held at the Monument volleyball courts .
 Colorado College Golf Team wins two of three matches played over the weekend . Colorado College captain Gordon Aamotli and playing partner Bruce McLaughlin lead the team to victory .
 Gordon Aamoth led all players with a 75 as four Tigers broke 80 on the difficult mountain side course . Four Tigers players also broke 80 in the difficult course on Sunday .
 The win marks the first CC victory over a DU athletic team since 1959 . The win marked the first victory over the athletic team for the first time since 1959.
 Tomorrow they take on the Air Force Academy and Regis College teams at the Eisenhower Golf Course in a triangular mateli on the Academy reservation, teeing off at 10:00m.
 John Tarr blows off local competition in prepa for the tournament . April 28 .
 Candidates for the presidency of the Associated Students of Colorado College spoke to a meager gathering of CC itudents at an assembly Tuesday, May 1 . Colorado College Tiger .
 Chris Griffiths, current president of ASCC, outlined the duties of a president . Griffiths suggested criterion to set up for determining the abilities of candidates .
 He stated that the presidency was largely an organizational position, therethe voters should consider the jlorado College Colorado Springs, Colorado, May 3, 1962 .
 The second duty of the president is to uphold and interpret the constitution, he said . The president is also tasked with upholding and interpreting the constitution . He said the president has a duty to uphold the constitution.
 This means that the president must be able to deal with the administration and express his iiui ASCC's ideas aptly . The president must also have the ability to work with the ASCC to express his ideas .
 Mr Power served as Tiger editor for the first semester (which made him an K-officio member of ASCC), is currently serving' on the Honor Council, and has had extensive leadership experience .
 ASCC will have a more direct influence on student life at CC because it can now function effectively as a legislative body . Mr Power said ASCC is now a 'legitimate' legislative body and will have more influence .
 A student policy committee will set up the regulations under which we will live . Students will be required to live in the dormitory dormitory . The university will also set up a policy committee to set up student policy .
 In a statement he covered two areas; continued improvements inside ASCC, and activities outside ASCC proper . In the statement, he also discussed continued improvements in ASCC's activities .
 A coordinating committee similar to the social one for non social activities . The committee for non-social activities will be a coordinating committee .
 Adopt a public relations outlook to make ASCC's activities and Powers better known . ASCC is a non-profit organization that promotes education and community service .
 This would delude making the functions and taads of the committees known ^d more comprehensive coverage the TIGER of ASCC activities M issues . The ASCC is the largest organization in the world .
 Propose that organizations such as Pan-Hel and the IFC seek ASCC endorsement support for feeir proposals . Propose: Organizations such an ASCC seek support for such proposals .
 The social coordinating committee and the problems connected with deferred rush. The social coordination committee . The committee will discuss the problems of deferred rush .
 The formation of a concrete proposal for liberalizing girls' dorm hours . The proposal is part of a plan to liberalize girls' hours .
 Better use of the pep clubs and the enthusiasm committee to help provide some of the support needed by the athletic tames . The enthusiasm committee should also be used to help with the support of the tames.
 ASCC must set objective goals so that the students know what they are expected of them . ASCC needs to set objectives so that students will know what to expect of them. ASCC should set goals for students .
 Campaign manager, Bob Kendall, introduced Brad Chase by stating his qualification for tbe office . Campaign manager Bob Kendall also introduced Chase to voters .
 Mr Chase has served on the social, constitution, and election committees of ASCC . He is presently serving as vice-president of his junior class .
 As his introduction, Mr Chase proceeded to expand upon his experience and leadership qualities . Mr Chase: "I am proud to be able to continue to be a leader in the world"
 He has been connected to ASCC since his freshman year — through his experience on the various committees and as vice-president of the junior class . He has also been involved in ASCC committees and has been on various committees since freshman year .
 He helped put together the Hockey Pep Rally and is currently involved in organizing the All School Picnic . He also helped organize the hockey Pep Rally .
 Mr Chase feels he has established vital connections with the worker students . Through these various activities, Mr Chase has set up vital connections between the students .
 CG Board of Trustees Re-Elects Officers . Three Colorado businessmen have been re-elected as officers of the Colorado College . CG board of trustees re-elects officers . CG College is a private college .
 Re-elected at the board meeting Saturday were Armin B Barney of Colorado Springs, chairman of the board; Gerald L Schlessman of Denver, vice chairman of board; and Robert L . L. Spurgeon of Denver was secretary .
 Barney Barney, a member of the class of 1920, is president of the Colorado Springs National Bank . Barney is a class member of 1920 class . He is now president of Colorado Springs national bank .
 He was secretary-treasurer of the Colorado School for the Deaf and Blind for 15 years . He has served in Colorado for more than 30 years .
 Schlessman is president of the Greeley Gas Company and chairman of the board of the Silver State Savings and Loan Association . He is a 1917 graduate from Colorado College and a 1917 Colorado College graduate .
 Spurgeon earned a bachelor of arts degree in history at Colorado College in 1926 . Spurgeon is now a Colorado Springs lawyer .
 The German Club will hold its annual spring picnic on Sunday afternoon, May t> at Austin Bluffs . The club will be celebrating the end of spring .
 After an afternoon of soccer and other games, club members will elect officers for the coming year . Club members will play soccer, other games and elect officers .
 Skip Meis, Jim Knapp, Norm Laurence, Bill Hyb, Matt Railey and Ed DeGeorge are among those recently tapped for Blue Key . Join at Brandt's house after a picnic for an evening of group singing and refreshments .
 Max Power, Mike Durfee, Brad Chase Hank Rase, Steve Sabom, and Ben Lewis. Max Power . Mike Durfe, Mike . Durfee and Brad Chase . Brad Chase Rase . Hank . Rase. Hank . Lewis .
 Fourteen students at Colorado College have been initiated into the Blue Key, the men's national honorary and service fraternity . The Blue Key Fraternity Taps 14 new members of Colorado College . The fraternity is a men's fraternity .
 The students, 10 juniors and four sophomores, were initiated at the Blue Key dance Saturday night at the independent college of arts and sciences . The dance was part of Parents Weekend during Parents Weekend .
 Members must have a grade average above the all-men's average and must have demonstrated outstanding qualities of leadership on campus . Members must also have an outstanding grade average and demonstrate outstanding leadership .
 The Blue Key members will help coordinate home-coming, take part in chapel, and welcome new male students at the beginning of each school year in September .
 Henri A Meis, Jr., Jr., junior; Henry L Rase III, junior; Bradford Chase, junior . W Stephen Sabom, sophomore ; William Hybl, sophomore; Max Power, junior, Normand Laurence, junior. Edward J De George, sophomore . Matt
 Miss Sarah Gruen was crowned as the queen for the forthcoming year . Miss Isabel Williams crowned last year's queen, Miss Isabel . The queen for next year, Miss Sarah, was crowned by Miss Isabel.
 Professor Carlton Gamer also attended the conference as a representative of the CC music faculty . The conference was held in New York City, New Jersey .
 The Colorado Music History Conference is a yearly meeting at which students of music history from all over the state of Colorado read papers and meet each other . Students and faculty members from the various colleges and universities in the state also attend .
 Colorado College Honor Council issued a first warning for a violation occuring in the ROTC Department . The warning was issued on April 19 .
 These slips will be ti"" \ 15"", and will bcur a number, such as ""U-17-5"", indicating the shelf in the new library on which this group of books will be placed when moved .
 Those hooks may be checked out, hut please bring the slips to the Main Desk with the hook .
 A first prize of fifteen dollars and a second prize of five dollars are offered for the best poems submitted by undergraduates of Colorado College . If the inn.li is used in the Library, please leave the slip in thy book while ng it .
 There are no restrictions as to the length, or tintype or the number of poems entered by each contestant .
 Manuscripts must he typed, with the contestant's pen name appearing on each poem, and on the outside of the sealed envelope containing his or her poems . Contestants' pen name must appear on each of the poems .
 Each contestant must hand in a separate sealed envelope with his or her pen name on the outside and his ID on the inside . Contestants must also hand in separate sealed envelopes with their pen name and ID .
 These prizes were endowed by the late Reverend Albert P Bridges in memory of his wife .
 Independent Men's social organization on campus invites all unaffiliated men to attend their meeting on Monday night May 7, at 7:30m. Crown and Lance extends an invitation .
 At this time, goals and activities for the coming year will be discussed . Goals and activities will also be discussed.
 Final arrangements will be made for the low cost housing available to members . Also final arrangements are being made for low-cost housing available .
 The meeting will be held at the Crown and Lance House, 15 E Cache LaPoudre, across the street from Perkins Hall .
 It seems that the hoped-for interest in CC's coming presidential election is virtually non-existant . CC's presidential election will be held in November 2014 .
 Power and Chase spent an hour in Perkins speaking about their qualifications and proposals . They asked that students with questions be at a meeting Tuesday evening .
 Very few persons have told the candidates what they want — yet the interested students are making these statements . Students are making such statements, says the candidate .
 Any CC student who neglects to vote because of this reason is merely showing his own lack of interest and energy . CC students who neglect to vote are merely showing their lack of energy and interest . Any student who does not vote should be encouraged to do so .
 There is still plenty of time to make a decision between Mr Power and Mr Chase .
 We urge you to make a decision and vote — then, follow up by making your wishes known . Therefore, make your decision and follow it up with your wishes .
 Kappa Sigma Fraternity elected officers for the first semester next year . Kappa Sigma elected officers last Monday for the Kappa Sigma fraternity . CEP Greek News
 Brad stated that through his experience, especially on the Hockey Rally, the social committee, and the All-School-Picnic, he has established connections with the administration . Brad said he is looking forward to the next year's senior year .
 Get the committees moving, with special emphasis towards the enthusiasm committee in order to get student interest up to where it should be . Get students to get involved in the committees .
 Mr Chase feels that ASCC should stay out of the affairs of such organizations as IFC and Pan-Hel unless the support of ASCC is asked for . Mr Chase says ASCC shouldn't be involved in IFC's affairs .
 Pressure should not be exerted upon these groups, but their policies should be supported . Pressure shouldn't be exerted on these groups' policies, but support should be provided .
 Following the platform presentations was a brief question and answer period . The platform presentations were followed by a brief audience discussion .
 Next year the fraternities and sororities will have to take a more active part in campus leadership, says Chase Chase .
 The question of if and how the candidates intended to rectify the inconsistencies in the Honor Code, such as the class absence policy and late papers, is whether or not they intended to do so .
 Mr Power answered by stating that you can carry the honor code to its logical extreme and maybe that is carrying it too far . Mr Power said that maybe that may be too much .
 Mr Chase stated that he doesn't believe that there are that many inconsistencies in the honor system . Mr Chase said that the professors should be expected to accept any and all excuses in these two areas .
 He will preach in Shove Chapel on Sunday morning, address the All-College Assembly on Tuesday, and speak at various meetings .
 He is well known as an ecumenical thinker to theologians throughout the world . He is also known as a thinker for the Christian community .
 He is the author of several theological works and many artcles on social and intellectual issues, including a small book entitled ""The Doctor's Profession"", which is an examination of various ethical and intellectual problems .
 This was written after several years of discussion with groups of doctors in England . It produced more discussion and controversy in certain journals than any other book that had been reviewed .
 As secretary of the Christian Frontier Council he is responsible for gathering together in London lay leaders from all varieties of religious faiths to discuss urgent contemporary issues .
 This group Warder year; varsity basketball Phi Delta Thela Froternity ASCC Traffic Com Director, sophomoi Black and Gold 3.03 oge. -Nan Burroughs Candidate for ASCC secretory .
 Phillip Noel Baker won the Nobel Peace Prize for Peace Prize in 1998 . Baker was awarded the Nobel Prize for peace in 2007 . Baker's review of the book was published by the Pulitzer Prize winner .
 Professor Jenkins can be profitably read by any radically minded person with pretensions to an interesting contemporary society and politics . He writes as a Christian, but should be read by anyone interested in society, politics .
 The central theme, that ""Equality demands the pursuit of excellence for its full realization" is argued with earnestness and depth, but also with clarity and humor . Real equality means real equality means equality in uniqueness .
 It is discussed in relation to such eminently practical matters as rewards and re-sibility in industry, incomes, ferentials, education, and class .
 Jenkins typically first as serts and then discusses, ""Our are not quiet times, Th the 1 threi fessc or r test enjo; His schedule follow > • — Terry Kidner Candidate for ASCC secretary .
 Alpha Lombdo Delia Sophomore: General Electric College Be Treasurer, Loomis Hall Copy Editor, "Kinnikinnik" Sunday, May 6, 11:00m. worship Service, Shove Chapel 7:30m.
 Jenkins will address himself to the question of the meaning of highei education from a Christian point of view . Jenkins will be addressing the issue of the ture and meaning of education .
 Christian Frontier Council under the auspices of the Nuffield Foundation . Study carried out in Britian by the Christian Frontier council under the . auspices .
 Rumor has it that there will be yellow ribbons all over campus sometime today . Rumor is that the ribbons will be placed around campus today .
 There are brand new Tiger Club mem bers . Don't be alarmed — congratulate the wearers . There are some brand new members .
 I was not about to argue such emphatic and straightforward logic— you know, the better part of valor and all that . "I'm not going to argue that, but I'm not sure what I'm going to do," he says .
 As a result of this layoff, my vending machine mind (obusly in need of repair) is ready to spew forth many gaily wrapped, ■hocolate covered ideas . Anyway, as a . result of the layoff I'm ready to . spew forth ideas .
 The spring heat may well have made some of them mushy but I really don't nd getting my fingers dirty, as they fit in so well with the decor y mind . The spring-summer heat may have made the spring heat .
 The recent campus political upheaval, wherein an unusually {urge group of liberals made exacttwo enemies and no friends, only goes to show how much it is to upset the status quo .
 Maybe next 'ear some of the stray apples can be harvested earlier and put on market — they looked very tasty . Maybe next year some of these stray apples will be harvested and sold on market .
 A couple of campus social organizations might well have ""taken it in the ear"" during last week's musi1 judgment . This question is only brought up in the wake of a slight trend in public on which indicates that a couple of social organizations may have "taken the ear
 If you can come up a suitable remedy for its disastrous results, please turn it into the class of '62 as soon before May 18 as possible .
 If this time-honored procedure is actually protecting these ""Innocent, easily deluded, morally indiscriminate" females, please let them know — some doubt has been cast upon their minds. If this is true, please tell them .
 In regard to Professor Kutche's talk on human evolution on the 24th of last month: Professor Kutsche stressed the importance of cultural evolution, but his example of cultural selection became rather far fetched .
 Any detrimental genes, such as those causing poor eyesight and hearing, are neutralized by therapy such as glasses .
 We don't know which way we want to move, for we're not sure what constitutes genetic progress . We're living in a state of uncertainty about genetic progress, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Kutsche mentioned that there were data indicating that arteriosclerosis and some kinds of heart disease were being selected against . The reproductive rate of these individuals was lower than that of the rest of the population .
 Kutsche admitted that the theories drawn from these data were largely speculative, and that the data were inadequate . But, Kutsche himself admitted that, K Deutsche himself, he admitted that .
 Much more must be learned about the genetic and environmental sources of these diseases, Kutsche admitted .
 Natural selection is NOT still going on in exactly the same way that it always has been . Contrary to Kutsche, natural selection is still going to be going on .
 Hereditary diseases such as diabetes and phenylketonuria, a disease causing mental retardation, are on the increase .
 Modchampion of every 21 year old girl on this campus — may God have mercy on my soul. Although cultural evolution, as Kutsche said, is extremely important, because of it . Because of it, through the preservation of lives by modchampion, .
 Harry High School and Joe College might not see eye-to-eye on various socially discussed topics . I'm afraid that after the absorption of two or three pitchers, Harry and Joe will no longer see eye to eye on social issues .
 A weekly all city gang fight might provide the desired physical impetus that we need to eliminate the mandatory ROTC course . But then again, a weekly gang fight may provide just the needed physical impetus for eliminating the mandatory course .
 Many detrimental genes are being perpetuated and are building up in the population . I'll see you later  ern medicine and welfare,   .
 Studies on mice, Drisophila (fruit flies), and human inbreeding indicate that 20% of mankind carry a detrimental gene obtained from the previous generation .
 Over successive generations, the buildup of these genes would be fantastic . The buildup of this gene pool would be 'fantastic' over generations .
 Any attempt to neutralize these detrimental genes by therapy, as Kutsche suggests, would be ultimately self-defeating . civilization would have to devote so much time and energy to the therapy of its genetically degenerate populace, that no time would be left for anything else .
 Much more work needs to be done, says Kutsche . The data is much more adequate than that given by Kutsche, much more work must be done .
 The statement that eugenists almost never admit this publicly is false is false . Our knowledge of this field is inadequate, but the statement is false, he says . The statement is not enough, he adds .
 Muller wrote a book on the subject of homosexuality in the U.S. in the 1980s . Muller's work on the topic has been published in the past .
 This passage should also help to answer reasons 2 and 3 of Kutche's, given at the beginning of the article . This passage also helps to answer why Kutche said Kutche was wrong to question Kutche .
 The social and biological dangers of genetic manipulation are great, and that our knowledge in the fields of genetic and supra-genetic evolution is presently inadequate . Granted that the social and . biological dangers are great . But that our . knowledge in . genetic and . supra-generational evolution is
 Campus Chest Aucfions to bo Tuesday, May 8. training held on ulatiou are even greater, resulting in genetic deterioration . But the dangers of no genetic manipulations are greater than the dangers posed by no one .
 We know that genetically determined poor health, diabetes, and phenylketonuria are not genetic progress, and that healthy bodies and intelligence, combined with virtue and social compatibility, is geneticprogress .
 Morgenthau remarked that most of the issues of today, political and otherwise, were far too technical and beyond the grasp of the man on the street . He said most of today's issues are technical and are beyond the reach of the public .
 Max CAMPUS CLASSICS SCENE II GENUINE BASS WEEJTJN . Made the Indian way— soft leather extends across and under the foot .
 Campus Chest Auction to be held in Perkins Hall . Fhrsheim Shoes Start at $19.95 .
 Each year the Tiger Club .sponsors this event at which time many of the . administrative offices are sold to the highest bidders . Tiger Club sponsors this event .
 The money reeoived f nm i the auction is turned over to the ASCC, which in turn distributes it to various charities . Last year the proceeds went to such organizations as the American Red Cross, Cerebral Palsy, March of Dimes, Muscular Dist
 Several p i o m i n e n ( figures around campus, as well ;is various queens who have reigned during the year, will he auctioned off as hashers . Several p. o m . m i . n e . n figures around the campus will be auction
 New Tiger Club members will be on hand to usher at this fun and charitable occasion . The Tiger Club will host a charity event at the end of the year .
 All students, members of the faculty, and administration are invited to attend . Then' will be something for everyone, and all students, faculty and administration will be invited .
 Oyo Baptist lioy'n High School, Oyo, Western Nigeria needs two t e a c h e r h urgently needed to teach biology and French .
 Applicants will he expected to sign a three-year contract with the school's mana«t>ment . Applicants are expected to . sign a . three year contract . The school will offer a range of scholarships for students .
 The contract could be extended at the end of the third year if the teacher deHires .
 The Principal Oyo Baptist Boys' High School Olivet Heights, Oyo, Nigeria . The Principal of the school was born in Oyo .
 Neither Castroism nor Communism explain all of Cuba's troubles according to Dr. Sherbet ME 5-2740 College Tiger Expert on Latin America To Teach Summer Session .
 Lawrence Hill, an authority on Latin American affairs who will teach here during the 1962 summer session, will teach at the University of Columbia in 1962 .
 Hill suggested that Castro may even be ousted before the eight-week course begins June 18 . Hill said Castro may be ousted by the course .
 Gregg Notehand course is listed in the schedule as Gregg Shorthand Simplified . He traces Cuba's troubles back to her emergence in Cuba . The Gregg notehand course includes a Gregg note .
 Gregg Notehand is not a course in vocational shorthand, but rather in notemaking . It is implemented by a short writing system based on the Gregg alphabet . The Gregg alphabet is based on Gregg letters .
 There are no dictation or words-a-minute objectives, and the course is not designed to train stenographers .
 Its aim is to assist students to read and listen more intelligently and make notes discriminate for furtnre study and other uses .
 Kennedy program for economic cooperation with Latin America with Latin American partners . Kennedy program aims to build on economic ties between the U.S. and Latin America .
 Hill said, ""The Alliance for Progress is a short step in the right direction. Hill said . Hill said that the Alliance is a "short step" away from the current situation .
 Hill added that such leaders as former President Quadros of Brazil have advocated sensible tax and land reform programs . Hill said such programs will be necessary for significant economic advances in any Latin American country .
 Characterizations and Voices Highlight Opera Presentation by John Glannes . Colorado Springs Opera Association production of Gilbert and Sullivan's THE MIKADO was outstanding .
 Charles Johnson as Ko-Ko combined his fine voice and acrobatic talent to produce a very versatile and animated Lord High Executioner .
 Edalyn Burger used her big voice and ease on the stage to give an entertainingly bloodthristy CC Receives NSF Grant . The Song Fest winners are from left to right .
 Your parents have received letters and order blanks from these kits, which cost only two dollars . The kits are available for $2 dollars .
 Upon receiving their order, a survival kit will be delivered to you May 27 .
 It's not too soon to be thinking of flowers for Mothei on Mother's Day — we will wire them to her . Mothei's mother will be receiving flowers from her home in Japan .
 Elstun's Flowers Colorado College receives $5,080 grant from National Science Foundation . Institute will be one of three such programs under NSF sponsorship offered in the United States .
 Some GO teachers from regional elementary schools are expected to be enrolled in the program . The program is expected to get underway next September 22 .
 This will be the third year that CC has offered an in-service institute to school teachers . CC will offer the in-services institute to teachers .
 Teachers will be able to earn credit hours in general science for one semester . The teachers will earn the credit hours for one year .
 The course will be repeated during the second semester, but may not be taken for two semesters . Students may not take the course for two years .
 Elementary teachers will attend classroom lectures, discussions and field work in the afternoons . The elementary teachers will participate in classroom lectures and lab work .
 The 14-week course will cover biology, meterology, astronomy, chemistry, chemistry and physics .
 Participants will receive a list of pertinent references at the first session in each of the six fields of science . Participants will be expected to do outside book and periodicial reading .
 Elementary teachers in the area who are interested in enrolling in the course may obtain further information by writing Professor Richard G, Beidleman at Colorado College, Colorado Springs .
 Ko-Ko and Katisha combined their talents on the son^ ""There is Beauty in the Bellow of the Blast" They received a rousing personal ovation from the audience at the show .
 Eugene Me Cleary was an entertaining but stiff Mikado . Patricia Washburn was an overly cute Pitti-Sing . Eugene Cleary turned in as an entertaining Mikado, and as an over-cute Pitti .
 CC was well represented by Ben Lyon as Pooh-Bah and Wallace Boyce as Pish-Tush . Ben Lyon was also well represented as Poah-Bah .
 Lyon seemed to be more in his element in this production than he was in GUYS AND DOLLS . Lyon's characterization improved 100% over his Sky Masterson . Lyon seemed more in character than in his previous role in the show .
 There was little chance for Bar to show the audience his fine voice on the fast Gilbert and Sullivan pieces .
 Pish-Tush is one of the most personable characters of the cast because of his facial expressions and relaxed stage presence . Doctor Wallace Boyce of the French Department is also a popular character .
 The chorus and orchestra left somewhat more to be desired then did the main characters . The main characters were played by the main character .
 The chorus held a consistent tempo and had good pitch but could have sung louder in places . The chorus was good enough, but it could have been louder than usual .
 Generally the chorus was convincing as ""Gentlemen of Japan"" in spite of some atrocious make-up and bungled movements .
 The orchestra seemed at times to be totally unaware of J Julius Baird's presence as the conductor .
 Sometimes this resulted in a syncopated rythm between instruments and singers, and sometimes in an orchestra . Sometimes the rythms of instruments and singing were syncoped . Sometimes this led to the creation of a syncoped orchestra .
 This was a bit disturbing especially in unison passages of the winds and strings, who were seldom together . This was especially in the unison passages, who are seldom together, who often play together .
 In spite of mistakes in the orchestra and some rather unusual tempi taken .by singers in the early stages of the performance, Dr. Dr. Martin says the performance was very good .
 Baird held the show together and should be complimented for his fine work, not only in this opera but also in operas given earlier in the season .
 It may be said for the technical production itself that the work was imaginative, yet practical . The work is imaginative and practical, but it is imaginative, and practical .
 The set, designed by Joe Deaderich, was easy to work with and captured the bright luminescence of color typical of a fine Japanese print .
 Although all the costumes were good, two stood out as being exceptional . Two costumes were exceptional, with the costumes being very special .
 The one for PoohBah, the most corrupt of all corruptable officials, and the one for Katisha, the ugly lady with the beautiful right elbow . The other one is for the ugly woman with the right elbow.
 Edalyn Burger's staging was intricate and required a concentrated tuning from the performers, but they generally handled it well . Lance wishes to thank the Kachina Lounge for their Las Vegas Night gift .
 National Science Foundation-sponged project studying the effects of various social conditions upon the distribution of energy in the mouse . Dr. John Sutter was working on a project studying effects of social conditions .
 Robert Z grown of the Colorado College zoology department observed many parallels between the social organization of mice and lien ■s . These include eating, sleeping, fighting (or raising families for females) and building shelters, grooming, and snooping .
 By fighting see who dominates the group . They solve iheir social problems . By fighting . See who dominates a group .
 Mice have a pyramidal social [fracture] with one boss as the top, few middle-class straw-bosses jelow him, and below them a vast rde of common mice .
 The males have nothing to do nth the rearing of the young. [hat is a completely feminine [unction]. Male males are not responsible for rearing the young .
 Brown observed that when new groups are formed in his pens ■e is continual strife for about hours as they decide who is the leader . aggressiveness, rather than size, usually is the most important factor in determining who becomes the leader, he said .
 "Those who lose the fight, but ■scape with their lives become 'straw-bosses'" or peasants. Those who fail to win the fight become "straw bosses" or "peasant" or peasants .
 The 'straw-bosses"" like middle class aecutives, live in constant tur . Most of them are either on ;heir way up or on their way town,"" Brown said .
 He feeds them well with a purpose, for he is trying to determine how they spend the energy they take into their bodies . Their diet consists of a specially-prepared, nutritionally balanced pellet made specifically for He feeds .
 Energy is used for producing work, gaining weight, or is passed off as waste . Basically the energy is used to produce work, gain weight or to pass on waste .
 Brown noted that the mouse who is destined to become the chief of his clan may have a lower metabolism than other mice . Brown said the mouse's metabolism may be lower than that of other mice.
 He thinks this is because the potentially superior mouse has a more efficient body . He thinks that the mouse body is more efficient than the mouse's .
 He hopes to find out how much energy each mouse burns under various kinds of conditions . Each mouse has a unique body shape and energy capacity .
 A mouse is placed in a sealed chamber in which ordinary air is pumped at normal pressure . The oxygen consumed is measured by placing a mouse in the same chamber .
 He measures the air passing out of the chamber to see how much oxygen has been burned up by the mouse . The air passing through the chamber is measured by the amount of oxygen it burns up .
 These joint awards are available for study in Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Poland, Rumania, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, and Venezuela .
 Travel-Only awards are available for study in Austria, Denmark, France, Germany, Israel, Italy, Italy and The Netherlands . The Netherlands is one of the world's most popular countries to study .
 A good academic record and a demonstrated capacity for independent study are also necessary . A good Academic record is also necessary in order to be a successful student .
 Love is only one of the multitu'de of mysteries that decorate life, but it is one with far-reaching implications . Love is a mystery that has far-ranging implications for the world .
 Even the greatest power of mind is not sufficient to sidestep the forceful drive of fate, and if it stings, an eternity of lifetime is necessary to cleanse the impression . An eternity of lifetimes is necessary for the impression to be erased .
 Robert Stabler, president of the Academy and chairman of the CC zoology department, will attend the meeting . Scientists and science students from colleges, universities, and research laboratories throughout the two-state area will attend .
 Students and faculty members from CC will present scientific papers before the anthropology, chemistry, plant science, and zoology sections . Students will also present their scientific papers .
 Four papers by CC scientists will be read before the ehemismay write to the Information and try section . Four of the papers will be examined by scientists at the centre of the project .
 Milton K Snyder, associate professor of chemistry, Counseling International Educatio ond Avenue, New Yoi York. Milton K. Snyder, Division, Institute of Institute of Associate Professor of chemistry .
 Fare for the fiv hour trip will be $4.50, and will include some features not available to non-ticket-holding mo toreadors .
 Any interested persons please contact Russ Sperry of the College Railroad Club before 6:00 m. m. Club .
 Zoology professor of zoology and senior zoology major Joan Jilka will read a paper on the 1969 Girl Scout Jamboree Site . Sunday at the latest .
 GANO DOWNS I'fl CLOTHING — FURNISHING AND GIFTS BROADMOOR HOTEL iwiinniiiiii.iiiiiii When It's Music It's Millers Miller Music Co. Millers Music Co.'s Millers
 This dofcat is not pleasant, regardless of the cause, and only a fool would commit adultery and invite the inevitable . Only a fool commits adultery and invites the inevitable, and it's not a fool . This is not a good idea, but it's a sign that the world
 Perhaps the individual that defies the social law is no more a fool than his conforming counterpart . But, perhaps, perhaps the individual defies social law no more than his . conforming . counterpart .
 Passion and fate cannot be outwitted, for it is under the stress of love that ""reason"" flounders, loses its validity, and becomes an incomprehensible phenomena, says the author .
 Maurice Maeterlinck wrote the play, Pelleas and Melisande . The play is based on the works of the same name .
 He imposed a web of symbolism on a romantic theme, but rose above Romanticism . The author rose above the literary movement, which often swoons in its own delight .
 Maeterlinck's tone and mood it creates alienate the action from time, and external events need not be relevant to appreciate the universality of the play .
 This other-world atmosphere offers a stubborn challenge to a prospective producer . However, it is a strong atmosphere that offers a strong challenge to producers .
 Maeterlinck utiliz ed the famous Paolo-Francesca narrative from The Divine Comedy . If you devotes close attention to the play, explicit parallels are visible .
 As Pelleas and Melisande opens the possibility of a disastrous love takes birth, and continually deepens until the final climax ia reached . The final climax is reached .
 Pelleas and his siBter-in-law, Melisande, are driven towards each other, and all consideration for his brother, Golaud, is ignored .
 Their common source of love and light is symbolized by the sea, but already the water is gloomy . The sea symbolizes a source of light and love for the couple .
 Pelleas envisons their destiny when he speaks of the storm that comes in at the end of each day . Presently the sea is calm, but the storm comes in each day. Presently it is calm .
 The play comes to its climax at ""Blind Man's Springs,"" where ""reason"" is shattered, clouds drift over the path of life, and living becomes a blind proposition .
 The defeat of Pelleas is final but not tragic, says Martin Samuel . The defeat is not tragic for the Welshman, says Samuel Samuel . Samuel Samuel was inspired by whimsical impulses .
 As the dramatic narrative concludes, Golaud, an iron man of great physical stature, and Melisande, a young girl that might ""give God lessons in innocence,"" are unable to save themselves from tragedy .
 Students watched gangs of Slocum Hall men punching, tackling, and o-ouging each other while trying to move a pregnant-looking white canvas ball across manure-laden fields . Last week students had the unusual opportunity ot watching gangs .
 The technical name of this new sport is ""pushball,"" latest attempt by intramural manager Jim Hanks to revive Slocum Hall athletic competition . Pushball is the latest attempt to revive the moribund athletic competition.
 The wild game, played by six men representing their respective wings, consists of moving the paunchy white ball toward the opponent's goal in an attempt to actually enter his goal, or cross his goal line and score two points .
 Theoretically, the sport has rules and referees; in actual practice, however, the law of the jungle prevails, especially in the immediate vicinity of the ball . Normally docile associates are suddenly transformed into rough-housing gorillas .
 The most successful maneuver has been to deploy half of the team in pushing the ball toward the goal while the other half pulls opponents from the ball . Successful teams have won by keeping the ball in the air, and on the ground .
 All strategy, however, must be reinforced by a hustling group that is willing to lose, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The demanding game enervates even the best athletes — and these are few and far between in Slocum's intramural competition . The demands of the game are too much to bear for the best .
 First West team, playing without reserves, beat Fourth North side in semi-final . First West, playing with reserves, smashed a number of teams from Fourth North . Fourth North were also playing without reserve .
 First West beat Fourth North 4-1 in a good exhibition of great-ape over rhinoceros . First West were clearly not so confident as their opponents, but managed to win .
 Clearly I mean a combination of quick thinking and brute strength over brute strength alone . "Quick thinking" and "brush strength alone" is the key to success in the battle .
 Aamoth, four down after four holes, fired a two under par 34 on the back nine for a 1 up 1 up win over Bob Hammer . The win also gave him and his partner, Bruce McLaughlin, who won his individual match, a win in the foursome match
 Bob Magie, a freshman from Duluth, Minnesota, shot a 79 to defeat Mielenz of CU . Rich Nichols' 77 gave them a halve in their foursome match . The pair were playing in the sixth position .
 Air Force Academy and Regis College played triangular match at Eisenhower golf course . Regis 14% to ZVz and AFA lost IOV2 to IV2 to AFA team .
 It was the first time on the course for six freshmen members of the team, the team shot consistent golf . Despite the fact it was the team's first time playing golf, it was a good start to the season .
 Magie finished with a perfect weekend by winning both of his individual matches from his AFA and Regis opponents . Magie won both individual matches against his opponents .
 The Student Guide Service is a recent addition to Colorado College . All people who are interested in joining submit applications to the Rastall desk today .
 All applications will be considered and members selected from them by the Student Guide Service . Members will be selected by the student guide service .
 The purposes of the Student Guide is to act as official guide for the college and to assist the Administrations Office in showing prospective students around the campus .
 Guide Service plans to expand its activities into such areas as guiding for conventions, debates, and similiar events . Guide Service will also focus on hosting teams and receptions for conventions .
 The hosts and hostesses for the President's Reception after Song Fest were student guides . Student guides were students at the event . The event was held in honor of the President of the Republic .
 CC's on-again, off-again baseball team sandwiched two weekend wins into an otherwise gloomy week of play . CC's baseball team has won two consecutive games this week .
 Tuesday the erratic nine alternated by dropping two to extremely strong Adams State . Tuesday's loss was the first time Adams State had dropped two games in a row .
 Friday's Mines game fell apart almost before it got started, both teams indulging themselves generously in errors . Both teams indulged themselves generously with errors .
 Mines accumulated 7 errors during the course of the game, but even here CC came in a close second .
 It soon became a question of who could take the most advantage of naturally weak fielding . It was also a question for the England team to take advantage of their weak fielding.
 The one bright spot in the CC effort was Don Jorgenson's brilliant pitching, as he held the admittedly somewhat inept Regis Raiders to one hit in the first game of a double bill .
 Tigers beat Tigers 4-0 at Tiger Stadium on Saturday night . Tigers had already won the game 4-1 in the first half .
 In the second game, junior Alex Yankovitch began for CC, but Coach Jerry Carle had to summon freshman Jeff Sauer . Sauer had to be summoned when the Raiders threatened to close a six-run gap .
 Strong pitching by reliever Sauer, combined with unusually good late-inning CC fielding, stemmed the tide of Regis' rally . The Tigers went on to triumph, 8-5, and the Tigers won the game 8-4 .
 Adams State battered a sloppy CC team mercilessly, exploiting a glaring pitching and fielding weakness . Tuesday proved to be less cheerful, as Adams State beat the CC team 7-2 .
 The Indians' ten-run drive was finally smothered as Carle again called on freshman Sauer . After sweeping through starter Don Jorgenson and reliever Alex Yankovitch in the disastrous fourth inning, the Indians' 10-run run was finally stopped .
 The Indians went on to suffocate CC, 120, holding Carle's nine to two hits . Carle was held to just two hits by the Indians .
 Chris Batley started what was to be an equally lopsided second game for the Tigers . Batley fell prey to an eight-run Indian massacre in the second inning .
 Adams State defeated by Adams State in their first match of the series . Tiger fielding tipped the balance in the match with a decisive helping hand from Indian flysnatching .
 After a fifth inning rally, CC finally succumbed to the Redskin horde, 16-7 . CC eventually succumbed to a fifth-inning rally .
 As the season has progressed, it has become painfully apparent that unless Carle's Tigers can balance an extremely lopsided pitching staff and eliminate fielding errors that have so far plagued the team, prospects are dismal indeed .
 The Tournament of Cycles was held in 1962 . It was the first time the event had been held in a public cycling event . It took place in the summer of that year .
 The Junkie Classic was handily won again by Gary Ziegler, repeating his first place finish last year . Gary Ziezler won the race again .
 In a seemingly effortless performance, Ziegler finished well ahead of the rest of the field . The German won the gold medal in the men's individual event .
 Rory Weed, riding a ""junkie"" by anyone's standards, finished second . Rory Weed finished in second place . Weed was riding a 'junk'
 The third ' finisher, Glen Foust, slid on a fast turn, flew into the air and made a beautiful 4 point landing . He recovered quickly, suffering only from well-skinned shins and elbow .
 Bud Mixon forged into the lead in the home stretch after following the pack most of the route to snag first place . Mixon followed the pack in the race for the first time in his career .
 A last minute entry, Rob Pittaway, followed close behind Bud and finished second . The winner of the race was a last-minute competitor .
 Right behind Rob was Russ Sperry to grab a very respectable third place in a hard-fought race . Russ finished second in the race .
 The last race, for eight to fifteen speed bicycles, was undoubtedly the most interesting . It was for eight-to-15 speed bicycles .
 The field passed the starting line three times in the IVi mile course, and each time a different cyclist led the pack . The race finished at the top of the line on Sunday .
 Jerry Macon set a new course record with a blazing 7:12 for 2V 2 miles . Macon also set a course record for the first lap of the 2-mile race .
 In the final lap John Tarr took over the lead and kept it to cross the finish line in first place . Tarr crossed the line first place in the final laps .
 Second place was not decided until the last few yards of the final few yards, a few seconds later . Second place in the world was decided in the final seconds .
 Mark Stetson, last year's first place winner, took second by a wheel from Bruce Colvin . Last year's winner took second place in a wheel-race in his first place place in the world .
 Dan Martin caught a second wind and zoomed past Evan Heckel just at the finish line . The remaining entries were well strung out except for 8th finisher Dan Martin, who finished 8th .
 A special award went to Kathy Murphy for her resolute attempt . Kathy Murphy was the only female entry to complete the race .
 Make-up drill for ROTC drill abscences will be conducted at 0700 hours on the eleventh and eighteenth of May . The make-up will take place on the 11th and 17th May .
 All cadets who have drill scences are strongly urged to take advantage of the earliest possible make-up drill date in order that an incompleted grade will not be submitted for the semester .
 Tigers Nab second As Bears Triumph In Golden Relays . Coach Flood asserted that a little luck CC had a good chance of copping the meet .
 Colorado State College swept seven of the twelve events to repeat as Conference Champions . However, the luck didn't come as Colorado State won seven of twelve events .
 The Tigers took first place in the distance medley with the team of Bob Grant, Weinster, Dave Smith, and Tony McGinnis . The Tigers won first place with Bob Grant and Bob Weinster . The team also won first time in the medley .
 They further showed their power in the distances by winning the mile relay in 3:28.8.8 . The team also won the 4-mile relay in a time of 3:30.8 seconds .
 This relay team made up of Bob Broyles, Krell Krell, Norm Liden, and Dale Mc Neal . The relay team was coached by Norm Lidner and Dale Liden .
 There is still time before the RMC Championships for CC to catch up and surpass the Bears . However, there is still a long way to go before the championships .
 Even after this diappointing showing, our own track team is better than in past year e t, >etwei tt rith rith £ he be shen looks tyle .
 Activities will begin Tuesday veiling, May 15 at 7 p.m. when lastall Center will sponsor ""The brothers Karamazov"" in Perkins Jail .
 Sloeum Hall ;ill sponsor a street dance in their arking lot . Immediately following the novie, at 8:30 p.m., Sloeums Hall . The novies will be held at 830p .
 The Astronauts, a flpular band from Boulder, will irovide music for dancing . They will play music from all angles .
 Wednesday morning, after spell awakenings in dorms, a md will play during breakfast . Afterwards everyone will go to Coburn to begin the movng promptly at 8 a-m. Wednesday morning .
 As students carry their loads, band will play on the lawn »tween the libraries . Band will play at the end of the day .
 All-School Picnic will be held on the lawn behind Perkins . All students will be moved by noon .
 Each shelf in the Library is marked with a distive number, and each unit of iooks in Coburn are marked with 3rresponding number on a 15"" slip placed in the first flok of the unit .
 These numbers gnate first, first, the floor number f the new Library, second, the number on that floor, and hird, the shelf number . The Library's new Library will be open to the public in 2015 .
 A number such as -147-6 designates the Third floor, ange number 147, shelf number 147 . It is possible to move books from Coburn at random, long as they are moved in units, to have them land on the proper helf .
 Bttier the front or rear entrance, depending on which part of Coburn is being moved, and to the floor corresponding to the numbering on the nuit of books being carried . Directional signs *ill lead students from these pickup points into the new Library by .
 The books will be carried to the range corresponding to this number, and left to be loaded on the shelf . They will be left to the shelf and left on the shelves .
 Heavier materials, such as periodicals, newspapers, documents and special collections will be moved by a professional moving company beginning on May 17th .
 Library operations will be discontinued at 4:00m. on Tuesday, May 15th . Library operations to be stopped at 4 p.m. Tuesday . Library will be closed for the first time since 2008 .
 Reserve books may be charged out at 3m. on May 17th, and will be due at 8:15m on May 18th .
 Charles Learning Tutt Library will begin operations at 7 :45m. on May 17th . Library will be open to the public for the first time ever .
 The collection will be split between the two buildings for about a week . The collateral material can be brought over to join the books . Library staff will get from Coburn any books that are needed .
 CC Young Republicans have recently elected their new officers for the 1962-63 academic year . Young Republicans Elect New Officers of the CC Young Republican Party .
 Chairman, Bill Hunter, Vice Chairman, Nancy Shoup Secretary, Marta Phipps Treasurer, Kay Anderson .
 The group is looking forward to a very important year, as it is a campaign year . The group says they are looking ahead to a 'very important year'
 Although interest in the club has lagged, it is hoped that, due to the importance of the coming months, many Republicans will lend their support to the candidates for state and national office .
 The group will be attending many rallies and speeches in the near future . The group plans to attend rallies and speak at rallies .
 Anyone interested in the activities or projects of the group are urged to contact Marta Phipps, ext.6 .
 Slocum Hall is sponsoring a street dance in the parking lot on Tuesday from 8:30 to 11:00 . The Astronauts from Boulder will provide music . The event will be held in the Slocums parking lot .
 Rossiter is director of studies on American communism and consultant for the Fund for the Republic . He has served as a member of the Rockefeller Committee on Legal and Political Philosophy .
 He is the editor of a series of books on "Communism in American Life" sponsored by the Fund for the Republic . He is also the author of many books and articles .
 Colorado College Community LIBRARY MOVING DAY is one of the historic events in the life of any college . The Colorado College community library is located in Colorado Springs, Colorado, Colorado .
 At Carleton, DePauw, Marietta and other institutions during the past decade students, faculty and administration joined together to carry volumes from the old building to the new .
 A few administrators confessed they had not been so deep into the library for years . Administrators said they have not been in the library in years .
 Colorado College faculty cancels classes May 16 and pledges their own portership . Library collection larger than those at the other colleges .
 Fine Arts Week will begin Sunday, May 13, and go through Friday, May 18 . St. Louis T Benezet Fine Arts week will be May 13-18 .
 The week is planned to give special attention to music, drama, art, and literature, with representation from other related fields, such as anthropology .
 Thomas W Ross and Harris Sherman will play clarinet and violin duets of selections from the works of Bela Bartok and Mozart . The pair will perform duets on the piano and clarinet .
 Experimental Theatre will present three one-act plays under the direction of James Fox . That evening, at 7:30m. in the W.E.S. room, will perform three plays .
 Colorado College Woodwind group will give a concert on May 14 . Monday, May 14, at 4:15m. in the north patio the group will perform .
 Clinton Rossiter will speak on the American tradition with regard to the new age . Rossiter: "The American tradition is to be proud of the New Age"
 The CC band' will play in the north patio of Rastall Center at 4:15 . Tuesdav, May 15, at 4,15, at . The band will play .
 At 7:10 m.m., in Perkins Hall, the movie ""The Brothers Karamazov"" will be shown . At 7.10 p.m. at Perkins Hall .
 People urged to attend this and then go on to the Slocum Hall Street Dance . People are urged to go to this dance then go to Slocrum Hall Street dance .
 This is the film which stars Yul Brynner, Maria Schell, Lee J Cobb, and William Shattner . The film is set to be released in cinemas worldwide on November 25, 2015 .
 No events for Fine Arts Week are scheduled for Wednesday, May 1G, because of the All-School Picnic and book-moving day . No events planned for May 1 G because of Wednesday's book moving day . Fine Arts week is May 1 .
 Mr Racey will give readings in poetry ""From Wyatt t Corso"" at 4:00m. in the W.E.S. room .
 All day long, in the south patio of Rastall Center, there will be a student sculpture show . The show will take place all day .
 Fine Arts Week will conclude Election News . The candidates for the office of vice-president of ASCC are Jim Knapp, John Lewis, and Steve Sabom . Fine Arts week will conclude with the election of the ASCC .
 Nan Burroughs, Diane Johnston and Terry Kidner are running for secretary . Nan and Diane are running in the office of secretary . Diane Johnston also running for the office .
 The two candidates for the office of treasurer are Bill Hybl and Steve Frink . Hybl is the treasurer of the state . Frink is the current treasurer .
 The election for these offices is being held Thursday and Friday, May 10 and 11 . The election will be held in May .
 Running for senior commissioner are Peigi Benham, Kathy Bruce, Pal Chapman, Norm Laurance, Ben Lewis, Buzz Poe, Don Wolfgang, and Alex Yankovich . Running for junior class commissioner are Chris Battley, Chuck Deaver, Ed DeGeorge, Dave Holdorf,
 Rossiter is an honorary member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences . He is a former president of the Statler Club at Cornell . Rossiter also is a member of Sigma Phi and the Century Association .
 Abiodun Afonja will play African music at an afternoon music hour in the Hub . W Lewis Abbott was a professor of business, economics, and sociology at the college .
 Fine Arts Week takes place in New York City, New York, October 1 . Everyone is invited to attend as many events as possible during Fine Arts week .
 Programs will be distributed this weekend and there will be publicity about the various events . The events will be held in various locations across the country .
 The final day of Fine Arts Week, the ""Kinnikinnilc"" will be distributed . The last day of the week is the last day .
 A case involving three girls and three boys who were drinking in a fraternity man's room was brought before the Committee of Student Conduct . Student conduct is being reviewed by the Committee .
 In the case of the boys, the Committee followed the action taken by the fraternity . The Committee followed by the action of the fraternity, the boys .
 These boys were placed on social probation which means no attendance of fraternity functions . The boys were also placed under social probation by the University of Wisconsin .
 The girls were prohibited to attend any of that fraternity's functions and their own sorority's scheduled social events . They were prohibited from attending any of those events .
 If there is any violation of misconduct or of these penalties they will be automatically suspended from school pending a hearing of the Student Conduct Committee . The students will have a hearing before they are suspended .
 DayIDHite printed Friday* by PEERLESS PRINTING CO., Colorado Sprir .
 Mr Power and congratulations to the student body for voting . Thereforecongratulations to Mr Power .
 CEP Music Department Presents Recital May 16 at 8 p.m. in Perkins Hall . First of two student recitals will be Wednesday, May 16 .
 Three advanced piano students, two string; groups; groups, and a woodwind ensemble will be featured on this program . The program includes students from advanced piano to two string students .
 Jane Humphrey, a freshman from Mullen, Nebraska, will perform two Intermezzi and one Capriccio by Brahms . Barbara Couey, a sophomore from Trinidad, Colorado, will be heard in the first movement of Schumann's Piano Concerto in A minor .
 With the exception of Miss Perry, the string and woodwind ensembles are made up entirely of non-music students .
 The first string group will open the program wtih the first movement of Haydn's quartet in G Major, op. op. The program will also feature a piece from the composer's first symphony piece . The program includes a selection of the Haydn quartet .
 The woodwind ensemble will be heard in two movements of the Suite for Woodwinds, op., by Charles Lebore . The Suite is op., op. for woodwinds . The ensemble will also play in a suite for the piano .
 Sign of the ROSE CORSAGES for all occasions at Shove Chapel in 1962 . Sunday, May 13, 1962 .
 The title of this sermon is borrowed from the title of a book by W Visser't Hooft, the general secretary of the World Council of Churches, which was published many years ago .
 The thoughts contained in the sermon are partly stimulated by the recent visit of two distinguished guests to our campus . The sermon was partly stimulated .
 As always, when confronted with some great theme or idea or institution connected with the history of the Church, we encounter a paradox . As always we confront a paradox when confronted by some great themes or ideas .
 It is hoped that the sermon will shed some light on these and other questions . The contemporary Church as organized is too often ""an abomination of desolation standing where it ought not"
 On May 17, the Annual Honor Council Nominating Assembly will be held in Taylor Dining Hall, at 4:15 . The importance of these elections of new Honor Council members is vital to the well-being of the Honor System .
 The method of election tries to combine the greatest possible democratic choice in permitting the nominations of anyone in the student body and in the two votes taken at the assembly to narrow the field of candidates to twice the number of vacancies .
 The members of the old Honor Council choose the new members from the final field . Then, in order to eliminate any aspects of a ""popularity contest,"" and to provide the most judicious choices, the members . The new members will be chosen from a final field, rather than
 People elected from academic classes are required to be present by the Dean and the Honor Council . The Honor Council is required to present the elected people .
 Mr Cassius De Flon's pro-eugenics letter in the Tiger of May gratulates the Tiger on raising the proportion of news it has consistently printed since the first few issues .
 It also gives me the opportunity to offer your readers some criticisms of the eugenics position, as none have appeared so far in your pages . It gives me a chance to offer some criticisms, but none so far so far .
 The version of his argument to which we were treated in the Roberts Lecture was eugenics at its most reckless, with none of the reservations added . It was 'eugenics' at its 'most reckless' with no reservations added, he says .
 The fallacy of the eugenics argument is that it makes deductions about human evolution from data derived solely from the biological sciences . Muller and De Flon present it as a fallacy . The fallacy is that the argument is based on data derived from purely biological data .
 Muller uses the terms ""culture"" and ""cultural evolution,"" he shows little awareness that human socio-cultural life is more complex than the existence of other animal species . Muller has little awareness of the complex nature of human life .
 On the face of it, the list of genetically ""good"" traits looks so desirable that to attack it would be like attacking mother-love .
 Anthropologists would be more enthusiastic about selection in favor of them if psychologists could tell us more about their dynamics . Geneticists can tell us about their genetic makeup, anthropologists say . But anthropologists would like to know more about the dynamics of selection .
 Muller fears that without selective breeding, human beings will eventually be able to 'prop up their own feebleness' Muller says that human beings 'will eventually do no more than . do nothing more than prop up themselves' Muller fears selective breeding will allow humans to 'do no more
 Some physical conditions are apparently being selected against by modern cultural conditions which were neutral before the industrial revolution, just an instant ago in evolutionary time . As I said on the 24th, this prediction ignores the fact that some physical conditions .
 It assumes that we have had accurate statistics on the incidence of specific diseases over long periods of time . It also assumes that the statistics are accurate and accurate .
 Phenylketonuria, for instance, is now well diagnosed now but was not always . Phenylkonuria is a form of kidney disease that causes kidney failure in some cases .
 One school of thought among physicians believes that the increase in statistics on this disease is an artifact of better diagnosis and better record-keeping .
 The definition and even the desirability of a healthy body are ""more parochial than the eugenists apparently suspect," says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 In mid-twentieth century America we enjoy a cult of health, youth, and suppleness which is by no means shared in other parts of the world, not in Euro-American culture at other times .
 A modern physician might well regard one of Titian's or Rubens' models as overweight . Rubens, Titian and Titian models were likely to be overweight. Rubens was a painter of the 16th century .
 A Hottentot male wants a female with a pot belly, swayed back, and fantastic eccumulations of fat on the buttocks . A female with pot belly and swayed back .
 There is good evidence that in paleolithic times men were selected for keen senses, fleetness, and grace . In the neolithic sheer strength had better survival value .
 In eighteenth century Europe, the tendency toward tuberculosis was fashionable . The tendency to develop tuberculosis was also fashionable in Europe .
 Selection for the modern American concept of good health would violate norms of other times and other places . Selection would violate the norms of others times, and we have no guarantee that this concept will last longer than any other .
 Muller's and his even more inflammatory term ""genetic deterioration"" appear to ignore the problem of measurement . Muller's fear of Muller's, and his inflammatory term "genetic deterioration" appear to be ignoring the problem .
 Evolutionary theory has no measure of genetic goodness except natural selection . If selection does not operate against a genetic factor, that factor can hardly be considered harmful . Selection is not necessary to be harmful, but it can be beneficial .
 Muller says cultural existence is an ""artificial"" way of life . Muller: Culture is an "artificial way of life" Muller: "Culture is an artificial way to live"
 Culture is a survival device, a part of nature no more ""artificial"" than the hide of the rhinoceros or the claws of the lion . Culture is not a "survival device" but a "part of nature" that is no more "artificial"
 I shall not argue that the tendency toward disease is actually of use to our species, though such an argument might be made . Instead, I shall argue that such a thing might be useful to the human species .
 Mr De Flon seems to understand well enough the position of some geneticists on human genetics .
 A sound knowledge of Homo sapiens, however, requires that one take a broad view of human behavior . The interaction between genetics and culture is an intricate interaction, says author .
 The Deak U PEAKS was a liberal arts college nestled comfortably in the lush green valley where the sparkling River Styx wound its course .
 Two young princes were roommates at the same college . The prince and the princess were both roommates . The princes were both princes .
 Cranfield Smartypants III studied every night, never caroused with the local wenches, maintained a 3.5 overall, and was very good . One of the best students in Cranfield, England, was Cranfield's Smartypant III .
 The other, whose name was Crazylegs Funandgoodtimes I, never studied, cut classes, lettered three vears in jousting, and was very bad. I was very good. I never studied and cut classes .
 Crazylegs was still in bed, having slept through Organic Alchemy, Fundamentals of Blood-Letting, and International Usury . One warm afternoon he was still asleep in bed .
 All of the closet door burst open and out stepped a dumpy little old lady, dressed in faded cheese cloth ami wearing an old St. Ami .
 She wore a St. Louis Browns baseball cap . She bore a sticking resemblance to Ma Kettle . She was wearing a baseball cap when she appeared .
 Crazylegs, being the shifty, rotten character that he was, did not feel it was his place to tell the dumpy litle old lady he was not Cranfield . He considei-ing the fact that there might be something in it for him .
 Crazylegs decided on a maroon Corvette a lifetime pass to the ale-house, and a 3.3 overall . CrazyLegs decided to buy the Corvette after a great deal of dickering .
 The real Cranfield stumbled into the hoom . He was so clumsy and made so much noise, that he startled the F.G.M. and she inadvertently turned him into a toad .
 Wedding Invitations See Our Exciting New Line of All the latest styles, including, ■ parchments — silver and gold designs — Protestant, Catholic, Mormon selections — complete accessories . See our exciting new line of invites .
 Pick and Pan awards given each year for outstanding"" work in speech, radio, debate and drama . Colorado College Tiger .
 The awards were first given in 1944 and have gone to students who have shown special interest and a willingness to perform in these areas .
 Sir Fletcher-Cooke has served the Colonial Office of the United Kingdom from 1034 to 1961 . He served in London, Malaya, Palestine, Cyprus, and Tanganyyika . He has served in Malaya and Palestine .
 This year the Pick and Pan awards for speech and radio go to Tom Rutenber, Dick Dugdale, John Trujillo, Vivian Arviso Onefeather, Tom Hook, Daniel Bernstein, and Steve Sabom .
 Awards for debate go to Dave Furgason, David Bitters, Susan Caudill . Awards for Debate go to David Furgasons, Susan Bitters and Dave Fergason .
 Jane Pierce, Carol Fischer, Cynthia Lamb, and Sylvia Stenovec are the recipients along with Ann Collins, daughter of Dr. Dr. Collins . Ann Collins is the daughter of Ann Collins .
 These award winners will be the guests of ""Chief"" Woodson Tyree at his home this Sunday morning for breakfast . The award winners are invited to his home for breakfast this Sunday .
 The gold pan and miner's pick and burro, as in the cut above, is the design of the design . The design is designed to look like a gold pan .
 In speech, drama and debate, as in prospecting, hard work and endurance are needed to profit . The symbolism shows that ""gold is where you dig it"" and in speech and drama, as well as in . prospecting . As well as the symbolism, the symbolism is that
 Sunday afternoon there will be a picnic at the Tyree's where the award winners will be the guests . Special recognition will be given to the membership of the Talent and Speakers Bureau .
 The picnic will begin at 4:00 m.m. and last year's winners are invited to attend . Last year's winner's picnic will be held at the end of the year's event .
 The sponsors of the the event, the CC Tiger Club, got the evening off to an enthusiastic start following a banquet honoring the newly tapped Tigers .
 I.O.Us and cash donations so far, $72.79 Grand Sum Total— $491.04 . He represented Tanganyika at the Ghana Independence Celebrations in Accra in 1957 .
 During World War II he was a Royal Air Force intelligence officer . He was captured and recaptured by the Japanese in Java, and was imprisoned in Japan for three years .
 Criticism of this performance is especially hard, considering the problems faced in this kind of play . Criticism is difficult, considering problems faced by the people involved in something like this .
 The cast as well as the technical staff are to be soundly applauded for their work and encouraged to continue with it . The cast and technical staff should be soundfully applauded for the work .
 The play, from a dramatic point of view, cannot in all fairin ^ often terr terrrt,i e to behold . However, the play is not all fair in all, and it is often not all funny .
 Hp _jss be dismissed with only a rewarding nod and a congratulatory smile . Hp_jss can be dismissed by only a smile and a nod from a colleague .
 "The play as a total unit had little or no continuity," reviewer says . "Each scene lacked the puissance to carry its action and its suspense over to the next"
 'They were disjointed almost without meaning', a chain of disorganized events; a dream. 'They're disjoint almost without meanings', a writer says .
 The use of gimmicks was an unsuccessful attempt to cover up for the poor acting of the players, says BBC Sportsmail . "The use of gimmicks was a failed attempt to cover up for the poor acting of the players," says BBC Sport's Simon
 'The music was excellent in itself, but it tried to create out of nothing something which did not exist' 'It was an attempt to create something which didn't exist,' says the reviewer .
 As it faded sporadically into the nervous silence of the auditorium, much of the mood and atmosphere of the play vanished along with it .
 The lighting was generally good, but it was not memorable or excellent . A few scenes such as the garden scenes or the one utilizing the King, Melisande, and her husband were noteworthy .
 The rest of the lighting was neither dramatic nor intense, and it helped to painfully illustrate the condition of the play . It helped to illustrate the play's condition .
 The settings, designed by Joan Carter, were the most outstanding, adding much to the atmosphere . The settings were designed by Joanne Carter .
 "They expressed with more precision than dialogue could do the tragedy and the forboding in the plot," the author says of the film . "They express more precision," he adds .
 The costumes were well chosen, flattering, and accurate . Except for anachronistic mop, the costumes were great .
 The last scene would fade into obscurity and the shuffling of scenery and impatient feet would be dispelled with the introduction of new activity . As it was, the last scene of the last scenes would fade .
 The activity itself was, in general, on the par of fraternity skits . It was matchless in its ability to embarrass the audience as a whole . The activity was 'matchless'
 Arkel the King, played by Jay_ Hemingway, was perhaps the most credible performance of the evening . The performance was a credible performance .
 Genevieve played by Margaret Neuman was flat and colorless, without life or feeling, but perhaps this was intentional . Perhaps this is intentional .
 Pelleas, portrayed by Carl Chard, ranted and strutted his hour upon the stage with little mc · · .
 The total effect was displacing the audience, but it seemed like it wasn't real .
 One cringed and squirmed with uneasiness and repulsion waiting in trepidation for the inevitable laughter to follow . But to see it enacted by this Pelleas one cringed, squirmed .
 As previously mentioned, his execution of Pelleas left something to be desired and was anything but effective .
 He too gave the impression that his Method acting had failed, creating an incomplete and self-conscious combination of Golaud-John Giannes .
 Ethel Six Geary's interpretation of Melisande was a far better attempt than most of the others . It was not a profound projection of high dramatic quality, but it was nevertheless a good attempt .
 There was even, at times, a true, sentiment, but it was soon lost in her flightiness .
 She acted throughout as the scapegoat for the audiences nervous laughter and derisive scorn . Nevertheless she did perform one function in that she acted throughout . Nevertheless, she was a scapegoat throughout the show .
 Three servants added a welcome relief with their light comments, and were enjoyed by most . Even if it was only a minor role, the three servants were a welcome addition to the cast .
 Mountaineer's Weekend is an annual gathering of college mountain clubs from the Rocky Mountain region . The Colorado College Mountain Club is sponsoring the event .
 The weekend will begin Friday as the visiting clubs arrive and register in Rastall Center . The visiting clubs will register at the weekend .
 Registration will continue into the early part of Saturday morning to accommodate clubs coming from as far as Salt Lake City . Registration will also continue into early Saturday morning for clubs from all over the country .
 After 10m. registration will move from the main desk to the club headquarters in the Berg Heil room . The club's main desk will now be located at the club's headquarters . The new registration system will be in place of 10m registration .
 Any interested students invited to come to the registration desk for information and are invited to participate in the weekend activities .
 Of greatest interest to spectators will be rock climbing in the Garden of the Gods and North Cheyenne Canyon . Rock climbing will be a highlight for visitors to the Grand Canyon .
 There will be climbers on many spectacular routes easily seen from the roads . CCMC members will be available to answer questions about the routes .
 Saturday evening, the club will sponsor a barbeque and party at Hermann's Ranch in Woodland Park . The club will also sponsor a party at the ranch . The event will be held in Woodlands Park, California .
 Traditionally this party has been one of the social highlights of the climbing season .
 There are no formal activities planned for Sunday as clubs from Wyoming and Utah will have to leave early . Climbing will probably continue through much of the day, but climbing is likely to continue .
 The first Mountaineer's Weekend was held at Laramie in May 1957 in the rain . Only four CCMC members participated in the event .
 Oskasita Hosts Annual Gymkhana held last Sunday in Penrose Stadium . CC Gymkhanas were held in the Penrose stadium in the city .
 Events were enhanced by an unusually large turnout and beautiful weather . Events were interesting, as well as often hysterical to watch .
 The most amusing of the events was Goat Tying, in which contestants had to ride out to the middle of the arena, dismount, throw and tie a goat tied to a stake .
 Although one could not help feeling sorry for the unfortunate animal, one also could not laugh at the antics of the contestants . The animal was injured in the incident .
 Donna Story won the event with an amazingly good time of 24 seconds . The event was won by Donna Story with an amazing 24-second time .
 Out of the nine classes, only three were really serious, the barrel racing and freshman and upperclass equitation . The barrel racing was the only serious class .
 Sue Thompson won the barrel racing with a time of 17. seconds — extremely good for a college event . Sue Thompson was the only person to win a barrel racing event in college .
 The ""fun"" events included musical tires, water relay, walk and lead race, walk, trot, and canter relay and egg and spoon race .
 All these classes were just what they were billed to be — fun, not only for the riders, but also for the spectators . All of these classes are just what it was billed as .
 The judge for all the events was Beverly Bryant, a young lady who is well known all over the state for her English and western riding .
 The primary job of the vicepresident of the ASCC is to suport and work closely with the isident . The ASCC's primary job is to support and support the president of the board .
 It must be realized that [ie vice-president is subordinate the president, and if . maximum ffectiveness is to be achieved the ffo will have to complement each ither . The vice president is subordinate to the president .
 Next year, because of deferred ish, the vice-president will be of jreat importance in helping to . irient the freshman class into the etivities of the college .
 He must ad the Enthusiasm Committee i'hich will coordinate the activities . He must also provide the school with jganized leadership' in various acuities .
 The vice-president must also guide the Social-Coordinating Committee which will coordinate jll student activities on the campus .
 This will provide the necessary guidance to have a smooth running social program . The program will also provide guidance on how to run a successful social network .
 These are the basic duties of the te-president, and it is important [hat these duties be properly executed], says President Obama .
 If elected, I will see that ihese jobs are carried out and anil assist the president in any capacity he deems necessary . Anil says he would see that jobs were carried out .
 Steve Sabom Candidate for Vice-President . Candidate for VP: Student enthusiasm is key to campus success . Sabom candidate: Students should be enthusiastic about campus life . Candidate: Students need to be enthusiastic .
 With rumors of abolishing athletics and constant talk of student apathy, one .annot help but sense a need in important . realm of campus life .
 Nothing is solved by mere complaint without subsequent action . Nevertheless, as prevalent as the need may be, the need for action is still prevalent .
 This action can be infilled into the student body through jffective ASCC leadership . ASCC leaders can also be responsible for this action .
 "I vest issured that with the innovation )f a deferred rush program next 11, the pep organizations can and ;il undertake a more vigorous approach to the short-lived enjoyment of freshman agitation," he said .
 The Hockey Rally held this past winter drew the school together in a rare display of unity . ASCC's ecutive Council backing hould follow along the line of such athletic ventures as the Hockey Rally .
 Greek Weekend, Parents' Weekend, and Sophomore Carnival need direct and indirect support from your Student Council . Other events, more on the campus scene, such as the Greek Weekend and Parents' weekend, need direct support from the Student Council.
 This spirit can be increased with constant pressure on the publications, enthusiasm, and communication committees which are formed with chairmen elected by the student body . The student body should be more involved in the student spirit .
 The opportunity of a 3.5-hour beer parlor near the campus also offers a novel experience which could evolve into a vital factor in school spirit . Beer parlor will be available at 3.3 p.m. on campus .
 It would provide the student body with atmosphere in which to relax, away from the humdrum of academic curriculum . Moreover, it would provide students with atmosphere to relax .
 The toilsome but necessary task of convincing the residents of this area to lift the prohibitive zoning ordinance will rest with every student interested in the project .
 These are a few of the vital issues facing your Executive Council next year . These are the issues facing the Executive Council .
 Whether or not they are resolved effectively is left up to your participation in the election and support of the new administration . It is up to you to decide whether or not these issues are resolved .
 As a representative of the student body, I would he proud to serve as your ASCC vice-president . I would be proud to run for ASCC Vice-President .
 One of the main issues in the presidential campaign was that of more effective communication between ASCC and the student body . ASCC is a student body body that needs more communication from students .
 This year's administration has amended the constitution so that the responsibility of communication will be a basic part of the secretary's job .
 As a candidate for secretary of state, I want to see these improvements implemented . I want the improvements implemented. I'm not a politician but a businesswoman .
 The ASCC is a representative organ of the Associated Students of Colorado College . It is of the utmost importance that the ASCC not be an ""ivory tower"" organization, but a representative of the college .
 I feel that the chairmanship of the newly revised Communications Committee gives the secretary a vast opportunity to utilize every possible method to insure this. I feel . The secretary of state has an opportunity to use every possible way to ensure this. The secretary has the chance to use this.
 Added communication between students and governing body should, I hope, also stimulate greater unity within the student body and increase in common interests and goals . Added communication should also stimulate more unity among student body .
 ASCC must be equally cognizant of student issues and controversies . ASCC minutes must also be aware of the student body's concerns . The student body must be acquainted with the issues handled in ASCC .
 ASCC secretary must act as a valuable intermediary between the student body and its government . ASCC Secretary must act in her fullest capacity, she says . The student body is a vital part of the university's government .
 The secretary is a regular voting member of the Council . There are many possibilities for initiative and originality, says the secretary .
 The secretary will also serve as the chairman of the Communications Committee next year . This will be true to an even larger degree next year as the secretary will be the chairman .
 The duties of this committee will be to establish a firm, informative relationship between the student body and its governing body — the Executive Council . The duties will include establishing a firm and informative relationship .
 By virtue of my office on the Council this year, I am thoroughly familiar with its function and duties . I would be able to help the new president immediately with the organization of the new Council .
 I am very interested in the role which student government plays on the Colorado College campus and I would like to continue to participate in our student government . I am also interested in continuing to be involved in student government at Colorado College .
 Next year the Treasurer will take on the even greater responsibility — chairman of a much more influential Finance Committee than in the past .
 Most all of the ASCC appropriations for clubs and special interest groups will go directly to the Finance Committee before the appeals for appropriations are voted on by the Executive Council . The committee will vote on appropriations for the clubs and groups .
 This will require many more valued judgments on the part of the Treasurer . The Treasurer will need to make a more valued judgment on the issue .
 Capable leadership must be shown in controlling the allocation of your money, which amounts to about $20 to $22 for each academic year . Capable leaders must show leadership in controlling money allocation, says the author . The author says leadership must also be shown to control money allocation .
 In this series of ASCC elections, it is your turn to make valued judgments . The ASCC is holding a series of elections for the next year .
 The first duty of the office is to direct ASCC funds to the groups and organizations in such a way that these funds will be used to benefit the greatest number of students . The office of the ASCC has a duty of directing funds to students .
 Phi Delts elected and installed their new officers for next semester . The second Greek News Monday night was the Phi Delt's second annual meeting .
 Bruce Franklin will serve as vice-president, Ben Lewis as treasurer, and Pete Webster as secretary . Ben Lewis will be treasurer, Ben Webster will be secretary, Pete Webster is secretary . Bruce Franklin has been named vice-treasurer .
 Other officers elected were Ed Lorson as social chairman, Chuck White as chorister, Ray Mithun as Wrnden, Paul Carson as historian, Steve Frink ns IFC representative, Chuck Lawerence as rush chairman, Mike Mayer as housemanager and Fred Singleton as
 Phi Delt White Carnation Dance will be held in Denver tomorrow night at the Petroleum Club .
 Treasurer comes in close contact with financial and legislative matters of the students . Treasurer must act upon them with the concern of these students, says Treasurer .
 I feel that I understand the duties and responsibilities of this office, and if elected, I am prepared to undertake their execution . I feel I understand my duties and responsibility of the office,’s candidate says . I'm prepared to do their execution, he says .
 As an officer of the Executive Council, I would be prepared to act on any matters that anight arise, to the best of my ability . I would not be surprised if there were any issues to arise, he said .
 A new school year will bring ASCC many problems, some of which will not have been seen before . ASCC students will have to deal with some of the biggest challenges of the year .
 I feel the office of treasurer must be n flexible one, reudy to cope with the decisions that must and will be made . It is therefore that I feel . I feel that the office . of treasurer should be flexible one .
 Tejon Jo Heller For Sophomore Class Commissioner . Tejon will be the school's first class commissioner . A dynamic ASCC cannot exist without student interest . EDDIE MACK's GARAGE 3 1 71/2 N.
 The sophomore class can make a substantial contribution through its commissioners . The commissioners will make a significant contribution to the college class .
 "I feel that I am qualified for this position, and 1 would like to represent the interests of our class," says one candidate . "I am qualified to represent our class. I feel that . I feel . that I can represent our interests," she says .
 It's not too soon to be thinking of flowers for Mother on Mother's Day — we will wire them to her . And, it's not just too soon, it is not too early to think of flowers .
 Almost wearproof! thick soles, storm welts, genuine shell cordovan tliut shines with a quick Rick of a cloth . Elstun's Flowers 16 S Tejon ME 4-8951 GENUINE CORDOVAN .
 Colorado College's golf team remained undefeated at home this season as they won 6-3 from Adams State at 'the Broadmoor Golf Club last Friday . The team blanked Regis 9-0 the following day at the Kissing Camels Golf Course .
 Ralph Haddad of Adams State was the defending medalist in this week's invitational sponsored by CC and the Air Force Academy . He shot a low 73 that included three birdies and an eagle in Friday's match .
 Bob Magie and Rich Nichols, freshmen members of the Tiger squad, tied for medalist honors on Saturday with a pair of 76's .
 Bruce McLaughlin, Don Stauffer, Rich Firmine, and Rich Nichols each won both their matches over the weekend .
 Colorado College and the United States Air Force Academy will co-hosts the Pikes Peak Intercollegiate Invitational Invitational Golf Tournament at the Eisenhower and Broadmoor courses .
 Sixteen teams from seven states have filed six-man team entries for the tournament . The tournament will take place in seven states .
 The tournament is a fifty-four hole medal play test, with thirty-sbc holes scheduled at the Eisenhower Golf Course at the Academy on Friday, and the final eighteen holes at the Broadmoor Golf Course on Saturday . The tournament will take place at Eisenhower, Eisenhower and Broadm
 Each team may enter six men, but only the low four count toward the team title . The low four teams can win a team title if they enter at least six men .
 Trophies are awarded to winners in both the college and university divisions . Trophies were awarded for winners in the college or university division .
 Colorado College will be represented by Gordon Aamoth, Bruce McLaughlin, Don Stouffer, Bob Magie, Rich Nichols, and Rick Firmine or Jim Schultz . Colorado College is represented in the process .
 The low Rocky Mountain Conference team will be recognized as the conference champion . A buffet luncheon for all contestants is scheduled at the Broadmoor Golf Club following the final round on Saturday .
 Ellen Boughn, Susan Merrell, Mary Beth Bishop, Barbara Tolley, Sharon Shackleford, and Karen Tucker. Ellen Merrell: "It's been a great year for the country," says Susan .
 The IntramuralS Slocum Hall pushball competition ended May 2 as an outnumbered First West team fell to a more powerful Fourth West squad . The tournament is recognized as one of the leading collegiate tournaments in the country .
 Fourth West beat Fourth West 8-8 in the final period of pushball competition . Both teams managed to score five points by entering their opponent's goal, but the victors managed to power the boggy ball across their opponents goal line to four ""partial"" goals of two points each
 The game was played between two West Wing teams . It was the first time the two teams had played each other .
 In Slocum Hall competition, the West wings have generally fared poorly since they have fewer residents than the others . The West wing has generally fared badly since it has fewer residents .
 That the two West wings could knock over their more numerous foe is clearly indicative of a greater wing spirit and desire to win, at least in pushball . The two West teams have a greater spirit and a greater need to win .
 This year's Intramural program has been generally successful in that it has involved the vast majority of Slocum Hall men in at least a little exercise .
 Jim Hanks should receive the proper recognition for setting up schedules and rules which have allowed the program to reach its generally successful climax . Hanks set up the scheduling schedule and rules for the show .
 It is hoped that next year's program will be even more successful as measured in terms of competition and participation .
 The Enthusiasm Committee will judge the tryouts . Final tryouts: Thurs., May 17, 7:30 .
 All girls are eligible who have been at CC for one semester and who had at least a 2.2. average last Bemester . All girls eligible are eligible for the program who have one semester at CC .
 United States Amateur, British Amateur, and Mexican Amateur have been among the participants . United States amateur, British amateur and Mexican amateur teams have been competing .
 Many golfers, unknown as collegiate competitors in the CC Invitation, later have gained fame as amateurs and on the professional circuit . Golfers who were unknown in the Invitation have later gained fame in golfing .
 Both games saw a Tiger team plagued by the same seemingly insurmountable pitching weakness that has lost all but three games this season . Tiger's pitching weakness has been a problem for the past two weeks .
 Colorado School of rado Springs High School ace Ron Mines impresses for Western State . Ron Mines is a former Cologame ace for the state .
 Western State pitching held CC to only nine hits, while two Tiger hurlers were bombarded for a total of 27 . CC pitching held the Tigers to just nine hits .
 The Bengals jumped on Anderson early in the game when leadoff hitter Joe Cordova was hit by a pitch . Reno Van Putten singled, and Dennis Walker loaded the bases on a throwing error .
 Anderson, having difficulty with his control, then walked Steve Gustafson and Joe Bergquist, driving in two runs . Anderson walked out of the game in the ninth inning .
 Anderson stopped the rally by forcing Matt Railey to hit into a double play, then striking out Mike Mestek . Anderson was the only pitcher to get out of the inning . Anderson is known for his ability to get back to the plate .
 Wayne McAlpine homered with the bases loaded to regain the lead for CC, 7-6 . Tn the second, Western State rallied with two down to take the lead 4-3, only to lose it in the third . Western State took the lead in the second .
 It was the last Tiger lead of the game, which turned into a rout . The Mountaineers gained three l'uns in the fourth on two homers, then clobbered both Barry Anthony and Gary Sparkman for five more tallies in the fifth .
 CC looked considerably better in Saturday's game, as they almost grabbed the victory, largely on the basis of Jeff Sauer's consistently able pitching . The CC almost won the game, largely thanks to the pitching of Sauer .
 Going into the ninth, the Tigers were clinging to a 10-7 lead . Western State opened up with a three-run barrage against reliever Don Jorgenson to tie it up .
 The Tigers failed to come up with any serious threat in the bottom of the ninth . Western State took full advantage of their tenth-inning opportunity to pound out 4 runs on two homers . One was an inside the park home run eked out by Western State's shortstop .
 It could also be the occasion for students to show their support for a baseball team which sorely needs it . Students could also show support for the team .
 The consistently empty bleachers which have characterized Tiger efforts at home can hardly act as an incentive for the sort of playing toward which Carle and his nine are aiming . The apathy which has come to characterize CC's students where sports events are concerned .
 After Wednesday's game, the Tigers host the Bears of Colorado State College on Thursday, May 10, then travel to Greeley for the second game of the series .
 GU wins 6-0 in six straight matches . CC tennis team's string of four straight wins snapped last Saturday .
 Russ Spevry was leading 2-0 in the first set, but was unable to put his big serve in the court . He was then unable to serve again in the second set, with grim results .
 The match was very wellplayed, however, with plenty of sizzling ground strokes and brilliant net play on both sides .
 Rusty Bastedo injured his arm trying for a big service to close out the game after nine deuce points at 2-1 in the first set . At number two position, Rusty Bastasto was injured trying to close the game .
 Unable to rely on his serve thereafter, he took to charging the net at full-bore, trying for the quick kill on the return, but even with this tactic he was unable to win .
 Alan Anisgard lost his service from 40-love and 3-4 in the first set, and psychologically that was the end of the match . The victory was a comfortable victory for the first time in a row .
 The matches were good preparation for the Conference meet at Greeley this weekend . CC hopes to bring back all the silver this year .
 Last year's finals were snowed out, necessitating no title for anyone . Last year the finals were held in New Jersey, but no one won .
 This team looks like the best CC tennis team since the days of Doug Corley, and maybe the members can prove that statement this weekend . This weekend's match will be the first time the team has played together since Corley retired .
 The fifth annual Abbot Lecture was given last Monday night by Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter delivered the lecture at the University of Cambridge .
 Dr. Shoulu describes the general hanges that shoulu can be effected in the American political system . Dr. J. Shoolu describes how the political system should be affected by the American government .
 Kossiter described the three polititraditions from which the united States has drawn . The United States is divided into three political parties .
 He spoke the Conservatism of Edmund Burke, generally associated with the British System, which was asciated with negative conceptions of progress and social welfare . He spoke out against the British system .
 The American people have rejected this conservatism with the violence that they have rejected the radicalism of Marx, Rosseau. and Paine. The U.S. has rejected the conservatism of the American people with violence, the president says .
 Instead of following either reactionary or radical paths, the American people had bhosen, according to the professor . The American people have a tradition of liberalism, or hopeful optimism, he says .
 The Cornell professor then began to list characteristics of our liberal tradition, including our populism, constitutionalism, and our skepticism of political power and its uses .
 He added that we have incorporated into our body oi philosophy belief in God, an optimistic view of history working in our favor, and a dynamic and progressive spirit of growth . Along wih these ""narrow"" definitions of liberal doctrine, he said .
 Rossiter then pointed out the dangers which can arise from having unreal or unrealizable ideals . Rossiter said the dangers of unreal ideals can arise when people have unreal or unrealistic ideals .
 Although ideals should be more advanced than the eality they describe, they should not be so advanced as to be imiractical, giving us a misleading onception of what our aims are in times of crisis .
 Calls this disparity between ■deals and reality the ""ideal gap,"" he went on to declare that we should correct at least three errors that are handicapping our progress today .
 Dssiter declared that modern government demanded a greater sponsibility for our leaders and that with this responsibility must be corresponding political and personal power, still within the confines of democracy . Modern government demands a greater sponsorship of our leaders .
 He pointed out that we must modify our present inhibitions against such increases of personal power . He said that we need to modify our current inhibitions .
 Professor Rossiter went on to say that we must lose our reluctance to use our political power for our own good, both foreign and domestic . He said we must use our power for the good of our country both abroad and domestically .
 Cornell professor says political power is less dangerous than political vacuum . Political vacuum is more dangerous than a political vacuum, he says . Cornell professor: In the modern world political power less dangerous .
 His final point was that we must modify our blind faith in individualism . He said that individualism is not a matter of individualism but individualism must be modified .
 We must realize that the most effective action is performed by and for groups . That is, we must realize, that the best action should be done by groups, not individuals .
 Rossiter appealed once more to the notion that all he had suggested had been previously suggested by other Americans in times past . Rossiter: "All of the things he suggested had previously been suggested by others"
 It almost seemed as though this argument cast a holy light on all his statements and made them ""homegrown"" and hence good . The argument almost seemed like this argument made it seem like it was 'homegrown' and therefore good .
 In spite of this one ""irrational" appeal, what the scholarly Abbot lecturer had to say was timely and articulate . The Abbot was a scholar of the Abbot .
 Rossiter admitted his proposals were far-reaching, but declared that they were consistent with the liberal tradition . Rossiter said they were essential to the success of our nation and our ideals in the twentieth century .
 Nicole Antuszewicz, special piano student of Max Lanner, will give a Young Artist recital on May 22nd .
 At 16, she was admitted to the Ecole Normale de Musique de Paris, founded by the famous pianist, Alfred Cortot . She studied at the famous piano school founded by Cortot in Paris .
 She won the school's first prize in piano in her second year at the Conservatoire National de Music de Versailles . From there, she graduated into the Conservatoriès National de Muschey de Music .
 She continued her work at the Musig Hochsehule in Munich under Professor Koebel, and then again in Paris under Jean Micault . She continued to work in Munich, Germany and Paris .
 This year, while in Colorado Springs, she has been studying with Max Lanner, preparing herself for an important competition in France . She will enter the competition upon her return next season .
 Barbara Morgan, from Fort Collins, is a member of the Colorado Springs Symphony . She is studying cello with Richard Maag .
 She will play the first movement of the cello concerto by Saint-Saens, with Mr Maag at the piano . She will also play a piece by the cellist for the first part of the concerto .
 Enriched Courses On Honors Level were recently honored at the AWS SENIOR HONOR'S BANQUET . Sue Dare, Joan Jilka and Sue Dare are present Cap and Gown members .
 Kathy Lyon, Chessie Kemp, Jan Fry, Judy Gibson, Sue Holt, Marcia Moses, and Betsy Foote. philosophy will be offered to a selected group of superior sophomores next September .
 The courses, ""Cosmology and Evolution"" and ""Philosophy Tutorial,"" will be as intensive as junior and senior level honors courses at many colleges and universities . The courses will focus on cosmology and evolution as well as philosophy .
 Warner ■ said that both courses will be open to students who successfully complete the current honors program in history and literature for superior freshmen . The courses will also be open for students who have completed the honors program . Warner ■ ■ said both courses are available to students .
 Twenty-four top students are in the program which was launched last fall . The program was launched in the fall and launched last year .
 The special science and philosophy courses were approved by the faculty at its monthly meeting April 30 . They were approved at the faculty's monthly meeting .
 The two new courses will be taught by the topical rather than the comprehensive method . As in the history-literature program, the two new programs will focus on the topical and comprehensive .
 Articles from scientific magazines and paperback books will be used instead of regular texts . Use this week's Daily Discussion to help with reading comprehension comprehension and vocabulary .
 The course will count toward the science requirement for non-science majors only, college officials say . The course is available to students at the University of Washington .
 The meeting to discuss aspects oT this Symposium will be held on Friday, Mav 18th, at 3:30m. in Room 207/209 of Rastall Center .
 All interested students and faculty are invited to attend his meeting . The meeting is designed to bring out as many good ideas as possible for the conduct of the Symposium Week .
 Ann Armstrong, Peigi Benham, Karen Bessessen, Julie Buhlke, Seece Boyce, Polly Franklin, and Polly Franklin are featured in this week's Top 10 .
 Steve Sabom was elected vicepresident of the Associated Students of Colorado College . Each of these girls has maintained an accumulative grade . Sabom has been elected vice president of the college .
 Steve Sabom, John Levis, Jim Knapp, Steve Frink 3(i2) and Terry Kidner, 308.1 . Nan Burroughs, 221.1; Bill Hyblbl.1.1, .
 The sixth annual Honors Convocation will be held Tuesday, May 22, at 11:00 in Shove Memorial Chapel . Blue Key Sponsors are Blue Key sponsors of the event .
 Approximately 30 awards and honors will be presented during the convocation ceremony . The convocation is sponsored by the college chapter of the Blue Key fraternity .
 The convocation program was organized by a special Blue Key committee working with Miss Lorena A Berger, secretary of the collgee and alumni secretary . Miss Berger organized the convocation .
 Chris Griffiths, Stew Ritchie, and Jerry Osborne were serving with him .
 Louis T Benezet, and Dean Lloyd E Worner will present the department's department awards and honors . Louis Benezett, Louis T Worner, will give a speech at the ceremony . Dean Lloyd Worner is also present at the awards ceremony .
 Following the presentation of the awards, the new president of the Associated Students of Colorado College, Max Power, will he installed . Max Power will be installed as the new student president .
 The Rev. J Julius Baird, on the chapel organ, and the CC Choir, under the direction otf Donald Jenkins, The Rev . Donald Jenkins . The choir was led by the Rev. Donald Jenkins and the choir .
 CAP and GOWN hopes to petition fur membership in the national association of Mortar Board Chapters in 19(14) Kenneth Burton will give the invocation and benediction .
 Cap and Gown have been in the forefront of the Shove Chapel's activities in the past year . This year's activities include the conducting of an assembly and panel discussion on foreign study and travel, and tile preparation of a hook list .
 It is hoped that this book list, which will soon ,be distributed to all seniors, will provide oticincentive for each individual to continue his liberal arts education .
 The members of Cap and flown have also invited a professor of their choice to dinner once a month in order to chat informally and get better acquainted .
 Cap and Gown has been a familiar and important part of the Colorado College community for the past three years . During the last three years, the team has been at the center of the college community .
 The girls sporting the black skirts and white blazers continue to be esteemed not only for their past achievements, but also for their collective contribution they make their senior year as members of Cap and Gown .
 Plans are underway to organize a ski team at Colorado College next fall . Plans for the ski team are also underway for Colorado College .
 During the preliminary training period weekend (raining will move to Saint Mary's Glacier) during the training period (rain will move) Rainy weather is expected during the weekend . Rainy conditions are expected to continue throughout the week .
 After the preliminary workouts, the team will hold timetrials where team selections will be made .
 Those who are interested in such a team will please contact either Peter McLaughlin, Glenn Foust or Don Odea before the end of the term .
 This week has been an unusual one at CC— unusual because of the interest shown and enerev expended bv CC students . This week was an unusual week for CC students and staff .
 The first thing lo support this is the student turnout for CC's Executive Council elections . Student turnout for the election will be key to the success of the election .
 Mr Steve Sabom, vice-president; Mr Steve Frrak, treasurer: and Miss Terry Kidner, secretary. Miss Kidner is secretary .
 Third the turnout at the Slocum Hall-sponsored dance Tuesday night and the Beta-sponsored twister Wednesday afternoon was quite unusual .
 Probably more persons were at the Tuesday dance than have been at any CC 'dance' in the past several years . The Tuesday dance was the first to be held at the dance in the school's history .
 This was quite a change from some of the other dances sponsored by various organizations this year . Perhaps this was due in part to the proximity of the dance, perhaps to the quality of the band, but in any event, this was a change .
 The job was completed in less than three hours . Because of the enthusiastic participation and the contest between CC's social organizations, the job was complete in less of three hours.
 This was much better than expected, and again shows the spirit that has pervaded the CC campus in the last week or two . It was a great day for the students, and it was a good start to the season .
 With its continuance, college at CC could become much more fruitful, and perhaps, just as important — more enjoyable . With its continuation, college could become more fruitful and perhaps just as enjoyable, more enjoyable.
 This year's initiates into Pick and Pan gathered at ""Chief"" Tyree's for the traditional breakfast . The traditional breakfast was held at the ""Chief ""Tyree's" Tyree"
 GANO DOWNS MEN'S CLOTHING — FURNISHING AND GIFTS BROADMOOR HOTEL Kachina Lounge Alta Vista Hotel I 18 N Cascade Ave. GANo DOWERS MEN'
 We have seen two very stimulating and thought provoking letters appear in The Tiger . During the past two weeks, we have seen a very stimulating, thought provoking letter .
 Both pro and con arguments about artificial selection have been presented . Both pro or con arguments against artificial selection are presented .
 He has implied that good health is only a matter of fashion, geography, or culture . He has also implied that it is only matter of style, geography or culture.
 Mr De Flon bases his argument for artificial selection on the fact that there is a buildup of detrimental mutations occurring in mankind's genetic reservoir .
 These mutations result in the inability of the organism to carry out vital metabolic processes, or to resist disease . These mutations are known as 'mutation mutations' and 'mutations'
 Mr Kutsche bases his argument on the hope that culture will counteract the pernicious effect of mutations .
 The examples Mr Kutsche cites of control by culture are rather easily counteracted lethal or sublethal mutations . The examples he cites are of control of culture by culture .
 When the buildup of genetic defects has reached a certain point, humans will appear who carry a series of these defects, and control by medical means will become increasingly impossible . Control will become impossible by the end of the day .
 Def defects which are not now selected against due to cultural knowledge can readily be considered harmful . Thus, defects which were not now considered harmful can be readily considered harmful.
 A Hottentot male wants a female with a potbelly and a swayed back . He doesn't seem to realize that it is precisely because of natural selection that a female has a pot belly .
 It also does not follow that because people once felt that tuberculosis was fashionable, it is good health in a purely objective sense, it does not mean tuberculosis is fashionable .
 On a statistical basis alone, I would object to the feasibility of this undertaking . On the statistical basis, this is not a good idea for the project .
 There is also the fact that new deleterious mutations would arise in each successive generation . Some of these would not be detected for several generations until an appropriate mating resulting in a homogenote occurred .
 Until our knowledge of genetics has increased sufficiently to provide us with an exacting method of genetic analysis in vitro, rather than a phenotypic analysis in vivo, the reduction of deleterious mutations by artifiicial selection would be impractical .
 Campus Chest Auctioneer, Don ODEN, strives to break last year's total of $489.60 . Aside from the above mentioned reasons, the cultural problems inCAMPUS CHEST AUCTIONEER, DON ODEN .
 Bob Novig has been selected as Colorado College's Photographic editor for the 19G2-63 school year . Novig will be the Photographic Editor for the next year .
 Bill Stafford volved would be so severe as to render the project impossible . Henceforth, requests for photographs will be referred to him rather than Bill Stafford .
 If we then decide to select against it, we would have to stop most of the African population from breeding in areas where malaria had been at all prevalent in times past . We would then have to choose against it .
 "It would seem much more appropriate to talk in terms of what we do know than what we don't," he says .
 From even the most superficial study of genetics, one finds certain things that stand out . From even a superficial study, genetics can reveal certain things .
 All genetic structures exhibit a certain tendency to change, i.e. to mutate . Genetic structures have a tendency to do so, and mutate, say experts .
 This tendency might be called the base mutation rate for that organism . This tendency may be the "base mutation rate" of an organism .
 This base rate may be raised by the presence of mutagenic agents such as ionizing radiations of various kinds . Second, this base rate is raised by mutagenation agents .
 That most mutations have a pernicious effect on the organism involved . Last, that most mutations . have a negative effect on . organism involved in the experiment .
 It would appear that, if we wish to do something about this problem, we should try to prevent the rise of our base mutation rate .
 "This, at present, seems to be the most realistic answer to this question," he says . "It seems to present to me, this is the best answer," he adds .
 The Rev. Herbert S Gaskill Jr. Shove Chapel Sunday, May 20, 1962 Sermon Title Called to be Saint* Worship Leader .
 This is the last Sunday Servici of the Academic Year at whidi Mr Burton will preach . Mr Burton's last Sunday will be Sunday at Whidi Church .
 As a considerable section of the collegt community is contemplating tin problem of what each one of then will do in the year and the years to come, the preacher will speak about one aspect of our vocatioi as children of God .
 It is tin preacher's contention that it is thi Christian man who is the norma man and that not only does he ""do' something in the activist traditi' but that he also become a rea person .
 Next Sunday, May 27, will 1* the last Sunday morning Worshii Service of the academic year . The service will be the last of the year's service .
 Dr John Bailey, Assistant Professoi of Religion, and Acting Chairmar of the Religious Department, wil be the preacher . Dr John will be preaching at the University of Cambridge .
 Bailey's last service at Colorad< College is last service before he and family depart for East Africa . Bailey and his family will be in East Africa at the end of the year . Bailey's funeral will be held in Colorado Springs, Colorado .
 Self-service dry cleaning is easier than washing clothes . Full 8lb. full 8 lb. full of 8oz. Full 8oz full of full 8oz of water .
 Colorado College scientist thinks he may have the as chemistry stuthis may be appl j ed ^h pron t,"" dents are concerned .
 The system is actually a series of six to eight books designed to help students r the harder spots of freshman chemistry . Professor Snyder is developing the system .
 On the first page, the student reads a short body of text and then answers a series of multiple-choice questions . The student answers the questions based on a list of answers to each other .
 Each of the multiple-choice answers requires i to turn to a different page in the book . The answers must be turned to different pages in each of the answers .
 If he makes the correct answer, he continues on to the next body of text . If he corrects the question, he goes on to answer it . He then repeats the question if he is correct .
 If he gives the wrong iwer, he will turn to a page where he will find an explanation how and why his answer was wrong . He will then turn to the page to find out what he gave wrong .
 If it is answered correctly this time, the student will be able to continue to the second question . If the student answers correctly, he can continue to answer the other question .
 "The idea is to allow the student to make a few mistakes but then capitalize on the mistakes to show him where he went wrong,"" e continued .
 Programmed instruction might bridge the gap between theoretical concepts and practical practice . Programmed teaching might also give students some excellent practice in applying theoretical concepts to more practical situations .
 To lease or buy: House near Colorado College near Colorado college . Small down payment and sonable rent .
 The Wristwatch Rally will take place on the same stage as the Rally for the Keg . It will be the first of its kind in a series of events held in the same venue .
 The amount of calculating will be almost nil so you will have a chance to see some scenery . The only thing to worry about is how much calculating is how little calculating you can do .
 The entry fee is $.75, starting time is 1m., Sunday, May 20, from the Rastall Center Parking lot . The entry fees are $.25 .
 The case involves two students who took a wallet from a town jewelry store . The case before the committee involved two students taking a wallet .
 The quest ion of readmittance and of his obtaining credits for the present semester's work was left to the discression of the administration . In the case of the one boy, we recommended to the administration that he be suspended from school .
 The other boy, an accessory to the action, was placed on disciplinary probation meaning that upon another violation of misconduct he will automatically be suspended from school pending a hearing of this committee . He will be suspended indefinitely .
 Mariana Cogswell, Judy Gray, Gay Petzold have been granted Fulbright Fellowships for graduate research abroad during the coming academic year . Given Fulbright Grants for graduate studies abroad . Judy Gray and Mariana Grazier have also been given Fulbright grants for
 Miss Cogswell is a student of modern diplomatic history . She hopes to continue graduate work toward an advanced degree in modern European history of international relations .
 She is preparing herself for a career of translating foreign scientific papers into English . She hopes to become a translator of scientific papers in English .
 She will study conditions of the Slovenian minority in the province of Carinthia .
 She hopes to learn to what degree Slovenians have become integrated into the political and social life of Austria . She wants to learn what extent the Slovenians are integrated into Austria's political life .
 Following this she will return to the United States and teach history and German on the high school level . She will also return to Germany to teach history, German and history .
 Paul Bernard, CC history professor, will undertake a longrange research project . The project may bring about a re-evaluation of the reform movement in 18th century Austria .
 Bernard is making plans to spend the summer in Vienna, Austria, laying the foundations for the project . Bernard is spending the summer laying the foundation for the new project .
 He will study manuscripts in the National Archives, War Archives, Administration Archives, and the Aulic Archives . The National Archives is the largest archive in the world .
 Bernard hopes that close study of the reign of Austrian Emperor Joseph I (17051711) will result in a two or three volume work . Bernard hopes to create a two-volume work of his studies .
 From his preliminary research this summer, he plans to establish a method for continuing the study from the CC campus .
 He will be able to do this by requesting that several documents be microfilmed and mailed to him here . The documents will be sent to him in the U.S. by mail .
 He spent the 15)53-54 academic year there as a Fulbright Fellow . During 1900-61, he conducted a study of the Bavarian exchange project .
 Tareyton May 17, 1962 - Colorado College Tiger Profs. The film was shot at Colorado College in 1962 .
 One already has accepted a position at a state university and another is retiring for the second time . It will not be the usual ""Goodbye, Mister Chips"" ceremony because one of the men is retiring .
 The appointment is only a temporary one, however, to fill a vacancy during the first semester of the coming academic year . The appointment will only be temporary .
 Knapp' plan to return to Colorado Springs at the end of the term next January . Knapp: 'I'm going to be back in Colorado Springs, Colorado, next January'
 Professor Barnes joined the faculty at Colorado College in 1925, and since 1945 has been Veraer Z Reed Professor of Chemistry . Since 1945, he is the Veraer . Reed Professor .
 Professor Barnes also has been an engineering chemist with the Illinois State Highway Department . He has been consulting chemist for the Alexander Film Co. of Colorado Springs .
 Professor Barnes has written numerous articles and features for professional journals and magazines . A specialist in the field of organic chemistry, Professor Barnes is a specialist in organic chemistry .
 Union Commitment held its final meeting of the year on May 10th where tentative plans were made for the coming year . Officers were elected and tentative plans for the year were made .
 Ann Armstrong was elected president; Chris Thatcher, vice-president, and Myles Hopper, secretary . Ann Armstrong is elected president . Chris Thatcher is vice-captive; Myles is secretary .
 Commitment seemed to reject a proposal of either joining or being offiliated with the Student Peace Union, the largest student peace organization in the United States . Members of Commitment rejected a proposal to either join or be offiliated . Commitment seems to reject the proposal .
 The majority of those presentfelt that Commitment should continue to remain a discussion group which will present various programs on the questions of War and Peace . Commitment will continue to continue to present programs on questions of war and peace .
 Commitment's activities in the coming year should be students interested in Commitment . Ann Armstrong is the leader of the Commitment of the Year .
 Matt Railey, and Stephanie Row have been elected to the Student Conduct Committee . The committee is a committee of three members of the University of Cambridge .
 The author of three texts on illumination and advanced lighting, he has written more than 40 articles for professional journals .
 Colorado College physics department has received assistance totaling nearly $60,000 for instructional equipment . The money will help implement a new physics curriculum .
 The physics department has embarked upon a completely revised curriculum designed to assist students in the crucial process of self-education in physics . Under the direction of Professoi Howard M Olson, the physics department .
 The new program was made possible by a grant of $24,500 from the National Science Foundation, matched by the college, in support of the program .
 The new curriculum was designed to meet the needs of four kinds of physics majors, including those who plan to teach physics at the secondary school level . Students who expect to go into industry immediately upon graduation will be able to use the curriculum .
 The new physics program is built around a course structure which consists of a solid core foursemester sequence of basic physics required of all majors in the field .
 These courses are followed by progressively more sophisticated courses, not all of which are required for graduation . These courses include courses not required for most of the time .
 A prospective Ph.D. candidate would probably take all of the offerings in the physics department . For example, the student who plans to tench high school physics might elect to take only some of the junior courses .
 A committee was formed to pursue the possibility of having a 3. place on or near campus . The committee is a follow up on the All College Conference discussion on drinking . A committee has been formed to explore the possibilities of having 3. places on campus .
 The purpose of a place like this would be to promote informal gatherings, with or without dates . "The purpose of this place is to promote gatherings," the author says .
 A questionnaire was submitted to the student body and faculty to obtain their views on this subject . The student body was asked to respond to the question .
 Some of the effects on campus life would be; Increased social drinking rather than excessive, give the freshmen a place to go, increase school unity, and cut down on drinking and driving would be cut down .
 The female response to the questionnaire was poorer but similar . 84 — yes, and of these 21 for on campus, 51 for near campus and 10 for either . 10 voted for either of these .
 The suggestions for question five were similar to the males except one girl felt that it should be put on a trial basis . One girl said it should have been put on trial basis. Another girl suggested it be a trial-based question .
 Other coments included: coat and tie on Saturday night, entertainment, only open it on weekends, have bridge tables, cover charge, make sure of good management, use a big college sign .
 President LOUIS T BENEZET is shown here tying the ""best company"" banner on the flag of Company B Company sponsor, Norma Parker, looks on .
 If you are between 20 and 26, between 5'2"" and 5'8"" and single, you may qualify for this challenging and rewarding career . Be Stewardess UNITED AIR LINES .
 Train i ing C ities trainees housed in the dormitory includes a year round pool . Recreational facilities include a year-round pool .
 Colorado College Tiger's position in intercollegiate sports might be described as the old minstrel joke involving the man accosted by the udge for deserting his wiife . The position of the Tiger is the same as that of the Udge .
 Big-time athletics leaves them, as it becomes more and more of a business, supportable only by large receipts . Big time athletics is a big business, but it's not a big enough to support it, says the sports world .
 This is a fortunate thing for small colleges, since economic pressures make them do what they ought to be doing anyway for educational reasons . Small colleges are doing what they need to do anyway for education reasons .
 In hockey Colorado College has its one so-called big time sport; and the relentless build-up among our much larger Western League competitors over the past five years has been hard on us .
 It is still possible that by pinpointed selection of hockey-playing students who artable and discriminating enough to desire the kind of educational experience Colorado College affords d by achieving our own ice rink for practice .
 In football, as in other sports, 'e are moving toward teams more cpresentative of the normal student athlete who elects to come to Colorado College, and the kino, of competition our kind of college ought to be playing . Colorado College is moving toward becoming more competitive in
 Despite geoaphical limitations, we see progss in these trends, mainly among lieges in the Great Plains . Despite geophical limitations we see prossions in this region .
 Colorado College expects to keep broad program of intercollegiate sports so long as student body will engage in them enthusiastically . College will manage the whole program without curbing commitment to a first-rate instructional program and a closeknit campus community .
 If students should become indifferent to sports attendance, or disinclined to stay out for the sake of the sport itself, we would have no reason to continue the program . If students were indifferent to attendance attendance, they would not have a reason to support a team .
 Student expressions of interest in intercollegiate sports are the most important element in our planning . It is important also to keep in mind the natural limitations imposed upon us, and the order of priorities which a college must keep in order to succeed .
 Mills Will Deliver Anthropology Lecture George Mills, lecturer in general education at Colorado College and associate director of the Colorado Springs Fine Arts Center, will discuss ""Anthropology as Art"" at 7:30 today in Rastall Center .
 The talk, part of Fine Arts Week, will be open to the public without charge . The talk will be part of the Fine Arts week .
 Mills has been on the facculy at Colorado College since 1957 . Mills is also a member of the staff at the Fine Arts Center since 1949 . Mills has also been on Colorado College's faculty and staff since 1950 .
 The best Colorado College tennis team in school's history played out the finals of the Rocky Mountain Conference Doubles Championship last Monday afternoon .
 W' say crowds of several hundred had seen and applauded these four young men at Colorado State College over the weekend . Yet on their home courts the team could do no better than to draw a roaring throng of four people .
 No team in conference history has ever won the Conterence so convincingly . No team has won more than one conference title in history .
 The interest of the college student body remains as overwhelmingly dormant as ever . The interest is still dormant in the student body, despite the fact that many students are college students .
 He defeated CSC's first man in three sets, gaining the semi-finals of the singles before being defeated . He defeated the first man, the first CSC player, in a three-set victory .
 The next day Jim and Aian Anisqard came from a 1-4 deficit in the .third set to win 6-4 and reach the finals of the doubles . Jim and his team came from behind to win in the third set of the match .
 In the other half of the draw Russ Sperry and Rusty Bastedo were down 2-5 in the second set of their match . In the Australian Open, the pair are playing in their second match of the tournament .
 The matches mentioned were won on sheer grit and a refusal to throw in the towel . If the reader gets the impression that these players produce under pressure, that is certainly true .
 Russ Sperry did not lose a set either in singles or doubles during the entire tournament . The top player of the tournament was Russ SPerry, who won the tournament .
 "His touch and pace on the ball, as well as his position play on the court .were flawless," says Toni Kroos . "He was flawless" in his first game in charge .
 Rusty Bastedo turned in excellent performances in spite of an arm injury which made backhands and services almost impossible . Alan Anisgai'd put together an amazing sequence of sizzling backhand drives and impeccably-placed volleys to lead the comeback from 1-4 in
 This is quite a team and worth most of the rest of this year's teams rolled together . This year's team rolled together is worth a lot more than the other .
 As the track season wore on this year, it became obvious that CC was a better than average team . The Bears won the state championship in 2012 .
 CSC, because of its greater depth, would dominate the league . However, it was also clear that CSC would dominate because of their depth .
 Jim Blair once again dominated the pole vault . Blair won the event at 13 ft. 13 ft . Blair was the most successful pole vaulter of all time .
 This relay team was made up of Dale McNeal, Norm Liden, Bob Grant, and Dave Krell . The relay team won't be the first time they have done so .
 Bruce Boyd and Steve Sabol took a close second and third in the shot put respectively . Bruce Boyd also took second, third in shot put .
 Freshman Dave Smith ran third in the mile making it likely that he and Tony McGunnis would dominate the distances next year . Freshman Smith ran 3rd in mile .
 McGinnis broke his leg in CC's last meet, so he was unable to compete in the final . Unfortunately, he was forced to pull out of the final with a broken leg .
 Colorado College won the Rocky Mountain Conference title and first place in the College Division . The 15th Annual Pikes Peak Invitational Golf Tournament was held last Friday and Saturday .
 RMC outshot their closest RMC rival, Adams State, by the wide margin of 29 strokes . They outshot Adams State by 29 strokes, the closest rival by 29 .
 CC's six man team were Bruce McLaughlin, Don Stouffer, Bob Magie, Rich Nichols and Rick Fir mine . CC's team of six men included Bob, Rich, Bob and Rich .
 NEW TIGER MEMBERS are front row, Polly Thompson, Karen Mcllvaine, Sue Moore and Robin Beckwith . Diane Frew, Lmnea Erickson, Sue Henrikson, Sue Lindholm, Judy Stampfli, and Gloria Farha are new
 The modern man takes to these College Hall traditional for their traditional comfort . College Hall is a classic classic for the modern man .
 The CSC Bears beat Colorado School of Mines 15-3 in three games . The Tigers came back from a 4-1 deficit to defeat the Miners in the 3rd game . Barry Anthony's 7-hit pitching and Mike Mestek's clutch hitting led the Tigers to victory
 The Tigers were slated to meet the extremely powerful and extremely overconfident CSC Bears on Thursday . The Tigers could only have looked with dread at the prospects for Thursday night .
 Through that crucial eighth the game was all CC's, and might have remained so but for a wild pitch . The game ended in a 1-0 victory over the Tigers .
 CSC pitcher Jay Woodward felled him with a wild fast ball . Batley had been turning in a brilliant job for the Tigers, but the blow he received was to prove fatal .
 Batley hobbled to first, and appeared rocovered, but as the ninth inning opened, CSC touched him for six quick hits to tie it up, 15 all . Gary Sparkman could relieve Batley and retire the eager Bears . The game was tied at 1-1 when
 The Tigers threatened to wrap it up anyway in the bottom of the ninth, but failed to score, giving the Bears one more chance . The Tigers were unable to score in the last nine .
 The winning run came on a heart breaking Tiger fielding error in the 10th inning . Joe Bonaquista scored the final, unearned, but winning run on the field .
 In the bottom of the fatal inning a demoralized CC nine fell easily to Bear pitching, and the CSC squad had gained a triumph against a surprisingly powerful Tiger nine .
 CSC held CC to three runs and eight hits while blasting Jeff Sauer for 15 hits . CSC was better prepared and understandably less confident Saturday .
 Center-fielder Alex Yankovitch paced Tiger efforts as he slammed in they romped, 15-3 . Center-first-run-scored in the Tiger's 15-2 victory .
 Saturday's game notwithstanding, Carle's squad made a fine showing for themselves . CC could point with pride to a team that had shown itself capable of beating the best, or making the best appear considerably worse .
 Fred A Sondermann, associate professor of political science, named associate dean and director of special studies . Fred A. Sondemann is a political science associate professor at the University of Columbia .
 The new assignment will also include directorship of the summer session, starting in 1963 . The summer session will also be a summer session .
 Sondermann's responsibilities will be the development of new programs, the winter symposium and the college's public lectures program .
 He will continue to teach one course in the political science department . He will also continue to be teaching one course .
 The CC political scientist is coauthor of one book, ""The Theory and Practice of International Relations,"" and author of numerous articles in professional journals . He is co-founder of the International Institute for International Relations .
 He is also active in many political organizations, both locally and nationally . He is a member of many political groups .
 Sondermann lias specialized in international affairs, American Foreign policy, and modern dictatorships . He specialized in foreign policy and international affairs .
 He was foreign student advisor for three years, and from 19591961, directed the cross-roads program . From 19591962, he directed the . Cross-roads .
 During the summer of 1950, he was one of 15 Americans selected to attend an eight week seminar on foreign policy . He was selected for the seminar . The seminar was held in the United States in 1950 .
 Colorado College wishes to express its thanks to El Paso County, Colorado, for the use of mechanical voting machines during student elections . Blood donors arc requested for Michael Mingus, a CC student who is now at Penrose Hospital .
 Intra and intermural sports ar slowly coming to an end in the U.S. Springs' House of WHEELS and RALEIGH BICYCLES PEAK AVENUE .
 Robbie Robinson of third soul (Robbie Robinson) won with a fine 78 .
 The Zetas, who have been doing well all year in Intramural sports, swept baseball . The team swept baseball.
 The winning tcatr consisted of Roger Simon, Curphy, Larry Gilbertson, Bergluiul, Jacques Rivard, Dai Wright, Ken Cairns, Cliff Rousi Dave Scrim, Marv Parliament, and am Barry Harrison .
 Guardsman's thick soles, storm welts, genuine shell cordovan that shines with a quick flick of a cloth . Almost wearproof!
 Students Awarded At Annual Honors Convocation . Sponsored by Blue Key Honorary Fraternity . Colorado College Tiger .
 The award for excellence in Art as presented by Prof. Kenneth Burton, and a brief welcoming from Blue Key president, Tim Moe, was presented by Tom Rivers, chairman of the Departmental awards .
 Professor Snyder presented three chemistry awards YlaxTavn ChemTheodore Chemical lived the ical Society Award, Wadman received tin Rubber Co. Co. Award . Wadman was presented with a tin Rubber Company Award .
 David Logan was the recipient of the Merk Index Award for the outstanding freshman, and David Logan received the award for outstanding freshman . David Logan also received the Merks Index Award .
 Kaye Prices Awards in Eclomics and Business Administration were presented by Prof. Michael Kaye . Prof. Kaye was awarded the Kaye Price Awards for Eclomics, Business Administration .
 Bob Williams — Business Administration, John Formby — Accounting, nnd Charles Bates, Economics. Paul Jones and Kenneth Curran to Bob Williams - Business Administration. Bob Williams – Business Administration; John Formaby — Accounting; Charles Bates — Economics . Paul Jones - Economics. John Bates —
 Prof. William Fisher of the Geology Dept. presented the Rocky Mountain Association of Geologists Award to the outstanding senior in geology to Rod Feck . Ted Callender received the John Mulford Award for showing the most potential for geological field work .
 Thomas Brandt to Jan Fraser, Kossuth, Norm Colbert and Norm Colbert, Min, Cecilia Luschak, Don Norton, and Paul Anderson . Brandt's gift includes a gift of $10,000 to the family .
 Louis Geiger, the Clyi'e Augustus Dunway Prize for the outstanding senior history ajor went to Kathy Lyons and arianna Cogswell . Kathy Lyons was awarded the award for senior history at the University of Cambridge .
 The mathematics prizes for highest scores on the GREs were presented by Prof. John Defterios of the University of Cambridge .
 Max Lanner of the Music Dept. presented a prize for excellence in organ to Mike Orem and the David and Karen Smith Cowp■thwaite Prize for Excellence in usic to Joseph Wilcox . The prize was awarded to the organist and composer .
 The Cowperthwaite Prize in physics went to Ron Biondini . Wilbur Wright was awarded the prize for his work on physics . The prize went to Bionidini .
 Suzanne Armstrong, Carol Wright, and Art Warwick received awards for excellence in French, Spanish and French . Joy Stoviak and Lorna Bates received the Spanish awards . Suzanne Armstrong and Carol Wright also received awards .
 Sociology and antropology /ards were presented by Prof. mShaw to Rosemarie Falbo and Martha Tilley . Prof. Shaw presented the Sociology/Antropology/ards .
 Martha received the ^art-Abbott Prize . Martha received a social worker award for her work . Martha was awarded a Social Workers Award .
 Prof. Al Johnson presented Dave Ferguson with the Apollonn Prize for excellence in foren . Dave Ferguson was presented with the top point athletic winner award .
 M.V.P. awards went to Ed Kintz, Farrell Thompson, Duke Dutowski, hockey, and Ron Strasburger .
 Bruce McLaughlin, Russ Sperry, tenjj Ed Loosli, track, and Archie Prestayko, hockey . Archie Prestokeko, ice hockey, golf, track and golf all won .
 President auis T Benezet presented the All-College Awards for outstandg service to the college comanity .
 Caroline Creyke was presented with the Publications Board TFC, Skip Meis, Rastall Center Board chairman, and ASCC President Chris Griffiths were given awards for outstanding service to CC publications .
 For his character and scholarly interest in social science, Chris Griffiths was presented with the Esden Memorial Award . Griffiths received the award for character and social science .
 Blue Key Award to the outstanding freshman went to class commissioner, Paul Carson . Class commissioner Paul Carson was the class commissioner at the University of Maryland .
 The special award for outstanding service to the student organization by a member of the faculty went to Dr. Dr. John Lister . Dr. Lister was awarded a special award .
 The Convocation closed with the installation of Max S Power as president of ASCC . The singing of the Alma Mater and the benedic .
 Associated Students of sists of Peigi Benham, Steve Sabom, Max Power, Terry Kid Thompson, front row; and Dave Holdorf, Al Loosli, Pat Chapman, Joe Heller, White .
 Reverend Harry G Griffiths of the First Presbyterian Church of Pueblo, Colorado, will deliver the traditional baccalaureate sermon at Colorado College on June 3 .
 Christopher Griffiths is a economics major and former president of the student body . He is a former economics major at the University of Columbia . Griffiths says he is proud of his achievements at the university .
 The baccalaureate speaker is a native of Fostoria, Ohio . He served in three churches in that state before being named pastor at First Presbyterian in Pueblo .
 During World War II, Reverend Griffiths served as a chaplain with the U.S. armed forces in Australia, New Guinea, and the Philippines . He served as an army chaplain during the war .
 He is active in community affairs in Pueblo and is former director of the Single Fund, the United Fund effort . He is also active in the community affairs and is a member of the single fund effort .
 Col arado Collec e contier, Stevi Frink Polly Ben Lewis, and Chuck ?,, ilins Spends Summer in Dr. Dr. Phil . The show is on PBS PBS .
 Collins would supervise counseling interns and teach a course in group counseling . Collins is also supervising interns and teaching a group counseling course . Collins will supervise interns, teach a class of group counseling.
 Professor Collins will participate in the summer Faculty Lecture series . During the six-week-long summer session, he will give lectures at the University of Cambridge .
 The Colorado College professor will be accompanied by his wife, Myrle, and their two daughters, Beth and Anne . He will be joined by Myrle and his two daughters . The family is from Colorado College .
 Collins is dean of girls at West Junior High School in Colorado Springs . Collins is a junior high school dean . She is also a junior at Colorado Springs Junior High . Collins: "It's a good time for girls"
 Following the summer session they will spend two weeks touring the islands in the 50th state . Following the six-week summer session, they will tour the islands .
 Senior, Ben Lewis, 85 votes; Piegi Benham, 79, and Pat Chapman, 77 . Junior, Ed DeGeorge, 103; Dave Holdorf, 68, and Al Loosli, 66; Sophomore, Chuck White, 104; Polly Thompson, 82, and
 Dean Moon —Meeting of all new men students, lecture room, Olin Hall, Speaker: Dean Reid —ASCC dinner for all new students, Rastall Center dining room TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 4, 1962 —Chest x-rays for all freshmen and transfer
 "Without ^theii tireless efforts the Tiger could never have made it to press," says author .
 Tomorrow brings the first day of finals, startling y showing how little time is left .
 CC will certainly miss the Class of '62 for all of the activities they participated in, and foi the singular mark they have made here . The Class '62 will be remembered for all their activities .
 1962-1963 1962 — Summer SESSION June 17, Sunday . Residence halls open June 18, Monday ~Eeg.on June 19, Tuesday instruction begms, 8:00m.
 Instruction ends at 12 noon Saturday, December 8, 12 noon Tuesday, December 11, 9.9m. Thanksgiving holiday .
 Saturday, March 23, 12 noon Spring recess begins Monday, April 1, 8:00m Spring recess ends Saturday, May 11 Instruction ends, May 13 Thursday, May 16 Reading period and Comprehensive examinations Friday, May 17, May 25 Final examinations Sunday, May 26 Baccalaure
 Normally, when I feel a sentimental mood about to envelope me, I flick the Scripto into my abalone shell, heave -a sigh of surrender to the approaching wave of emotion, and count on eight hours of straight Z's to reimplant my feet on terra firma
 I've decided it's high time to record these inner murmerings of my usually thankless soul, despite the shrieks and howls of posterity who doesn't want to be bothered with such nonsense . Now, however, I have decided to record the inner murmings of
 We'll have a round of Kleenex for everyone in the house while I pour a tumbler of 90 proof soul juice . So if posterity will kindly remove her hands from her ears, we'll have her hands on the ears .
 You couldn't have traversed those years any faster if you had been strapped to the back of a frightened iguana . You could have been strapped onto a scared iguana in the wild .
 Rastall Center Letters to the Editor: Next time I hear anyone say anything about the softness of the younger generation, I will strike him down .
 Student bookmoving energy Wednesday was magnificent, not only in quantity and intensity, but in the fine discoordination that moved so many .books so fast and so successfully, it was magnificent . That surge of student book moving energy Wednesday .
 The Charles Learning Tuttling Library in Coburn is under consideration to be moved back into Coburn next Spring . The library will be housed in the Coburn area of Coburn .
 Pending this decision, I want to express my deep gratitude to the students of the College for their fine help in the move . Pending the decision, he wants to express his deep gratitude .
 ASCC Traffic Committee was treated to dinner at the Embers Monday night . ASCC traffic committee was given a special dinner at Embers .
 The meal was paid for by you and I. They used the proceeds from the traffic fines to pay for this repast . The meal is paid for for the first time .
 The outgoing ASCC Executive Committee went to the Kachina Lounge Monday afternoon . We also noticed that the outgoing members of the ASCC went there to celebrate .
 If CC can support an ice rink it can also support a Dog Track, the bleachers could continue the Great Olin Wall to Shove Auditorium . Washburn Field could be modified and kennel space would be available on the old ROTC stomp grounds .
 Spring Springs' House of WHEELS SCHWINn and RALEIGH BICYCLES PEAK AVENUE . And somehow you a million or so hours of panicked studying .
 You griped and complained every inch of the way, somehow loving and cherishing every one of those damn inches . And you griped, complained, but somehow still loved and cherished every inch .
 "Now it's almost all over and you stand there barefooted, pushing your big toe in the sand and grinning sheepishly— trying to find someone to thank for those wonderful, gorgeous years," she says .
 You say thanks to your parents and marvel at the vastness of their understanding . You say "thank you" to them, you marvel at their kindness .
 You say thanks to the professors who pushed and shoved you and you're just a little bit embarrased by the many curses you flung at them for imagined injustices . You say "thank you" to the professor who pushes and pushes you .
 You thank your friends for all the laughs, the mutual advice, and the companionship and you're very sad because you must leave them . You're very very sad .
 "You realize the inadequacev and the smallness of those ""thanks,"" so you keep your mouth shut and hope they'll understand . "And, of course, they do. And suddenly you realize . Suddenly you realize the . inadequacevev . And the . small
 "You stand up, look around for the final time, and force out a choked ""good-bye"" and, believe it or not, there's a little tear in your eye. Then you stand up and say 'good-by' to everyone you know .
 You whisper to yourself, ""Je ne regrette rien,"" and you start the next four years . You whisper, "Je ne regrets rien"
 Senior Announcements still available at the college bookstore . Senior announcements are still available in the college's bookstore .
 Need skilled typists, stenos, bookkeepers, office-machine operators, etc. for vacation replacements in Denver's leading firms . Needed skilled typist, steno, bookkeeper, bookkeeping, office machine operators .
 Work by the day, week or month according to your own desire and personal schedule . Work by day, day or month depending on your desire and your personal schedule. Work by your own day or week .
 The campus chapter is open only to fourth year ROTC cadets . It was organized last fall .
 The 34 juniors will be fourth-year cadets during the forthcoming academic year . The 34 seniors received their legion lanyards from Col. Col. John Sutter .
 Amanda Ellis was one of three judges for the annual short story contest sponsored by the Denver Women's Press Club . Ellis is a professor of English and writer in residence at Colorado College .
 Judging with Miss Ellis were Margaret Cousins, Doubleday editor, and Anne Einselin, assistant editor of the Ladies' Home Journony .
 Attending the ceremony were Donald Oden, director of student activities; Lt. Lt. David Oden and Lt. Dan Oden . The ceremony was held in front of students .
 Twelve new members were initiated last Tuesday, May 22, into Alpha Lambda Delta, a national honorary organization for Fresh; men women having a 3. grade point' or above .
 Janet Nyquisl,"" president; Frieda Koster, secretary; Linda Dunkin, treasurer . Linda Dunkins, treasurer; Jan Afton, Onica Friend, Catherine Grant, Judy Jaccard, Norma . Parker, Susan Phillips, Ruth Thompson, Hilary
 The three judges selected a short story written by Margaret Shipley of Boulder, Colorado . Shipley was selected by three judges .
 Among her works are the novel ""Elizabeth,"" such textbooks as ""Continental Literature"" and ""Recent Continental Literature,"" and ""Representative Short Stories" which went through seventeen editions . Her works include textbooks and short stories .
 Her television play ""The Death Waltz"" was broadcast over the ABC network last year . Her TV play "Death Waltz" was broadcast last year over ABC .
 Miss Ellis is a member of the faculty at Colorado College since 1927 . She was named writer in residence two years ago .
 Introduction to Digital Computing is designed to teach students how to work complicated mathematical problems with an electric . The course was approved by the college faculty at its regular monthly meeting Monday .
 Two years of college level mathematics courses, involving analytic geometry and calculus, will be required to gain admission to the year-long course carrying two credit hours each semester . Two credit hours are required for the course .
 Course will deal with logical and mechanical characterizations of a computer . Number systems and computing codes; coding, mathematical models, numerical analysis, and numerical analysis; and automatic programming systems .
 The new course was approved by the mathematics department, the division of natural sciences, and the committee on instruction at the independent college .
 In other action, the college faculty voted to reorganize the geography program .
 The result was four new geography courses to replace three differently structured courses . The result of the change was four different geography courses .
 Each of the new geography courses, to be given during the coming academic year, will carry three hours of credit . Each course will carry a total of three hours per student .
 Physical Geography is a study of the physical elements of geography, including the earth and its representation, the nature and distributinon of climate, soils, vegetation, and landforms . The study of physical geography includes the earth, soils and vegetation .
 Cultural Geography is a general introduction to the ways in which man has modified and used the landscapes of the world . The book is based on the works of cultural geography .
 The cultural, physical and economic geography of the United States and Canada, considered in historical perspective . Geography of North America . The cultural and physical geography of U.S. and Canada . Canada .
 Black and Gold, a campus men's enthusiasm group, recently elected 12 new members to its midst . The group is comprised of men and women .
 John Barker, Joe Bergquist, Newell Bossart, Chuck Deaver, Dave Herrington, Al Loosli, Dan Martin, Jeff Sauer, Jim Schultz, Gregg Smith, Bill Stafford, and Ron Taylor .
 NEW: Roland Poe, president, Chris Batley, vice-president, George Klein, secretary . NEW: Wayne Deutscher, THREE-FIFTHS of the DRUM QUINTET, entertained CC students and faculty for an hour last Friday, May 18 . NEW
 Also playing were Henry English and Rod Kenney, who drums with the Del Rays down at Suiseppe's . Henry English is Henry English, who plays for the Del Ray .
 For the official part of the program, they played African songs for an hour . They played an hour of African songs . It was the first time African songs had been played in the program .
 As an encore for the fasinated audience, the drummers drummed for another hour and one-half .
 May 25, 1962, Colorado College Tiger Red Top Drive In 1520 So. So. Tacos & Pizza in 1962 .
 A few athletes showed their lack of conditioning by nearly passing out at the end of their events . However, the performances on the whole were good .
 Farrell Howell of the Kappa Sigs had the best over-all record . Howell took firsts in the high jump and broad jump and a second hi the discus . Howell also won the high-jump, broad jump, high-jumper and the broad jump .
 Phi Gamma Delta, Sigma Chi, Zeta, Kappa Sigma, Phi Delta Theta, and Beta Theta Pi were all Phi Gamma . Sigma Chi was Sigma Chi . Kappa Sigma was Kappa Sigma Kappa Sigma . Phi Gamma Gamma Delta was Phi Delta Gamma Delta .
 Kappa Sigs took fourth place in the interfraternity championship . The Kappa Sigma fraternity won the championship in the last event .
 Voll'yb'U 5 1 3 S Wrestling 3 Vz 5 M j Tr'ck & Fid 5 13 j Softball 3 1 5 I Tot. Voll’yb’U 5 . 1 3 I Tot.'S wrestling 3 . 1 1
 Sanders' Kentucky Fried CHICKEN: "it's fingtr liclcin' good"" "It's finger-trlicin' good," says Sanders . Sanders. Sanders. "It was a great thing to eat"
 This kind of a program should emphasize sports activities that will have carry over value in later life, such as tennis, golf, swimming, horseback riding, etc. Such activities should have a carry-over value, says author .
 Calisthenics should also be an integral part of the training regime . Good shape is essential to success in sports, while it also demonstrably improves performance in other areas . Calismhenics are essential to good shape in sports .
 Students tramp through three feet of snow to get to an eight o'clock swimming class . What must be avoided (and not been in many schools) is a schedule that has students tramping through three .
 Ed. Ed. program will have the advantage of making sports an organic aspect of campus life through the participation of the whole student body . Ed. students will be able to participate in the program .
 It could also increase interest in intercollegiate sports, for participation in sports at an amateurish level almost inevitably elicits interest in seeing these sports performed in the more polished manner of the intercolcollegiated team play . The move could also raise interest in other sports .
 NEW CHEERLEADERS are Bobbie Tolley, Linnea Erickson, Isabel Williams, Jennie Ivloore, and Cheryl Betts . The Enthusiasm Committee selected the new Cheerleaders .
 Director of Athletics Jerry Carle reviews 1962 Sports Looks at '63 Season Hopes . Carle gives a look at prospects for the future .
 At Commencement Exercises top places in both tennis and golf, and took second in basketball and track, an extremely good showing for a school of size and primary goals .
 The coming season will in many ways mark a turning point in the iduct of both of these sports at Colorado College .
 As before, no student will be considered for a scholary unless he is academically admissible and able . The new program will no longer be sufficient to assure an award .
 In the immediate future, however, and in particular where the football team is concerned, the benefits are less certain . In the future, it is not clear whether the benefits will continue to exist for the club .
 Next year's squad will have lost 22 senior players, and will therefore be heavily dependent on the support of incoming freshmen . The squad will be heavily reliant on incoming freshmen to replace the players who have left .
 Up to this year, a given number of grants could be ""earmarked"" for award to incoming admissible students who displayed ability in football . Up to a number of grantees could be awarded to incoming students who showed ability .
 The team will be a young one, the Tiger coach said, emphasizing the importance of experience as a factor in winning . Tiger coach says experience is a factor that can only be built up over a long period of time .
 Facing a strong Rocky Mountain Conference next year, the Tigers were expected to make at least a creditable showing against heavy opposition .
 In hockey, another new policy, this time on the part of the El Pomar Foundation, promises an upturn in Tiger rink hopes . The foundation has a new policy to improve the fortunes of the Tiger hockey team .
 The Tigers are the only team in the Rocky Mountain Conference to play hockey . The rule does not apply for any of the teams with which CC competes on the ice . The Tigers have removed their hockey program from RMC jurisdiction .
 This action will enable El Pomar to increase their grants, beginning next year, to a level that is more consistent with that prevailing in the rest of the Western Collegiate Hockey Association . The action will allow El Parma to increase its grants, starting next year .
 Even with this improvement in the grants program, building a hockey team is a slow process . The prospects for next season's conference play are if anything more formidable than was the case this year .
 A number of Eastern teams have been added to the schedule for 1962-63 . The completion of the new practice rink should provide even more incentive for active student support .
 The 1962 showing pushed Eastlack's squad to an RMC second this year . Basketball prospects for next year promise to be good, with perhaps not quite so strong a showing .
 Carle looked for a good performance from track, golf, and tennis . Carle hopes to see a good result from track and golf teams .
 The track squad, losing only three graduating seniors, promises to excel again after a Conference 2nd this year . The track team lost only three seniors .
 The golf squad, 1st this year in Conference play, loses only one senior, Gordy Aamoth . The team returns to Conference play in 1963 .
 The Tiger tennis team, also sporting a 1st place award this season, loses only number one man, Rusty Bastedo, and looks forward to three highly rated freshmen next spring . The Tiger Tennis team also has three highly-rated freshmen .
 After a painful 4-16 overall record this year, the Tiger coach emphasized the youth of the team . Coach emphasized the excellence of this year's frosh players . The team is losing only two seniors, and is losing two seniors .
 Carle looked to next season's play as a time for building on this year's improved nucleus . Carle pointed to experience as a vital factor in the squad's success .
 Tiger nine wound up the season last weekend (May 18 and 19) with a twin loss to Western State College at Gunnison . The Tiger nine ended the season with a double loss to the state college .
 Dennis Walker leads Tiger hitting efforts with a .423 . Steve Gustafson has a .420 mark . Dennis Walker is one of the top three players in the team .
 Baseball this year was something less than spectacular for Carle . Carle seemed justified in looking for considerable improvement next year with a returning group of seasoned players .
 In summary, Carle outlined a year's progress in an athletic program that, if not always a victorious one, is an extremely adaptable one . The program promises to put up a strong showing in every aspect of intercollegiate competition this season .
 The two honorary degree recipients are Walter K Koch, leading Colorado business executive, and Dr. Dr. David Koch . Dr. Koch was awarded the award for his work in Colorado .
 President Bernard Bernard will deliver the Colorado College commencement address . President Bernard will give the speech at Colorado College .
 National Bank, Silver State Savings and Loan Association, Wheat Ridge Foundation, The Wheat Ridge foundation, The Denver Dry Goods Company, and the Great Western Sugar Company. National Bank .
 He also holds an honorary doctor of engineering degree from the Colorado School of Mines .
 He joined the telephone company in 1923 and within two years was advanced to traffic superintendent at Pueblo . Within two years he became traffic superintendent . He was promoted to Traffic Superintendent at the company's headquarters .
 During the following 20 years he was Denver traffic chief, general sales manager, Salt Lake City commercial supervisor, and Denver commercial supervisor . He has also worked in Denver, Utah and Denver, Colorado .
 In 1945 he was promoted to general commercial manager and vice president . In 1949 he was named vice president of the company .
 He is also vice-president of the Metropolitan Safety Council, Colorado civilian aide to the secretary of the army, and past president of the Denver Chamber of Commerce .
 Bernard attended Colorado College during 1912 and 1913 . Bernard is a Colorado College alumnus . Bernard attended the college during 1912-1913 .
 He holds a B.A. from Pomona College and an LL.D. from Claremont Men's College . He also holds an L.M. degree from the University of California, California .
 Bernard is president of the Association of Independent California Colleges and Universities . Bernard is also a member of the executive committee of Independent Colleges of America . He says the colleges are independent colleges and universities .
 He began his career in education as assistant to the president of Pomona College, a post he held for 10 years . A college administrator for the past 45 years, he has been at Pomona for more than 40 years .
 He has served as events committee chairman of the Brides Auditorium and secretary and managing director of Claremont College . He has also served as secretary, managing director and secretary at the college .
 He holds a BA from Pomona College and an honorary LL.D from Claremont Men's College . He also holds a B.S. degree from Claremon College and a LL.M.D .
 Judith Gibson and James Blair are majoring in mathematics and history at Grand Junction, Colorado . They are Judith Gibson, a mathematics major, and a history major, respectively .
 Miss Gibson plans to enter graduate school to continue her study of mathematics once she completes her tour of duty .
 She has turned down three assistantship offers for graduate work to accept the African assignment . She has also turned down offers of assistantship work for the job .
 She hopes eventually to teach mathematics in the United States either on the high school or college level . She hopes to eventually teach math in the U.S.
 At Colorado College, Miss Gibson has been a member of Cap and Gown and Alpha Lambda Delta . Miss Gibson is president of Gamma Phi Beta .
 This year she was named to Phi Beta Kappa, scholastic honorarv society . She is a junior at the University of North Carolina .
 Each student will live with a Colorado Springs family during his stay here . The students will stay with their families during their stay .
 This marks the first year the program will be attempted at another educational institution . This is the first time the program has been attempted at an institution not at the University of Cambridge .
 The program is co-sponsored by the International institute of Education in co-operation with the United States State Department .
 Tin 1 local program will give 50 foreign students the opportunity to compare and evaluate their experiences in this country . Tin 1 will give students the chance to compare their experiences with this country's experiences .
 The United States State Department again this year will contribute toward the travel expenses of ten of the students . The U.S. State Department will also contribute to the students' travel expenses .
 A host committee is busy assigning students to host families for the week of June 9-16 . The week of the week is June 9 to 16 .
 Douglas Freed of Colot rado College will serve as general chairmen for the program . Douglas Freed will be the program's "town >, and gown" general chairman .
 Henry I Szymiinski is chairman of the international pot luck dinner, Mrs. Mrs. Szymyinski is also chairwoman of the International Pot Luck Dinner .
 These students have studied at 75 colleges scattered from Maine to Oregon and from Florida to California . Students have studied in Maine, Oregon, Florida and California .
 Crossroads participants and local college students will hold at Colorado College's Rastall Center, Announcement to Seniors Seniors . Be sure to pick up caps and gownn at college bookstore either Friday June 1, or Saturday June 2 until noon .
 Nearly 80 students were nominated in the Honor Council Assembly to fill the seven positions . Council Nominates seven student members . Council is comprised of seven students .
 Graduating members of the Honor Council are Lynn Carmichael, Gay Petzold, Karen Williamson, Tim Moe, Jerry Moore, Stew Ritchie, and Gordy Aamoth . The Honor Council is the first group to graduate in the U.S.
 Returning members of the Council are Erv Hinds, chairman; Seece Boyce, secretary; Ben Lewis, Karen Bessesen, Rachael Jensen, Ed DeGeorge, and Steve Sabom . Returning members are Seece .
 Classes were dismissed for the move which featured an all-campus picnic at noon at noon .
 The modern glass and curtain-wall structure features wall-to-wall carpeting on each of the four floors . It was financed through a gift from the EI Pomar Foundation of Colorado Springs .
 Not all of 180,000 volumes in the old Coburn Library were moved Wednesday due to the fact that not all of the shelves for the new library arrived in time . The move was made due to a lack of shelves in the library's new library .
 Charles Learning Tutt Library will contain seminar rooms, typing rooms, microcard rooms, a special collection room, tape recording rooms, periodical rooms, administrative offices, and stacks .
 The new library consists of a garden-level opening on one side to a sunken court, a glass-walled main flooor, and a third and fourth floors walled with pre-cast concrete panels measuring 11 by 22 feet each . The library is located in a garden
 Two upper stories are pierced by six-inch wide vertical strip windows . The two upper stories of the building are pierced with six inch wide vertical windows .
 Coburn Library is located on the north side of the Coburn library . It is located in Coburn's north-east corner of the library . The entrance to the library is a chute leading from the upper stories to the lower floors .
 Business Firms recruiting graduating seniors at Colorado College this spring have been looking for students with a broad academic background . Colorado College students are capable of eventually stepping into management positions . Business and industrial firms want students with broad academic backgrounds .
 Sales jobs are designed to lead to junior executive posts . But most of these sales jobs are meant to be in sales positions .
 The average starting salary offered this year was $400 — ranging from a low of $375 to a high of $475 — for students with no experience . Average starting salary is $400 for students without experience .
 Representatives from 19 different firms visited the college campus here this year during the three-month recruiting period . The recruiting period was three months long, with representatives from 19 firms visiting the campus .
 He attributed a part of this to encouragement from professors in the field in which they are taking their major .
 Rich Love, Thomas Burk, Rick Carroll, Tony Ayers, Tony Gaskill, Chuck White, Lee Hunt, Jim Knapp and Pete McLaughlin are on the panel .
 Both Clay Sorrick and Steve Cross, who acted as counselors this year, will retain their jobs for the coming year . Both Sorrick . and Cross will remain in charge .
 The 49 seniors and graduate students who earned degrees at Colorado College last August and January will receive their degree diplomas at commencement exercises here June 4 . Colorado College graduation ceremony will be June 4 at the college .
 The August graduates included 18 seniors who will receive bachelor of bachelor of arts in teaching degrees . Eight graduate students will receive master of arts degrees . The students will also graduate from high school to high school .
 Of the January graduates, two will receive master of arts degrees and 20 will receive bachelor's degrees . Two will receive masters degrees; 20 will get bachelor degrees .
 Ralph J Streamer of 1304 N Foote; Jeanine Kochar Bramwell of Route 3; Penelope Jane Hylbom of 15 W Uintah . Penelope J Hylmom, Penelope . Hyllom, Don Gregory Robbins of 1517
 Also receiving bachelor's degrees are Ruth S Black of the United States Air Force Academy; Juanita Presley Caroom of the U.S. Air force Academy . Carol Joyce Hammond of 1430 Pine, Rocky Ford, Colo. also received a bachelor's degree .
 Blair Blair was an all-around athlete at Colorado College . Blair was end on the Tiger football team for two years, and for three years was one of the college's star trackmen .
 Class ring with eagle, date 1960, and name ""Wilson"" on the crest . LOST— Class ring . Class ring  with eagle date 1960 .
 R William Goodacre of 4904 45th St., Red Deer, Alberta, Can. Can. Toole, Utah, can. Goodacre . Goodacre is of Toole in Utah; Goodacre was of Red Deer in Alberta .