 Dr. John MCCONE and the CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS AUGUST 1-NOVEMBER 3, 1962 A THESIS SUBMITTED TO TO THE FACULTY OF THE HISTORY DEPARTMENT IN CANDIDACY FOR THE DEG
 President’s Military Representative Chairmen, Joint Chiefs of Staff Thompson, Llewellyn E., Jr., Jr. and Adlai E American Representative to the UN Taylor . CIA Deputy Director of Research, CIA Sorensen .
 For the next two weeks, both countries went to their highest military alert levels . It seemed likely that both countries would go to war, with the probability of nuclear exchange greater .
 U.S. intelligence sought to discover the true nature of the Soviet buildup in Cuba, while their Soviet counterpart tried to keep that buildup secret . In the months before the crisis, the U.N. intelligence found out the true extent of the buildup in the country .
 The Director of the Central Intelligence Agency was one of the first government officials that discovered the large military buildup underway in Cuba .
 McCone led a personal effort to convince members of the intelligence community and the Kennedy administration that the Soviets might take such a risk and place nuclear weapons in Cuba . Because of his own personal beliefs about communism and his experiences with nuclear power, McCone .
 During the crisis, McCone was one of the intelligence officials responsible for briefing the Kennedy administration on the Soviet efforts in Cuba . McCone: "I was a hero of the day"
 After the crisis subsided, McCone provided Kennedy with confirmation that the Soviets had begun removal of the missiles, officially ending the crisis . McCone confirmed Kennedy that the missiles had been removed .
 John McCone’s role in the crisis is one of the key facets to understanding the reasons of the crisis and its outcome . McCone's role will be key to understanding why the crisis happened and how it happened .
 Because of declassification of government documents and memoirs from the participants, historians have a wide range of documentation for their studies . Historians have declassified government documents, memoirs, from memoirs .
 Most historians focused on the reasons why the crisis happened, and the role of government officials in his outcome . Most historians focus on the circumstances of the crisis, and government officials .
 In most historical works, McCone received little attention before or during the crisis . McCone was a prominent figure in the American Civil War .
 Even in the most detailed works, historians viewed his role as secondary to the crisis . Historians view him as a secondary figure in the history of the Holocaust .
 McCone maintained throughout the summer and fall of 1962 that the Soviet Union might place nuclear weapons into Cuba . McCone: The Soviet Union may have placed nuclear weapons in Cuba in 1962 .
 McCone made his concerns clear to President Kennedy and other members of the administration before leaving on his honeymoon in August 1962 .
 During his honeymoon, he called for more reconnaissance flights over Cuba, empowering his deputy, General Marshall Carter, to continue his efforts in Washington . He called for a more reconnaissance flight over Cuba .
 When he returned from his honeymoon, he found gaps in the reconnaissance over western portions of Cuba, and pushed for more reconnaissance flights .
 On the final of those authorized flights, October 14, the reconnaissance flights found the missiles . The missiles were found by reconnaissance flights on October 14 .
 McCone‟s “crusade‟4 during the summer and fall of 1962 was a primary reason for the early discovery of the missiles . The missiles were discovered in the fall of that year .
 At the start of the crisis, McCone delegated many of his responsibilities to his subordinates . He created a committee composed of several intelligence groups to deliver daily intelligence recommendations .
 Khrushchev, Castro, and Kennedy proposed a surgical strike against missile sites followed by an invasion . The attack would be followed by a surgical attack on missile sites .
 McCone had the job of briefing the administration on the intelligence reports . He kept Kennedy and his cabinet informed on the Soviet military buildup in Cuba .
 Despite his emotional calls for attacks on Cuba, McCone's efforts to combine intelligence reports, analysis, and photo interpretation branches during the crisis allowed the president to have a detailed picture on the withdrawal of the missiles .
 McCone used the committees he organized during the first week of the crisis to bring detailed intelligence reports on the construction efforts in Cuba and the status of Soviet ships bound for Cuba .
 He also had the important task of briefing members of the press and Congress on the situation . He also provided deputies to answer questions during the UN talks, despite his personal belief that the talks hurt the diplomatic standing of the United States .
 When the crisis weakened his emotional state, he urged caution during EXCOMM deliberations . He also requested that his deputies prepare daily memorandums combining the evaluations of the joint committees and other CIA intelligence reports .
 Khrushchev authorized the removal of the missiles in Cuba, Kennedy relied on CIA Director for analysis on whether the missiles had indeed left Cuba . Kennedy relied heavily on the CIA Director to provide analysis .
 McCone gave the administration the conclusions of the analysts and committees studying the Soviet withdrawal . McCone concluded that the Soviet Union dismantled and shipped the missiles back to the Soviet Soviet Union .
 XI, XI, 3, gave Kennedy evidence he needed that missiles were in fact leaving Cuba, officially ending the crisis . XI was important role of giving Kennedy evidence that missiles had been leaving Cuba . XI played key role in ending crisis .
 After the crisis subsided at the end of 1962, American historians began searching for the reasons why the events took place as they did . American historians have been searching for answers to the events in 1962 .
 In the years immediately following the crisis, historians focused on what happened before and after, asking why the government failed to prevent the crisis . Historians have been looking at what happened in the years leading up to the crisis in Russia .
 Without classified government documents, historians used their own experiences, evidence available at the time, and previous attacks to prove or disprove that the government could have prevented the crisis, or defend the government‟s actions .
 In the 1970s and 1980s, historians used primary evidence from personal memoirs, actual intelligence training, and newly declassified documents to shed light on the events, methods, and problems facing an earlier detection .
 Archives led historians to re-evaluate interpretations of events . Historians have been re-evaluating interpretations of the events in the past .
 New historians focused more on the mindset of the U.S. government during the crisis . They focused on Soviet motivations for the introduction of missiles into Cuba, and intelligence efforts .
 Other historians used the massive amount of primary evidence in the post-Cold War era to make dramatic narrative histories of the Crisis .
 Historians produced no encompassing work on the importance of McCone‟s participation in the crisis . Even with the number of works produced on the crisis, historians produced no work on McCone's participation .
 One of the reasons McCone has a secondary role in the majority of histories is the lack of a published memoir . McCone's memoirs have never been publicly published .
 Most historians choose to utilize the large array of sources to discover the reasons why the crisis happened and how select members of the government influenced the outcome . Historians choose to use the large amount of information to find out what happened .
 Most of the information on McCone‟s involvement in EXCOMM comes from other participants such as George Ball, McGeorge Bundy, Robert Kennedy, Arthur Schlesinger Jr., and Theodore “Ted” Sorensen .
 Ball's memoir examined McCone‟s management of the intelligence effort before and during the crisis . Ball: McCone asked for more flights even during his honeymoon . Ball also showed McCone's repeated requests for more . flights even while he was on honeymoon.
 Bundy takes a more critical view of McCone . Bundy: McCone used his position to convince the administration, without evidence, that the Soviets were placing nuclear weapons in Cuba . Bundy shows how McCone convinced the administration without evidence that the Soviet weapons were being placed there .
 Robert Kennedy‟s work is one of the best tales on the crisis, but contained little information on McCone except for a few quotations . Robert Kennedy's work is a good tale of the crisis in which McCone died .
 Brugioni provided key insights into McCone‟s management style and his role outside the EXCOMM meetings . He was a peripheral member in the crisis .
 Most of the information on McCone‟s involvement came from excerpts from larger works on issues facing the United States during the crisis .
 The most detailed work on McCone’s involvement in his “crimes” was published in 1962 . Another excellent work on the same subject is published in 2012 .
 Graham Allison and Philip Zelikow focused on the reasons the Soviets placed missiles in Cuba . McCone was one of the first officials to recognize the Soviet reasons .
 Beschloss detailed how McCone‟s background influenced his views about the Soviet Union . He said he believed that the Soviets might place nuclear weapons in Cuba .
 Eisenhower, Kennedy and the JUPITERS gave an excellent analysis on McCone‟s arguments supporting the decision to remove the missiles from Turkey in their negotiations with the Soviet Union .
 A complement to Nash's work is Bohning‟s detailed analysis of the covert operations authorized against Castro during the summer of 1962 . Bohning's analysis of covert operations against Castro is a complement to his work .
 Bohning provided information on how intelligence resources used for the earlier operations helped McCone discover the true nature of the Soviet buildup in Cuba . Bohning also provided information about how the intelligence resources were used to find out about Cuba's Soviet buildup .
 Allyn, Blight, and Welch's Cuba on the Brink contained a brief section on McCone's clash with Kennedy's administration on the missile issue . McCone was the principal figure in the discovery of the missiles .
 Most historians viewed McCone as the primary reason that the U.S. found the missiles, but used information on his role as part of a study on the crisis itself .
 McCone was a key member of the intelligence effort to find the missiles in Cuba . He served as one of the core members of EXCOMM when the president needed solutions to the problem .
 When Khrushchev made the decision to remove the missiles from Cuba, McCone took on the responsibility of overseeing the intelligence sources he created during the crisis to determine if indeed the Soviets were removing the missiles . McCone: "It was a very difficult task to do"
 John McCone was the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency from November 1961 to April 1965 . He was the CIA Director from 1961 to 1965 . McCone is credited with leading the CIA during the Cold War .
 During the summer and fall of 1962, he maintained that the Soviet Union might place nuclear weapons into Cuba . He maintained that he believed the Soviets may have placed nuclear weapons in Cuba .
 McCone made his concerns clear to President John Kennedy and other members of the administration before leaving on his honeymoon in August 1962 .
 During his honeymoon, he used his deputy, General Marshall S Carter, to continue his efforts in Washington . General Marshall Carter was his deputy during the honeymoon .
 When he returned from his honeymoon, he still found gaps in the reconnaissance over western portions of Cuba . He pushed again for more reconnaissance flights .
 The October 14 flight found the missiles . After the president finally authorized more flights, the president authorized more .
 McCone’s “crusade”31 was a primary reason for the early discovery of these missiles . The missiles were discovered in the 1950s .
 His father, Alexander McCone, ran the family‟s iron foundries throughout California . He was born in San Francisco .
 McCone rose through the ranks of several steel factories . McCone was Vice President of the Consolidated Steel Corporation . He helped establish the BechtelMcCone Corporation .
 As founder and engineer, McCone had a role in the design and construction of several oil refineries, factories, and power plants in the Americas and the Middle East . McCone was founder and as an engineer,
 Even during the Great Depression, McCone managed his businesses making large sums of money through construction projects . McCone was able to make a lot of money during the Depression .
 During World War II, he founded the Seattle-Tacoma 29 Brugioni, Eyeball to Eyebal, 146 . He founded a radio station in Seattle, California, during WWII .
 After the war, McCone served in the Truman administration as a Deputy to Secretary of Defense James Forrestal, and as the Under Secretary of the Air Force . McCone also served as an Under Secretary and Deputy to Defense Secretary of WWII .
 McCone played an important role in the incorporation of nuclear weapons into air warfare tactics . During his time within the Truman administration, McCone was a key figure in the development of nuclear warfare tactics.
 McCone‟s comments made him many enemies within the Eisenhower administration, especially on the issue of the nuclear test ban, which he opposed .
 McCone believed that Soviet propaganda encouraged many Americans to support the test ban treaty . McCone fought against President Eisenhower‟s support for the ban as well .
 The main reason McCone maintained his position as Chairmen of the AEC was the fear of political consequences if Eisenhower removed a Republican he had placed in the position .
 The dictatorship of Fuglencio Batista led many Cubans to resent their government and his American supporters . Many Cubans resent the Batista government and its supporters .
 Castro and his movement toppled the Batista government faster than experts in the U.S. and the Soviet Union had predicted . Experts in the United States and Soviet Union predicted that Castro's movement would topple Batista's government .
 Castro declared Cuba a socialist state modeled after the teachings of Karl Marx and Vladimir Lenin . Castro's government was modeled after Marx and Lenin's teachings . Castro declared the socialist state in 1959 .
 This dramatic event provided the Soviet Union with a tremendous opportunity, while for the United States this event proved its worst fears . For the U.S. it was a huge opportunity, and for the Soviets, it was an opportunity to win back control of the world .
 With a Soviet-backed communist nation in Latin America, the Soviet Union could pressure many Latin American countries into accepting communism, undermining the U.S.‟ close neighbors .
 With the close proximity of Cuba to the United States, roughly ninety miles, the Soviet Union could threaten the security of the U.S. by placing weapons in Cuba . The close proximity to Cuba could be a threat to the American security .
 President John F Kennedy approved a plan for an invasion of Cuba to remove Castro from office . In response to recommendations from the intelligence community, the plan was approved by President Kennedy .
 On April 12, 1961, the invasion commenced, with surprise air strikes against Cuba air force buildings and installations with Cuban forces landing on the beaches .
 The attacks eliminated only half of the Cuban air force . Kennedy denied several requests for air support from the Cuban government .
 Both McCone and Robert Kennedy‟s families attended the same Catholic Church . They became close during the sickness and death of McCone‟ first wife, Rosemary Cooper, who died .
 McCone’s reputation as a “rigid cold warrior” was also important . Arthur Schlesinger, an aide to Kennedy, believed this friendship had a large role in the selection .
 McCone replaced many of Dulles‟ deputies and most of the division chiefs . He battled with the Pentagon on the use of intelligence planes, satellites, and better logistical support .
 McCone set up a CIA 45 Polmar and Gresham, DEFCON-2, 46 . Because of his prior relationship with the AEC, he set up the CIA 45 .
 McCone also had the advantage of being new to the intelligence community, giving him a more objective viewpoint on intelligence estimates . McCone was a new member of intelligence community .
 McCone entered the office as the Agency released reports on the Bay of Pigs operation . McCone was in the office at the time of the operation .
 One report, from Lyman Kirkpatrick, detailed the reasons for the failure of the operation . The operation failed to reach the highest level of security in the country .
 Kirkpatrick made the mistake of handing the report directly to McCone instead of using the proper channels . The breach angered McCone as much as the report itself did .
 This incident led “the hawkish republican” to impose stricter guidelines on intelligence reports, and later blamed Kennedy and Dulles for failing to make the invasion work . “The hawkish Republican” was later blamed on the failure of the invasion .
 McCone earned the reputation of a “hard-driving executive” as DCI, but many believed him to be a much more cautious and realistic manager than previous directors . McCone is a former DCI director .
 McCone had the important role of repairing the reputation and morale of the CIA . McCone used new measures to protect secrecy and provide quality national intelligence .
 While McCone reformed the CIA, tensions mounted between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . McCone's CIA was created in 1950s and '60s .
 After the Bay of Pigs, Nikita Khrushchev and the Soviet government voiced support for the Castro regime . The Soviet government issued several warnings to Washington about the regime .
 Castro, fearful of future invasions, began requesting larger arms shipments from the Soviet Union . Castro was fearful of possible invasions . Castro requested more arms from Soviet Union in response to Soviet invasion .
 The Seven Leaders who Built the Soviet Regime , 236. 13 the economic assistance to the fledging communist nation . The seven leaders who built the Soviet . Regime . 236.13 .
 In Khrushchev's mind, the situation in Cuba and the success of the regime coincided with the overall prestige of the Soviet Union in the international independence movement of the early 1960s .
 The Soviet assistance at the time involved personal weapons and vehicles, as Khrushchev delayed his decision to introduce weapons systems that were more expensive .
 Khrushchev continued to receive reports of increased American subversion efforts in Cuba . In April 1962, after making the decision to send military aid to Cuba, the Soviet Union sent military aid . In 1962, the Cuban government began receiving reports of American subverting efforts .
 The Soviet premier analyzed the situation and realized Cuba‟s importance to the communist movement and the advantages to placing nuclear weapons on the island to secure Castro and balance the strategic situation with the Americans .
 Khrushchev decided to supply Cuba with long-range weapons to accomplish his goals . It was then that he decided to arm Cuba with weapons to achieve his objectives .
 Khrushchev saw that the best option to solve these dilemmas was to introduce medium and intermediate-range ballistic missiles . The weapons were weapons that the Soviet Union had in surplus . The missiles were introduced in the 1960s .
 This decision solved the two issues without overstretching the Soviet economy . The decision was made to solve the problems of Soviet economic stability and economic stability .
 The first step in formulating the plan was to sell the idea to Fidel Castro, Fidel Castro . "The first step was to formulate the plan," the author says .
 Many in the Soviet government believed that Castro would not accept a large Soviet base in Cuba . The negotiations concluded with the decision to deploy nuclear weapons in Cuba, the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev assigned Rodion Malinovsky, his Defense Minister, to create an operation to hide the deployment from Western intelligence . The operation was created to hide from the Western intelligence.
 On May 24, the Soviet government initiated Operation ANADYR to deploy nuclear missiles in Cuba . The Soviet government prepared the selected units for deployment . The missiles were deployed in Cuba in May .
 Khrushchev believed that the presence of nuclear missiles in Cuba would counterbalance the American superiority in long-range ballistic missiles and guaranteed the safety of Cuba . The presence of nukes in Cuba counterbalanced the U.S. superiority in ballistic missiles .
 Operation ANADYR went into effect in June 1962, and preparations for the shipment of materials to Cuba began . Operation AnADYR was launched in the summer of 1962 .
 Operation marked the clear divergence from past Soviet assistance to non-bloc countries . With the amount of materials and personnel assigned to ANADYR, the operation marked the .
 The sheer size of the operation meant U.S. intelligence would eventually discover the missiles, an ANADYR staff member says . Anatoly Gribkov: American intelligence would find the missiles .
 The plan called for large shipments that contained missile divisions, anti-aircraft weapons, jet fighters and bombers, and radar equipment . The plan contained several missile divisions of the Soviet Rocket Forces .
 Soviet personnel received orders to pack for frigid weather, stating their destination for somewhere in the upper regions of Siberia . Soviet personnel were ordered to prepare for the cold weather .
 Soviet captains opened their destination orders, learning that Cuba was their destination . Cuba was Cuba was the destination of Soviet ships bound for the Atlantic Ocean .
 Soviet personnel offloaded the materials at night in Cuba only, and concealed their transport to the construction sites . The materials were transported by Soviet personnel at night and concealed in Cuba .
 These methods limited the possibilities of premature discovery of the contents of the shipments . These methods were used to avoid premature discovery .
 Kennedy administration enacted MONGOOSE to remove Castro‟s government from power . The Kennedy administration was able to do so without Castro”s government .
 A select group of Washington officials met together to discuss subversion and reconnaissance plans . The group also discussed subversion plans for the CIA .
 Officials such as Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, Deputy Undersecretary Alexis Johnson, General Maxwell Taylor, General Lyman Lemnitzer served in the Special Group .
 Robert Kennedy also attended many of the MONGOOSE meetings, but had a more limited role . Robert Kennedy had a limited role in the organization, but attended many meetings .
 MONGOOSE had the unexpected role of revealing the beginnings of the Soviet buildup in Cuba . It led to increased reconnaissance of the island, leading to increased surveillance .
 The first method involved surveillance of shipments destined for Cuba, and the types of weapons or materials they contained . The other method involved monitoring of shipments to Cuba .
 The second came from first-hand accounts from refugees fleeing Cuba for the U.S.
 The use of intelligence agents on the ground in Cuba provided the most accurate information, the author says .
 Photoreconnaissance, the final method, provided the concrete proof needed for Washington to act on the intelligence reports from Cuba . The U.S. President Barack Obama ordered the CIA to carry out an assassination mission to Cuba .
 The surveillance of shipping bound for Cuba carried with it inherent limitations, problems, said the Cuban Navy .
 Satellite and reconnaissance planes provided detailed photographs of the ships bound for Cuba . Much of the contents remained in the holds within the holds of the ship .
 CIA used a computer and calculated measurements of items in reconnaissance pictures, formulating their size for analysts to compare their data on Soviet technology .
 The system did correctly identify the crates transporting bomber and fighter parts on the decks of Soviet ships . Neither the crate-ology system nor the standard shipping intelligence methods found the MRBMs within the holds of the ship .
 Since the overthrow of the Batista government in 1959, thousands of Cuban refugees fled to the United States and brought reports with them . Thousands of Cubans have fled the country to the U.S.
 Refugees brought stories of dramatic events in Cuba, notably reports of missiles in Cuba . These refugees brought reports of missile attacks in the country .
 This caused the “cry wolf phenomenon’85 to develop inside the intelligence community,’s ‘cry wolf’ phenomenon, to develop . The intelligence community has been in touch with the U.S. intelligence community for years .
 The sheer volume of the reports also made this form of intelligence insufficient on its own . The sheer number of reports was also not enough .
 In terms of providing evidence for Soviet actions in Cuba, the system could do little more than describe the situation for the people of Cuba and for the mentality of the common people .
 The most useful photo-reconnaissance came from the Lockheed U-2 high-altitude reconnaissance plane . The plane was used in the World War II era .
 The main problem to this method of reconnaissance is its dependence on good to fair weather to bring back accurate pictures . This method of photographing is dependent on good weather .
 Within hurricane season in the Caribbean, there were a limited number of days each month for complete coverage .
 Soviet Union also devised a defensive missile system to engage high altitude aircraft, increasing the risk over areas where the system existed .
 Up to September 1962, Cuba lacked this missile system, but after their installation, the Kennedy administration decided to limit the flights over the island .
 MONGOOSE became the primary focus for McCone and the CIA in the summer of 1962 . The CIA became the focus of the CIA's efforts to find out who was behind the cover up .
 McCone presented the intelligence community's analysis of the strength of Castro‟s regime and the potential for organized resistance against his government . McCone: The intelligence community is concerned about the potential of organized resistance .
 The report concluded that Castro had consolidated his control over the communist party in Cuba . The Soviet government recognized that this was a fact recognized by the Soviet government .
 The intelligence community believed that the Soviet and Cuban relations improved from March to August, with the Soviet Union sending military equipment and advisors to aid the Cuban military . Despite their differences, the intelligence community believes that the relationship improved .
 The report stipulated that while the Soviets increased their military shipments to Cuba, they provided only defensive weapons . The report said the Soviet Union increased its military shipments .
 This conclusion led the community to believe that the Soviets would not enhance their commitment to Cuba in the near future . The conclusion led to the conclusion that the Soviet Union would not increase its commitment .
 McCone‟s experiences in the Air Force and the Atomic Energy Commission along with his anti-communist ideals influenced his unique analysis of the early reports of Soviet military equipment in Cuba . McCone: "The early Soviet reports in Cuba were very accurate"
 The experiences in the Truman and Eisenhower administrations made him skeptical of Kennedy‟s ‟Flexible Response,” because he believed that the nuclear balance remained the crucial deterrence to Soviet aggressions .
 To McCone, the minimum number of nuclear missiles and warheads did not count as deterrence and assumed Khrushchev felt the same way . McCone: "I assume that [Krushchev] felt that [Deterrence] didn't work"
 McCone was more receptive to the idea of the Soviet Union using Cuba as a missile base, despite the prevailing mindset within the administration and the rest of the intelligence community that the Soviets would not take such a risk . Because of this mindset, McCone .
 Early reports of increased shipments from the Soviet Union to Cuba alarmed McCone . While the intelligence community had little knowledge of Soviet plans for Cuba, McCone said .
 On July 26, the first ANADYR shipment aboard the Maria Ulyanova arrived at the port of Cabanas .
 Reports of first shipments arriving in Cuba did not reach Washington until the first week of August . Reports of the first shipments did not arrive in Cuba until the early August .
 McCone viewed the increase in Soviet personnel and the sudden increase in shipments as the first steps in a new Soviet commitment to Cuba . McCone said the increase of Soviet personnel was the first step toward a new commitment in Cuba .
 On August 10, McCone voiced his concerns about Cuba during a meeting with the Special Group . McCone: "I'm concerned about Cuba"
 McCone‟s fears of the future deployment of missiles in Cuba continued to grow as more reports arrived in Washington . McCone: “I don”t think it”s possible that the missiles will be deployed in Cuba .
 On August 20, he presented the Special Group with the analysis of the intelligence gathered since the August 10 meeting . The analysis was based on sixty intelligence reports arriving from Cuba and reconnaissance flights over Soviet vessels and Cuban ports .
 According to intelligence reports, twenty-one Soviet ships docked in Cuban ports during the month of July, with seventeen ships en route in the Atlantic at the time .
 Soviet personnel offloaded unknown materials from the docked vessels in large crates under extreme security precautions . The crates were filled with unknown materials under strict security measures .
 McCone believed that crates possibly contained airplane fuselages or missile components . Some crates contained components for radar equipment .
 Approximately 4,000 to 6,000 Soviet personnel arrived in Cuba in July and August, but no evidence of organized units . Along with increased supplies, there was also increased supplies .
 The implications of this operation were that the crates possibly contained components for surface-to-air missile systems, Communications Intelligence equipment, or Electronic Intelligence systems .
 These systems posed a problem for future reconnaissance flights and operations in the Caribbean, the U.S. Navy said .
 On August 21, Rusk held a meeting in his office with McCone, McNamara, Johnson, Taylor, Lemnitzer, and Bundy .
 McCone stated its purpose was to bring other members of the cabinet up to date on the recent intelligence on Cuba . McCone said the purpose of the meeting was to discuss the intelligence .
 The DCI detailed that at the August 10 meeting, he gave as much information as available, and that since there was a substantial increase in Soviet assistance to Cuba, there was an increase in the Soviet assistance .
 The extent of the Soviet operation was much more involved than previously believed, with preliminary indications of sophisticated electronic equipment and missile sites . Preliminary indications indicate that sophisticated equipment was used .
 McCone reiterated his concerns that the Soviets might place MRBMs into Cuba . McCone proposed that the administration have plans in place if it occurred .
 The group discussed various options in case the Soviet Union decided to risk placing nuclear missiles in Cuba . The group understood the critical nature of the situation .
 The group proposed a partial and total blockade, but feared that it might lead to similar actions by the Soviet Union in Berlin, Italy, and Turkey . The group feared similar actions would lead to a similar blockade in Berlin and Italy .
 McCone proposed aggressive actions in intelligence, sabotage, and guerilla warfare . He detailed the disappointing results in Cuba up to that point in Cuba .
 The following day, McCone brought the military buildup in Cuba to President Kennedy‟s attention . McCone arranged a meeting with the president for Wednesday, August 22 .
 The report stipulated there was no direct evidence of organized military units in Cuba . Despite the large number of Soviet personnel, the report stated that the program was new .
 Intelligence sources report two large military construction sites on the northern coast of Cuba . Regular convoys from the ports to those construction areas are reported .
 The construction appeared confined to northwest Cuba, and photoreconnaissance showed limited activity in other regions of the island .
 McCone concluded that while they had little knowledge of the nature of the construction, it could be the initial phases of a SAM defense system, intelligence-gathering facilities or missile sites .
 The general conclusion that the community and McCone agreed on was that the construction proved that the Soviet Union had taken a strong step forward in protecting Cuba . McCone: "The general conclusion is that the . community and the . . community agreed on the construction .
 McCone, Rusk, McNamara, Gilpatric, Taylor, Bundy, and Bundy attended the meeting on Thursday, August 23 . Despite McCone‟s suspicions on the introduction of missiles into Cuba, the president and Rusk doubted that the Soviets would risk moving nuclear missiles
 McCone again raised the issue of what the U.S. should do in case the Soviets placed offensive missiles in Cuba .
 Kennedy requested more intelligence of Soviet personnel in Cuba, and the number and type of weapons delivered to the island . Kennedy also requested more information on the number of weapons brought to Cuba from Cuba .
 McCone questioned the value of the JUPITER missiles in Italy and Turkey, and inquired how difficult they were to remove . McCone also asked how difficult it was to remove the missiles .
 It called for a study on the implications of giving the intelligence to members of the O.A. States . It also asked them to limit their assistance to Cuba .
 It also called for an analysis of possible actions if they discovered Soviet surface-to-surface missiles in Cuba .
 Bundy reiterated to agencies that the president wanted an immediate response . Bundy made his final recommendations before leaving on his honeymoon on August 25 .
 McCone left Washington on August 26, bound for Seattle, Washington, where he married Theiline Pigott110 on August 29 . On August 30, the couple departed for Cape Ferrat on the French Riviera where they remained for most of the month of September .
 With McCone out of the country, Carter replaced McCone in meetings with the U.S. Intelligence Board and the MONGOOSE Special Group .
 On August 29, Carter met with the USIB, where he detailed his conversation with McCone and Lemnitzer on using Air Force RF-101114 and Navy RF-8115 reconnaissance aircraft in Cuba .
 Carter argued that other types of photography failed to provide enough detail on certain construction sites . The following day, Carter attended the Special Group meeting, where he argued that such photography was inadequate .
 Carter sent several telegrams to McCone keeping the Director informed of the recent intelligence on Cuba . The Special Group agreed to study the issue further and locate specific targets that had the greatest need of low-level flights .
 McCone's first wife and Pigott's first husband died within the year before they re-married . The two families had known each other for some time .
 RF101 served alongside of the Lockheed U-2 and the Vought RF-8 as the primary photo-reconnaissance aircraft in the early 1960s . The RF101 was the first aircraft to be used by the Air Force in the U.S.
 It was a fast and agile aircraft, making it well suited to low-level reconnaissance flights . It was also well-suited to be used in reconnaissance missions for the CIA .
 With a top speed of 1,225 mph, it had the capacity to make repeated flights over Cuba . It had a range of . 1,500 nautical miles without the weapons, .
 Carter said he believed the Soviets would place missiles in Cuba . President Carter reiterated his ideas to important officials in Washington .
 The first definitive report of the presence of SAM sites in Cuba came from a U-2 reconnaissance flight on August 29 . Carter’s importance to McCone‟s efforts became clear as the agency received more reports on construction projects in Cuba .
 The U-2 flight that day covered areas around Havana and other parts of Western Cuba . It showed several construction sites consistent with previous SAM sites in the Soviet Union .
 SAMs identified as the SA-2 Guideline120, the same missile system responsible for downing Gary Power‟s U-2 in 1960 .
 On August 31, Carter reported the readout of the U-2 flight to Bundy and Lemnitzer . Carter reported on August 31 that the plane was en route to the U.2 .
 After Bundy informed Kennedy of the conversation, Kennedy contacted Carter that afternoon . Kennedy contacted the president that afternoon after Bundy informed him about the conversation .
 Kennedy put a freeze on distribution of the report, giving the intelligence community time to prepare an extensive briefing for him . On September 1, Carter spoke with Ray Cline, the Acting Deputy Director of Intelligence, authorizing him to prepare a full analysis .
 Cline presented his analysis to Carter on September 3, which showed the presence of SAM sites, guided missile boats, and additional land armaments . The analysis was presented to Carter .
 The photography discovered eight SAM sites under construction, and another unknown unknown site being prepared .
 The missile had a range of 24 nautical miles at a speed well in excess of any American aircraft . The missile was launched at a height of up to 100 mph .
 Eyeball 127.25 operational within two weeks . See also Brugioni, Eyeballs to Eyebal, 127. 25 operational within 2 weeks .
 The U-2 also discovered eight Soviet missile boats, each armed with anti-ship missiles . The U.2 also found eight Soviet missiles boats . U.S. Navy says the U.K. found the boats in the area .
 The following day, Carter informed McCone in a telegram of the construction as well as his belief that the report altered the Cuban situation . Carter told McCone that he believed the construction altered the situation .
 Carter assured McCone that he would continue to push the administration for more reconnaissance flights . Kennedy released a statement on the presence of SAMs and guided missile boats in Cuba .
 The statement included much of the information from Cline‟s report, and the conclusion that reconnaissance showed no offensive missiles . The statement includes much of Cline's report, including the report's conclusion .
 The summer weather over the Caribbean had limited the amount of useful photography on a majority of the August flights . The Group has to choose where to concentrate future reconnaissance flights .
 At the time of the telegram, the Soviet Union had remained silent on the president‟s speech . The Soviet Union remained silent at the time .
 Sources in Cuba believed that Castro might use the situation to justify increased Soviet military assistance, to divert intelligence sources from his economic and political problems . Castro believed that the situation might have been motivated by increased Soviet assistance .
 The intelligence analysis from the August 29 mission led the intelligence community to believe that another missile site near Banes, Cuba might be a SSM site . The intelligence community believes the site may be a missile site .
 The president once again chose to limit the dissemination of the report outside of the intelligence branches . The report was released by the White House .
 When McCone received the report of this site, it fueled his suspicions concerning the Soviet intentions in Cuba . The site fueled McCone's suspicions of Soviet intentions .
 McCone prepared to meet with the French General Paul Jacquier in Paris, while he continued advocating low-level flights . McCone met with Jacquier to discuss the issue .
 Carter: Congressional Republicans gave the president the authority to invade Cuba if necessary . According to Carter, the president was given the power to do so . Carter: "Congressional Republicans gave him the authority"
 Carter planned to take McCone's statements on using RF-101 for reconnaissance and the introduction of missiles to Cuba again during the scheduled meeting with Bundy on Saturday, September 8 . Despite McCone‟s continuing correspondence to Washington, a series of problems with the U-2 complicated the
 U-2 flight on September 5 failed to produce any usable photography over the Banes site because of cloud cover . Cloud cover prevented any usable photos of the site .
 On August 30 and September 8, a series of U-2 incidents led the Kennedy administration to re-evaluate the risks involved in using the aircraft over Cuba . The Kennedy administration re-evaluated the risks of using the U.2 over Cuba in September .
 On September 4, the day of Kennedy‟s ultimatum, one of the U-2s accidentally penetrated Soviet airspace in the Soviet Far East, prompting the Soviets to send fighters to intercept . The Soviets sent a fighter escort to intercept the plane .
 On September 8, a U-2 was lost over the Chinese mainland, prompting even more restrictions on flights over Cuba . The U.2 has been banned from flying over Cuba since the loss of the plane .
 Kennedy halted the entire program pending a briefing to review procedures . Carter informed McCone of the decision .
 In Carter‟s September 8 telegram, he provided McCone another intelligence report on the September 5 U-2 flight . Carter”s telegram: “In the U.2 flight, he gave McCone a report on September 5 .
 The new photographs show three more SAM sites, located in the Las Villa Province in Central Cuba . The new photos were taken in the same province .
 In addition to the sites found on August 29, the total number rose to 13 with the current report . The total number of sites found is now 13 .
 Carter believed 25 sites provided Cuba with a complete missile defense against approaching aircraft . Carter believed that 25 sites would provide Cuba with an effective missile defense system .
 Reconnaissance also showed one advanced Soviet MiG-21 fighter137, and possibly the parts to assemble nineteen more . Reconnaissance showed one of the most advanced aircraft in the world .
 Rusk asked Carter to convey his thanks for suggesting the creation of contingency plans with Latin American allies, and promised to take it under advisement . Rusk: "I'm glad to hear that the U.S. is prepared to deal with the situation"
 Carter informed McCone of the decision to halt further U-2 flights pending an investigation . On September 10, Carter sent another message to McCone, updating him on the search for the missing plane . At the end of the telegram, Carter told McCone that the search had been
 Intelligence had no information on the fate of the pilot . Despite a detailed search, intelligence had yet to find any sign of the U-2 .
 There was no evidence of any mechanical malfunction, leaving either pilot error or attack as the primary possibilities . The crash was the first of its kind to take place in the U.S.
 Carter pointed out the interesting fact that the Soviet Union failed to take advantage of the incident as in previous incidents . The community had no other information on the Soviet reaction, Carter said .
 The presence of this fighter in Cuba added to the risk of low-level reconnaissance flights . The presence in Cuba has been a problem for the Cuban government for years .
 McCone was apprehensive of the president‟ decision to halt U-2 flights over Cuba . In response to McCone‟s suggestion, Carter argued that the program might be usable in April of the following year .
 In his mind, the U-2 remained the best intelligence-gathering method available to the intelligence community . While he believed that the incident was distressing, he said it was not the most distressing .
 McCone took the opportunity to make his views on missiles in Cuba known to Carter . Once again, McCone made his views known to the president .
 It was in this telegram that McCone gave his reasoning for the placement of missiles in Cuba . The telegram was sent to the White House in 1945 .
 Kirkpatrick attended the White House meeting on Cuban overflights and sent notes from the meeting in the daily cable to McCone . McCone concluded his message with a remark that the beautiful weather helped make that determination .
 The A-12 was designed to penetrate enemy airspace at speeds in excess of Mach 2. to reduce the risk to the aircraft . It was developed in the 1980s to be able to reach Mach 2 speeds .
 Rusk then analyzed the proposal for two more overflights to over the areas that the August 29 and September 5 flights missed . Rusk: The proposal for the two overflights was analyzed by Rusk and the proposal was approved .
 The risk of a third incident convinced Rusk to allow peripheral flights around the island and over international waters . Rusk has allowed peripheral flights over the island .
 Rusk authorized four flights, two peripheral and two over international waters, to limit the risk to the safety of the pilots . Rusk says the flights will be limited to four, including two of the flights .
 At the end of the meeting, Bundy and Rusk agreed that the overflights would continue if no further incidents occurred . The Special Group considered the future of U-2 flights .
 Carter sent a memorandum to McNamara asking for further reconnaissance over the Banes site . Carter sent another memorandum asking McNamara to reconmine the site .
 The U-2 could not effectively photograph this site, meaning other reconnaissance aircraft might be useful . The U.S. could not use the U.2 as a reconnaissance aircraft .
 On September 11, Washington also received the first official Soviet response to the President‟s September ultimatums and the U-2 incidents, which Carter sent to McCone . Carter sent McCone along with the BNE's response .
 According to the Soviets, any American attack on Cuba would unleash a global war . U.S. would attack Cuba if it were attacked, according to the Soviet Union .
 The Soviet government believed the U.S. had plans to invade Cuba, and took steps to boost its defenses . The Cuban government believed that the United States had plans for invasion .
 The Board of National Estimates promised to include their preliminary report in the Special National Intelligence Estimate . The intelligence community continued analyzing the photography .
 On September 13, intelligence reports provided more information on the suspicious missile site near Banes . The site is believed to have been located in Banes.
 Report showed the location of similar missile sites near Bay of Pigs and other beaches, which led to analysis that their placement coincided with probable invasion locations from American troops .
 The SS-N-1 Scrubber was the NATO codename for the Soviet P-1 Strela cruise missile . The Prela was a Soviet missile developed in the 1950s and 1960s .
 It entered service aboard Soviet destroyers in 1958, and in shore installations in Russia . It was used in Soviet ships and shore installations .
 It had a range of 22 nautical miles and could carry either nuclear or conventional warheads . It was designed to carry either a nuclear or a conventional nuclear weapon .
 SS-N-2 Styx was the NATO codename for the Soviet P-15 Termit cruise missile . The SS- N-2 was NATO's codename . The missile was a Soviet missile developed in the 1960s .
 McCone made repeated requests to the BNE to study the prospects for the Soviet Union placing missiles in Cuba . Carter made no comment on McCone‟s statement about the missiles .
 McCone urged the Board to study the feasibility of the Soviets secretly sending offensive weapons to Cuba . McCone again urged the study of the feasibility .
 He made the comment “we must carefully study the prospect of MRBM‟s in Cuba” to show how strongly he believed that the Soviets would introduce those weapons .
 McCone believed that the Soviets would use Cuba similar to how the U.S. used Britain, Italy, and Turkey . McCone said that Cuba would be used by the Soviets similar to the United States .
 He argued that the CIA and rest of the intelligence community had the responsibility to keep the government informed of the dangers .
 McCone said the estimate needed to include a usable distinction between the terms “offensive” and “defensive” weapons . The director believed that the estimate would need to include the distinction .
 If nuclear weapons did exist in Cuba, McCone suggested a study on how long the Soviets needed to install the missiles . He asked the board to consider regions of the island where the SAM defenses would hinder overflights .
 McCone concluded that the estimate should include all these elements and include alternative plans of action should they find missiles in Cuba . The rift between the analysts and McCone became apparent with the release of the BNE report on Cuba .
 McCone‟s suspicions of Soviet intentions in Cuba continued to grow as he received more intelligence reports . Most of the intelligence community believed that the Soviets did not intend to take such a risk in light of the expected American response .
 This estimate stated that the purpose of the Soviet military buildup in Cuba was to strengthen Castro‟s regime by creating an advanced air defense and coastal defense network to thwart any invasion . The estimate said that the Cuban military buildup was to bolster Castro”s regime .
 The board believed there was a great temptation for the Soviet Union to introduce nuclear weapons into Cuba . The Soviet Union also wanted to introduce IL-28 bombers, submarines and short-range SSMs .
 McCone responded to the estimate on September 20, in which he made several recommendations to Carter .
 He believed that the Board should re-evaluate their conclusion on the risk of the Soviet Union placing nuclear missiles in Cuba .
 The agent reported a large convoy of vehicles headed for the San Cristobal area of Cuba, with trailers seventy feet in length . trailers believed to be carrying large missiles .
 A similar report arrived in Washington on October 1, detailing another large convoy in the Pinar Del Rio with eight large trailers, carrying “huge tubes” larger than the flatbed . The report also detailed another convoy with eight trailers carrying ‘huge tubes,’ larger than
 Some analysts in the CIA studied the possibility of the trailers transporting SS-4 “Sandal” missiles . McCone viewed these reports as confirmation that the U.S. needed to increase surveillance of the island .
 McCone urged the administration to authorize a series of U-2 reconnaissance flights . McCone said the U.2 reconnaissance missions should be authorized by the administration .
 Robert Kennedy began the meeting reiterating President Kennedy‟s concern with the lack of success in the subversion of Castro”s regime . President Kennedy expressed his concern that the subverted of the Castro regime was not successful .
 McCone told Robert Kennedy that one of reasons for the problems in MONGOOSE was the hesitation of the government to risk American assets . McCone said the government was reluctant to risk assets .
 After a brief argument, the group agreed to re-consider the limitations placed on the U-2 . The group agreed that the limitations should be considered .
 The missile had a range of 1,080 nautical miles, capable of hitting targets as far north as Maryland if placed in Cuba . The missile was authorized by the group to include complete coverage of the island .
 McCone noticed a large gap over Western Cuba overlooked since September 5 . Because of the limited number of flights and the peripheral coverage, McCone says the gap has been overlooked . McCone: "It's not unusual to see a gap over Cuba"
 The group agreed with McCone, and proposed that the members prepare a plan of action and submit their proposal during their next scheduled meeting .
 He wanted the president to authorize complete coverage of the island with the U-2 . The U.2 is a U.S. Navy aircraft that can carry out missions to the island .
 President Kennedy made a public statement that the United States would conduct overhead reconnaissance of Cuba . The meeting ended with the agreement to review the situation in more detail over the weekend .
 The U-2 was the first flight to discover the presence of nuclear missiles in Cuba . McCone believed the Soviets might have placed the missiles in the country .
 McCone correctly argued that the present buildup was the first phase in the establishment of a nuclear missile base on the island . McCone: The Cuban military buildup was first phase of a missile base .
 He justified this belief through his understanding of the strategic situation between the Soviet Union and the U.S. He justified his belief through understanding the situation between Russia and the United States .
 He believed that while the risk was great to the operation, it also provided the Soviet Union a way to balance many of their objectives without risking reprisal from either Cuba or the U.S.
 McCone took a lengthy honeymoon during the crucial month before the crisis began . He pushed Deputy Director Carter to continue efforts to keep the administration from being surprised if intelligence confirmed his beliefs .
 McCone continued to encourage Washington officials and the BNE to consider that the Soviets saw the great advantage to having nuclear missiles in Cuba . He sent several cables to Carter and other CIA officials .
 The BNE believed that the Soviets would not risk placing offensive weapons in Cuba . Several reports from intelligence sources led several analysts to agree with McCone that they needed more reconnaissance flights .
 When the U-2 covered the island on October 14, it found the MRBM missile sites under construction . The U.2 found the sites .
 Had it not been for McCone‟s continued efforts, the missiles would have been operational before their discovery by the U.S. Had the missiles had been operational, they would've been operational .
 John McCone pushed the Kennedy administration to remove Castro and his communist government from power . After learning of the October 14 U-2 flights, McCone called for the removal of Castro .
 McCone joined several prominent members of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council in proposing a surgical strike against missile sites followed by an invasion . McCone: "Surgical strike" would be followed by invasion .
 McCone briefed the administration on daily intelligence reports and construction efforts in Cuba . McCone had the job of briefing the administration about daily intelligence .
 His greatest contribution to the intelligence effort was his coordination and integration of all the major civilian intelligence agencies during the Crisis to reduce the time required for analysis .
 He also had the job of briefing former President Eisenhower on the situation in Cuba .
 Despite his emotional calls against negotiations with the Soviet Union, McCone‟s efforts to coordinate and integrate intelligence reports allowed the president to have a detailed picture on the status of the Soviet missiles . Kennedy made informed decisions when dealing with the Kremlin .
 Analysts found three MRBM sites near San Cristobal, with eight MRBM transporters located adjacent to those sites . The film arrived at the National Photographic Intelligence Center .
 The report stipulated that there was no evidence precisely when the missiles arrived in Cuba, but their judgment was that they arrived sometime in September . There is no evidence that there is no time in which they arrived .
 The decision to place missiles in Cuba showed the determination of the Soviets to deter any American intervention against Castro‟s regime, by increasing the risk and costs of such a conflict . The decision was made by the Soviets in Cuba to deter American intervention .
 The report concluded that the Soviet leadership must have known that it would complicate the relationship between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The presence of missiles in Cuba threatened the large military bases and urban areas in the southeastern United States .
 The Strategic Air Command had eighteen bomber and tanker bases within that range, and an Inter-continental Ballistic Missile silo . The SAC also had an inter-continental ballistic missile silo in that range .
 The Navy had three major bases and other smaller facilities from Panama to Puerto Rico . The missiles had the range to reach those bases .
 The biggest target that the missiles could reach was Washington D.C. When the U-2 discovered the missiles, McCone was on the West Coast preparing to bury his stepson . McCone's stepson was buried when the missiles were discovered .
 Carter replaced McCone in meetings with the National Security Council, while Cline replaced him at the Commonwealth-US Intelligence Methods Conference . McCone escorted the body from California back to Seattle for burial .
 Cline met with a delegation of intelligence analysts who informed him of the presence of missiles in Cuba . When Cline returned from the conference, he met with the intelligence analysts .
 See also Brugioni's 189. 40 intelligence reports before attending the gathering .
 Carter authorized its dissemination to members of the United States Intelligence Board and to McCone . When Carter received word from Cline about the intelligence report on Cuba, he authorized it .
 Rusk made the comment that McCone saw the possibility of missiles back in August . Rusk related the conversation with McCone about the Soviets using Cuba like the U.S. used Turkey .
 He proposed a series of air strikes, followed by an invasion of the island . He first proposed air strikes followed by a invasion of island .
 He also proposed a warning to Castro and steps to isolate Cuba from the rest of the Free World .
 McNamara argued that if they attacked Cuba, they must attack before the missiles became operational, while Taylor confirmed that a surprise attack was essential to that attack . McNamara said that if the attack was carried out, it would be a surprise strike .
 EXCOMM is an abbreviation of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council . The members of the committee would meet every day to determine the course of action . The committee is called EXCOMm .
 When McCone arrived back in Washington, he immediately became an active member of EXCOMM . ExCOMM members include Dean Acheson, George Ball, Bundy, Dillon, Gilpatric, Robert Kennedy, McNamara .
 He also approved the transfer of information to the NPIC in order to reduce the time it took to create intelligence reports . He also established a joint committee of the major intelligence boards to release several estimates .
 McCone concluded his day with a briefing with the president for further study of the photographs . At 10:30 PM, McCone met with President Obama for a second time .
 He gave Lundahl greater authority at the NPIC by passing most of the intelligence directly to their offices to reduce the time it took to prepare estimates . Lundahl gave him greater authority .
 Albert Wheelon, Chairmen of the GMAIC, took on an added role of preparing joint estimates from the major intelligence boards after it came to Lundahl .
 Lundahl passed information to Cline, who then passed that information to McCone, McCone . Lundahl received the information from Lundahl, who passed it on to the Cline .
 McCone prepared a list of talking points before meeting with EXCOMM on Wednesday, October 17 . McCone‟s delegation of authority gave him more leeway in making recommendations .
 While the Soviets installed the missiles in Cuba, the defensive capabilities of the island continued to expand . McCone reiterated his earlier concerns about such an expensive missile defense system .
 McCone says despite the number of Cubans working at the sites, the missiles themselves remained under Soviet control . McCone: "There was no doubt that despite the fact that Cubans were working there, the sites remained entirely under Soviet .
 The first meeting of EXCOMM focused on the choices available to the U.S. regarding the Cuban situation . McCone proposed sending a warning to the Soviets giving them twenty-four hours to remove the missiles .
 Ball argued that any military action in Cuba would limit their options with NATO allies . Ball said any action would limit the options with their NATO allies with their options .
 He believed that the U.S. government needed to consider that Khrushchev might not know what was going on in Cuba . Further, he said that the United States needed to think about the situation in Cuba.
 Ball and Maxwell Taylor agreed that it might just be a ploy by Khrushchev to provoke an American response . Ball and Taylor thought it might be just a ploy to provoke a response .
 McNamara avoided taking a position during the first meeting, wanting more time to study on all the facts available . McNamara said he would not take a position until the next meeting .
 Current intelligence reports showed fifty or sixty MiG-17 and Mi-19 fighters in Cuba . Intelligence reports showed 50 or sixty fighters in the country .
 Soviet ships delivered parts for IL-28 bombers, along with at least one MiG-21 interceptor . Soviet ships also delivered parts of IL-27 bombers, including parts for MiG21 interceptors .
 The report confirmed three MRBM sites under construction, which could be ready in two weeks . The report also confirmed that three MRB sites are currently under construction .
 The report showed no evidence of nuclear warhead storage sites . It failed to determine if the Soviets intended to place conventional or nuclear warheads on the missiles .
 McCone received reports from Lundahl on a number of crates of unknown purpose, and at least twenty-eight Soviet ships en route to Cuba with similar cargo . The crates were of unknown cargo .
 McCone argued several points from his notes, including how strongly he believed that the Soviets were using missiles in Cuba to force the U.S. to trade their bases in Europe . McCone: The Soviets were trying to get the United States to trade its bases with Europe .
 The meeting focused on intelligence-gathering actions for that day, along with the proposed plans of action to remove the missiles . The meeting also focused on the intelligence gathered on the missile removal .
 The discussion was brief because of the short amount of time between meetings scheduled for that day . McCone only referred to several of his warnings that he proposed .
 Kennedy entrusted McCone with the role of briefing former President Eisenhower on the Cuban situation . McCone immediately departed for Gettysburg, Pennsylvania to brief Eisenhower .
 The DCI met with Eisenhower to review the developments in Cuba, including all the current intelligence on the Soviet military buildup and the U-2 photographs of the MRBM sites .
 The former president criticized the failure at the Bay of Pigs and the failure of MONGOOSE to remove Castro from office, especially during the months before the Soviets sent weapons to Cuba .
 He believed an ultimatum to Castro and Khrushchev would fail, and that a blockade would bring difficulties of its own . He believed that an ultimeatum to . Castro and . Khrush . would fail .
 McCone believed that Eisenhower favored military action to cut off the Cuban government with an invasion, ending the situation with limited bloodshed . McCone: "Icyrism's plan was to end the crisis with a limited bloodshed"
 McCone promised to keep informed and consult him, whether or not he received a message from Kennedy . McCone immediately returned to Washington to attend afternoon and evening EXCOMM meetings .
 During the meetings, the group once again discussed plans of action for Cuba .
 Ambassador Charles Bohlen argued against any military action in Cuba because it would divide their allies and subject the United States to criticism around the world . Bohlen: Any military action would divide the U.S. from its allies .
 Rusk believed that the administration should ask Congress for a declaration of war against Cuba, but keep their options open afterwards . Rusk said that the government should not ask Congress to declare war, but to keep options open .
 Ball emphasized the time constraints on action, meaning that the quicker they acted the less risk it imposed on the U.S. Ball emphasized that the United States has time to act .
 Kennedy wanted to know how America‟s allies, notably Turkey, Italy, and Britain, might respond to an American response to missiles in Cuba . Kennedy asked allies to consider how they would respond to U.S. response .
 McNamara did not believe the missiles were that great a threat to the United States . Gilpatric supported his opinion, saying they were not a threat .
 McNamara, McCone, and Taylor agreed that talks with the Soviets gave Khrushchev the time to prepare the missiles for launch and to camouflage the sites . After considering the military option, the group moved to the pros and cons of a naval blockade .
 The group argued over a partial or total blockade, with McCone pointing the strengths of a total blockade . McCone said a total or partial blockade would be better .
 McCone argued that the primary goals of action in Cuba were to dispose of the missile sites and remove Castro‟s government from power .
 Rusk proposed a timetable that began with a briefing of key allies followed by a series of sorties against the sites . Rusk proposes a timetable for the sorties, starting with briefing of allies .
 McCone and Taylor supported the military strike option, while Bohlen continued to support the diplomatic route . Bohlen supported the diplomatic option .
 Thompson and Martin supported the blockade option . The rest of the group remained neutral on the issue, including Gilpatric .
 The committee found at least one Soviet missile regiment with eight launchers and sixteen MRBM missiles at two launch sites in Cuba . Based on the photographs from the U-2 flight on October 14 and the two flights from October 15 .
 Two other MRBM launch sites are under construction, bringing the total to three . Further analysis of the photography showed two more MRBM sites under construction .
 Photographs from October 14 and 15 missions show remarkable building progress . Images show the appearance of erectors for the missiles and temporary buildings and vehicles .
 The report stipulated that if the missiles were of the 1,020 nautical mile range, the first of them could be operational immediately if needed . The missiles would have a range of about 1,000 nautical miles .
 The committee argued that the Soviets might not have the warheads in place for use . However, because the photos did not show the missile silhouette facing upwards, the committee argued . The committee said that the photos didn't show the missiles facing upwards .
 If not ready, the committee agreed that the missiles could become operational in a matter of days . McCone also received an intelligence report from Lundahl on the October 15 flight .
 On the second flight on October 15, the U-2 found what appeared to be a probable IRBM site under construction . Previously reported as military equipment, the site was previously reported to be military .
 Photographs showed an erector already in place with six missiles in the vicinity . The photographs showed an erectionor already being erected with missiles .
 The construction site itself confirmed to previous Soviet emplacements in Eastern Europe . The report did not stipulate that the missiles were IRBM .
 Lundahl met with McNamara at his home the next morning, which led McNamara to call McCone expressing his concern about IRBM sites . Lundahl says he met with McCone the next day to discuss the IRBM site .
 Lundahl delivered his report on the October 15 photography . Lundahl was briefed on the report from Wheeler .
 Lundahl believed that they must have low-level photography for the public to understand the images . The president asked Lundahl if a novice could see that the pictures showed MRBM missiles, Lundahl said .
 Thompson and Bohlen reiterated their previous objections to immediate military action . Thompson pushed for a declaration of war from Congress if the group authorized military action, Bohlen said . Bohlen proposed a blockade instead of immediate action .
 McCone, Dillon and Taylor suggested immediate military strikes . They believed that diplomatic efforts would limit the options .
 McNamara and Ball argued that a strike without warning would lead to Soviet retaliation somewhere in the world . McNamara, Ball argued a strike could lead to retaliation from Soviet retaliation .
 The group agreed that the president should confront Andrei Gromyko, the Soviet minister of Foreign Affairs, on the presence of offensive missiles in Cuba . The group also agreed that President Obama should confront the minister of foreign affairs .
 McCone joined many EXCOMM members in promoting the air strike option to remove the missiles from Cuba . Kennedy requested that the group study the advantages of either a blockade or air strike against Cuba .
 One of the reasons he feared the Soviet missiles was his belief that the Soviet military gave more control to their battlefield commanders, he said .
 The intelligence reports from October 18 solidified his beliefs, and led other members such as Dillon, Taylor, Acheson, and Bundy to support the air strike option .
 McCone suggested that an air strike alone could not remove all the missiles . McCone even suggested that a strike could not be enough to remove all missiles .
 McNamara proposed an invasion of Cuba to remove the missiles and Castro‟s government . By the end of the Thursday meetings, many EXCOMM members had moved away from the air strike option, due to arguments by Robert Kennedy and McNamara .
 Rusk and Bohlen became more outspoken in their opposition to the air strikes . Rusk, Bohlen pushed for the blockade options .
 McCone became more open to the idea of a blockade . He also took a strong stance against Adlai Stevenson‟s suggestion that the U.S. confront the Soviet Union at the United Nations .
 He continued to emphasize the problems with a blockade, and during the evening meeting with the president, supported the air strike option, he said .
 By the end of the meeting, the consensus that existed earlier in the meetings broke down, leading the president to order them to return to their arguments . McCone showed his support for the air strike during the meeting with the president .
 McCone believed that the group favored a blockade, and that the U.S. should declare war on Cuba only as a last resort . McCone believes that the United States should declare a war only as last resort.
 The limited blockade sought to prevent more weapons arriving in Cuba and to become a total blockade if Castro and the Soviets continued construction on the missile sites . The blockade was aimed at preventing more weapons from arriving in the country .
 McCone believed that continued surveillance was critical to either option . He said it provided crucial information on the status of the missiles .
 McCone argued that if they chose the blockade option, it would begin with a public announcement from the president and limited notification of allies on Monday, October 22 . It seemed to McCone that the air strike option was on hold until after they attempted the blockade, he said .
 Those who supported the blockade believed it gave the administration the ability to increase or decrease pressure according to the situation, and provoke a less severe Soviet reaction . Those who backed the blockade thought it allowed the administration to increase pressure .
 The USIB released a Special National Intelligence Estimate on October 19, which analyzed possible Soviet reactions to American actions regarding Cuba . McCone wanted the board to give him the assistance he needed to choose the best options for the United States .
 If the U.S. did nothing about the missiles, the Soviet Union would introduce strategic nuclear weapons . The missiles would contribute greatly to the Soviet strategic capabilities, the author says . If the United States did nothing, the Soviets would introduce nuclear weapons, he says .
 If Kennedy chose to warn the Soviets, it would hinder the surprise air strike option . Kennedy chose not to warn Soviets, which would hinder air strike .
 The board considered the Soviet decision to launch a war unlikely; instead they believed they would launch an attack against Berlin . Cline reported on the board‟ estimate during the Friday morning EXCOMM meeting .
 Rusk argued that the president needed a legal framework if he launched a military invasion of Cuba . Rusk: "I'm not sure if the president would be able to launch a military operation"
 Many in the group supported the idea of rationalizing action in Cuba as self-defense . After deliberations, many supported the decision to take action as self defense .
 McCone stipulated that a warning did not improve their position and possibly hindered it . On the issue of a warning, McCone said it would not improve the position of the team .
 If they decided to support a defensive blockade of Cuba, it would involve force, which the U.N. charter prohibited except in certain situations .
 It would give the president a legal framework for an air strike, invasion, or blockade . The group renewed its disagreements on either air strike or a blockade .
 He asked for further deliberations on both suggestions, because of the problems inherent with both . The decision is expected to be made in the near future .
 A blockade did not remove the missiles, meaning they needed something more substantial . A blockade didn't remove them, meaning a more substantial solution was needed . The U.S. government has not been able to find the missiles .
 He moved to support the air strikes, because he supported decisive action . He said he wanted to support decisive action in Syria .
 Robert Kennedy also supported the blockade, because an air strike had too many implications for international opinion, and went against the traditions of the U.S. The blockade was also against the tradition of the United States .
 Besides killing many Cubans, it would kill many Soviet personnel as well . The Cuban government would also kill Soviet personnel in Cuba .
 He proposed two working groups, each tasked with writing papers on the advantages and disadvantages of their assigned option .
 Johnson headed the blockade group, composed of Thompson, Martin, Gilpatric, and Meeker . Bundy was to head the air strike group, which contained Dillon, Acheson and Taylor . Bundy headed the air strikes group .
 McCone shifted his support away from the air strike option, but did not fully support the blockade . Despite his belief that the strike option posed the best course of action for the president, McCone remained off the strike group due to his position in the intelligence community . During the course of
 At that time, each group voiced their proposal, after which each member showed their support or criticism for the plan . At the end of each proposal, each member of the group showed support for the proposal .
 The group began with the blockade proposal, where criticism led to many changes in the original plan . The group has been criticized for the original blockade proposal .
 The group agreed there was not enough time to have everything ready for the president to make an address on Sunday . First, the group agreed that there was too much time to prepare .
 Thompson stipulated that they needed twenty-four hours between Kennedy‟s address and enforcement of the blockade, to allow the Soviet commanders the time needed to inform their ships . Kennedy”s address was set to be followed by the blockade of the Soviet Union .
 The blockade plan also contained a list of actions needed to ensure success of the operation . The plan also included a scenario that mapped out the blockade and international reactions .
 Each group voiced their plans, there was general agreement that either option posed its own risks . The possibility of the Soviets forcing the U.S. to give up the missile bases in Turkey and Italy is one of the risks, experts say .
 McNamara made an important statement that calmed many of the air strike proponents . At this point, McNamara said: "I don't think we should go to war." McNamara's comments calmed many .
 The committee reported that October 16 flights confirmed the existence of three MRBM sites and two IRBM sites . Current intelligence showed the sites manned by Soviet personnel .
 A key component of the intelligence was the identification of a nuclear warhead storage site near the most completed construction site at Guanajay . One key component to the Wednesday intelligence is the identification .
 The committee believed that the warheads could already be in Cuba, despite the lack of photography on an operational nuclear storage site . The committee said the warheads were already in Cuba .
 Intelligence photographs show twenty-four launchers when completed, each with the ability to fire multiple missiles . At present, intelligence photographs showed twenty-24 launchers when . completed .
 Of the twenty-six SAM sites located in Cuba, intelligence reported 16 operational batteries . Intelligence reported 16 SAM sites in Cuba . Intelligence: Of the 26 SAM sites, 16 are operational .
 The committee believed two of the coastal defense sites were operational . The committee said they believed two were operational.
 McCone met with NPIC ballistic missile experts, who showed him the construction sites that conformed to previous IRBM sites in Eastern Europe . The following morning, he met with Dave Boyle, one of the experts .
 McCone traveled with Cline and Lundahl to another meeting with the president at 2:30.266 This meeting had a particular importance because the president, his advisors, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the regular EXCOMM members were meeting to give their reports on blockade or air
 McCone instructed Cline to brief the group on the Joint Evaluation from October 19 . Lundahl showed the locations of both the MRBM and IRBM sites .
 McNamara argued that despite disagreements in the group on plans of action, the military commanders were ready to implement either option . Current intelligence showed sixteen SS-4 MRBMs, aimed towards the central U.S.
 This weapon nullified the advantages of an amphibious assault by inflicting enormous casualties to the men and their equipment . The weapon nullifies the advantages . It was designed to counter an amphibian assault .
 One of the key problems with the blockade was the length of time it took to achieve their objective of removing the missiles from Cuba .
 The blockade also risked “serious political trouble in the United States” and a weakening of the U.S. international position, the president says . The blockade could also risk ‘serious political problems” in the US, he says .
 The blockade did have the advantage of doing less damage to America‟s allies in Europe, and allowed the United States to maintain its traditions against surprise attacks and leadership in the Free World .
 Robert Kennedy informed the president that the plan had the support of Bundy, Taylor, the Joint Chiefs, while Dillon and McCone supported parts of the plan . Robert Kennedy said the plan was supported by Bundy, . Taylor, Bundy, and the Joint . Chiefs of the Joint. Chiefs,
 Taylor argued that the air strikes gave them the chance to take out the missiles, the IL-28 bombers, and the SAM sites . Taylor argues that the strikes were the best way to get around the country .
 McNamara again cautioned the president that an air strike might not remove all the missiles . Taylor countered that not removing those weapons meant the U.S. had to invent new procedures for dealing with military threats .
 Robert Kennedy argued that the air strikes were an option if the blockade failed, which McCone supported . Robert Kennedy: "Air strikes are an option"
 A limited use of force in a blockade made it much more difficult for a military strike because of the time needed to implement the blockade and measure its effectiveness . Stevenson again argued for a diplomatic solution involving the United Nations .
 This had the effect of turning most of the Council‟ attentions from their own opinions to criticize Stevenson‟s position . Stevenson”s position was criticized by some of the council members .
 Taylor, Dillon and McCone argued against the diplomatic solution as well as Stevenson‟s claim that there might be no nuclear weapons in Cuba . Stevenson: There may be no nukes in Cuba.
 McCone admitted there was no photographic evidence of nuclear warheads in Cuba . He referred to Stevenson as the “St. Stevenson’s” Stevenson .
 McCone requested that the president allow the CIA to send copies of the aerial photography to allies in Western Europe . McCone also suggested sending a CIA officer along with the brief .
 He suggested Tidwell to brief the Canadian government first, giving the administration the chance to gain support from its allies before taking action .
 Kennedy requested that Ball, Johnson, Martin, and Martin prepare a detailed timeline for briefing all the groups suggested by McCone . Kennedy requested the timeline be prepared .
 McCone was a devout Catholic, which meant he used the term as an insult . According to Brugioni, McCone used it as a term for a Catholic insult .
 McCone secured more intelligence reports and estimates from the intelligence committees . The administration informed key allies about the missiles .
 The USIB released another Special National Security Estimate while EXCOMM deliberated with the president . ExCOMM also deliberated on the issue .
 The group analyzed the options provided by McCone‟s notes, providing several consequences to each action . The committee reported on the current status of the weapons in Cuba, along with the purposes of these weapons .
 If the U.S. failed to confront the Soviets on the missiles, the Soviets most likely would continue the buildup indefinitely . If the United States failed, the Russians would continue to build the missiles indefinitely .
 It believed no action by the Kennedy administration would provide encouragement to communist movements around the world and cause considerable damage to American power . The Kennedy administration believed that no action would encourage communist movements .
 A simple warning would not remove the missiles, and perhaps would lead to negotiations for concessions . The warning could lead to a deal being made with Iran .
 On the issue of the blockade, even a total blockade would not prevent the Soviets from using submarines to deliver nuclear warheads . The Soviets would not be able to use submarines to carry nuclear warheads, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 A blockade would place considerable pressure on the Soviet government . The presence of a blockade would be considerable pressure .
 If the president chose the air strike option, it would have a much greater chance of provoking the Soviet Union, by forcing the Soviets to attack the U.S. somewhere in the world . It would require direct action to remove Castro‟s regime, not a blockade .
 McCone received Joint Committee‟s analysis on U-2 flights up to October 18 . General war became a real possibility if the U.S. chose to attack, but board stipulated they did not believe the Soviet Union would directly attack the United States .
 At the third MRBM site in the Sagua La Grande region, photography showed portions of the missile regiment arrived on October 17, but was not ready for more than an emergency deployment before November 1 .
 The speed of construction at the fourth MRBM site in the Guanajay area showed a much higher construction rate than previous Soviet efforts . Control bunkers, blast walls, and concrete all visible from the photography .
 The board did not believe that the missiles would be ready for launch at the IRBM sites until December . However, the board did say that they would not be ready to launch until December.
 The last flight on October 17 also confirmed the presence of nuclear storage sites under construction, along with an unidentified SSM site in the Remedios area . McCone met with Kennedy on Sunday morning, October 21 .
 Carter informed McCone that the construction efforts and presence of guided missiles in Cuba meant that the Soviets had been planning the operation for at least a year . Similar to their October 20 Special estimate, Carter said that the operation had been planned by the Soviets .
 Reports showed parts to assemble 22 light bombers and 40 MiG-21 fighters were present in Cuba . Reports showed that the parts were needed to assemble the fighters .
 Current intelligence showed twelve guided missile patrol boats in Cuba . McCone attended an EXCOMM meeting with Kennedy later that morning .
 McNamara and Taylor argued that the air strikes themselves would only destroy ninety percent of the missiles . They argued that an advance warning would give the Soviets time to move the missiles to undisclosed locations .
 General Walter Sweeney296 detailed the plans for the air strike per the president‟s suggestion, and the group decided that an air strike must include missile sites, airfields, and SAM sites .
 Taylor and McNamara argued that if the president decided to authorize the attacks, they must begin by Monday morning . Taylor: If the president decides to authorize them, the attacks must begin Monday morning.
 McCone advised against a surprise attack, agreeing with Robert Kennedy‟s reasoning from the prior meetings . The president then asked for McCone”s opinion, and McCone gave his opinion .
 At 4:30 PM, McCone met in private with the president on Eisenhower‟s recommendations on the blockade . McCone reiterated his opinion that the President should issue a public statement that the United States would remove the missiles if intelligence showed they were not removing them .
 He noted that he received intelligence report from Lundahl that morning, followed by his meeting with Eisenhower . Eisenhower also met with Lundahl, Eisenhower .
 Eisenhower believed that the air strikes by themselves were never conclusive . The surprise attack set a precedent to the world that other nations might follow, Eisenhower said .
 Eisenhower favored the use of a blockade and eventual air strikes if the Soviets kept the missiles in Cuba . Eisenhower agreed that the situation called for a warning to the Soviets prior to either option .
 Kennedy requested that McCone also brief Vice President Johnson . McCone told Kennedy that Eisenhower had only certain information on the Soviet buildup . Kennedy: Eisenhower's opinion represented "a flash judgment rather than considered judgment"
 At 8:30 PM, McCone had Lundahl brief the Johnson on the current photography from Cuba . Lundahl also discussed the president‟s proposed speech .
 Johnson believed a surprise attack was the best option . Johnson questioned the use of a blockade followed by air strikes and invasion . Johnson: A surprise attack would be the best strategy .
 He believed that a warning limited the effectiveness of the air strikes, and argued that the blockade might not work . He also argued that a blockade might also not work.
 McCone countered Johnson‟s arguments with his briefing paper from the October 20 EXCOMM meeting . McCone said Johnson”s arguments were based on a briefing paper that McCone presented .
 EXCOMM's conclusions and Eisenhower‟s recommendations, Johnson agreed to accept the blockade option . The Joint Committee evaluated the status of missile sites in Cuba . The blockade option was approved by Johnson .
 The committee believed that the current MRBM sites had the ability to launch eighty missiles . Each launcher reloads once, with each launcher reloading once, the committee said .
 Photographs show eight Soviet missile regiments, each with eight launchers and at least 16 missiles each . Photographs showed eight Soviet missiles regiments with at least sixteen missiles .
 Lundahl provided McCone with the readout from the last mission on October 19, which showed another confirmed MRBM site, bringing the total to five MRBM sites and two IRBM sites in Cuba . Lundahl also provided a readout of the mission, showing the total of five
 McCone requested that Cline prepare a briefing for the president during the afternoon meeting with EXCOMM . Each site showed missile trailers, erectors, and support vehicles, with construction continuing at an accelerated pace .
 He reported on seventeen separate U-2 flights from October 14 to October 20 . The U.2 confirmed twenty-four launchers for MRBM missiles at six sites, and 12 launchers for IRBM sites located at three bases .
 Photography showed between over thirty missiles currently in Cuba, with no evidence of IRBMs among them . Photography showed over thirty missile missiles, but no IRbMs were in Cuba .
 Report showed four MRBM sites believed to be operational, with the remaining two sites expected to be . operational by October 25 . The report also showed that the report showed that four of the sites are operational .
 CIA received a report from the CIA that a fleet of Soviet submarines was en route to Cuba and expected to arrive within the week . McCone also informed EXCOMM that the CIA got a report that the Soviet submarines were en route .
 The president stipulated that the group should show the differences between the Cuban blockade and the Berlin blockade . Because the blockade plans allowed shipments of food and medicine to continue to Cuba, President Obama stipulated .
 Kennedy argued that he chose the blockade option over the air strike option because the air strikes would not remove all the missiles . Kennedy said he chose blockade over air strikes because it was easier to remove missiles .
 Failure to destroy all the missiles would allow the Soviets time to use the remaining missiles to attack the U.S. The Soviets would then use them to launch an attack on the United States . Failure to remove missiles would give the Soviets more time to strike the United.
 The president had his final briefing with EXCOMM and members of the Senate at 5:00 PM before he addressed the nation . The president agreed with Bundy not to discuss that fact with the public .
 The meeting centered on the Soviet responses to the blockade . Having made his decision to authorize the blockade, the president authorized it .
 McCone had the task of repeating to the group the intelligence reports from that morning, and the president reviewed the situation over the last 8 days . McCone was tasked with repeating the reports .
 Senator Richard Russell of Georgia wanted Kennedy to consider stronger steps than currently taken . Similar to Vice President Johnson, Russell believed a warning message hindered their options .
 McNamara described for Russell that an attack on Cuba would follow the blockade if it failed . McNamara said an attack would follow a blockade if the blockade failed .
 Other members of the group began asking questions, pertaining to the impact of the blockade verses the air strikes .
 Arkansas Senator J William Fulbright also questioned the president‟s decision to impose a blockade instead of invading Cuba . Congressman Carl Vinson of Georgia urged Kennedy to strike with the maximum force available .
 Most of the attendees of the meeting challenged the president’s decision . Except for the members of EXCOMM, most of the members challenged the decision .
 The United States discovered the missiles in Cuba while McCone traveled to the West Coast to bury his stepson . McCone was in the U.S. when the missiles were discovered in Cuba .
 When he arrived back in Washington on October 17, he immediately delegated his authority to his deputies, to allow intelligence-gathering services to issue reports on intelligence at a quickened pace .
 These decisions allowed him to concentrate on policy decisions during EXCOMM meetings while still receiving intelligence reports as they arrived . These decisions allow him to focus on the policy decisions .
 McCone spent much of the first week of the crisis in meetings with EXCOMM, determining what course of action Kennedy needed to take to remove missiles .
 He also had the important role of briefing former President Eisenhower on the situation .
 McCone coordinated intelligence organization during the first week of the crisis . Kennedy and EXCOMM had the information they needed to make informed decisions when dealing with the Soviet government .
 President Kennedy decided to initiate a blockade of Cuba in response to the Soviet missile threat in Cuba . President Kennedy made the decision after a week of lengthy deliberations with EXCOMM .
 The president informed the American public of his decision during a televised address on Monday evening, October 22 .
 For the next week of the crisis, McCone continued to receive detailed intelligence estimates and reports from the committees he established at the beginning of the week . McCone received intelligence estimates, reports from committee he established .
 He kept many members of Congress and the press informed on the crisis . He gave United States Ambassador Stevenson the support of his deputies Ray Cline and Arthur Lundahl .
 McCone requested that Cline prepare official CIA briefings containing all current intelligence . Because of his own personal involvement in EXCOMM and the strain of the crisis, McCone asked for the briefings .
 After Khrushchev made his decision to end the crisis by removing the missiles, McCone pressed the intelligence community and the administration to maintain its intelligence mission in Cuba .
 By early November, the intelligence community confirmed to McCone that the Soviets were indeed removing the offensive weapons from Cuba . The crisis officially ended .
 McCone briefed members of Congress and the press, advised the government on the intelligence . He advocated continued intelligence operations in Cuba until the Soviets removed the missiles .
 President Obama said the U.S. increased surveillance of Cuba after reports of missiles . Obama said he received the first reports of the missiles on Tuesday morning, October 15, and increased the surveillance .
 The MRBM sites in Cuba had the ability to launch nuclear warheads at Washington, D.C., the Panama Canal, Cape Canaveral, and any city in southeastern U.S. and Central America .
 The administration planned to continue increased surveillance of Cuba . If the Soviets continued construction of the missiles, resolution of the crisis might require further action .
 Kennedy called for a meeting with the Organization of American States to consider the threat to their nations . Kennedy also called for the OAS to give the United States the legal means to protect the hemisphere .
 He urged Khrushchev to remove the missiles from Cuba that threatened the stability of the region and relations between the U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy left no doubt that the United States and its people faced a difficult task, but argued that the U.S. did not enter the fight for victory, but for freedom and peace in the hemisphere and the world .
 The readout showed three additional MRBMs and four additional launchers, bringing the total to thirty-three . Twenty-three additional launchers were added to the arsenal .
 The U-2 discovered another SAM site as well, bringing the total to twenty-four operational SAM sites . The U.2 also found another SAM sites in the area .
 The photography showed no IRBMs in Cuba, and still no information on the presence of nuclear warheads . The photography was taken in Cuba in the summer .
 The National Security Agency also released an intelligence report that showed several Soviet ships had reversed course during the evening and headed back to the Soviet Union . The report also showed several ships reversed course and headed home to Russia .
 McCone promised to bring up the intelligence reports during his EXCOMM briefing .
 McCone showed increased evidence that the Soviets controlled the missile sites in Cuba without Cuban personnel . McCone also showed evidence of Soviet ships in Cuba .
 McCone then asked Lundahl to show the group the photographs from the recent U-2 missions . Lundahl then showed the group photos of the recent missions .
 McCone asked EXCOMM to allow him to brief certain members of the Senate and the press . ExCOMM approved McCone's request to brief senators and press .
 The committee then discussed the steps needed to establish the blockade . The committee also discussed how to establish a blockade .
 McNamara wanted to inform the Soviets on the exact time the blockade was to begin, and created plans to intercept the closest Soviet ships when the blockade began . McNamara created plans for intercepting Soviet ships .
 McCone believed that the Soviets might launch a blockade of West Berlin, and had a greater chance of capitulating before the Cubans . McCone said he had a better chance of surrendering before the Cuban troops .
 McNamara wanted a policy in place to inform the chain of command so they could quickly respond to any attack . McNamara said he wanted to keep the chain-of-command ready to respond quickly .
 President approved the use of attack aircraft to destroy any SAM site that engaged them . If the Soviets launched an attack on the reconnaissance planes, the president approved the attack aircraft .
 Taylor ordered eight attack aircraft be ready to launch immediately . The Navy prepared to conduct search and rescue operations in case the pilot survived the attack .
 Ball conveyed to the group Stevenson‟s concerns about not having enough evidence to bring to the United Nations Security Council meeting . Ball agreed to send copies of the relevant photography to Stevenson .
 Stevenson proposed one large map showing the locations of the missile sites, photographs of the construction, and a list of all the missile site sites . Stevenson proposed a map of the Soviet missile sites in the Soviet Union .
 McCone decided to accept all of Stevenson‟s requests except for the prior photographs of missiles in Soviet territory . He ordered Lundahl and Cline to report to the UN to answer the questions .
 Bundy suggested that each member of EXCOMM have a staff member as an aide . Bundy suggested the idea of sending Lundahl and Cline to the UN . Bundy: Each member of the committee has a staff aide .
 The group accepted McCone‟s suggestion to have Carter confer with members of the State Department and the Department of Defense to find the best candidates for the positions .
 McCone showed them several photographs to convince them evidence existed for their actions in Cuba . McCone also showed them photographs of the Cuban government .
 Lawrence and Scott wanted to know why the intelligence community did not know sooner about the buildup in Cuba . Senator Kenneth Keating received intelligence information in August and September, they say .
 McCone explained the reasons for the intelligence problems and the timing of the President‟s response . McCone said nothing about Keating‟ statements .
 Lawrence and Scott argued that members of the administration informed the press that no offensive weapons were in Cuba, even after the White House received the contrary reports during the prior week . Lawrence and
 The two columnists believed that the White House briefings over the last week misled the press . They questioned the decision to have those briefings . McCone had another conversation with Scott, where Scott attacked McCone‟s creation of the Board of National Estimates .
 During the buildup to the crisis, he believed that the Soviets were placing IRBMs into Cuba, and wanted Kennedy to action action . Kennedy believed that he was being targeted by the Soviets .
 He claimed to receive intelligence reports in late August that confirmed the presence of missiles in Cuba . But evidence was not accurate since the first missiles did not arrive in Cuba until two weeks after his statements .
 McCone tried for weeks to make the Board consider the possibility of missiles in Cuba . McCone told Scott that he knew nothing of the estimates . Despite the fact that McCone said he knew about the estimates, he said he did not .
 He believed that an air strike and invasion were the next crucial steps after the blockade . He said that air strikes and invasion would be crucial next steps .
 Senator Hicklenlooper, a Colorado Republican, shared Russell's support for the president‟s speech and choices, as well as concerns that the president's advisors might pressure Kennedy to take a weaker position in Cuba . Russell: President Kennedy's advisors may pressure him into taking a weaker
 Congressman Vinson felt that the president made an excellent speech, but believed military action was the next step if the blockade failed to produce results . Vinson is another Georgia Democrat, another Democrat .
 Vinson reviewed the naval situation with McCone, and insisted that the blockade be effective . Vinson insisted preparations for a swift attack be in place to remove Castro .
 Kennedy signed the documents authorizing the blockade and other assets needed for the operation . It was during this meeting that Kennedy signed documents authorizing a blockade .
 Rusk reported that the OAS made a unanimous decision to support the U.S. blockade . Rusk said the United States was given the legal support needed for the operation . The United States is expected to launch the blockade .
 In response to the decision by the OAS, Kennedy told McNamara to review all relevant details with the Fleet Commanders . The group discussed the actions needed to combat Soviet resistance .
 Assistant Secretary Steuart Pittman375 moved the discussion towards protection of the southeastern U.S. in the event the president authorized the invasion of Cuba . Pittman said the discussion was moving towards protection for the southeastern United States .
 If the Soviets launched the missiles from Cuba, only 40 million Americans out of 92 million residing in the southeastern U.S. had a chance of reaching fallout shelters . Kennedy worried Kennedy .
 Lawrence Burd, “Kennedy Signs Quarantine in Cuba,” October 24, 1962, Chicago Tribune, 12.30 October 24 .
 He received an estimate from Abbott Smith, the Acting Chairmen of the BNE, on the probable effects of the blockade on Cuba .
 SMith believed there would be no challenge to the Navy on October 24 and 25, but after that point the Soviets could decide to engage the blockade fleet if their political efforts failed . SMith said the Soviets were unlikely to challenge the Navy's blockade fleet on that date .
 The Soviets might stage an incident using a ship with non-military cargo and force the U.S. to attack the vessel . Smith‟s summary noted that the Soviets might use a ship to force the United States to attack it .
 If the attack failed to end the blockade, the board agreed that the Soviets might attack Berlin in retaliation . The board also agreed that if the Soviets failed to stop the blockade in retaliation, Berlin might be attacked .
 If the Soviets decided to retaliate, they would attack either a U.S. ship or the access routes to Berlin . Smith stipulated that despite the board‟s recommendations on possible Soviet retaliation, most believed the Soviets would not take military action .
 The committee focused its evaluation on the completion status of the missiles, along with any changes found from the low-level photography .
 The committee expected the completion of all the MRBM sites within the week . Neither the U-2 nor the RF-8s located any additional missiles, transports or launchers .
 The new photography also confirmed that while there were no IRBMs present at the construction sites, there were increasing efforts to camouflage equipment at those sites .
 The committee confirmed earlier reports that several ships suspected of carrying missiles had reversed their courses . The committee said it still had not discovered any definite nuclear warhead storage bunkers .
 EXCOMM met in the situation room at the White House on Wednesday, October 24 . ExCOMM believed that while there was no evidence of nuclear warheads on the island, several Soviet transport aircraft could also deliver up to ten nuclear warheads at a time .
 McNamara outlined his efforts to defend American bases in southeastern U.S. After McCone‟s briefing, McNamara outlines his efforts .
 McNamara showed photographs of the dispersal of U.S. aircraft . Taylor outlined the procedures to decrease the time needed to respond during a missile attack .
 McNamara recounted his meetings with Fleet Commanders, and their recommendations for naval interception of suspected ships . McNamara then recounted the recommendations for interception .
 McNamara also provided evidence that Soviet submarines escorted some of the ships suspected of carrying missiles . The president might have to authorize the ships to attack those submarines during the boarding process .
 At the conclusion of the meeting, Kennedy authorized McCone, Rusk, and McNamara to take immediate action to improve communications in the Caribbean area . Most EXCOMM members spent the rest of the day dealing with the blockade .
 The next day, he delivered his all the relevant intelligence as of 6:00 AM that morning that morning . He delivered the next day . The next morning, the president delivered his .
 The intelligence reports confirmed that 14 out of the twenty-two ships presently on course for Cuba reversed their course . However, eight ships appeared to be continuing their approach to Cuba, five of which were tankers .
 Rusk asked McCone for answers regarding any changes to the course of the ships returning to the Soviet Union, the destination of Soviet ships bound for other nations besides Cuba, and the reaction of the Cuban public to American actions .
 McNamara reported that an American destroyer intercepted the tanker Bucharest earlier that morning . McCone promised answers to those questions .
 The destroyer hailed the vessel asking what is was transporting, and discovered from its captain that it carried petroleum . The destroyer said it was carrying petroleum .
 The group decided to keep the vessel under close surveillance rather than board it . Because it contained only fuel, the group decided not to board it.
 The president asked the status of other ships en route to Cuba, McCone informed him that a number of those ships in the Eastern Atlantic had changed course, but needed more time to gather information on the Soviet ships . McCone told him that the situation was more complicated than expected .
 U-2 and RF-8 reconnaissance flights over missile sites, airfields, naval ports, and suspected nuclear storage sites . At the urging of McNamara and McCone, Kennedy authorized another series of low-level reconnaissance flights .
 The low-level flights showed that the Soviets had indeed started a crash program to complete construction on the MRBM sites . The Soviets were flying low-levels over the Soviet-era sites .
 The photography also confirmed the presence of a nuclear storage site, probably completed between October 20 and 22 . The photography was also confirmed that the site was completed in October .
 They also found two assembled IL-28 bombers, three under construction, and the crates present indicated an ability to construct twenty more . The crates present indicate they could construct 20 more .
 McCone provided this information to EXCOMM during the afternoon meeting, along with the list of Soviet ships approaching the Panama Canal from the Pacific . McCone also provided the list .
 McCone noted that all ships underwent searches as they passed through the port, negating the need for a blockade of the canal as well . McCone: All ships undergo searches and the port is searched as they pass through .
 Rusk asked the group about the possibility of getting the missiles out of Cuba or at least place them under the control of the United Nations . Rusk asks the group whether the missiles should be placed under the U.N. control of Cuba .
 It was crucial in the next two days for the American delegation to convince the Soviets to stop the missile buildup in Cuba . The U.S. delegation to Cuba was crucial .
 McNamara and Rusk approved the tightening of the blockade to include non-military equipment . If the decision came down to the Security Council vote, Rusk believed it would receive a seven-to-two vote; therefore, to keep the pressure on the Soviet Union .
 Rusk suggested the U.S. purchase the charter and cargo of any steamers en route to Cuba . Rusk offered to let the captain and owner of the ship defect if needed .
 McNamara briefed him on the East German ship, the Voelker Freundschaft . McCone agreed with Rusk‟s suggestion, because it would hinder the Soviet economy .
 The ship is currently beyond the quarantine line and being trailed by the destroyer USS Pierce . It was currently beyond quarantine line .
 Kennedy asked if the East German ship fell under the request of the U.N. Secretary General U. Thant . Kennedy said the ship was not under any request to avoid any incidents until after talks concluded at the UN .
 Bundy argued that U Thant‟s message did not cover the ship, Bundy argued . McNamara showed how difficult it was to stop a passenger ship . Bundy argues that McNamara”s message didn‟t cover the U. Thant .
 The group decided to allow the ship to pass through the blockade, but decided to tighten the blockade to keep up the pressure on the Soviet Union . The blockade was tightened to keep pressure on Russia .
 McCone received a message from Carter on a MONGOOSE operation scheduled for that week . The president then received a series of documents proposing air strikes against the missile bases and bombers .
 Carter informed McCone that the main problem in using MONGOOSE plans was the jurisdictional issues between the intelligence community and the JCS . Carter noted that another problem was the length of time it took to approve operations under the system, time not available in the current crisis .
 MONGOOSE secured 50 Cuban refugees to infiltrate the island prior to the invasion, to gather as much intelligence as possible .
 The operation proposed by General Edward Lansdale425 had severe logistical problems . The problem was the operation had to be dealt with by General Lansdale . The operation was a logistical nightmare .
 Carter noted that despite these problems, planning continued on the operation . In addition, the Cubans assigned to the operation had their own interests in mind, not that of the United States strategy .
 The preliminary plan included reconnaissance of the MRBM and IRBM sites, collecting data and establishing a network to deliver that information .
 The board analyzed the nine lowlevel flights as well as the single U-2 flight . The board also analyzed nine low-level flights .
 Low-level flights showed no additional missiles, vehicles, or launch equipment at the missile sites . Thankfully, the photography from the low-level flight showed no more missiles or vehicles .
 The group believed heavy rains kept the Soviets from activating the San Cristobal missile site . Heavy rains of the prior day kept the Soviet missile site from activating .
 The photography also confirmed that three of the Soviet ships believed to be transporting missiles continued their course towards the Soviet Union . Early on the morning of October 26, McCone received the CIA‟s briefing on the intelligence received during the night .
 As of 6:00 AM that morning, McCone confirmed that two Soviet freighters and five tankers remained on course for Cuba . McCone said that two of the freighters were still on their way to Cuba .
 One of the freighters, the Belovodsk, carried up to twelve Mi-4 helicopters, was currently in the North Atlantic . It was carrying up to 12 helicopters and is currently in North Atlantic.
 The other remaining freighter, the Pugachev, was near the Panama Canal, and appeared to have stopped or slowed its progression to Cuba . The Pugachev is the last freighter to reach Cuba .
 McCone believed that the Soviets and its satellites had increased their alert status, but made no major changes in deployment of forces in Europe . According to the CIA reports, McCone .
 Khrushchev accepted U Thant’s proposal for U.S.-Soviet negotiations . Sources in the Soviet Union confirmed that Khrushchchev accepted the proposal for negotiations . The proposal was made by U. Thant .
 Chinese officials wanted a stronger response from the Soviets to the crisis . McCone noted that the decision to enter negotiations angered Chinese officials, who wanted a strong response .
 McCone halted a CIA operation that used submarines to deliver Cuban refugees to the island . McCone then informed the president that he halted the operation pending discussions by the group .
 Kennedy believed that the Special Group should study the proposal that day . Kennedy suggested that the group reintroduce MONGOOSE as part of EXCOMM‟ deliberations .
 Kennedy believed that the JCS and the CIA needed to coordinate all existing plans for possible covert activities as a prelude to invasion . Kennedy said that the CIA and JCS had to coordinate plans to prepare for invasion .
 The location of the SS Oxford, one of the CIA‟s communications ships, left it open to attack from the Cuban mainland, McCone said . McCone then informed the president that the president .
 Soviet Union replaced Mi-4 with the Mi-8 at the time of the crisis . Most of the remaining models were passed to Soviet allies in Europe, Middle East, and Cuba .
 He wanted both day and night reconnaissance flights to challenge Soviet air defenses . He wanted to drop flares during the night flights, including dropping flares .
 McCone informed the group that the USIB had recommended against night reconnaissance flights . When asked his opinion, McCone told the group he had been advised against such flights .
 Stevenson supported Rusk‟s position on the issue . Rusk also questioned the effect that night missions might have on the negotiations at the UN .
 8.8 EXCOMM discussed objectives of the UN negotiations for that day . President authorized daylight missions but delayed the night missions .
 To accomplish these goals, the quarantine had to continue, and they had to increase the list of items on the embargo list . The quarantine continued to continue .
 McCone argued that any decision the group made must end with the removal of both Castro and the missiles . He said even if they removed the missiles, Castro still could undermine his Latin American neighbors .
 McCone held the meeting to coordinate MONGOOSE operations with the JCS plans for the invasion of Cuba . McCone argued that because they designed MONGOOS to create uprisings in Cuba to remove Castro from power, it must remain subordinate to the invasion plans .
 He quelled any belief that the CIA failed to give Lansdale the support he needed by confirming that Lansdale would continue as director of the operation .
 Special Group confirmed Lansdale was to be in charge of all covert activities in Cuba . The military would assume some of the responsibilities previously assigned to MONGOOSE .
 The strain on McCone and other members of the administration became apparent during the long deliberations . They charged Lansdale to analyze the needs of the government and formulate a procedures based on his available assets .
 John Scali told Roger Hilsman of a meeting with Alexander Fomin earlier that morning . Fomin asked if the State Department might be interested in settling the Cuban crisis by dismantling the missile sites in return for an American pledge not to invade Cuba .
 President Obama met with select members of EXCOMM to question the proposal . Hilsman passed this message to the president, who met with members of the president .
 Khrushchev used Fomin as a means of opening secret negotiations with Kennedy to end the crisis . Fomin was used as a way to open secret talks with Kennedy, ending the war .
 Khrushchev's letter was intended to end the threat of nuclear war . The group agreed it was a very emotional and personal letter written by the former leader .
 Khrushchev promised to remove weapons presently in Cuba and end further arms shipments to the island . The weapons were removed from Cuba and banned from the island in the 1960s .
 EXCOMM members examined document into early morning hours . ExCOMM decided to allow State Department to prepare its own analysis because of their emotional and physical condition .
 The president requested that intelligence sources have their analysis ready for the Saturday morning EXCOMM meeting . Washington received another statement from the Soviet government . The hope felt by many of EXCOMm‟s members faded when Washington .
 The second letter added the removal of missiles in Turkey to the original agreement, which severely complicated the political situation and increased the intensity of the crisis . The decision to remove missiles from Turkey has also complicated the situation .
 See also “United States Bars Any Deal With Turkey,” October 28, 1962, Washington Post, A1 .
 Intelligence failed to determine if ships approaching the blockade changed their course during the night or the status of Soviet troops .
 CIA intelligence sources also reported on the mobilization of Cuban and Soviet units in Cuba, but stipulated that these units were under orders not to take action unless the U.S. attacked .
 The tense situation reached its breaking point on Saturday, October 27 . Other intelligence reports confirmed the activation of all twenty-four SAM sites, and the presence of Soviet submarines near the quarantine line .
 McCone started the meeting once again with a briefing on current intelligence . McCone: "I'm not going to be surprised"
 President requested that U Thant inform the Soviet delegation of the established quarantine line . To warn the Soviets against approaching the line, the president requested that the Soviets not approach the line .
 See also Lawrence Burd, “Reds Speed Cuban Missile Buildup,” October 27, 1962, Chicago Tribune, A1 .
 McCone countered McNamara‟s request for night missions, because of Carter and Lundahl”s reports that it would have no great benefit to the intelligence mission . However, McCone said it would not have any great benefit .
 Kennedy chose to keep the flights grounded for the time being . He requested they remain on standby in case he needed to alter the plans .
 Ball and Paul Nitze488 argued that removing the missiles would be difficult politically . Ball andNitze488 argue removing missiles from the U.S. would be politically difficult politically to do .
 Nitze recommended that the group focus on Cuba, not on the U.S. bases in other nations . Nitze recommends that the focus should be on Cuba and not on other nations, he says .
 Rusk and Bundy believed they should not link Cuba to Turkey, because the Soviet missiles remained in Cuba . Bundy and Rusk believed it should not .
 The president noted that he considered removing the missiles several days prior, but the second letter from the Soviets eliminated the possibility of quietly removing them from the U.S.
 McCone argued that the missiles were obsolete, but wanted to add more ballistic submarine patrols if they decided to remove the missiles .
 Kennedy believed that the missiles in Turkey were of great military value with the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba . Because of the political problems in removing the missiles, Kennedy believed the missiles would be of great value . The missiles were in Turkey .
 EXCOMM has proposed a meeting with the Turkish government to explain the situation and the possible need to remove the JUPITER missiles to stop a war . ExCOMM is concerned about the possibility of removing the missiles .
 McNamara also reported that the Air Force aborted the first U-2 flight over Cuba because of a mechanical problem . Rusk reported to the group that a U.2 penetrated Soviet airspace over Siberia because of navigation error .
 Other reports also showed that the U-2 afternoon flight over Cuba encountered ground fire and was overdue . Other reports said the plane was over Cuba and was missing .
 McCone received a report that the Soviets attacked a U-2 with a SAM missile, destroying the aircraft and killing the pilot . The letter also emphasized the American position that Soviets must cease construction on missiles .
 After hearing this report, the group began a discussion on how and when to launch attacks on Cuba . The group has also begun a discussion about how to attack Cuba .
 McNamara recommended that the group examine the plans for air strikes against Cuba . McNamara said the group should also examine the plan to air strikes on Cuba .
 McNamara believed that if the Soviets launched attacks against the reconnaissance aircraft on Sunday, the U.S. should launch immediate attacks against SAM sites . McNamara: If the Soviets attacked, the United States should attack SAM sites on Sunday .
 The president agreed but refused to make a definite decision on how to attack SAM sites . The president said he would not make a decision on the attack .
 McCone confirmed that the East German forces remained in their defensive positions, and had made no advances towards Berlin . The last hours of the crisis brought the United States and the Soviet Union from the brink of war to its successful conclusion .
 He approved activation of several of the air force reserves . During that meeting, he approved the activation .
 If the Soviets continued construction, he would authorize the beginning of air strikes on Cuba for Monday morning . He would authorize air strikes against Cuba if they continued construction .
 The Joint Committee reported that all twenty-four MRBM launchers were operational . The Soviets appeared to be dispersing their equipment to defend against air attacks .
 The photography also showed a nuclear storage site at each of the missile complexes, as well as a port possibly used to transport those warheads to the sites .
 The CIA confirmed that construction on missile sites continued at a rapid pace . Cuban military units remained at high alert, the CIA said .
 McCone believed the Soviets wanted to avert the possibility of war by downplaying their rhetoric against the United States . However, intelligence sources established that the Soviets had yet to change the deployment of their armed forces, which led McCone to believe .
 Khrushchev confirmed McCone‟s belief that the Soviets did not want to start a war when he made the decision to withdraw the missiles from Cuba on Sunday morning, October 28 . The decision lowered the threat of war .
 Washington Times reporter James Reston referred to this moment as “following the normal pattern of the cold war’s cold war. Reston: This is a normal pattern .
 Howard Simons, “Reds Could Fire Missiles in 15 Minutes, Bases Indicate,” October 28, 1962, Washington Post, A25 .
 Kennedy offered to negotiate with the Soviets if they abandoned missile sites . Kennedy was president of the White House .
 The group agreed to halt the reconnaissance flights scheduled for the day . The group also prepared statements to the public .
 The group also ordered McCone to release all pertinent intelligence information to the UN delegation and send CIA experts along to answer any questions . McCone must also release all relevant intelligence to UN delegation .
 To protect the intelligence sources and his deputies, Cline authorized Cline to send Bill Tidwell516 and Colonel David Parker517 to conduct the briefing . To protect his deputies and intelligence sources, the briefing was confidential .
 McCone believed that the United States needed to maintain pressure on the Soviet Union during the negotiations . He also wanted to protect the intelligence sources used in the crisis and convinced EXCOMM to send older intelligence photographs to the UN .
 McCone pushed EXCOMM to continue surveillance of Cuba to determine if the Soviets were removing missiles from Cuba . Over the next several days, the spy agency continued surveillance of the country .
 McCone pushed EXCOMM to allow the flights to continue . On November 1, when the Air Force grounded the remaining Agency U-2s, McCone said . McCone: "The agency is doing its job. It's a job. We're doing our job"
 McCone spent much of the time after the president‟s public address receiving the most up to date intelligence to bring to EXCOMM meetings . Finally, on November 2, the photography confirmed the dismantling of the missiles, officially ending the crisis .
 McCone briefed members of the press and Congress on the situation . McCone had the important task of briefing members of Congress and the press .
 He also provided deputies to answer questions during the UN talks, despite his personal belief that the talks hurt the diplomatic standing of the U.S. He said he did not want the talks to hurt his country .
 JFK provided first reports of course changes in Soviet ships, giving Kennedy the time to halt any action against those ships . Kennedy made changes to the intelligence process during the first week of crisis .
 When McCone realized the strain on himself and the rest of the EXCOMM, he had his deputies prepare detailed intelligence memorandums containing the most recent intelligence reports .
 EXCOMM confirms that while the Soviets continued construction, their armed forces remained in their defensive posture . McCone confirms that the Soviets continue construction, eliminating some of the concern within the group .
 When Khrushchev chose to remove the missiles, McCone protected intelligence sources and his deputies from the public eye . Sources were able to continue their efforts to determine whether the Soviet was withdrawing the missiles .
 His management allowed the group to maintain detailed surveillance on the removal of the missiles, and pinpoint definitively that the Soviets were removing the missiles .
 Khrushchev wanted to place missiles in Cuba as a way to solve the Soviet Union's strategic goals and secure Castro‟s communist government . He believed that Khrushchev wanted to solve Soviet Union”s strategic goals .
 During his honeymoon, he called for more reconnaissance flights over Cuba, and remained informed of the situation through his deputy . He called for reconnaissance flights to Cuba .
 The October 14 flight discovered several Soviet missiles in Cuba . The president requested more overflights .
 Because of McCone‟s “crusade‟527 during the summer and fall of 1962, the United States confirmed that the Soviet Union had placed nuclear missiles in Cuba . The U.S. confirmed the Soviets had placed the missiles .
 When McCone learned of the October 14 U-2 flights, he wanted the Kennedy administration to remove Castro and his communist government from power, he said . McCone wanted to remove the Castro government .
 McCone joined several prominent members of EXCOMM in proposing a surgical strike against missile sites followed by an invasion . McCone: "Surgical strike" followed by invasion followed by surgical strike .
 During the first days of the crisis, McCone favored immediate action against Cuba, but realized that the blockade best served their immediate goals while limiting the risk of war . McCone: "The blockade served our immediate goals and served our interests"
 He expedited the time between receiving intelligence reports from Cuba and delegating his authority to his deputies, Carter, Cline, and Lundahl .
 McCone briefed Eisenhower on the situation, and reported to Kennedy on Eisenhower‟s recommendations . McCone also briefed Eisenhower about the situation .
 McCone‟s efforts to coordinate and integrate intelligence reports permitted the president to have a detailed picture on the status of the Soviet missiles, allowing him to make informed decisions .
 He briefed members of the press and Congress on the president‟s decision to launch a blockade . The president also briefed the press on the blockade .
 During the negotiations with the Soviet Union, he provided deputies to answer questions during the UN talks . Despite his personal belief that the talks hurt the standing of the United States, he said they hurt his country .
 He provided the first reports of the course changes in Soviet ships, giving Kennedy the time to halt any action against those ships . Because of the changes he made to the intelligence process during the first week of the crisis, he provided first reports .
 When the strain started to affect his decisions, McCone had his deputies prepare detailed intelligence memorandums containing the most recent intelligence reports . McCone's deputies prepared the most current intelligence reports in advance .
 The groups McCone established allowed him to confirm for EXCOMM that while the Soviets continued construction, their armed forces remained in their defensive posture .
 When the crisis ended in the 1962, scholars focused on the reasons why the crisis happened . The crisis ended with the end of the crisis in 1962 .
 Historians relied on interviews, memory, and previous attacks on the U.S. as evidence for their conclusions . The historians of this period relied on .
 EXCOMM members released memoirs on the crisis in the late 1960s and 1970s . Intelligence training to emphasize the timeline, intelligence methods, and the problems facing the Kennedy administration during the crisis .
 The release of memoirs and classified documents allowed historians to construct detailed pictures of the event . In the 1980s, the release of several more memoirs helped historians to reconstruct the events .
 Historians view McCone as the primary reason that the U.S. found the missiles, but otherwise focused their studies on the larger crisis itself . Most historians viewed McCone's role in the discovery of the missiles .
 Personal memoirs from EXCOMM participants and intelligence officials give insight into the mindset and actions of the participants . The memoirs remain limited in their interpretations .
 Nothing connects McCone‟s participation from the discovery of the Soviet military buildup in Cuba to the resolution of the crisis . Even with the declassified documents, memoirs, and histories on the crisis, nothing links McCone with the resolution .
 McCone pressed for a re-evaluation of the belief that the Cuban missiles were coming into Cuba . The intelligence community and the government failed to predict the introduction of missiles into Cuba, McCone said .
 McCone served as one of the key members of a group of advisors to help make decisions on the crisis . When the president needed a group, McCone was one of those key members .
 Kennedy established new intelligence committees to expedite the release of that information to Washington . Kennedy established the committees to allow him to make informed decisions in Cuba . He established new committees to release that information .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk speaks on behalf of the U.S. State Department . Rusk is a former diplomat who served in Iraq and Afghanistan . He has served in the Middle East .
 Douglas Garthoff: Directors of Central Intelligence as Leaders of the U.S. Intelligence Community, 1945-2005 . Douglas F. Garthoffs: "Directorial Directors of CIA Directors are the most powerful men in the United States"
 Eisenhower, the CIA, and the Hidden Story of America’s Space Espionage . Eisenhower and the CIA are the subject of a new book, "Space War"