 These operations would employ primarily radio broadcasts and other means of propaganda, and at informing the Cuban masses of the truth, according to the Cuban government . The operations would use radio broadcasts, other means, and other propaganda .
 King's memorandum pointed out that representatives of various of the Cuban opposition groups organized in the United States had requested Agency assistance to set up propaganda operations directed against the Cuban mainland .
 McClelland, had his people studying the best methods for carrying out such propaganda broadcasts . The broadcasts were carried out under the guise of a propaganda broadcast .
 King's initial memorandum, contained no information about potential locations of transmitters, personnel security, inter-Agency coordination or costs . NAR A~ ~Cj^6 ' DAT E S* Sfch^ King had no information on potential locations .
 The subject of propaganda directed against the Castro government was introduced to discussions in the Special Group . King to the Director, the subject of the discussions was introduced .
 The DCI requested that Wfl Division provide more specifics on the propaganda operations . The D.C. DCI asked that the division provide more specific information on the project .
 By ; mid-November, following additional discussions both within the Agency and by the Special Group, WH Division proposed that the broadcasts originate from £* / © j under the guidance of Manuel Benitez, and from £^ II j under . The Monte Cristi Group, headed by
 The presumption was that thefc /& J operation would be self-sufficient, but that the£ ft ft 7 operation . Operation would be CIA funded, supported, and directly under Agency control . Operation was 'self-sufficient'
 There was considerable discussion about the possibility of getting permission from £ <& y ft 7 ft 7 "" to agree to permit the broadcasts from his country .
 Some members of the Special Group suggested the possibility that the antiCastro broadcasts might be originated from other Latin American countries . Mr Dulles discouraged because of the lack of suitable broadcast facilities that would be available in countries outside of the immediate Caribbean area .
 T6P Sl ' ICKEl I NAR A^rjg-O ^ '"" DATE ^ffiPS nrnn nnnn i — r suggestion that broadcasts against Castro could be originated from continental United States .
 How Barnes came by this proposal is not known, for no such activity was ever given the slightest sanction . No one was ever sanctioned for such activity .
 He has agreed not to interfere If we initiate broadcasts from available transmitters in c u 1v . Even though thought had he&n given to the establishment of a special transmitting facility for the Frente Revolucionario Democratico .
 CIA will need to create such unilateral, FRD, and third country operations as may be feasible and useful, CIA says . CIA will also need to be able to create unilateral and third-country operations as possible and useful .
 "Black operations will be carefully coordinated within CIA prior to implementation," CIA official says . CIA official: 'Black operations are carefully coordinated' CIA director: "Black ops will be very carefully coordinated"
 All direct dealings with members of the FRD wiir^be under unofficial cover . Funding of the propaganda operation was going to be a major problem .
 It was decided that personal contributions were most advisable because they would not require action and approval by Boards of Directors, and therefore could be most easily concealed . Personal contributions were decided to be most discreetly concealed .
 'InAR A~cJ?-o"" '"" DAT E^^yS WH/4 had requested Chief, WHD's permission to obligate JMATE funds for support of the station . But Chief, WhD refused, indicating that private money would be available .
 CIA was to create and control both short and medium wave shipborne radio broadcasting operations, and to investigate the feasibility of an airborne radio transmitter capable of black broadcasts .
 Phillips figured that three flights per week to six selected Cuban cities over a two month period would show operating costs in excess of $83,000, plus an additional $60,000 for transmitting equipment on a C-54, and a cost of $250,000 .
 Phillips had done propaganda work for the Agency at the time of the Guatemalan activity, but subsequently retired . Phillips had been in private business in Havana .
 According to his own story, he had intended to stay in private business; but in the course of Castro's rise to power, he was recontacted by Agency personnel and persuaded to take on the job of running the Agency's propaganda campaign against Castro .
 Phillips had worked with a handful of completely controlled Latin American propaganda writers, and had developed a single credible propaganda line . In the Guatemalan campaign, Phillips worked with .
 Washington orders to offer radio broadcasting time to all the major and competing Cuban exile groups . Washington orders, t« offer radio broadcast time to offer to all of the major, competing exile groups.
 Q W '"" DAT E S^ffi^S TOP 3CCRDTeffort went into overcoming the idea that CIA financed radio programs should become a forum for the varying views of rival exile splinter factions .
 Already located on the island was a Federal Aviation radio beacon, and a Department of Commerce weather station .
 Among those Jrho worked in Phillips's Political and Psychological Section in WH/4, were William Kent, John Isaminger, Phillip A Toomey, Earnest I.Harrison, Paul Oberst and Michael J Maney .
 The loading of the transmitters, the unloading, and the construction of the facilities to house the . transmitters was done by the Navy Seabees under the direction of Alfred Cromartie of the CIA's Office of Logistics .
 180,000 pounds of equipment from/; /Q J, aboard Agency trucks for delivery to Norfolk — ' J' J and reloading aboard two LST's . The construction activity at Swan Island required the movement of 180,
 In addition to locating the transmitters and constructing the facilities, the crude landing field also was cleared . The landing field was cleared to clear .
 The total time involved was approximately 20 days, and the cost was something under $225,000 . The cost of the project was approximately $225.000 .
 The Department of Commerce, the United States Customs Service, and numerous Agency components were involved in this brouhaha . Involved in the incident were the Commerce Department, the U.S. Customs Service .
 Common sense prevailed and the question of export licences was dropped . Common sense ultimately prevailed in the decision .
 U.S. Information Agency Director Abbot Washburn was the subject of the book .
 The meeting made clear that the Agency was doing medium wave broadcasting directly into Cuba . The meeting also revealed that the agency had been working with Cuba .
 CIA also was supporting station WRUL, which had made a direct application on its own initiative for funding such broadcasts . The Agency was behind such broadcasting and such financing .
 Frankel was designated as the Chief representative of the Office of Naval Intelligence by Admiral Fauste, then Director of ONI . Frankel declined further involvement in supporting the cover story .
 Frankel was that the USN was already so heavily involved in the project that it would do them more harm than good to withdraw . Frankel said that the U.N. is already heavily involved with the project .
 Information on this meeting with the Navy and other information pertaining to the development of the Swan Island facility is contained in the sources listed under Reference 14/ . -215 TOP SECRET NAR A CjR-O DAT E <jj •€$£& WF Sfc
 The problem of security of the island — particularly the fear that perhaps Castro would send saboteurs — was never put to any real test . The problem was not put to a real test, though .
 Security Officer for the island and the Deputy Chief of Base. The security officer was most successfully resolved by the Security Officer .
 A potentially dangerous situation was averted by the tactful handling of the group by Mr £ 3 ^who persuaded them to leave thexr armament of 13 pistols and three submachine guns .
 The group leader indicated that he wanted to take a census of the population, and was furnished with pertinent information, with no divulgence of Agency interest in Radio Swan or its personnel .
 Upon completion of the census, the group was permitted to raise the Honduran flag, was given lunch nr . r > n pui""» nn r I NAR A . frg-Q DAT E 3 ffi 2ft TOP 3CGRGT and refresh
 The Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, for example, called Jake Esterline, Chief, Project JMATE to report on conversation that he had with "a person of considerable importance who was very familiar with Cuba,"" concerning the nature of the propaganda which should be aimed at the Cuban population
 The island was manned by 24 people, all but nine of whom were CIA personnel . Cabell stated that if tapes of Castro's radio broadcasts could be acquired and then patched together for rebroadcasting to the Cuban population for hours on end, the effect would be ""to bore the people
 Esterline passed the word on to Dave Phillips with the comment that he thought perhaps such broadcasts might be used as filler during the intervals when Swan was not doing its regular broadcasts .
 It was COS Havana's suggestion that wide publicity be given to this article in the Spanish language, presumably including broadcasts from Radio Swan .
 Department of State hoped document would have impact on upcoming meeting of foreign ministers of the Western Hemisphere countries . NATO Council also received a copy of the document .
 The theme of the Revolution Betrayed Hammered Hammered is the idea that Castro had double-crossed the Cuban people by abandoning the programs and promises that originally won him support . WH/4's propaganda chief, Dave Phillips, says the theme is that Castro betrayed his people .
 None of CIA's propaganda, spoken or printed, ever urged the populace to rise up against Castro . CIA propaganda never urged the public to rise against Castro.
 This appeal would be used when, and if, a Provisional Government obtained a lodgement on the island . This appeal was suicidal before the invasion of the island in 1968 .
 Diplomats in Havana monitored CIA's principal broadcasts and confirmed that signals were loud and clear . Third country diplomats in Havana confirmed that the signals were clear .
 Swan Island radio offered simple gifts to any listener who would write to the station . To verify its audience, the Swan Island station offered gifts to anyone who wrote to them .
 Listeners' letters were an act of defiance to the Cuban regime . Considering the police controls inside Cuba, listeners' letters are considered defiant to the regime . Listeners were able to write letters to the government in Cuba .
 WH had a letter from a Cuban listener who, in the form of a letter bitterly attacking Swan, made it clear that the Swan broadcasts were coming in loud and clear .
 One problem which would plague Radio Swan — as well as other elements of Project JMARC — was the shortage of Spanish language capability .
 It appears that perhaps baseball cards also were going to be offered as an inducement to get listeners to indicate that they had picked up Swan's broadcast .
 He has contacted a company making baseball cards who claim 'this most unusual order ever' received . The order was made by a company who claim it is 'the most unusual ever'
 Radio propaganda — via both short and medium wave transmitters — was to play an important role immediately following the landing of the anti-Castro forces on Cuban soil .
 Bohemia Libre was reputedly the most widely circulated Spanish language weekly in the world . Both of these were published in Miami by the exile groups .
 WH/4 PP engaged in a public opinion survey conducted by the Lloyd Free organization to assess the attitudes of the Cuban people toward the Castro regime . Although barred from Cuba, selected items from both publications were broadcast by Swan or WRUL .
 The majority of Cubans surveyed felt that both they personally and their country were very much better off than during the days of Batista . Among the findings of the survey, the findings were included in the summary report .
 The majority of the sample was enthusiastic about the Castro Government and its program . Attesting the apparently genuine enthusiasm of the great majority for the Revolution, the majority replied .
 In view of the overwhelming popularity of the Revolutionary program, it is patently clear that criticisms of Castro's program as such will fall largely on barren, ■vf not counter-productive ground .
 The point was made strongly to ADDP/A that the Free report, in fact, is not at all valid other than for a limited ""sample"" of the City of .^Habana .
 CIS, actually paid for the report, ADDP/A agreed, but said he did not thinJc State should be made aware of the fact CIS paid for it . The report was commissioned by CIS, but the report was never published .
 CIA never received a copy of the report, which CIA never got in full . CIA chief says he is still trying to find out how the report got out of control .
 In an interview with the author of this history, Dave Phillips stated that Enno Hobbing had provided the editorial guidance for the WH/4's propaganda efforts . However, no study was conducted of the Castro propaganda effort .
 The Klein and Saks contract was not blocked at the DDP or DCI level, it's incomprehensible . That Klein/Saks contract not blocked is equally incomprehensible . The Klein-Saks deal was also not blocked by the DCI or DDP .
 In an Eyes Only memorandum to the Director of Central Intelligence, Col. Col. Michael Hayden wrote that the CIA director of national security had been briefed on the situation in the U.S. The memo was sent to the D.C. director of intelligence .
 J King informed Allen Dulles that it had been learned that Khrushchev had accepted an invitation from the Government of Cuba to visit that country .
 A two-pronged program was being developed with the intention of either forcing the cancellation of the trip or indicating the opposition of the Cuban people to Communism .
 Havana Station was to be responsible for organizing church opposition to Khrushchev's visit to Cuba . WH/4 and other elements of WH Division were responsible for instigating rumors that an assassination attempt would be made on the leader .
 WH/4's contacts suggested that leaflets should be prepared depicting the crucifix upside down, to signify the Soviet treatment of religion . These leaflets should also be distributed widely through Cuba .
 WH/4/PP cannot be charged with lack of imagination . Khrushchev did state that he wanted to visit Cuba in 1960s .
 It was proposed that the Office of Medical Services' psychiatric study of Fidel Castro be surfaced because the profile was not particularly flattering to the Cuban leader . The Castro image also would have suffered if a disorienting drug could have been placed in Castro's food .
 These proposals were similar in intent to others aimed at the Castro ""image"" as revealed in the Senate Select Committee investigation of CIA plots against the Cuban leader .
 Rumor that Cubans were painting some of their British Sea Fury aircraft with the American flag said planes to be used in a provocation action to discredit the United States . WH/4 investigated the possibility of doctoring some photos of the planes with the flag being painted on in order to forest
 Agency art shop pointed out that it would be technically infeasible to attempt to make such fake photos . Unfortunately, however, the agency art shop said it would not be possible to make the photos .
 A^iJ Reproduced al the National Arcnive propaganda campaign aimed at terrorizing Castro's militia (and apparently at the request of Col. Col. Castro) Reproduced in the campaign .
 WH/4/PP gave some thought to preparing a purported order to Castro's militia to establish an ""elite suicide squad"" which would fight on even after the defeat of the other troops . Jack Hawkins, Chief Chief, Chief, WH/VPM) gave some . thought to
 E Howard Hunt and Dave Phillips assessed the possibility of sending a white painted ""flight of truth"" airplane on a trip to several Latin American countries, bringing — in a ""Billy Graham type operation"" — the message of Castro's betrayal of the Cuban Revolution . Hunt, who would later become
 The DCI, General Cabell, and Mr Helms discussed this cable on 24 August and concluded that since Fidel' Castro is definitely identifying himself more and more with the Russians, it is not worth the candle to launch an operation such as that one proposed in subject cable .
 Mr Helms said that we may discreetly try to find a body for this operation, providing we play it very carefully and do not XUHJlJlAOnu rCK V.L,1 U2-32b .
 There are numerous acts of sabotage reported from all provinces of Cuba . Cuba has been hit by numerous attacks on the island nation .
 One of the earliest and most thoroughly discussed sabotage programs against Cuba — disruption of the Cuban petroleum industry — was a complete and total bust . In fact, the disruption of Cuba's petroleum industry was a total bust.
 Attempts to sabotage and interfere with the operation of Cuba's petroleum refineries continued until well into the middle 60' s . At least one of the sabotage experts displayed the same notable lack of success, but excess of foolishness, that characterized his activities .
 A great deal of the other sabotage were the results of the demolitions we supplied to the various teams and other action groups in Cuba with which we were in contact with . In addition, we feel that a great deal .
 WH Division is one of the major U.S. oil companies operating a refinery in Cuba, L *%■& ^X . It is worth recording here, because of the close relationship between the two companies .
 Minutes of a Special Group meeting reflect conversations that both Allen Dulles and Gordon Gray had concerning the problems being faced by the major petroleum companies operating in Cuba . SONJ, Texaco, and Shell — and particularly the need for ""discreet means of intercompany consultation""
 A number of demonstrably unworkable — though subtle — sabotage efforts came to naught . Unfortunately, there was a communications gap between the operations people and intelligence analysts most familiar with the world petroleum industry .
 This, in turn, was supposed to alienate Venezuela and Mexico, normally among Cuba's crude suppliers . This, of course, also alienates Venezuela, Mexico and Venezuela . Cuba's oil industry is a key source of its own crude exports .
 The former manager of the U .9*^ 5 refinery commented to this effect after reviewing the all source intelligence materials available on the plant .
 National Archives prohibited were attacks under Agency sponsorship on Soviet and Soviet-bloc targets located in Cuba . C|tex> IW3BjbSS3 Reproduced at Ihe National Archives .
 Agency were far less efficient than such attacks would be if they were mounted through Agency efforts . Agency were not only less efficient, they would be less efficient if such attacks were mounted by Agency efforts.
 Because of its areawide nature, the activities of the goon squads were run out of WH/D rather than out of the WH/4 . The activities were run by the same agency as those of the other .
 In contact with a group of dissidents capable of violent action, including assassination . Contacted in contact with the group in the 1980s .
 This group has killed a number of agents of the Servicio de Inteligencia Militar . Dominican Secret Police . Group has killed many agents .
 Special Projects Group, Counterintelligence made a pitch to Chief, JMATE to acquire a vessel which — for its acquisition, operational maintenance, crew, including incentive bonus would run roughly $200,000 for a 6-month period .
 In viev; of the high cost involved, and the other factors mentioned above, I do not concur in the acquisition of this craft for deception purposes as proposed in the reference . I don’t concur .
 A careful search was undertaken of the voluminous CIA records of the operation in order to recover those items pertaining to Nixon's participation directly or indirectly — through his aides, assistants, or correspondence .
 Fidel Castro accepted the invitation of the Vice President of the United States to meet with Kr. Kr. Fidel Castro . Kr. Castro was invited to the United Stages in the spring of 1959 to meet .
 Nixon in his official office in the Capitol for an informal discussion . Nixon was in the midst of an informal meeting with President Richard Nixon .
 The administration might profit if one of its leaders could gain additional inside information about what made Castro tick .
 The thrust of the meeting was that Nixon was emphasizing the need for Castro to establish a democratic form of government as he understood it . In his recent Memoirs, EN, Nixon states that a copy of the memorandum also went to John Foster Dulles .
 John Foster Dulles was technically Secretary of State until 22 April 1959 . He was succeeded by Christian Herter . Dulles succeeded by Herter in 1959 .
 Mr Herter had been acting in Mr Dulles' place at the time of the meeting between Nixon and Castro . At the time he was in charge of the CIA, he was the CIA director .
 Reportedly Castro was not particularly enchanted with the meeting either, for according to a member of his party when Castro emerged from the meeting he ""was angry" Castro was reportedly angry .
 It was only after making a direct request to Mr Nixon that a copy of the memorandum was obtained . Cushman made it^clear that the Vice President was not a Republican .
 No copies were found in the files of CIA, State, or the Eisenhower Library . No copies of the documents were found .
 Among the other subjects discussed with General Cushman on 23 February 1960 were propaganda attacks on the Castro government and the possibilities of economic sanctions similar to those which had been suggested by former Assistant Secretary of State Henry Holland .
 CIA's anti-Castro efforts were of some interest to the Vice-President . CIA's relations with the Department of State was also of interest . CIA was not one of the Vice President's favorite organisations .
 King made clear that all of CIA's actions were undertaken only after policy approval . King made it quite clear that the CIA had to approve all of its actions . King said all of the CIA's decisions were made after policy meetings .
 FBI provided derogatory information to the Vice President about Ambassador Bonsai and William Wieland of the Bureau of American Republic Affairs . The FBI had provided the information to King some derogatory information .
 King's memorandum provided no details about the nature of this information, but the probability is that both were accussed of being too tolerant of Castro and communists . King's memo provides no details of the information .
 Cushmannoted that the Vice President had suggested that possibly the Agency would want to consult with, or acquire, the services of . The Vice President suggested that . possibly . possibly the . Agency would . want to . consult with or acquire the . services of. the Agency .
 Lansdale's activities in helping to quell the Huk rebellion in the Philippines, apparently were well known to Nixon . Lansdale: 'I was very pleased with his efforts to help with the Philippines'
 Ydigoras Fuentes, President of Guatemala, and President Luis Somoza of Nicaragua were noted as having made offers of support for this country's anti-Castro activities . Details were given on the preparations being made for resistance activities including the acquisition of training bases in third countries
 Plans for economic warfare against Castro were also outlined for the Vice President .
 Delaying deliveries of necessary spare parts for the sugar industry, tightening credit by oil companies to restrict delivery of essential petroleum products, and possible restriction in sugar quotas were mentioned as under study . Delays of spare parts and possible restrictions on sugar quotas are also mentioned .
 The author has found no other references to drugs or other types of attack which were being considered upon Castro's person, or the persons of any of the other Cuban leaders .
 This copy was sent to the DCI through the DDP and carries Mr Bissell 's initials . This copy of this copy of the DPP was sent by the DSP and carries Bissell's initials .
 The carbon of the memorandum does not show this stamp and the presumption is that it was the Director who did the briefing . It is not known if the Director of the National Security Council will attend the briefing.
 The author assumes that regardless of reader's biases, that the fact that he heard about this drug in the course of a briefing will not be construed to make him a member of a conspiracy to assassinate Castro and other of the Cuban leaders .
 For the Director's use at the NSC 5412 Representatives Meeting . Meeting will consider the Cuban covert action program paper .
 This would seem to imply that perhaps perhaps the DCI did in fact do the briefing . The DCI has been accused of leaking information about the CIA .
 The briefer may not be positively identified, but there is no question however, that the Vice President did receive a detailed briefing on the Agency's plan for action against Castro prior to the formal proclamation .
 Mr Nixon's only reported comments during this meeting concerned the cutting off of new capital to Cuba, the pulling out of private American firms, and the possibility of reducing tourism to stop the flow of American dollars into Cuba .
 Pawley also was a principal contributor to the Republican party, particularly to Mr Nixon's cause . Pawley was a major contributor to Nixon's campaign .
 Pawley was a widely known conservative . He was hopeful of an appointment as Assistant Secretary of State for Latin American affairs assuming a Republican party victory in the 1960 presidential election .
 In the spring of 1960, Pawley 's contacts with the Agency (particularly 2«9 I OF SECRET CJ&O DAT E 2'$tt2>^ with WHD) and with Nixon's office became increasingly frequent /and apparently quite close .
 On 21 March 1960, four days after formal approval of the anti-Castro program, Jake Ester line met with Pawley to plan a meeting to be held in Pawley 's Miami residence'
 Details of the agenda were not discussed other than to say the principal emphasis would be on reviewing what work could be done throughout the hemisphere .
 Any action involving exiles now should be most carefully coordinated with Chief, WHD and Chief of Branch U to avoid any flaps . It was carefully explained to Mr Pawley that any action should be carefully coordinated .
 A rjgQ DAT E 3-^^ I JNJ1. L1 U2026 Reproduced at the National Archive .
 The Agency's representatives briefed, among other things, on the problems being faced by the Cubans in exile who were trying to form a government . The meeting mentioned in the foregoing paragraph was convened in Pawley's Miami residence .
 There was considerable discussion as to who should be the nominal leaders of this government in exile, with Pawley pushing for Dr. Dr. David Cameron . Pawley pushed for a Dr. Cameron to be the leader of the government .
 None of the Latin American countries seemed particularly anxious to provide a base of operations for the government in exile, it was stressed . The Vice President's representative said .
 King points out that over and above a bond issue which will be floated in the name of the government in exile with Mr Pawley's help, that donations are being made by private citizens .
 He cautioned that this arrangement was being limited to a very small group of people . He said it was being used to protect the environment .
 Pawley suggested that rather than lean toward the OAS, better use should be made of the U.S. Military Mission in Latin American countries .
 Nixon was being fully informed of the plans that were underway to accomplish the United States objectives, and that certain private American citizens were closely involved in the planning . Other items of importance that were discussed by the group were the planned propaganda program and the present pathetic effort on the part of the Catholic
 Barnes stressed the need for the U.S. to decide whether or not it wished to be charged with supporting reactionary movements in Latin America, he said . The need is for the United States to decide not to support reactionary movements .
 King said he intended to make his views regarding the FRD known to Vice President Nixon . King told King that he planned to speak to Nixon about FRD . King said that he wanted to speak with Nixon about it .
 Pawley also had a meeting with President Eisenhower on 12 or 13 May 1960 at which time he stated his opinions with regard to the Dominican Republic and probably with reference to Cuba .
 In view of Pawley's recalcitrance to continue to work on the funding of the FRD, the DDP, ADDP/A, Chief WH/D and others discussed the pros and cons of cutting off the communications channel between Pawley and the Rubio groups into Cuba .
 Ida/ . jiiirLuuu xxij.vjr.^-iUZ.-J^O( i JrJV AL-1J Reproduced at the National Ar NAR A CJ^O DAT E 3 .
 The Pawley group had a duplicate channel into Cuba and would not necessarily have been restricted by denial of the Agency channel .
 A restriction was placed on the transmittal of communications which would be prejudicial to CIA operations in Cuba . But it was agreed that Pawley should be advised of the cancellation of such messages .
 The monitoring of such cable traffic was the responsibility of Chief, WH/4, Jake Esterline . The monitoring, however, was to be monitored by the Chief of WH/3 .
 These views in our opinion are mimical to the best interest of the United States, we say . These views of the U.S. should be mimical of the best interests of the nation .
 If such action Is not tSenf no guarantee can be made fox the security of the JM&HC operation . Security already' has been damaged severely, according to the message .
 Pawley was having trouble with an Agency or Agencies who wanted back another junta, but after Pawley offered withdraw completely, he was talkedout of doing so . Group has entre to Veep .
 Jake Esterline joined General Cushman for lunch on 20 June 1960 . The purpose was to provide the General with sufficient information on the state of the anti-Castro program .
 Rubio' s failure to join the Frente, however, has not held up progress in forming the junta, and/or the other important aspects of the operation . Rubio is not expected to be in the military junta .
 General Cushman was told that the Frente 's headquarters were to be established in Mexico, and it was on this occasion that Esterline introduced him to E Howard Hunt, who was going to move to Mexico with the Frote . Esterlines introduced General C
 The Vice President requested this information in order to prepare for an upcoming NSC meeting at which he would be a senior official . Cushman noted that the Vice President asked this information .
 The Vice President's aide also asked if there were any particular problems with relation to the operation that Chief, WH/« wished to have brought to the attention of the Vice President . The Vice president's aide said there were 'no particular problems'
 Esterline reported that for the moment all factions seemed to be quiescent . The only problems that had occurred concerned political differences among the exiles .
 The meeting was attended by the Secretaries of State, Defense, and Treasury, the Director of the Office of civil g Defense Mobilization, the Acting Attorney General, a representative of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff .
 Bissell, King, Esterline, and McMahan of the Central Intelligence Agency . Bissell and King are pictured in the photo .
 The propaganda picture also discussed, with particular emphasis again on radio broadcasts from Swan island . The propaganda pictures also discussed .
 Teams would go into Cuba to organize and train indigenous dissident groups . The teams would go to Cuba to train indigenous groups .
 ADCI also mentioned the plans to create an anti-Castro air force, but his comments about this air force were very much in error .
 Some trained Cuban fliers are currently available and we hope soon to have access to additional numbers . The Cuban government hopes to use the funds to help Cuban citizens .
 Should this eventuality occur it would seriously affect the operation . See Volume I of the Official History of the Bay of Pigs Operation, Air Operations .
 Cabell suggested that the anti-Castro forces be drawn from U.S. Special Forces . Cabell was the presiding officer at the special National Security Council meeting .
 Vice President Nixon raised a number of questions with the Department of State representatives . He also posed a series of questions concerning the economic pressures that the U.S. might put on Cuba .
 Mr Nixon was interested to know if there were any obstacles that the Agency was encountering vis-a-vis other agencies in support of JMATE . Vice President indicated that he personally would help to resolve such problems .
 This information could not be given to Col. Cushman . This information was not given to him, he said .
 Garcia was a Cuban exile who claimed to have extensive backing within the Cuban community in Miami and among dissidents inside Cuba . Garcia was the Cuban exile known for his support for Cuban dissidents .
 At one point, he claimed that he could raise a force of 2,000 men in the Miami area and 10,000 in Cuba . He claimed he was given proper financial support for training and equipping these men . At one time he claimed he could . raise a . force of
 Garcia 's name first came before the Agency in mid-June 1960 following a meeting he had with a Cuban exile who was an Agency contact . Garcia was a member of the Cuban exile in Cuba .
 Whether the FCC was chastened by Mr Nixon or whether a determination was made concerning the increased use of commercial advertising for Radio Swan is left in doubt . During this * ■ * During this .
 Barnes's suggestion of official USG participation in Swan was rejected . Barnes's proposal was rejected by the US government .
 Word of Garcia apparently got to the FBI, to General Cabell, and apparently to the Office of Vice President Nixon . Garcia was the subject of an investigation by the FBI .
 Jake Esterline met with Marshall Diggs, a Washington lawyer and Garcia 's sponsor, on 9 July 1960 . In a follow-up meeting in Diggs's office on 11 July, Phillip Toomey, WH/4/Prop met with Garcia, Cameron Pulley,
 Garcia went into his act about how his force could overthrow the Castro Government, assuming that he could get some financial assistance for training and equipping the troops . Garcia said he would get financial assistance to train and equip troops .
 Mr Pulley proceeded to tell Mr Toomey that Garcia's project was part of a program that was being promoted by former Senator Owen Brewster for the entire Caribbean area — apparently a program to eliminate all the bad guys .
 Garcia denounced the FRD leaders as Communists . Marshall Diggs was informed that the Agency had no interest in supporting Mr Garcia . Garcia was unimpressed by his credentials .
 Pulley indicated that the administration's policies with regard to Cuba might hurt the Vice President in the upcoming election . The subject dragged on, however; and at one point Mr Pulley was a strong supporter of Mr Nixon .
 Pulley indicated that a congressional investigation of the anti-Castro plan was possible . Pulley also is reported to have indicated that congressional investigation was possible. Pulley is said to have said that the plan could be investigated by Congress .
 Garcia readied from beyond the grave to touch on the BOP operation . Garcia was a member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Mexico .
 Rep. Garcia died almost a year after his death . Garcia was a member of the House of Representatives .
 In return for support of the invasion from Mario G Kohly, a popular right-wing leader who was exiled from Cuba, then Vice President Nixon agreed in October 1960 to order the CIA to arrest the leftist leaders and turn them ove^ to Kohly for ""elimination"" after
 affidavits reportedly came from a former CIA contract agent and Mario G Kohly, Jr., son of the would-be invasion leader . The affidavits were reportedly made from an affidavit filed by Mario Kohly Jr. and a former agent .
 These materials were supposed to have some bearing on House of Representatives * s investigation of the assassination of President Kennedy; but there is no indication that they were given any credence .
 Allen Dulles briefed Sen. Richard Nixon following the Democratic convention in July 1960 .
 In his memorandum to President Eisenhower, Dulles reported that in the two hour period for each briefing he had covered United States relations with the Soviet Union, developments in the Berlin situation, in the * Whether this /reflects the concentration of the Vice President's activities on the upcoming November election
 King's files, which have disappeared from the sight of God and man — or whether, in fact, this is an accurate reflection of the limited contacts, the author cannot confirm .
 Kennedy was briefed again on 19 September I960 . The briefing touched on relations with the Soviet Union and on the trouble spots in the world, including Cuba .
 The White House was informed of this briefing prior to the event; and subsequent to the briefing of Kennedy, Mr Dulles reported on the meeting to both Jerry Morgan of the White House Staff and Brigadier General Andrew Goodpaster .
 We mus£ attempt to strengthen the nonBatista democratic anti-Castro forces in exile, and in Cuba itself, who offer eventual hope of overthrowing Castro . We mus ££ attempt . to strengthen . the non-Batista . anti-Cuba forces .
 Thus far, these fighters for freedom have had virtually no support from the Government . The UK government has been silent on the issue for years .
 "I immediately had a member of my staff call the White House on the security line to ask if these briefings covered Cuba," says President Obama . "I'm not sure if the briefings cover Cuba," he says .
 At the time of the debate, however, and after checking with the White House, I had to proceed with the assumption that Kennedy had been briefed on the secret program .
 If in the TV debate I were to reveal the existence of the training program and point out that I had been one of the strongest advocates, I would pull the rug out of under Kennedy's posxtion .
 The project would be doomed, and also the lives of the brave men, both inside and outside of Cuba, who were receiving training and assistance . But if I did so, the project would have been doomed, he says . He says he hopes to continue the project in Cuba .
 In an interesting conversation with Pawn M Brodie who is writing a Nixon biography, the author of this history, emphasized that plausible deniability was of real concern at the time of the TV debate . The result of the introduction of the Cuban issue into the late stages of the debate was
 Nixon also emphasized the Catch-22 aspect of the situation as explained by Nixon . Nixon: "I'm not going to be able to do anything I want to do"
 Brodie said it seemed equally valid to infer that perhaps Kennedy had leaked detailed information about the antiCastro program . Brodie also suggested that Kennedy had used this device to put Nixon in a corner .
 Arthur Schlesinger, of course, claimed that the Kennedy comments were no more than a rhetorical flourish . Schlesingers claimed that Kennedy's comments were "no more than an rhetorical flourish"
 The election campaign, struck sensitive nerves within the Agency . General Cabell met with Gordon Gordon on 26 October 1960 .
 Eisenhower's National Security Adviser: Debate touching on areas which, in the end, might be damaging to the nation's interest . Gray: Discussion and debate about Cuban issues touched on areas . Gray said the discussion and debate may be damaging .
 On 27 October at the Special Group meeting, Mr Gray reported that he had talked to ""certain Nixon people in the White House"" in an attempt to enlist their support to bring such discussions to an end .
 I have also seen the White House statement, issued today on this subject . I'm not sure if it's true, but I'm sure it's not true .
 This was probably due to the nature of the message Mr Nixon writes he received as to these briefings . Mr Nixon wrote about the briefings he received .
 The Cuban situation was, of course, dealt with in the briefings I gave to Senator Kennedy, CNN's John Sutter says .
 The last briefing I gave him was over a month before the debate, he says . He says he gave him the last briefing before the issue arose .
 They did not cover our own Government's plans or programs for action — overt or covert . The Government's own plans and programs were not covered in this article .
 This interest was especially strong in the period from the winter of 1960 through the late summer of 1960 . The interest was particularly strong in that period .
 Vice President's concern was the fear of the establishment of a communist government in the Western Hemisphere . Vice President was concerned that the Agency-sponsored Cuban-exile organization was being taken over by pro-Communist groups . Some of the vice president's interest was politically motivated .
 I960. I Sar a Tcjf^^ '"" dat e jjT-ffizft #■4 OP SECRtT affairs in 1979, particularly in the third world countries, if Richard Nixon had been elected President in I960 .
 Allen Dulles, the Director of Central Intelligence (and possibly both Presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy) was aware that Castro was an assassination target . It appears highly probable that Dulles was aware of the assassination .
 The Mafia involvement was a fundamental part of the Agency's response to President Eisenhower's March 1960 authorization for CIA to be principally responsible for the ouster of Fidel Castro . Unfortunately, the Senate Committee Report and the media coverage of the investigation of the assassination plots made it appear that the Mafia involvement
 Bissell, Edwards, .and Harvey, with Maheu and the Mafia remained strictly compartmented and isolated from the officially authorized Project JMARC — the Project which cane to be known as the Bay of Pigs operation . The Project was known to have been known as 'Bay of Pigs
 I have no recollection of any specific other plot against Castro during this period when the Castro regime was in power .
 I do remember my own feeling that the Mafia plot had a very modest chance for success, and that it was not something to be depended*on in any way . I do . remember feeling that it had a . modest chance of success .
 In effect, he and his immediate subordinate were case officers for that activity; and I don't think anybody else involved . "In effect, [his] immediate subordinate was case officers," he said . "I'm not sure anybody else was involved," he added .
 "I think probably Tracy may have known about it, but I don't think anybody else involved with the Bay of Pigs operation knew anything about xt, whatever" "Tracy" knew nothing about the operation .
 Bundy never went to the Special Group, and that is the vie* of Bundy . Bundy was a member of the Bundy clan, but he was not involved in the case . Bundy's son says Bundy was the only person to be involved in Bundy's death .
 CIA's Deputy Director for Support, Col. Col. Edwards was concerned about the elimination of Castro . CIA's deputy director for support said he was worried about Castro's elimination .
 General Cabell agreed to talk with the Director about this, and to try to obtain his approval to increase Mr Tighe's force to six people . The Director agreed to increase the number of personnel to six .
 White House Chief, Chief, WH Division, refused to tell Jake the purpose for which the check was intended . Jake was given a blank check by the Chief of the WH Division .
 Esterline reported that King nonetheless got a FAN number from the Office of Finance and that the money was used to pay the Mafia-types . King still got the number and got the money from the office .
 COPS should know a little about everything about everything, he says .
 "We had spent a considerable amount of nervous energy figuring out how are we going to get a shot at the old son-of-abitch concurrent with the landing. My thought, when I saw this, was Jesus Christ, I must have been a little over-compartmented
 If anybody with whom I participated in planning for that . . . something that we never had figured out how to do, because so many of our agents went down just prior to the invasion . If anybody . participated with whom . I participated with that .
 It occurred to me that maybe there was a very good reason for me not to know. Then it occurred to be that there were very good reasons for me to not know .
 I am not saying what I've just said in any kind of pique; and I certainly don't want to leave you — or this tap««< recorder — with the impression that had I known about this, I would have been opposed .
 "We put out an awful lot of bullshit to the Cubans about the restoration of democracy and all that. I must say, I don't think I would have enjoyed the instrument very much," he said .
 "Those Cubans that were working with us were not, I submit, working, for the re-establishment of the Mafia as a controlling factor in Havana," says President Obama .
 We surveyed all of our agent material to see who could take a shot at him . The assassination of that charismatic guy, coincidental with the invasion, would have been a highly desirable thing .
 Whether the instrument to be picked should have included the Mafia, I think I might have questioned at the time, he says . The Mafia was the instrument of choice, he adds .
 Evidence to indicate that the white-hatted guys would have no objection if a successful assassination attempt could have been made, suggests Mr Drain .
 WH/4 records reveal interest in the Castro brothers and Che Guevara . Records show interest and possibly limited participation in a number of such activities .
 As the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, Cabell pointed out to Mr Merchant that such action was highly dangerous both in conception and execution, and, further, he indicated that it was beyond the Agency's capability . So far as I have been able to determine no coherent plan was ever developed
 Only someone who consistently engaged in omphaloskepsis would have a problem understanding the meaning to be anything other than assassination .
 He is to be also checked out this week in the use of a sporting rifle with telescopic lens attachment . The week is also to be checked out in the . use of the use . of a sports rifle with . telescopic . lens attachment.
 It was revealed subsequently that upon his reinfiltration into Havana, £ (6 J) had two principal sabotage missions one against the Esso refinery and the other aimed at the Havana Electric Company .
 Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro Ruz was killed on 26 July 1960 during his visit to Mina del Frio, an army camp in the Sierra Maestra mountains, between Bayamo and Manzanillo .
 No, I think it [silenced weapons] is for hit and run operations, where tney could do their maximum damage and get out without alerting people . I know of no — within JMARC as I knew it -I know of . no attempt, no plans that were
 Asked why not proceed with Operation AMHINT to set up a program of assassination . Asked Ed . Dave P, Dave . Hinkle, Hinkle . Moore, Moore, and Jake [Esterline] .
 I said I was not failing to give some attention to the business of assassination. I said that I was . failing to . give some . attention to some . assassination, he said . I said . "I said that . I was ... not failing . to give ... attention to assassination
 Sheffield Edwards arftl Maheu in the Mafia . Operation AMHINT to set up a program of assassination . Either none of those bastards knew anything about Sheffield Edwards . or some of them did .
 WH/4 apparently involved in a disinformation action where"" re ports of an attempt to assassinate Che Guevara were to be directed at Cuba from the CIA controlled radio transmitter on Swan Island . AMHINT program was mentioned, |"" WH/ 4 apparently was involved in . a
 The only evidence found which might have been related to an assassination attempt was an AMHINT request of 14 January 1961 for the 'Silenciadores Rifles'
 I have never seen that list in my life, but this is the whole top gang at that time . This is the first time I've seen the list of the top gang in the history of the world .
 Armando Hart was also half nuts at this point, and he still is . They got rid of Olivares, and Roca was pushed aside . Armando Roca and Armando Olivares were both half nuts, and still are .
 "I guess he is still fairly prominent, but he is not really in the power structure," he says . “I guess I guess he still . still . well-known, ‘but he was still fairly . prominent,” he says. “but he is
 "None of these people must be allowed to have a role in the new government," says David Cameron . "We need to know if this 'Must Go' is in terms of the assassination, or in terms nobody," he says .
 Che Guevara is one of the most famous people in the world to be assassinated . Che Che was one of many of the world's most famous men .
 I myself, contemplating the future government, thought it might be interesting to try to keep Raul in, with Fidel out . "I myself, thought ... I thought ... Raul would be interesting," he said .
 Capture what magic there was in the name of Castro, but do it with that little homosexual, instead of with Fidel, the real man . Capture of the magic in Castro's name, but capture it with the little homosexual .
 President Nixon turned to the Soviet Union and its allies for military, technical, and economic assistance . He turned to them for military and technical assistance .
 This was the officially sanctioned program approved by President Eisenhower on 17 March of 1960 . President Eisenhower approved the program on March 17, 1960 .
 It outlined the political, economic, propaganda, and paramilitary programs which would be implemented in an attempt to oust Fidel Castro .
 CIA made organizational plans to carry out the policy . Once the official U.S. position was announced, CIA planned to carry it out, CIA said .
 A separate Task^oirce within the Western Hemisphere Division was established under the leadership of Jacob D Esterline, on whose shoulder Col. Col. Esterlines is credited with the success of the task .
 Strong support was to be provided for' anti-Castro publications launched in the area of Miami . Strong support also was provided for anti-Cuban publications .
 Paramilitary programs initially called for the training of cadres of communicators and paramilitary instructors who would go into Cuba and provide leadership and training for dissident elements that reportedly were ready to move against Castro .
 As the summer of 1960 drew to a close, it became apparent that Castro's military strength and training programs were sharply improving and that the initial plan to infiltrate small teams of dissidents no longer was feasible .
 Eisenhower reinjected himself into the program and stimulated action to the point where some of CIA's planners hoped that — in addition to the propaganda program which was already underway — paramilitary operations might be initiated .
 When our country was in danger of direct aggression and mobilized itself, it waited for the presidential inauguration thinking that this asm would do something different . "We didn't jooderstaad why a man who assumed the administration of the United States would want to bear the guilt of someone
 Cabell, ADCI, were two of the most vigorous proponents of direct action . Cabell proposed air and naval protection for the invasion and, if necessary, use of U.S. marines to hold the beachhead. Cabell was the most vocal proponent of direct intervention .
 J.-lUZOZOUl-'K AU 1 j Reproduced atttie Nafonal Archives NAR A Cj&O DAT E 3 ^£^ eeTTET"" end of Eisenhower's administration . J.-LZOzoul-K
 There was considerable concern over the necessary formalities of diplomacy in order that the United States not be involved in investigations by either the' UN or the OAS for its anti-Castro program .
 Nixon's role could not be construed to have had a major impact on the development of operational planning by the Central Intelligence Agency . It was the role of an interested senior officer in the Executive Branch .
 A thorough examination of the evidence was undertaken to determine if this allegation was supportable . Because of the sensationalism surrounding the Senate Select Committee's report on Alleged Assassination Plots Involving Foreign Leaders, including Fidel Castro, was undertaken .
 Allen Dulles, Richard Bissell, Shef Edwards, Bill Harvey, and possibly Tracy Barnes — probably knew about Mafia connection and Mr Maheu .
 In terms of Project JMATE itself, the few bits of information which indicate the possibility of assassination attempts against the Cuban leadership also fail to demonstrate any responsibility for their initiation . if anything, the evidence would indicate that WH/4's position was one of watchful waiting and wishful thinking
 Agency-supplied weapons might be involved in such an attempt, it has been suggested . Agency weapons might not be ruled out of such a possible attempt .