 Declassified January 15, 1989, this document reveals details of a proposed overthrow of Castro . Declassified documents reveal details of the proposed overthrow .
 Minutes from an October 24, 1962 Executive Committee meeting . The most critical and dangerous event in the Nuclear Era: the Cuban missile crisis, 1962 .
 Archive has been diligently locating, obtaining declassification of, organizing, and indexing government documents on the Cuban missile crisis . Archive is committed to capturing the documentary record of the critical events, issues, and decisions of the Nuclear Age .
 The collection presents a uniquely integrated, comprehensive history of the crisis . It covers the aftermath of the Bay of Pigs, the U.S. secret war against Castro and the United States secret war . The collection includes the first intelligence reports which pointed to the deployment of Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 This is a one-stop retrieval for information on events, issues, and players . Here is the complete list of events, events and players from the world's top teams .
 Hard-bound index to names and subjects--designed by indexing specialist David Bearman--is a major historical contribution in itself . Archive staff prepared hard-bound Index to names, subjects and subjects .
 This title is Number 4 of a reference series, The Making of U.S. Policy . Number 4 is the first of the Nuclear History Series .
 Each document bears a unique accession number, to which all indexing is keyed . All documents have unique accessions numbers to which they can be found .
 Any microfiche found to be physically substandard in any way will be replaced free of charge . Microfiche will also be replaced by the government .
 A two-volume printed Guide, prepared by the National Security Archive, accompanies the microfiche collection . The Guide is available in two volumes .
 Volume I index provides in-depth, document-level access to names, organizations, and subjects . Volume I is an index providing in depth, document, and subject-level information . Volume II index is a collection of more than 1,000 books .
 Volume II contains an events chronology, glossaries of names and organizations, a chronological document bibliography, and a bibliography of secondary sources . Volume II also contains a chronology of events, glossary and bibliographical notes .
 Douglas Dillon Secretary of Treasury ; ExComm Member Raymond Garthoff Senior Fellow, Brookings Institution; State Department Officer during Missile Crisis . Richard Ned Lebow Professor of Government and Director, Peace Studies Program Robert S McNamara Secretary of Defense . Arthur Schlesinger, Jr. Robert S.
 The National Security Archive has the essential empirical grounding necessary for the further study of the crisis . The Archive has an empirical grounding needed to further study the situation .