 Analysis of an Article Concerning Cuba ■■' ■ ■ ■'■ Planning Which Appeared in the ST LOUIS POST DISPATCH of 30 November 1962 .
 The organization and command and control plans for an invasion of Cuba were mishandled and, if an invasion had been necessary, would have caused great confusion with consequent loss of . life and delayed success .
 References in the article which would indicate that it reflects statements made by, or views held by, senior military men are untrue . In short, references in this article are not intended to reflect the views of senior military officers .
 None of the criticisms levelled by the article are considered valid . Command relationships for the planning for, as well as the conduct of, operations in regard to Cuba were, and are, designed for unity of command .
 The command structure actually used during the build-up phase of the Cuban contingency was predicated upon clear-cut channels of authority and responsibility .
 As stipulated in planning guidance, CINCLANT was provided with staff augmentation personnel . The Joint Task Force Commander retained responsibility as the Joint Task force Commander .
 The Army, Navy and Air Force components were clearly delineated and functioned in close cooperation, with unity of purpose and maximum mutual support . The Army and Navy components functioned with unity, unity and maximum support .
 The contributory efforts of the other Commanders in Chief involved, namely, CINCSTRIKE, CINCONAD, and CINCPAC, were laudatory and without restraint . CINCARIB was laudatory .
 It is considered that the subject article is based upon misinformation regarding the Unified Command system and does not recognize the responsibilities that each of the unified commanders has within his assigned geographic area . Marines all placed resources requested or otherwise considered necessary at the immediate disposal of Admiral Dennison .
 Group 3 DOWNGRADRAD at 12 YEAR INTERVALS NOT AUTOMATICALLY DECLASSIFIED . E.0.0 . Group 3 is based on 12-year-old data .
 Commander Mereness, USN, was consulted in the preparation of this analysis . For an analytical discussion of the subject article, see Enclosure .
 The refutation of the subject article set forth supra, be discussed with the President and with such Public Affairs' officials as may be appropriate .
 Analysis of an Article Appearing in the ST LOUIS POST DISPATCH of 30 November 1962, Concerning Alleged Mishandling of Cuban Invasion Organization Planning . An analysis of an article published in the St. Louis Post Dispatch of 30 Nov. 1962 .
 The article was ska^£ycritical of what was purported to be our Task Organizations for both the planning and employment phases of an invasion of Cuba . It was also ska ^£y critical of the organizations for the planning of the invasion .
 The article further criticized command relationships in regard to our contingency planning . The article also criticized command relations with the U.S. military .
 An analysis of the points raised in the article indicates that the author overemphasized ifttHoF pr oble ms . An analysis indicates that it renecj^--si^ements made by, or views held by, seniormiiftary men are untrue .
 None of none -eisffls— l-evel-reTi _ by "" the ' article are corisTi 3.5 . Similarly, none of none -- eisfflls— by "" by "" . None of the words in the 'article are cor
 Command relationships for the planni-n-g— f-o-iv-a-s— well_as_ tbe-^«idue^-of, operations i-n.£airl-~tTr-<^lba were . Command relationships
 The Army, Navy and Air Force components were clearly delineated and functioned in close cooperation, with unity of purpose and maximum mutual support . Group 3 DOWNGRADED AT 12 YEAR INTERVALS .
 It is my opinion that the subject article is based upon misinformation regarding the Unified Command system . The subject article does not recognize the responsibilities that each of the unified commanders has within his assigned geographic area .
 Specific charges levelled by the article, that Service rivalry and competition for authority crippled the operations, are not supported by fact and are considered invalid . The article is considered invalid.
 Cuban contingency plans are "militarily sound and those best designed to ensure an early and successful termination of hostilities with minimum casualties," says U.S. President Obama .
 Hadden, USN OPCP Br, OP Plans Div, J -3 X 54773 . Hadden is a member of the U.S. Navy’s National Security Council . He is the son of a Navy SEAL Team Leader .
 In attempting to bear out these criticisms, the author utilized a paucity of fact, misinterpretation of command relationships and over-emphasis of minor problems . The author of this article uses these criticisms to point out that the author of the book is incorrect .
 Analysis of the command structure' actually used for the planning and for the deployment of forces during the build-up phase of the Cuban contingency discloses clear-cut channels of authority and responsibility .
 CINCLANT was provided with staff augmentation personnel as planned and retained responsibility as the Joint Task Force Commander . The Joint Force Commander retained responsibility for the Joint task force .
 The Army, Navy and Air Force components were clearly delineated and functioned in close cooperation, with unity of purpose and with maximum mutual support . The Army and Navy components functioned with unity, unity and unity .
 Command arrangements for the conduct of the actual operations were, and are, designed for unity of command and the full exploitation of the capabilities of the various forces to be employed .
 The charge that Service rivalry and competition for authority had a crippling effect on the planned operations is not supported by fact. Service rivalry, competition and authority had not been affected by fact, it is said . Service rivalry is not a problem, it's a problem for the government, it says
 Commander of Continental Army Command and Air Force Tactical Air Command, General Sweeney, are around-the-clock component commanders of the over-all commander, Admiral Dennison of the Atlantic Command . This is clearly evidenced by the Commander of the Army's Continental Army command, General Powell,
 The Army, Navy, Air Force and Group 3 DOWNGRADED at 12 YEAR INTERVALS NOT AUTOMATICALLY DECLASSIFIED . Marines all placed any resources requested or otherwise considered necessary at the immediate disposal of Admiral Dennison . Marines .
 Army, Atlantic Fleet and Air Force Atlantic are abbreviations . Army, Air Force, Atlantic fleet is the third component of the Atlantic Command . ARLANT and AFLANT are components of the command .
 The statement that AFLANT includes Air Force crew training bases in Arizona and ""many others of similar lack of consequence to the Navy Commander in Chief, Atlantic, CINCLANT" is false .
 The announcement purported to have been made by the Atlantic Command that the ""Atlantic Command has taken over all the Army and tactical air forces in the US" is denied by the CINCLANT Public Affairs officer .
 The article recognizes that the Atlantic Command is a unified command with military responsibilities throughout the Atlantic Ocean area, the Caribbean Sea, and part of the Indian Ocean . However, it promptly dismisses the joint staff aspects of the unified command .
 The reference to JTF W is based on misinformation as this planning organization is designed only to handle CINCLANT responsibilities in Africa, South of the Sahara . The reference is based upon misinformation .
 JTF h does not appear in the preliminary operations for invasion of Cuba; this organization has no responsibilities in regard to Cuba . Hence, the article is correct in stating that JTF H does not .
 The charge that there was no unification or unified command organization in existence in existence at the stage at which preparations ceased is incorrect . It is incorrect that there were no unified command organizations in existence .
 T,held the responsibilities of the Joint Task Force Commander and his staff functioned accordingly . T, held responsibilities of Joint Task force Commander .
 LtGen Howze, CG XVIII Corps was designated as the JTF commander . He would have been Commander JTF Cuba once forces were successfully ashore . Howze's statement is partially correct in that he would be Commander of Cuba .
 Under CINCLANT, he would have had responsibilities for all operations in Cuba . As such, under CinCLANT he would be responsible for all Cuba operations .
 The statement that the command would have extended only over the Army, that the Marines would have operated separately, is entirely false . The Navy would have conducted operations in its own way, he says . The statement is false .
 Most of the remainder of the article is based on misinformation regarding the Unified Command system . The article does not recognize the responsibilities that each unified commander has within his assigned geographic area .
 The author is not aware that the United States Strike Command was created to provide for the training, provision and deployment of forces in support of the other unified commanders . The author does not know that the Joint Chiefs of Staff created the command to conduct contingency operations .
 It was not, and not, intended that he be made responsible for contingency operations in Cuba, he said .
 The concluding statement of the article which charges that the civilian secretaries were trying to conduct the operation is equally untrue . The conclusion of this article is also untrue, says the author .
 The deployment of forces within CONUS, the conduct of the quarantine, and the reconnaissance operations all were carried out by the military as directed through the Joint Chiefs of Staff .
 LANGLEY AFB CINCLANTFLT ADM. DE1ISON NORFOLK* COMANT DEF COM RADM SMITH ROOS ROOT COMNAVTF 1 VADM RIVERO & 2COMNAV BASE GTMO RADM O'DON