 Riasanovsky was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1987 . He is one of the foremost Russian historians .
 In updating and revising this eighth addition, we have extensively revised the discussion of the long history before 1855 . We have made additional revisions to the late imperial, Soviet and post-Soviet ens ens ens.
 Historians' goal is to reflect new research and new questions and interpretations, they say . Russian history has remained very lively, says historian .
 The diversity of actors and experiences has continued to grow with each successive edition, especially to include more attention to diverse social groups, women, dissenters, non-Russians, and the regions . If anything, this diversity of actor and experience continues to grow .
 The eighth edition of A History of Russia is dedicated to our students, who are always in mind as we write .
 A distance of five thousand versts in width from Persia, one of the southern Asiatic states, to the end of the inhabited world—to the North Pole . The North Pole is a distance of 5,000 versts wide .
 Russia contains all types of soil from the warmest to the coldest, from the burning environs of Erivan to icy Lapland . Russia is self-sufficient, independent, absolute, absolute .
 "Broad and spacious is my homeland, Rich in rivers, fields, and woods, I know no other land like this," he writes . "Where a man can breathe so free. Broad and spacious" is his homeland .
 A versta is not quite two-thirds of a mile, or a little over a kilometer . SONG OF THE MOTHERLAND, 1936, is the song of the Motherland .
 Climate, soil, water, water and flora, flora, fauna, mineral resources, and physical landscapes present human communities with limitations and opportunities . Climate change is a key part of human development in the world .
 Human history has often been a story of efforts to use, master, and even change environments . In turn, human history has been a tale of attempts to master and change environments, such as the environment .
 Russian history has been especially profound in Russian history, for it has occurred in a vast, difficult, and changing environment .
 At its imperial peak, Russia represented a land mass of over 8. million square miles, an area larger than the entire North American continent . At the Russian Empire and then the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics .
 The Russian Federation remains the largest country in the world geographically . It lost about a quarter of its territory when the Soviet Union broke up in 1991 . Even after the loss of territory, Russia remains the world's largest country geographically .
 Russia's enormous territory is marked by a mixture of great homogeneity and rich variety, both of which helped shape Russia’s history . Russia's history is marked with great homogenicity and great variety .
 The great bulk of Russia is an immense plain—at one time the bottom of a huge sea—extending from central and even western Europe deep into Siberia . Russia is one of the most populous countries in the world .
 Although numerous hills and chains of hills are scattered on its surface, they are not high enough or sufficiently concentrated to interfere appreciably with the flow of the mighty plain, the largest on the entire globe .
 The Ural Mountains, ancient and weather-beaten, constitute no effective barrier between Europe and Asia, which they separate . A broad gap of steppe land remains between the southern tips of the Ural chain and the Caspian and Aral seas .
 Only in vast northeastern Siberia, beyond the Enisei River, does the elevation rise considerably and hills predominate .
 Russia has so far remained at best on the periphery of Russian history . But this area, while of a remarkable potential, has not been seen in Russia's history .
 Impressive mountain ranges are restricted to Russian borders or, at the most, borderlands . The most impressive mountain ranges in Russia are located in the country's borders .
 The Carpathians, the Caspian Peninsula, and the Pamir, Pamir and Altai ranges lie on the southern border . They include the Carpathian, the high and picturesque Caucasian chain in the south between the Black Sea and the Caucasus .
 Rivers have played a large role in Russian history . Rivers have given names to places and peoples, connecting distant places and providing resources .
 Russia's broad and slow-moving rivers were the land's first important routes, carrying both goods and settlers . Above all, Russia's slow and slow moving rivers were important routes to Russia .
 Most of these rivers carry their waters along anorth-south axis . They empty either into the Baltic and Arctic Ocean or into the Black and the Caspian seas . Most of the rivers are located in the region of Russia .
 In European Russia, such rivers as the Northern Dvina and the Pechora flow northward . Others, notably the Dniester, the Bug, and the larger Dnieper, Don, and Volga proceed south .
 The Dnieper and the Don empty into the Black Sea, the Volga into the Caspian . The Volga and Dniepteps empty into each other, the Dniep and Don empty the Black and Don .
 5 rivers, the huge Ob and Enisei, as well as the rapid Lena, the Indigirka, and the Kolyma, drain into the Arctic Ocean . Siberian the largest river system in the world, the largest in the region of the world .
 The Amur, which flows eastward, serves during much of its course as the boundary between Russia and China, and empties into the Strait of Tartary . The exception to this is the Amur which flows westward .
 Both the Amu Daria and the Syr Daria flow northwestward to the Aral Sea . The former at one time used to reach the Caspian, although the former used to do so . The Amu dia flows south of Siberia in Central Asia .
 While Russia abounds in rivers and lakes, it is essentially a landlocked country . Russia is essentially landlocked and has a long history of being landlocked .
 The neighboring seas include the Baltic and the Black, both of which must pass through narrow straits, away from Russian borders . The Caspian and the Aral are totally isolated .
 Major Russian lakes include Ladoga and Onega in the European part of the country . The huge and extremely deep Lake Baikal in Siberia is one of the world's largest lakes .
 The Russian eastern coastline too is subject to cold and inclement weather, except for the southern section adjacent to the Chinese border . The southern section of the Russian eastern coast is also subject to the cold weather .
 Latitude and a landlocked condition largely determine Russian climate . Russian climate is severely continental . Latitude, landlocked and landlocked conditions largely determine climate .
 Northern and even central Russia are on the latitude of Alaska . The position of southern Russia corresponds more to the position of Canada in the western hemisphere than to that of the United States .
 The Gulf Stream barely reaches one segment of the northern coastline of Russia . Gulf Stream does so much to make the climate of western and northern Europe milder .
 Icy winds from the Arctic Ocean sweep across European Russia to the Black Sea . In the absence of interfering mountain ranges, icy winds sweep across Europe Russia to Black Sea.
 Siberian weather, except in the extreme southeastern corner, is more brutal still . Siberian weather is expected to be more severe this year .
 In northern European Russia the soil stays frozen eight months out of twelve . The soil is frozen in northern Europe .
 Even Ukraine is covered by snow three months every year, while the rivers freeze all the way to the Black Sea . The rivers freeze in Ukraine all winter, and the Black River freezes in Ukraine .
 Siberia in general and northeastern Siberia in particular belong among the coldest areas in the world . Siberia is one of the world's coldest places .
 When summer finally comes, it often comes rather suddenly, temperatures soar . Still, in keeping with the continental nature of the climate, when summer comes, temperatures soar . Summer temperatures are still high in some areas, but temperatures are expected to remain high .
 Heat waves are common in European Russia and in much of Siberia . The deserts of Central Asia spew sand many miles to the west, which spew sand .
 The long-term effects of climate, along with other environmental conditions, created a variety of ecosystems across the Eurasian plain . Climate change has created a range of ecosystems in the region .
 Russia was divided into several natural “zones” extending east-west across the country, though there were overlapping transitional areas . As Russian scientists codified in nineteenth-century studies, Russia was known to have been divided into zones .
 Historically, the early history of Slavic and Scandinavian settlement was focused on the mixed forest zone that extends from the Baltic and western frontier toward the Ural Mountains . This region would remain, in terms of population, the heartland of Russia .
 In the medieval period, Russian peasants would begin to move north into the coniferous taiga, a harsh land that stretches from southern Scandinavia to the Pacific Ocean . The taiga is a harsh area of harsh land stretching from the Scandinavian to Pacific .
 Together, these two huge forested belts accounted for over half of the territory of the Russian Empire and the Soviet Union . Together, they accounted for more than half of Russia's territory .
 The tundra stretches from the Kola Peninsula to the far northeastern edge of the Eurasian continent . It covers almost 15 percent of Russian territory . Still further north, there is a brutal land of swamps, moss, peat, and shrubs .
 Few Russian settlers ventured to the area before the end of the seventeenth century . Few Russians ventured there before the start of the 17th century .
 To the south is the steppe, or prairie, occupying southern European Russia and extending into Asia to the Altai Mountains . The steppe is also known as a prairie in Russia and Asia .
 Russian colonization of the steppe was delayed by nomadic groups, many of which had come from farther east but would become extensive in the imperial period . The steppe is now largely populated by Russian settlers .
 The southernmost zone, that of semi-desert and desert, extends from the Caspian Sea through Central Asia . Finally, the southernmost region is that of the semi-deert zone .
 It occupies less than one-fifth of the total area of the former Soviet land mass . It occupies somewhat less than a fifth of the . area .
 Diverse patterns of climate and vegetation provided people with a variety of resources for subsistence and development . There were relatively little first-rate agricultural land .
 Only an estimated one million square miles out of an area more than eight times that size are truly rewarding to the tiller of the soil . Only one million sq miles of soil out of a larger area of more than 8,000 square miles are rewarding, say experts .
 Much of the country suffers from short growing seasons, too little or too much precipitation, morainic deposits, and shallow and sandy topsoils . The country has a short growing season and too little precipitation .
 Even the best land in Ukraine and Russia, the excellent black soil of the southern steppe offers agricultural conditions comparable to those on the great plains of Canada rather than those in warmer states .
 Russia is rich not only in wood but also in game, berries, edible plants, and fish . The country is rich in forests, more than any other country in the world .
 It has a great wealth and variety of natural resources, ranging from platinum to oil and from coal to gold . It also has a variety of mineral resources, including platinum and oil .
 On the whole, however, these resources remained unused and even unexplored for a very long time .
 This was a land plagued by cold, flooding, famine, and fire . Adding to the everyday challenges faced by the working population, this was a time of famine and fire.
 With industrialization came even more radical efforts to bend nature to human needs and desires . Not always successfully and not always with positive consequences, not always .
 Historians have long been fascinated by the role of geographic factors in human history . Herodotus wrote about the importance of the region in ancient times .
 The father of history referred to the broad sweep of the southern Russian steppe and the adaptation of the steppe inhabitants, the Scythians, to their natural environment in his explanation of why the Persians could not overcome them .
 Geography is a key part of Russian history . Geography has been important in Russia's history . Historians have noted the significance of geography in Russian history.
 The influence of intellectuals like the geographer and historian Lev Gumilev has revived attention to the influence of geographical environment on society and culture . More recently, the rise of environmental history and, in Russia, the . influence of . intellectuals like . the geographers and historians .
 Russian national The GEOGRAPHICAL ENVIRONMENT 7 character and its dependence on the environment . Even if we reject environmental and geographic determinism and refuse to speculate on such nebulous and precarious topics, some fundamental points have been made .
 This setting notably made it easier for the Moscow state to spread across eastern Europe . This setting made it easy for the state of Moscow to spread .
 The Russians advanced all the way to the Pacific, Alaska and California, a progression paralleled only by the great American movement west . Beyond the Urals, the Russians advanced to Alaska, California and Alaska .
 As the boundaries of the Russian Empire ultimately emerged, they consisted of oceans to the north and east and, in large part, of seas, high mountains, and deserts to the south . Only in the west, where the Russians merged with streams of other peoples, did the border seem unrelated
 The extremely severe climate contributed to the weakness of the tribes scattered in northern European Russia and of the various inhabitants of Siberia, leading to their utter inability to stem the Russian advance .
 The Russians could easily expand, but they were well protected from outside attack . Whereas the Russians could expand, they are well protected against outside attack, the Russians are protected from the outside .
 Russian distances brought defeat to many, although not all, invaders, from the days of the Persians and the Scythians to those of Napoleon and Hitler . Russian distances have brought defeat .
 The problem of administering an enormous area, of holding the parts together, of coordinating local activities and efforts remained a staggering task for those in power .
 The variety of peoples on the great plain makes issues of centralization and federation all the more acute . And it's bound to make such issues as centralization or federation more acute, he says .
 Conquest and colonization of this vast land required the backing of state power, not only to overcome the sheer “friction of space,” as geographers call it, but also to integrate diverse peoples into a common empire .
 One can appreciate the opinion of those thinkers, prominent in the Enlightenment and present in other periods, who related the system of government of a country directly to its size and declared despotism to be the natural form of rule .
 The magnificent network of Russian rivers and lakes also left its mark on Russian history . The network of lakes and rivers also left their mark on Russia .
 It is sufficient to mention the significance of the Dnieper for Kievan Rus, or of the Volga and its tributaries for the Moscow state . The Volga, Dye and Dyeper are the most important rivers in Russia .
 The landlocked position of the country and the search for an access to the waterways of the world made the Russians repeatedly concerned with the Baltic, the Black Sea, and the Straits . Russia's search for access to waterways made the country repeatedly concerned .
 Climate and vegetation basically affected the distribution of people in Russia and also their occupations . Climate, vegetation and climate and vegetation affected people's lives . People in Russia were affected by climate, vegetation .
 The poor quality of much agricultural land has led to endemic suffering among Russian peasants . Poor quality of land has taxed the ingenuity of tsarist, Soviet, and post-Soviet ministers alike .
 Russian natural resources have added immeasurably to Soviet strength, says Putin . Russia's natural resources, since they began to be developed on a large scale, have given Russia a huge boost to its power .
 Both the wealth of Russia and the geographic and climatic obstacles to a utilization of this wealth have remained a challenge even to the present . Russia is one of the most powerful countries in the world .
 The location of Russia on its two continents has had a profound impact on Russian history . Russia's location of the continent has had an enormous impact on its history .
 The southern Russian steppe served for centuries as the highway for Asiatic nomads to burst into Europe . The southern Russia steppe was used as a way to get to Europe .
 The steppe frontier, open for centuries, contributed hugely to the militarization of Russian society . In effect, the steppeped frontier contributed hugely . It was reinforced by the generally unprotected and fluid nature of the western border .
 Russia later expanded grandly in Asia without the need first to rule the high seas . But proximity to Asian lands led also to some less warlike contacts . It enabled Russia later in turn turn to expand grandly .
 Neo-Eurasianists have tried to interpret the entire development of Russia in terms of its unique position in the Old World . The Eurasian school of historians, represented in the English language especially by George Vernadsky, has tried to explain Russia's position in Russia .
 Russian location in Europe may well be regarded as even more important than its connections with Asia . Russian location may be more important in Europe than in Asia .
 Russia's location on the periphery of Europe, especially at a time when European power grew to dominate the globe, provided a challenge and a model, shaping Russia’s emergence as both a nation and an empire . Russia‘s emergence was shaped by the strength of Europe’
 Russia and the West are at odds over Russia's relationship with the West . Russia's relations with Russia is a key part of the West's relationship . Russia and West have been at odds for decades .
 As the preceding examples, which by no means exhaust the subject, indicate, geography does affect history . As well as geography, geography affects history .
 The influence of certain geographic factors tends to be especially persistent, says CNN.com .
 So far we have not changed mountains into plains or created new seas, though some Soviet writers dreamed of just that . Thus, while our modern scientific civilization does much to mitigate the impact of climate, we have yet to change mountains or seas .
 The Slavonic state of Kiev presents the same features...because the same cultural tradition was the only tradition which was known to South Russia for centuries . No German or Mongolian invaders were able to destroy the tradition .
 Every historical event is unique, and every sequence of events presents diversity, flux, and change . It is the connection of a given present with its past that makes the present meaningful and enables us to have history .
 "The specifics of how we construct continuities, however, are arguments and often controversial," says the author .
 The very title of this book, though seemingly straightforward, is an argument, for it groups many particular peoples, cultures, and histories under the heading “Russia” Some of whom would later win independence as nation-states and insist that their history is not Russian history .
 In contemporary Ukrainian and Polish historiography, for example, the tendency is to speak of the inhabitants of the Kievan Rus as Rus‘ians or Ruthenians rather than as Russians .
 Other historians warn that the term ‘Russia’ could potentially obscures diversity and even legitimizes imperial domination . The term “Russia” read back historically into early times and extended geographically .
 The history of Russia cannot be the history of a simple ‘nation-state,” though the role of Russians and ideas of Russian nationality would become powerful RUSSIA BEFORE THE RUSSIANS .
 The job of the historian is to seek both continuity and complexity, historian says . But it is also the job of a historian to find both complexity and continuity .
 This book uses "Russia" very broadly in order to explore the continuities that comprise Russia's history . As such, this book, following long tradition, uses “Russia” very broadly .
 We insist on its persistent complexity and multiethnic diversity . But we also insist that it is persistent complexity . We insist that multiculturalism is a matter of complexity .
 Those that flourished in Transcaucasia and Central Asia exercised merely a peripheral influence on Russian history . The areas themselves became parts of the Russian state only in the nineteenth century and later separated again in the late twentieth century .
 As an introduction to Russian history proper, we must turn to the northern shore of the Black Sea and to the steppe beyond . The steppe of the steppies is the most important part of Russia's history .
 These wide expanses remained for centuries on the border of the ancient world of Greece, Rome, and Byzantium . They remained on the borders for centuries .
 Greek colonies began to appear in southern Russia from the seventh century before Christ . Through commercial and cultural contacts in general, the peoples of the southern Russian steppe participated in classical civilization .
 Herodotus’ account and other scattered and scarce contemporary evidence have been greatly augmented by excavations pursued first in tsarist Russia and subsequently, on an increased scale, in the Soviet Union . Herodotuss’s account of the discovery of the site has been greatly enhanced by
 At present we know, at least in broad outline, the historical development of southern Russia before the establishment of the Kievan state . At present, we know that southern Russia was at the heart of its history .
 Russian history is important to Russian history, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We have come to appreciate the importance of this background for Russian history"
 Neolithic Age, beginning around 4,000 years before the Christian era, was a period of rich cultural development in the valleys of the Dnieper, Bug, and Dniester rivers in south .
 Its remnants testify to the fact that agriculture was already already entrenched in that area, and also to a struggle between the sedentary tillers of the soil and the invading nomads, a recurrent motif .
 Neolithic people also used domestic animals, engaged in weaving, and had a developed religion . This neolithic people were also engaged in using domestic animals .
 Rostovtzeff: The “pottery of spirals and meander” links it not only to the southern part of Central Europe, but also to Asia Minor . The precise connection is difficult to establish, but a precise connection with Asia Minor is difficult .
 At about the same time a culture utilizing metal developed in the Kuban valley north of the Caucasian range . The Kuban culture was contemporaneously with similar cultures in Egypt and Mesopotamia .
 Its artifacts of copper, gold, and silver, found in numerous burial mounds, testify to the skill of its artisans .
 While the bronze age in southern Russia is relatively little known and poorly represented, that of iron coincided with, and apparently resulted with, new waves of invasion and the establishment of the first historic peoples .
 The Cimmerians are usually considered to be the earliest such people, again in large part thanks to Herodotus . They are thought to have been the earliest people to have lived in the region .
 Recent historians have assumed that the Cimmerians represented the upper crust in southern Russia . The bulk of the population consisted of indigenous elements who continued the development of culture on the northern shore of the Black Sea .
 The ruling group was to change several times during the subsequent centuries without destroying this fundamental cultural continuity . It was to be changed several times but not destroyed this cultural continuity.
 The Scythians followed the Cimmerians, defeating them and destroying their state . Scythian followed them and destroyed their state of Scythonia .
 The new invaders, who came from Central Asia, spoke an Iranian tongue and belonged thus to the Indo-European language family, although they apparently also included Mongol elements .
 The Romans ruled southern Russia from the seventh to the end of the third century B.c. They ruled the region from the 7th century to the 3rd century BC . The Romans are said to have ruled Russia from 7th to 3rd Century BC .
 Herodotus traveled from the Danube to the Don and from the northern shore of the Black Sea inland for a distance traveled in the course of a twenty-day journey . The Scythian sway extended, according to a contemporary, Herodotuss, from a . contemporary, from
 At its greatest extent, the Scythian state stretched south of the Danube on its western flank and across the Caucasus and into Asia Minor on its eastern flank .
 In war they formed excellent light cavalry, utilizing the saddle and fighting with bows and arrows, and short swords . In war, they fought with bows, arrows, short swords, and long-range weapons .
 Their military tactics based on mobility and evasion proved so successful that even their great Iranian rivals, the mighty Persians, could not defeat them in their home territory . Even their great rival, Iran's mighty Persian, were unable to defeat them .
 The Scythians established a strong military state in southern Russia . For over three centuries it gave a considerable degree of stability to that area . Scythian state was established in the area of southern Russia in the early 1400s .
 Indigenous culture continued to develop, enriched by new contacts and opportunities . Indigenous culture continues to develop in the United States .
 In spite of nomadic nomadic and pastoral nature of the Scythians, agriculture went on flourishing in the steppe north of the Black Sea .
 The Scythians were defeated and replaced by the Sarmatians, another wave of Iranian-speaking nomads from Central Asia . They were defeated in southern Russia and replaced in Russia by Sarm at the time .
 The Sarmatian social organization and culture was akin to the Scythian . Sarm at the time was similar to the ancient Scythians, but some striking differences were noted .
 Sarmatians used stirrups and armor, armor, lances, and long swords in contrast to the light equipment of the Scythians . The two peoples fought as cavalry .
 Russia's rulers apparently had little difficulty adapting themselves to their new position as rulers of southern Russia . What is more important is that they apparently had . little difficulty in adapting themselves . to their . new position .
 The famous Greek geographer Strabo, writing, in the first century A.D., mentions this continuity . The great east-west trade route through the southern Russian steppe remained open under the Sarmatians .
 The Sarmatians were divided into several tribes of which the Alans, it would seem, led in numbers and power . The Alans were the most powerful tribes in the world, leading in numbers .
 The Ossetians of today, a people living in the central Caucasus, are direct descendants of the Alans . The Alans were originally Alans, who lived in the Caucasus . Ossetian descendants of today's descendants are the people of the Caucasus region .
 Graeco-Iranian culture developed on the northern shore of the Black Sea and in the Russian steppe . It was during the Scytho-Sarmatian period that the Graeces-Iranians culture developed .
 The Iranian element was represented in the first place by the Scythians and the Sarmatians themselves . The Scythian and Sarman were the first to be represented in first place .
 They established large and lasting military states which provided the basic pattern of political organization for the area . They established long-lasting military states .
 They brought with them their languages, their customs, their religion emphasizing war, and their original style in decorative art known as the Scythian animal style . The Scythians are known for their vigorous and varied art and craftsmanship, especially in metalwork .
 The enormously rich Greek civilization came to the area primarily through Greek colonies . Greek colonies were important to the region's civilization .
 These colonies began as fishing enterprises and grew into major commercial centers . The colonies are now thriving and thriving communities .
 Olbia, Chersonesus, Tanais and Panticapaeum were founded in the middle of the seventh century B.c. They included the already mentioned Olbia and the Strait of Kerch .
 The Greeks engaged in varied trade, but especially significant was the importation of southern Russian grain into the Hellenic world . The Greeks brought the Russian grain from southern Russia into their world .
 The settlements near the Strait of Kerch, enjoying a Scythian gold reindeer, sixth century B.c.c., were Scythians . The settlements are thought to have been in the area since the sixth century BC .
 Animal imagery was very strong in Scythian art and likely in their religion . The Scythians used animal imagery in their artworks .
 The kingdom as well as other Greek centers in southern Russia fell in the first century before Christ . It fell under the sway of Mithridates the Great of Pontus and after his ultimate defeat by the Romans, of Rome .
 Some former Greek colonies on the northern shore of the Black Sea had a revival as outposts of the Byzantine Empire . Chersonesus was one of the most important outposts in the Roman Empire . Even after the Empire's collapse, some former colonies had another revival .
 Iranians and Greeks lived and worked side-by-side for centuries . The Iranians and the Greeks worked and lived together .
 It has been noted that the Scythians and the Sarmatians made no sustained effort to destroy Greek colonies in southern Russia . Instead, they maintained vigorous trade relations with them .
 Intermarriage, Hellenization of Iranians, and Iranization of Greeks proceeded apace . Intermarriage between Greeks and Iranians continued apace. Intermarriage was a major factor in the development of Iran .
 The resulting cultural and at times political synthesis was such that the two elements became inextricably intertwined . It was a cultural and political synthesis such that it became intertwined .
 A loosely knit confederation of cities and tribes in its beginning, it became gradually a political body of dual nature . A loosely-knit confederation, it has gradually become a body of political dual nature.
 GraecoIranian culture in southern Russia was a major part of the ancient culture . The Hermitage and Hermetage Museum in Moscow is a museum dedicated to the region .
 The Sarmatian rule in the steppe north of the Black Sea was shattered by the Goths . The Goths were the first to break Sarm at the time of the Sarmate .
 These Germanic invaders came from the north, originally from the Baltic area, reaching out in a southeasterly direction . The invaders were originally Germanic from the northern Baltic area .
 In southern Russia they split into the Visigoths and Ostrogoths . The latter eventually established under Hermanric a great state stretching from the Black Sea to the Baltic .
 Gothic period in Russia ended abruptly with the appearance of new intruders from Asia, the Huns . Gothic period was usually from p.d. to A.D. 370 . Huns were the first to arrive in Russia in the Gothic period .
 Goths proved themselves to be fine soldiers and sailors, but their general cultural level lagged considerably behind the culture of southern Russia . The Goths had little to contribute to Russia's culture .
 Huns, who descended upon the Goths around A.D. 370, came in a mass migration by the classic steppe road from Central Asia to southern Russia . Huns came in in a massive migration from central Asia to central Russia .
 Huns were a Turkic-speaking people supported by large Mongol and Ugrian contingents . A remarkably mixed group when they appeared in European history, the Huns are supported by Mongol, Ugrian and Turkic people .
 Later, as they swept into central and even western Europe, they also brought with them different Germanic and Iranian elements which they had overwhelmed and picked up on the way .
 Huns played a key role in the so-called period of great migrations in Europe . Huns were one of the most primitive peoples to come to Russia .
 Even after their defeat in the battle of Chalons, deep in France, in 451, they invaded Italy . Tradition says they only spared Rome only because of the influence of Pope Leo I on their leader, Attila .
 Its successors included the large horde of the Bulgars and the smaller ones of the Utigurs and the Kutrigurs . Its successors were the larger and smaller groups of the Ugar and Kutrigur .
 The next human wave to break into southern Russia consisted again of an Asian, Mongoland Turkic-speaking, and relatively primitive people, the Avars . The Avars were the first to enter southern Russia from Asia .
 Their invasion is datedp.8, and their state lasted for about a century in Russia and for over two and a half centuries altogether . At the end of which time it dissolved rapidly and virtually without trace, at the end it dissolved .
 At the height of their power, the Avars ruled the entire area from eastern Russia to the Danubian plain . The Avars had their capital and where they remained after they had lost control in Russia .
 Avar armies threatened Byzantium, and they also waged major, although unsuccessful, wars against Charlemagne and his empire . Avar forces threatened Byzantine Empire, but were unsuccessful .
 The Utigurs and the Kutrigurs retrenched to the lands along the Sea of Azov and the mouth of the Don . The Kutrigur and the Utigur were the first to leave the region .
 The Khazars were still another Turkic-speaking people from Asia . Their historical role proved to be quite different from that of the Huns or of the Avars .
 To begin with, they fought bitter wars against the Arabs and served as a bulwark against the spread of Islam into Europe . They fought bitter battles against the Arab world and fought to protect themselves from the spread .
 When their own state assumed form in southeastern European Russia, it became notable for its commerce, international connections, and tolerance and enlightenment of its laws .
 The Khazars promoted the building of towns such as Samandar, Sarkil, and certain others . Although a semi-nomadic people themselves, the Khazar people themselves were the people of the region .
 The location at the crossroads of two continents proved to be of fundamental importance for the Khazar economy . The location of Khazar trade routes proved important for Khazar traders .
 Khazar revenue came from commercial imposts and tribute . The tribute increased as the Khazar rule expanded westward on the Russian plain .
 Pagans, Muslims, Christians, and Jews mingled in Khazaria, where all enjoyed considerable freedom and autonomy to live under their own laws .
 In the eighth and ninth centuries the Khazars themselves embraced Judaism, or at least their ruler, who bore the title of khagan, and the upper class did . This adds another exceptional chapter to their unusual history .
 The development of Khazaria, with its close links to the Arabic and Byzantine worlds, as well as to some other civilizations, well represents one line of political, economic, and cultural evolution on the great Russian plain .
 While the Khazars were outstanding in commercial development, varied commercial intercourse on a large scale also grew farther north, in the country of the Volga Bulgars . It may be added that while the . Khazar was outstanding in . commercial development .
 The East Slavs Cultures on the northern shore of the Black Sea and in the southern steppe form an essential part of the background of Kievan Rus . Cultures from the neolithic period to the time of the Khazars, form an important part of  Kie
 Rus or Russians were not Scythians, Greeks, or Khazars, much as they might have been influenced in one way or another by these and other predecessors and neighbors . Yet it is true too that the people of the Kievan state who came to be known as the
 The term itself is linguistic, as our better classifications of ancient peoples usually are . Ancient peoples are linguistic, and the term is linguistic .
 Great Russian, often called simply Russian; Ukrainian; and White Russian or Belorussian . Great Russian or Ukrainian; or White Russian . Great or Ukrainian .
 Other branches of the Slavic languages are the West Slavic, including Polish and Czech . South Slavic is represented, for instance, by Bulgarian, Croatian, and Serbian . Other branches are the South Slavs, and West Slavs .
 Slavic languages form a subdivision of the Indo-European language family that includes most of the tongues spoken today in Europe and some used in Asia . The Slavic language family includes the languages used in Europe, Asia and the rest of the world .
 Languages are organically and intrinsically related within the same subfamily . Languages are also intrinsically related to each other in the subfamily and within the family .
 No fundamental connection has been established between languages in different families, for example, Indo-European and the Ural-Altaic . By contrast, no fundamental connection, as distinct from chance borrowing, has been firmly established .
 Scholars have postulated an original language and homeland for each family, such as for all Indo-European peoples . Later languages and homelands for different linguistic subfamilies before further separation and differentiation .
 Slavs have been assigned a common homeland in the general area of the Vistula and the northern slopes of the Carpathians . Within the framework of this theory, the Slavs are usually assigned a shared homeland .
 The split has been dated, by Alexei Shakhmatov and others, in the sixth century A.D., and the settlement by the East Slavs of the great plain of European Russia in the seventh, the eighth and the ninth .
 It should be emphasized that in relying on original languages and their homelands, one is dealing with languages, not races, not race .
 The categories listed here are all linguistic, not racial, and do not necessarily correspond to any physical traits . The categories are linguistic and not racial .
 Intermarriage, conquest, imitation, as well as some other factors, have repeatedly changed the number and composition of those speaking a given language . The number of people speaking a language has also changed in the past .
 At present few specialists speak with any confidence about the historical homeland of the Indo-Europeans . Some reject it RUSSIA BEFORE THE RUSSIANS 17 even as a theoretical concept .
 The Slavic homeland has also been thoroughly questioned in Russia's history . More important for students of Russian history, the Slavs have also been questioned .
 The revaluation has been largely instigated by discoveries of the presence of the Slavs at a much earlier time and over a much larger area in Russia than had been traditionally supposed .
 Some scholars have redefined the original Slavic homeland to include parts of Russia . To meet new evidence, some scholars redefined it as Russia .
 Others have postulated an earlier dispersal of the Slavs, some suggesting that it proceeded in several waves to explain both their ancient presence on the Russian plain and their later migration .
 Recent work concerning Slavic prehistory has produced many new facts, it has lacked a convincing general theory to replace that which has been found wanting .
 The first extant written references to the Slavs belong to the classical writers early in our era, including Pliny the Elder and Tacitus . The first known reference to Slavs belongs to the writers of the classical period .
 Later accounts include those of the sixth century produced by the Byzantine historian Procopius and the Gothic Jordanes . Important later accounts of the 6th century are produced by Procopious and Procius .
 The terms most frequently used to designate the Slavs were ”Venedi” and “Antes,” with the latter coming to mean the East Slavs . ‘Antes’ has also been given other interpretations, such as pre-Slavic
 Slavic settlements in parts of Russia, notably in the Don area, date at least from the middle of the first millennium B.c. c.c., say archaeologists . Soviet archaeologists insist that Slavic settlement dates back to middle of first millennium .
 Slavs are thought to have been a significant part of the population of southern and central Russia from the time of the Scythians . It is now assumed by some historians that the Slavs composed a . significant part, perhaps the bulk of the . population .
 Certain East Slavic tribes were paying tribute to the Khazars at the dawn of Kievan history . It is known that the East Slavs fought against the Goths, were swept westward with the Huns and were conquered by the Avars .
 At that time, the East Slavs were divided into twelve tribes located on the broad expanses of the Russian plain, from the Black Sea, the Danube, and the Carpathian Mountains, across Ukraine, and beyond, northward to the Novgorod territory .
 Finnic elements scattered throughout northern and eastern Russia and Lithuanian tribes to the west . Their neighbors included, along with some of the peoples already mentioned .
 East Slavic economy, society, and culture had already experienced a considerable development . East Slavs economy and culture were already experiencing a considerable change .
 Other important occupations included fishing, hunting, apiculture, cattle raising, weaving, and pottery making .
 Novgorod, Smolensk, and Kiev, belonging to the tribe of the Poliane, were to have long and important histories . They possessed a remarkable number of towns, some of which, some, such . some, some . such . such a town such as Nov
 The origins of the first state in Russian history, that of Kievan Rus, are exceedingly complex and controversial . Russia's first state is the country's oldest and most populous region, Kieva Rus .
 Much of the early history exists in the foggy boundary zone between myth, legend, and verifiable fact . Much of this early history is in a realm of myth and legend, but not fact .
 The Primary Chronicle is known as The Tale of the Years of Time . It is based on a combination of textual sources from Latin, Byzantine, Islamic, and Slavic .
 Compiled by Kievan monks at the turn of the eleventh and twelfth centuries . Source is rich and colorful in narrative detail but not restrained by modern notions of historical evidence .
 Even the dates of events, even their chronological order, are not all certain . Even the events are not always certain, and even their dates are not .
 A close reading of the text would suggest, establishing a certain dynastic and territorial legitimacy for the ruling dynasty, creating a type of national history, and laying out ideal models for politics, society, and religion . More to the point, it was written from a distinct point of view and
 Modern students of the subject should avoid cruder mistakes and oversimplifications of the past . Modern students can by no means produce all the answers, but should at least be able to avoid the cruder errors .
 The first comprehensive effort to explain the appearance of the Kievan state was made in the eighteenth century in terms of the socalled Norman theory . Norman theory was based on socalled Norman theory .
 As formulated by Gottlieb Bayer, August Ludwig von Schlézer, and others, this view stressed the role of the Vikings from Scandinavia in giving Russia government, cohesion, and, in large part, even culture .
 Norman period of Russian history was postulated as foundation for its subsequent evolution . Norman period was thus postulated to be foundation for subsequent evolution of Russian culture .
 Other specialists, however, opposed it virtually from the very beginning, offering instead a dazzling variety of possibilities . Other specialists say it offers instead of a dazzling array of possibilities.
 In estimating the value of the Norman theory it is important to appreciate its drastic limitations in the field of culture . The Norman theory has a drastic limitation in the study of culture.
 The original assertion of the Norman influence on Russia was made before the early history of southern Russia, outlined in the preceding chapter, had been discovered . The Norman influence in southern Russia was not discovered until after the discovery was made .
 With our knowledge of that history there is no need to bring in the Norsemen to account for Kievan society and culture . With our present knowledge of the history, we should not have brought in Norsemen, says author .
 Scandinavia itself, located in the far north, lay at that time much farther from cultural centers and crosscurrents than did the valley of the Dnieper . What is more important to Scandinavia is that it is located far from the cultural center of the valley .
 Once the Kievan state emerged, its culture developed more richly and rapidly than that of its northern neighbor . Whether we consider written literature and written law or coin stamping, we have to register their appearance in Kievans Rus .
 Detailed investigations of Scandinavian elements in Russian culture serve to emphasize their relative insignificance . Scandinavian elements are found in Scandinavian culture in Russia .
 Norman words in the Russian language, formerly supposed to be numerous, number actually only six or seven . Norman words are thought to be a number of words in Russian language .
 Old Russian terms pertaining to navigation were often Greek, those dealing with trade, Asian or native Slavic, but not Scandinavian . The terms were often used in reference to trade, trade and navigation .
 Written literature in Kiev preceded written literature in Scandinavia . It experienced clear Byzantine and Bulgarian influences rather than Nordic influences .
 Perun, the god of thunder, was described as the supreme divinity of the Antes by Procopius in the sixth century . A linguistic analysis of the names of East Slavic gods reveals a variety of cultural connections, but none of them with Scandinavia . Perun is
 Norman cultural influences on the organization of the Kievan court or on Russian dress tend to be vague and inconclusive, especially when compared to the massive impact of Byzantium and the tangible effects of some eastern cultures .
 The importance of Scandinavian culture for Russian culture no longer represents a major historical issue . But the role of the Normans in the establishment of the Kievan state itself is on stronger ground, though remaining controversial .
 The question of the origin of the Kievan state is very closely connected with a group, tribe, or people known as the Rus, and it is also from the Rus that we derive the later name of the Russians .
 Almost everything connected with the Rus has become a subject of major controversy in Russian historiography . Almost everything in the history of the Rus have become a major controversy .
 Varangians were known as Russes, just as some are called Swedes, and others Normans, Angles, and Goths . They accordingly went overseas to the Varangian Russes . Some of them were also known as Normans and Angles .
 The Chuds, the Slavs and the Krivichians then said to the people of Rus, “Our whole land is great and rich, but there is no order in it.” The Chud, Slavs, and the . Slavs then said, �
 Three brothers, with their kinsfolk, took with them all the Russes and migrated to Russia . They thus selected three brothers with their kinfolk, who left Russia .
 The oldest, Rurik, located himself in Novgorod; the second, Sineus, in Byeloozero; and the third, Truvor, in Izborsk . Truvor was found in the Russian city of Truvor; Rurk was found
 The district of Novgorod became known as the land of the Rus . On account of these Varangians, the district became known for its inhabitants .
 The proponents of the Norman theory accepted the Chronicle verbatim, with the understanding that the Rus were a Scandinavian tribe or group, and proceeded to identify the Rus-Ros-Rhos of other sources with the Scandinavians .
 A group called Rus could not be found in Scandinavia itself and were utterly unknown in the West . The group was utterly unknown to the West and could not find Scandinavia .
 Rus became identified with the Kievan state, and the very name came to designate the southern Russian state as distinct from the north, Novgorod included .
 Primary Chronicle itself came to be suspected and underwent a searching criticism . Finally, the primary Chronicle itself itself was suspected .
 Supporters of the Norman view set out to find the Scandinavian origin of the name Rus . Rus Rus is the name of the Slavic word Rus .
 From Schlézer to the present, the search has had mixed success at best . Their search, from the time to the time, has had a mixed success .
 The deduction of Rus from the Finnish word for the Swedes, Ruotsi, developed by Vilhelm Thomsen and upheld by Adolph Stender-Petersen and others, seems linguistically acceptable, but it has been criticized as extremely complicated and unlikely .
 The Bertinian Annals is a strong piece of evidence for Scandinavian influence . Recent historians such as Jonathan Shepard have argued that the Annals were influenced by Scandinavia .
 The odd usage of the title ‘khagan’ might suggest Khazar rather than Norman influence . Other evidence suggests Scandinavian rulers might have adopted the title to bolster their power as they moved .
 We are not entirely satisfied with it either in general or in this particular instance. Cambridge, Mass, 1930. We are happy with it, but we are not satisfied with the result .
 A slight change in the original chronology also enabled these specialists to regard as Scandinavian the Rus who staged an attack on Constantinople inp.p. and who were described on that occasion by Patriarch Photius .
 In the tenth century Bishop Liutprand of Cremona referred to the Rusios in his description of the neighbors of the Byzantine Empire . The Rusios were the neighbors to the Byzantine empire .
 A controversy still continues as to whether Liutprand described his Rusios as Normans or merely as a northern people . A controversy continues to be over whether the Rusios were Normans .
 The “Russian” names, or at least most of them, can best be explained from Scandinavian languages .
 Supporters of the Norman theory point to Scandinavian names of the first Russian princes and of many of their followers listed in the treaties between Kievan Rus and Byzantine .
 Their opponents challenged their derivation of some of the names . They stressed the treaties were written in Greek and in Slavic and that the Rus swore by Slavic gods .
 Certain Arabic authors also mention and sometimes discuss and describe the Rus, but their statements have also been variously interpreted by different scholars .
 In general the Rus of the Arabic writers are a numerous people rather than a Viking detachment, “a tribe of the Slavs” according to IbnKhurdadhbih . In general, the Rus is a numerous and numerous people .
 The contrast may refer to the difference between the Kievan Slavs and other Slavs to the north . The contrast, however, may refer simply to the differences between the two .
 The Rus known to the Arabs lived most probably somewhere in southern Russia . It is thought to have lived somewhere in Russia .
 Arabic writers refer primarily to the 9th century . Relations of the Rus with the East at that time suggest an acquaintance of long standing .
 Other evidence, it has been argued, also points to an early existence of the Rus in southern Russia .
 The Rus, reportedly, attacked Surozh in the Crimea early in the ninth century and Amastris on the southern shore of the Black Sea betweenp. and 842 . To mention only some of the disputed issues,
 Vernadsky derives the name of Rus from the Alanic tribe of the Roxolans . The name Rus means "Rus" and "Roxolans" in Russian .
 Other scholars have turned to topographic terms, ranging from ancient word for Volga, Rha, to Slavic names for different rivers .
 An ingenious compromise hypothesis postulates both a Scandinavian and a southern derivation of Rus-Ros and the merger of the two . The hypothesis is based on both Scandinavian and southern derivations .
 The Primary Chronicle is a central source for the Norman theory . It has been thoroughly analyzed and criticized by Shakhmatov and other specialists . The primary Chronicle has been criticized and analyzed .
 This criticism threw new light on the obvious inadequacies of its narrative and revealed further failings in it . This criticism throws new light into the story .
 Oleg's capture of Kiev in the name of Riurik’s son Igor in A.D. 882, the starting point of Kievan history, also raised many issues . The Chronicle: Oleg captured Kiev in 882 in name of the son of Ri
 Igor could hardly have been Riurik’s son, due to considerations of age, and that no Kievan sources anterior to the Primary Chronicle, that is, until the early twelfth century, knew of Riarik, tracing instead the ancestry of the princes only to
 The Chronicle as a whole is no longer regarded as a naive factual narrative . Moreover, as we have noted, the Chronicle as well as the Chronicle .
 The Chronicle remains our best source concerning the origin of the Russian state, and that its story, although incorrect in many details, does on the whole faithfully reflect real events . On the other hand, proponents of the Norman theory argue .
 Norman theory can no longer be held in anything like its original scope . To sum up, the Norman theory is no longer held in an original scope. Norman theory no longer holds in the original scope of its origin .
 Most significantly, there is no reason to assert a fundamental Scandinavian influence on Kievan culture . Most notably, there are no reasons to assert Scandinavian influence, says author .
 Supporters of the theory stand on a much firmer ground when they rely on archaeological, philological, and other evidence to substantiate the presence of the Normans in Russia in the ninth century .
 Only later in the century would the seat of this growing state shift to the Dnieper town of Kiev . The seat of the state would later shift to Kiev .
 The names of the first princes and of many of their followers in the treaties with Byzantium, along with material cultural evidence from archaeological sites, convince the majority of scholars today that the first Russian dynasty was Scandinavian .
 Historian Omeljan Pritsak rejects Normanist and Anti-Normanist positions as too simple . He favors an interpretation of the “origins of Rus” asa “multiethnic and multilingual” social and economic entity involving Baltic, Mediterranean
 It remains dangerous to interpret the role of the Vikings on the Russian plain by analogy with their much better known activities in Normandy or in Sicily .
 Structure of political authority began to emerge in Russia in the ninth century, whether through internal evolution, outside intervention, or some combination of the two . In any case, it is clear that structures of Russian political authority emerged in the nine century .
 The political and military locus of the Rus shifted toward the middle Dnieper, at which point we can begin to speak of the beginnings of a Kievan state and society . Toward the end of the century, probably because of the lure of trade with Byzantium,
 Kievan political history can be divided into three periods, though the boundaries are not precise . The first line of an EPIC POEM is the opening line of a poem .
 Kievan princes built up their domain into a major European state with wide regional ambitions . They exploited the position of Kiev on the famous road “from the Varangians to the Greeks’’
 This was the period of Kiev’s greatest development, prosperity, stability, and success, says historian . ‘This was the time of Kiev's greatest development and prosperity,’ he says .
 The third and last period of Kievan history was a history of decline and fall, though the precise dates are debated . The precise dates of this period are debated, but it is thought to have occurred in the early 1900s .
 Some scholars argue that the decline began with the passing of Iaroslav the Wise in 1054 . Some scholars say the decline of the kingdom began in 1055 . Some argue that it began after the passing .
 There is little consensus about the precise point at which foreign invasions, civil wars, and the diminution in the significance of the city of Kiev brought this era to a close .
 The history of Russia is one of many separate histories of Slavic peoples in the region that would later be subsumed by an expanding Muscovite state . The region would later become known as Russia .
 Use of the term ‘Rus’ is also favored for emphasizing continuity with the history that preceded the establishment of a capital in Kiev . The use of “Rus” also favored is also to emphasize continuity with history .
 Kiev was an East Slavic settlement probably ruled by the Khazars in the ninth century . The city of Kiev was probably ruled in the 9th century . Kiev was the birthplace of the Kievan State .
 A Varangian named Oleg occupied Kiev in 882, establishing it as the new capital, thus enabling closer connections with the important Byzantine markets . According to the Primary Chronicle, Oleg Oleg established Kiev as a new capital . Oleg's occupation enabled closer connections to the important
 Since Oleg was not in the princely succession, he reigned in the name of Riurik’s infant son Igor . Igor would take the throne after Oleg’�s death in 913 . Oleg died in 914 .
 We can identify Oleg and Igor as historical figures, as opposed to largely legendary rulers like Riurik, but not unambiguously . Oleg, Igor, and Igor are historical figures .
 Oleg was a key ruler in the early development and expansion of the Russian state . What we do know is that he was key to the development of the state .
 Oleg spread his rule from the territory of the Poliane to the areas of several neighboring East Slavic tribes . Assisted by his retainers, the druzhina, the . Druzhina was Oleg's mainstay .
 Some record of bitter opposition of the Drevliane to this expansion has come down to our time . Certain other tribes, it would seem, submitted with less struggle. Some other tribes .
 Other tribes might have acted simply as associates of Oleg and Igor in their various enterprises, without recognizing the supreme authority of Kiev . Still other tribes may have acted as associates or associates of Igor and Oleg .
 Russian chronicles exaggerate Oleg’s success and tell, among other things, how he nailed his shield to the gates of Constantinople .
 Byzantine sources are strangely silent on the subject of Oleg’s campaign . Byzantine sources remain silent on Oleg's campaign .
 Oleg, the semi-legendary Olegi, is a fully historical person . Our knowledge of him comes from Greek and Latin, as well as Russian sources, he says . He stands out, by contrast, as a well historical person.
 Igor had to fight the Drevliane as well as to maintain and spread Kievan authority in other East Slavic lands . Igor's first battle was to defeat the Drevlian and spread the Kievans' authority in East Slavs .
 Each new prince was forced to repeat in large part the work of his predecessor . That authority remained rather precarious, so that each new prince had to repeat his predecessor's work of the previous .
 The Greek fire was an incendiary compound projected through copper pipes by Byzantine sailors to set on fire the ships of their opponents . The war was finally terminated by the treaty of 944, the provisions of which the provisions were .
 The document was written in 17th century . It dealt with the sojourn of the Rus in Constantinople, trade with its inhabitants and relations between the two states in general .
 War was meant to protect and enhance these connections, not to alienate the Greeks . Connections with Byzantium were highly valued, especially as a source of trade . War was intended to protect these connections and not alienate them .
 The allure of the “Byzantine connection, as historians have called it, likely motivated the Rus leaders to move their center to Kiev . The Rus leaders would shape much subsequent foreign policy .
 At the same time, inhabitants of the steppe continued to threaten the young Kievan state . The steppe was a major threat to the young state .
 The Khazar kingdom remained strong and the Kievan rulers were moving in on their domains . The Kievans were moving into their domains, leading to repeated armed conflicts .
 Kiev was also threatened by semi-nomadic tribes that pressed westward . Khazaria was a stabilized competitive force, but was not stable .
 The Magyars were a nomadic horde speaking a Finno-Ugrian language and associated for a long time with the Khazar state . They moved from the southern Russian steppe to enter the Pannonian plain at the end of the ninth century .
 Turkic Pechenegs or Patzinaks began to carry out constant assaults on the Kievan state in the second half of the tenth century, after the decline of the Khazars . But they were replaced and indeed in part pushed out of southern Russia by the next
 Igor’s sudden death at the hands of the Drevliane left his widow Olga in charge of the Kievan state, for their son Sviatoslav was still a boy . Olga was still in charge when her husband died .
 Her visit helped strengthen political and commercial relations between Rus and Byzantium . Her visit also helped strengthen diplomatic relations between the two countries .
 Russian history has given Russian history a new center on the Danube . It might then be writing a history of a different Danubian Rus with many consequences .
 Sviatoslav’s daring campaigns and designs left their imprint all the way from Constantinople to the Volga and the Caspian Sea . Even with their ultimate failure, Sviatsov's daring campaigns were left behind their imprint .
 Sviatoslavoslavoslav was a classic warrior-prince, simple, severe, indefatigable, brave, brave . He shared with his men uncounted hardships as well as continuous battles . He was a simple and severe warrior, simple and strong leader .
 Sviatoslav’s appearance, dress, and manner of life all remind us of the steppe, says the author of the novel "Sviatoslav's appearance"
 Khazar state lasted for another half century, but never recovered from these staggering blows . Khazar State was devastated by the fall of the Khazar empire .
 His campaign completed the unification of the East Slavs around Kiev, attaching various groups to the southeast and bringing the entire flow of the Volga into the Caspian Sea trade route .
 The Khazars defeated the Pechenegs, but weakened their effectiveness as a buffer against other eastern peoples . The victory over the Khazar had its downside: it weakened decisively their effectiveness .
 In 968, the Byzantine emperor Nicephorus Phocas invited Sviatoslav to raid Bulgaria, offering payment in gold . The Byzantine emperor offered payment for the raid in gold in 968 .
 Sviatoslav accepted and led a large army into the Balkans to attack the Bulgarian state in the Danubian valley . He led the army to attack Bulgaria in the area .
 The Russians captured the capital of Kiev in 969, capturing the capital and taking prisoner their ruler Boris Boris . The Russians had to interrupt the campaign to defeat the Pechenegs, who in the absence of Sviatoslav and his troops had besieged Kiev .
 Sviatoslav, who came from the Volga to the Danubian plain, began to imagine a vast Russian commonwealth . He assigned his sons to various cities—with its ruling center on the Danube .
 Russians impressed by fertility of the region but also by its strategic economic location . Russians were impressed by the fertility and the economic potential of the area .
 One can only speculate on the possible implications of such a change of capital for Russian history . The Russian state of power is currently under control of the Kremlin .
 As Sviatoslav would not leave the Balkans, a bitter and fiercely fought war ensued in the spring of 971 . The war ended in the death of Sviatsovoslav, who died in 971.
 By mid-summer, Sviatoslav was reduced to making peace with Byzantium on condition of abandoning the Balkans, as well as the Crimea, and promising not to challenge the Byzantine Empire in the future . The peace deal was made with condition of leaving the Balkans and Crimea,
 Russia retained its right to continue trade in Constantinople . On the other hand, Russia retained the right to trade in the city .
 Sviatoslav was intercepted and killed by the Pechenegs on his way home, with a small retinue, in 17th century .
 Tradition has it that the Pecheneg khan had a gold-clad drinking cup made out of Sviatoslav’s skull . The cup is believed to have been made from the skull of Svatoslavoslav .
 Byzantine sources indicate that Sviatoslav fought at the head of 60,000 troops, of whom 22,000 remained when peace was concluded . Svatoslav fought in the Balkan wars .
 Sviatoslav, constantly away with the army, entrusted the administration of the Kiev area to his eldest son Iaropolk . He dispatched the second son Oleg to govern the territory of the Drevliane, and sent the third, the young Vladimir, with an older relative
 Iaropolk had the upper hand, but Oleg perishing in the struggle and Vladimir escaping abroad . Vladimir escaped abroad . Oleg died in the battle .
 In two years Vladimir returned and with foreign mercenaries and local support defeated Iaropolk . But in two years he returned and defeated and killed Iarobolk .
 Vladimir, who reigned until 1015, continued on the path set by his predecessors but with some very important advances . Vladimir's reign was the first of its kind in Kiev .
 First, he continued the political and military policies of establishing order and fealty to the Kievan state among the East Slavs, which had been badly shaken during the years of civil war . Second, he expanded and defended Russian territory .
 He recovered Galician towns from Poland and subdued the warlike Baltic tribe of the Iatviags . He also extended his domain in that area to the Baltic Sea .
 Vladimir also made a major and generally successful effort to contain the Pechenegs . Vladimir also tried to stop the spread of violence in his homeland .
 He built fortresses and towns, brought settlers into the frontier districts, and pushed the steppe border to two days, rather than a single day, of travel time from Kiev . He managed to push the steppep border to a two-day travel time .
 First, he established a more stable dynastic principle for ruling Kievan Rus, which would last for the next half a millennium . Second, he set up a stable dynasty for the rest of the century .
 The Riurikid family managed to establish itself as the only source of politically legitimate rule in Russia . Those who could claim descent from the legendary Riurik’s recognized descendents are recognized .
 Vladimir's adoption of Christianity not only for himself but also for the Rus state and society, had long lasting effects . Vladimir's adopted Christianity had a long lasting effect on society and society .
 Vladimir's adoption of Christianity was a political act, designed to integrate diverse peoples into a single society and to help him legitimize his own reign and that of his dynasty . The church allied itself with secular political authority, historians conclude .
 Christianization also facilitated further strengthening of the bonds with Byzantium . Christianization helped further strengthening the bond between the two nations .
 The significance of this choice long outlasted the specific political and cultural circumstances that led to the step . However, the significance of the choice long outlived the specific circumstances that made it possible .
 There may even have been a Rus diocese of the Byzantine Church as early as 867, although not all scholars agree on this . Kiev itself experienced Christian influences before the time of Vladimir .
 A Christian church existed in Kiev in the reign of Igor, and we know that Olga, Vladimir’s grandmother, became a Christian . Olga's brother Iaropolk has also been described as favorably inclined to Christianity .
 Olga’s conversion did not affect the pagan faith of her subjects . Kievan Rus experienced a strong pagan revival in the first part of the reign of Vladimir .
 Vladimir’s military aid to Emperor Vasilii II of Byzantium, the siege and capture by the Rus of the Byzantine outpost of Chersonesus in the Crimea, and Vladimir's marriage to Anne, the Byzantine emperor's sister . Vladimir was also involved in the capture
 The conversion of Kievan Rus to Christianity fits into a broad historical pattern . The conversion was a major event in Russia's history .
 At about the same time similar conversions from paganism were taking place among some of the Baltic Slavs, and in Poland, Hungary, Denmark, and Norway .
 Vladimir Putin's decision was a real and extremely important choice, says Vladimir Putin . Vladimir Putin made a very important decision to make the decision, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Rus did lie at cultural crossroads, and it had contacts with many of its neighbors . It had contacts not only with Byzantium and other Christian neighbors but also with the Muslim state of the Volga Bulgars .
 It was consistent with a strong tendency, which we have already often seen, of Rus leaders looking more toward the west than the east . But it was also consistent with the strong tendency to look west than east .
 Vladimir and his associates chose to become the Eastern flank of Christendom rather than an extension into Europe of non-Christian civilizations . Vladimir chose not to become an extension of Christianity into non-Christendom .
 Byzantine culture opened wide the gates for the highly developed Byzantine culture to enter their land . In doing so, the Byzantine culture was allowed to enter the land .
 Kievan literature, art and law, law, manners, and customs experienced a fundamental impact of Byzantium . Byzantine architecture, architecture, art, law and customs were a major influence in Byzantine culture .
 The institution was to play a role similar to that of the Church in other parts of medieval Europe . It was to be used as a political institution .
 Christianity, as already indicated, remained by no means confined to the Church, permeating instead Kievan society and culture . Christianity was not confined to Church, but permeating Kievans society . Christianity remained in the forefront of Christianity's influence in culture .
 In politics too it gave the Kievan prince and state a stronger ideological basis, urging the unity of the country and at the same time emphasizing its links with Byzantium and with the Christian world as a whole .
 Francis Dvornik, Dimitri Obolensky, John Meyendorff, and many other scholars have given us a rich picture of Byzantine heritage and of the Russian borrowing from it .
 Christianity came to Russia from Byzantium, not from Rome, says Russian historian . Christianity came from Byzantine, not Rome, he says .
 The break between the Eastern and the Western Churches occurred only in 1054 . The Russian allegiance to Byzantium determined or helped to determine much of the subsequent history of the country .
 Russia remained outside the Roman Catholic Church, and this in turn deprived Russia of what that Church itself had to offer, and also contributed in a major way to the relative isolation of Russia from the rest of Europe and Latin civilization .
 Russian suspicions of the West led to the tragic enmity between the Russians and the Poles . It helped notably to inspire Russian suspicion of West . Poles and Russians have long been bitter rivals .
 Vladimir’s turn to Constantinople represented the richest and the most rewarding spiritual, cultural, and political choice that he could make at the time . On the other side, one can well argue that one can argue that the choice was the richest choice that Vladimir could make .
 The violence that erupted between Vladimir’s sons at the time of his death in 1015 revealed key weaknesses in the dynastic order Vladimir had established . Vladimir died at the age of 1015 .
 While legitimacy was vested in the Riurikid family as a whole, its distribution among individuals and its structures of hierarchy and succession were not fixed .
 This system was made all the more unstable by the regional power of the princes . The princes' regional power made the system unstable by regional power, it is said .
 Vladimir has given each of his sons a regional base to ensure family control over tribute gathering . Vladimir had given each his sons regional bases to ensure they had control of the gathering .
 Local source of strength and support combined with individual ambition within an ambiguous system of succession to undermine the ideal of orderly dynasticism . Individual ambition within a system of . succession undermines the ideal . of orderly dynasty .
 Sviatopolk was defeated in 1019 by another son, Iaroslav, who resumed the conflict from his base in Novgorod . Initially, the eldest son, Svatopolk, triumphed over several rivals and profited from strong Polish aid .
 Sviatopolk’s traditional appelation in Russian history can be roughly translated as ‘the Damned’ His listed crimes include the assassination of three of his brothers, Sviatoslav, Boris, and Gleb .
 The reign of Prince Iaroslav the Wise was generally acclaimed as the high point of Kievan development and success . It was an age of stable political authority, a unified society, military security, and economic prosperity .
 Jaroslav had to contend with violent challenges to his authority by his brother Mstislav, with whom he was forced to divide the realm by an agreement of 1026 . Jaroslav died in 1026.
 Only after the death of Mstislav in 1036 Iaroslav became the ruler of the entire Kievan state . Only after Mstisav's death of 1036 he became the head of the state . He ruled the entire state from 1036 onwards .
 Viadimir's son Iaroslav was only one of his sons to remain alive and at liberty, namely Iarsov . The Russian state was unified only when one of the sons remained alive and in liberty .
 Iaroslav had to suppress a whole series of local rebellions, ranging from a militant pagan revival in the Suzdal area to the uprisings of various Finnish and Lithuanian tribes . The king had to also suppress a number of other local uprisnings .
 Success in establishing domestic order was matched by successful foreign wars . Sviatopolk fought in 1031 to recover from Poland the southwestern section of its southwestern section .
 The campaign was unsuccessful and proved to be the last in the long sequence of Russian military undertakings against Constantinople . By contrast, the campaign against Byzantium some twelve years later was unsuccessful . The campaign against Constantinople was the last to be unsuccessful .
 At the time of Iaroslav the prestige of the Kievan state stood at its zenith . The state itself stretched from the Baltic to the Black Sea and from the mouth of the Oka River to the Carpathian Mountains .
 Iaroslav obtained the hands of three European princesses for three of his sons . He married his three daughters to the kings of France, Hungary, and Norway . One of his sisters became the wife of the Polish king, another the . wife of a Byzantine prince .
 St. Iaroslav offered asylum to exiled rulers and princes, such as the princes who fled from England and Hungary and St. George . The princes fled from the English and Hungarian and fled from Hungary and Hungary .
 Olaf, the king of Norway, with his son, and his cousin Harold Hardrada . Olaf was the first Norwegian king to hold the throne in Norway .
 It should be added that while the links with the rest of Europe were particularly numerous in the reign of Iaroslav, they were in general a rather common occurrence in Kievan Rus .
 Jaroslavoslav's fame rests more on his actions at home than on foreign relations . Jaroslav's great fame, however, rests more with his actions in foreign relations than his foreign policy .
 His name stands connected with an impressive religious revival and with Kievan law, education, architecture, and art . His name is also connected with law and education .
 Iaroslav is credited with a major role in the dissemination and consolidation of Christianity in Russia . He is believed to have been the founder of the Russian Orthodox Church of Christendism .
 Rus was a province of the patriarchate of Constantinople . There are some uncertainties and debates about the relations between the Russian Church and Byzantium in this period . Rus was one of the most important provinces of the Byzantine Empire .
 The Church in Kiev was headed by a metropolitan, appointed or approved, as a rule, by Byzantium . Local districts were headed by bishops, and local districts were head by bishops .
 The number of monks and parish priests grew in medieval times . Monks were established and churches were established, the numbers of monks grew .
 The spread of bishoprics, monasteries, and local churches into the regions can be seen as a measure of the increasing success of Christianization among the population but also the reach of Kiev’s political power, for the state and the Church spread together . Kiev's political power
 He supported the building of churches and monasteries on a large scale . Most visibly, he supported the construction of churches . Most visible was his support for the construction and maintenance of monasteras .
 From the moment of his sole rule, Jaroslav was determined to transform Kiev, especially through church construction, into a symbol of power and glory unrivaled .
 Iaroslav the Wise has been considered responsible for the first Russian legal code, The Russian Justice . He has also been considered to be an invaluable source for our knowledge of Kievan society .
 He played a significant role in Kievan culture by such measures as his patronage of artists and architects . He established a large school and a library in Kiev .
 Iziaslav, the eldest, received the Kiev and Novgorod areas; Sviatoslav, the second, the area centered on Chernigov; Vsevolod, the third, Pereiaslavl; Viacheslavl, the fourth, Smolensk;
 The princes, apparently, were expected to cooperate and to hold Kievan Rus together . The princes were also expected to hold together .
 The position in Kiev was to move up step by step, with the summit the summit . Moreover, it would seem that when a vacancy occurred, they were to move upwards .
 Iaroslav’s arrangement, based on old clan concepts and relations still present in the ruling family, worked to break the natural link between a prince and his state . It excluded sons from succession in favor of their uncles, their late father's brothers . The arrangement was based
 With a constant increase in the number of princes, precise calculations of appropriate appointments became extremely difficult . Besides, with a constant . increase in . number of . princes, it has also become extremely difficult to calculate the appropriate appointments .
 At their meeting in Liubech in 1097 the princes agreed that the practice of succession from father to son should prevail . In 1097 they agreed to the practice .
 The principle of rotation from brother to brother remained linked to the most important seat of all, that of the Grand Prince in Kiev .
 The reigns of Iziaslav, Sviatoslav, and Vsevolod, the last of whom died in 1093, present a frightening record of virtually constant civil wars that failed to resolve with any degree of permanence .
 At the same time the Kievan state had to face a new major enemy, the Polovtsy, or the Cumans as they are known to Western authors . The Cumans are known as the Crimean Warthaians or the Kharkaans .
 Turkic invaders from Asia had defeated the Pechenegs, pushing them toward the Danube, and had occupied the southeastern steppe . This latest wave of Turkic invasions from Asia was the latest in a long line of invaders .
 Russia attacked Kievan territory for 34 A HISTORY OF RUSSIA the first time in 1061, and after that initial assault became a persistent threat to the security and even existence of the Rus and a constant drain of resources .
 Viadimir Monomakh was a ruler of the Kievan state in the early 1930s . He was one of the most successful monarchs of the time . He ruled the state for more than a century .
 He played a major role in the actual fighting against the Polovtsy, obtaining perhaps his greatest victory over them, in 1111 at Salnitsa, before his elevation to Kievan seat .
 Vladimir Monomakh fought virtually all the time from 1113 until his death in 1125 . As Grand Prince, he fought virtually every single day .
 He waged war in Livonia, Finland, the land of the Volga Bulgars, and the Danubian area, repulsing the Poles and the Hungarians among others .
 Vladimir Monomakh distinguished himself as an effective and indefatigable organizer and administrator . The town of Vladimir in the northeast on the river Kliazma was to become in two generations the seat of the grand prince .
 Vladimir Monomakh was succeeded by his able and energetic son Mstislav and after him by another son, laropolk, who reigned until his death in 1139 .
 Before long the Kievan seat became again the object of bitter contention and civil war . Civil war often followed the classic pattern of a struggle between uncles and nephews .
 Prince Andrew, or Andrei, Bogoliubskii of the northeastern principalities of Rostov and Suzdal, stormed and sacked Kiev in 1169 . After his victory in the civil war he transferred the capital to his favorite city of Vladimir .
 Andrew Bogoliubskii’s action reflected a striking decline in importance of the city on the Dnieper . The action both represented the personal preference of the new grand prince and reflected a . striking decline of the . city .
 Finally, it suffered virtually complete destruction in 1240, at the hands of the Mongols . The Mongols took over the city in 1241 .
 The decline and collapse of Kievan Rus have been interpreted in a number of different ways and ascribed to a variety of factors . The reasons for the collapse and decline have been many different ways to explain .
 Kiev, to the northeast, Smolensk, Riazan, Vladimir-Suzdal, and Novgorod . 35 Kiev, 35 Kiev-area cities, including Kiev, and to the north and northeast, are cities of Russia .
 There was certainly rivalry and conflict as the rulers of these principalities sought to expand their territory and gain succession to the throne in Kiev . These regions were developing their own local interests and strengths .
 Many of these regions established independent relations with neighboring states and peoples, built commercial ties with neighbors and even more distant countries, and enjoyed a richly developing cultural life .
 Soviet historians emphasize the loose nature of the Kievan state and its evolution in the direction of further decentralization and feudalism . One way to describe this is to emphasize the state's loose nature and evolution of the state .
 In this interpretation, the Kievan state represented a federation or association of a number of areas which could be effectively held together only for limited periods of time and by exceptionally able rulers . The state was very far from resembling its modern counterparts, it represented in a sense of a federation .
 Huge distances and poor communications made the issue of centralization especially acute . Huge distances, poor communications meant the issue was especially acute in the United States .
 Russia, as well as Europe in general, evolved toward natural economy, particularism, and feudalism, it is argued . It is argued that Russia and Europe evolved towards natural economy and particularism . Russia's economy evolved toward feudalism and natural economy .
 Russia emerged as an aggregate of ten or twelve separate areas . Therefore, the relatively slender unifying bonds dissolved, and Russia emerged . Russia emerged from the ashes of the Soviet Union .
 We shall return to this view when we discuss the question of feudalism in Russia, and on other occasions, and other occasions .
 The image of a Kievan “golden age” of political stability and unity was partly the invention of chroniclers who sought to idealize the accomplishments of their own prince, especially Iaroslav the Wise . In this light, it is worth keeping in mind the British
 Soviet historians, as well as some other specialists, also pointed to social conflicts as a factor in the decline of Kiev .
 They refer in particular to the gradual enserfment of the peasants by the landlords and to the worsening position of the urban poor, as indicated by events at the time of Viadimir Monomakh . The peasants were enserfed by landlords and their position was worsened by the
 Another essentially economic explanation of the fall of Kievan Rus stresses trade, or rather the destruction of trade . Trade was destroyed by the fall, rather than the fall .
 In its crude form it argues that the Kievan state arose on the great commercial route “from the Varangians to the Greeks,” lived by it, and perished when it was cut .
 In a more limited and generally accepted version, the worsening of the Kievan position in international trade has been presented as one major factor in the decline of Kiev . Kiev's worsening of international trade is one of the main factors in its decline, according to some .
 The city on the Dnieper suffered from the change in trade routes which began in the eleventh century and resulted in the establishment of closer connections between western and central Europe on the one hand and Byzantium and Asia Minor .
 It was adversely affected by the Crusades, and the sacking of Constantinople by the 36 A HISTORY OF RUSSIA Crusaders in 1204, as well as the decline of the Caliphate of Bagdad .
 Smolensk and especially Novgorod profited by the rearrangement of the commercial map of Europe . The rise of Italian and German cities only tended to make Kievan control over them less secure .
 Kiev experienced difficulty in protecting from the steppe peoples the commercial line across the southern steppe to the Black Sea . Kiev experienced tremendous difficulty, and ultimately failed, in protecting the line from steppies .
 In addition to the economic and social analyses, one can turn to the pollitical.com analysis of the social and economic analyses .
 A number of historians have placed much stress on the failure of the Kievan system of government which they consider a major, possibly decisive, cause of the collapse . The collapse of the Rusian government was not merely a reflection of more fundamental economic and social difficulties, rather than merely a
 There is a consensus that the Kievan princely political system did not function well, but there is no agreement as to the exact nature of that system .
 Of the two main interpretations, one considers it simply to be confusion worse confounded and a rule of force without broad agreement on principle . The other gives full credence and weight to the practice of joint clan rule and of brother-to-brother rotation .
 In any case, the system did collapse in constant disputes and endemic internal strife . The system collapsed in any way, but it did not collapse in any case .
 Kievan princes have also been blamed for being too militant and adventurous and often lacking the more solid attributes of rulers .
 On this point it would seem, however, that their qualities in general were well suited to the age of the age. On this . point, however .
 Towns added further complications to princely rule and princely relations . Towns were added to the list of princes and princesses to the princely family . Towns added additional complications to the royal family .
 Towns in Kievan Rus had existed before princely authority appeared . Towns represented, so to speak, a more fundamental level of political organization . Towns were first to exist before princeial authority appeared, and they represented more fundamental .
 As princely disputes increased and princely power declined, towns played a significant role in Kievan politics . Towns played a key role in determining what prince would rule in a given town and area .
 The later evolution of Novgorod represents an extreme case of this Kievan political tendency . Novgorhod represents a 'extreme case' of the 'Kievan-style' of Russian politics, says historian .
 The fall of Kiev can also be explained primarily in terms of outside aggression, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: Economic, social relations, and politics all led to the collapse of the state .
 Kiev had to fight countless exhausting wars on many fronts, but above all in the southeast against the inhabitants of the steppe . For Kiev, the city has fought countless exhausting battles against the people of the Steppe . Kiev was one of the most powerful cities in the world .
 The Pechenegs replaced the Khazars and the Polovtsy, but the fighting continued . The fighting continued between the two sides until the end of the war .
 After the Polovtsy and Kievans virtually knocked each other out, the Mongols came to give the coup de grace . The Mongols gave the Kievans the victory .
 In contrast to the wars of medieval Europe, these wars were waged on a mass scale with tremendous effort and destruction . Medieval Europe was a time of peace and peace, but it was also a period of chaos .
 The bogatyri, the mighty warriors of Kievan Rus, met the invaders head on . It tells of the great warriors of the Kievans, meeting the invaders .
 The bogatyri fought very hard; indeed they split their foes in two with the blows of their swords . They split them in two, says the king .
 Each half would become whole, but then each half would be whole, and the enemies kept pressing in ever-increasing numbers until they finally overwhelmed the Russians . The Russians would never be able to defeat the Soviet Union .
 This spirit permeates, this form marks everything that comes from Russia; such is our song itself, such is its tune . Such is the organization of our Land. Such is our land. This is our country, such as Russia, our Land .
 The decisive factor in the process of feudalization proved to be the emergence of private ownership in land and expropriation of the small farmer . The small farmer was turned into a feudal ‘tenant’
 The traditional view of Kievan economy stresses the role of trade in the country's economy . Trade is a key part of the economy in the region of the country .
 Constantine Porphyrogenitus is an account of the activities of the Rus . It was composed by the tenthcentury Byzantine emperor and scholar Constantine . The document is a classic account of events in Russia .
 Every November, the Kievan princes and their retainers went on a tour of the territories of different tributary Slavic tribes and lived on the fat of those lands during the winter .
 In April, after the ice on the Dnieper had broken, they returned, with the tribute, down the river to Kiev .
 Slavs, subject to the Rus, would fell trees, build boats, and in the spring, when rivers became navigable, take them to Kiev and sell them to the prince and his retinue . In the meantime, Slavs fell trees and built boats and sold them to
 Rus next moved down the Dnieper to Vitichev where they waited for more boats carrying goods from Novgorod, Smolensk, Liubech, Chernigov, and Vyshgorod to join them .
 Finally, the entire expedition proceeded down the Dnieper toward the Black Sea and Constantinople . The expedition was led by the crew of the expedition .
 Kievan Rus, 39, is the name of a Russian explorer who led the Soviet Union in the 1960s and '90s . He was the first person to travel to Russia in the 1930s to join the Russian Revolution . The Soviet Union was founded in 1961 and is now
 The main concern of the prince and his retainers was to gather tribute from subject territories . The prince's main concern was gathering tribute from subjects during the winter .
 The tribute in kind, which the prince obtained in his capacity as ruler, formed the foundation of the commercial undertakings of the Rus . The tribute was in kind of such items as furs, wax, and honey .
 Many merchants from different parts of Kievan Rus with their merchandise joined the princely train to secure protection on the way and support for their interests at the end of the journey . Many other merchants with their goods also joined the train .
 The gathering of tribute, the construction of boats and their sale each spring near Kiev, the organization of the commercial convoy, and finally the expedition itself linked the entire population of the Dnieper basin, and even of Kievan Rus in the large, and constituted the indispensable economic foundation
 With regularity, coins from Byzantium or Bagdad found their way to the banks of the Oka or Volkhov rivers . The Oka is the largest river in Russia, the Volkhova, the largest in Russia .
 Constantine Porphyrogenitus’ account, it is further argued, explains also the foreign policy of the Rus which followed logically from their economic interests . The Rusians' foreign policy, it has been argued, follows logically from the economic interests of their country .
 Kiev rulers in Kiev strove to gain foreign markets and to protect the lifelines of trade leading to those markets . The rulers in Ukraine strove .
 The Kievan state depended above all on the great north-south commercial route “from the Varangians to the Greeks” which formed its main economic and political axis . It perished with the blocking of this route .
 Wars began over attacks on Russian merchants in Constantinople and ended with trade pacts . Typically, wars began over such incidents as attacks on Russians in Constantinople .
 All the Russo-Byzantine treaties which have come down to us exhibit a commercial character . The treaties have been signed by Russia and the U.S. in Russia .
 The provisions dealing with trade are both extremely detailed and juridically highly developed, constituting in fact an engaging chapter in the history of international relations and international law . Furthermore, their provisions .
 Russian commercial interests, it may well be noted, obtained various advantages from these agreements . The agreements were considered in Constantinople not as private enterprise but as trade missions of the allied Kievan court .
 History of Kievan commerce goes, of course, far beyond the significant story of Russo-Byzantine relations .
 Trade routes and activities in southern Russia prior to the formation of the Kievan state . Rostovtzeff and some other specialists treat the subject .
 Attention must also be drawn to the widespread commercial enterprises of the East Slavs themselves long before the time of Oleg, as well as to the fact that at the dawn of Kievan history they already possessed many towns .
 Some Russian weights and measures were borrowed from the east, notably from Mesopotamia, while others came originally from Rome . Some of these weights were originally from the Roman Empire .
 East Slavs established trade relations with their closer neighbors and also with some more remote European countries, like Scandinavia . Similarly, to the west at an early date, they established trade ties with closer neighbors .
 With the flowering of the Kievan state, Russian trade continued to grow, and on an impressive scale . Russia's trade continued on a large scale in the 1920s and 1930s .
 The Russian Justice code was written in the eleventh-century Russian law code . Its complexity and high degree of development find strong reflection in the code's development .
 Traditional estimate of Kievan economy stresses commerce, more recent interpretations emphasize agriculture . More recent interpretations of agriculture emphasizes agriculture .
 Soviet historians carefully delineated the early origin of agriculture in Russia and its great complexity and extent prior to as well as after the establishment of the Kievan state . Soviet historians, in particular, carefully delineate the early origins of agriculture .
 In point of time, agriculture in southern Russia goes back to the Scythian ploughmen and even to a neolithic civilization of the fourth millennium before Christ .
 The past of the East Slavs also testifies to their ancient and fundamental link with agriculture . The East-Slutans have long been linked to agriculture . They have a long history of farming and agriculture .
 linguistic data indicate that from deep antiquity they were acquainted with various kinds of grains, vegetables, and agricultural tools and implements . For example, linguistic data .
 Their pagan religion contained the cults of mother earth and the sun . Their different beliefs and rites connected with the agricultural cycle survived in certain aspects of the worship of the Virgin and of Saints Elijah, George, and Nicholas .
 Archaeological finds demonstrate the great antiquity and pervasiveness of agriculture among the East Slavs . They include metallic agricultural implements and an enormous amount of various grains, often preserved in separate buildings .
 Kievan writings illustrate the central position of agriculture in agriculture in Kieva life .
 Much bread is associated with abundance, while a drought means a calamity . Bread and water represent the basic ration, and much bread is synonymous with abundance . Much bread and water are associated with prosperity .
 It should be noted that the Kievan Rus knew the difference between winter grain and spring grain grain .
 Russian Justice laid heavy penalties for moving field boundaries . The Russian Justice also laid extremely heavy penalties . The penalties include moving boundaries and moving boundaries .
 Tribute and taxes too, while sometimes paid in furs, were more generally connected to the ‘plough’ as the basic unit, which probably referred to a certain amount of cultivated land . The plough was probably the most important unit of land .
 Boris Grekov and other Soviet historians argued that this fundamental role of agriculture in Kievan economy determined the social character of the prince and his druzhina and indeed the class structure of society . The prince's role in agriculture determined his social character as well as the role of his dru
 They emphasized connections of the prince and his retainers with the land, as shown in references to elaborate princely households, the spread of princely and druzhina estates throughout Kievan territory .
 They considered that Kievan Rus was developing into a fully feudal society, in the definition of which they stressed the prevalence of manorial economy . The definition of this society was that of a feudal society .
 The evidence supporting the significance of trade in Kievan Rus and the importance of agriculture supplement, rather than cancel, each other . It can readily be seen that the evidence supporting trade in the region should not cancel each other.
 The interrelationship of the two does present certain difficulties . But the interrelationships between the two do present some difficulties, he says .
 One view holds that the bulk of the population supported itself by agriculture, whereas the prince and the upper class were mainly interested in trade .
 Constantine Porphyrogenitus’ account may be a valid guide for the middle of the tenth century . Other specialists stress the evolution in time, suggesting that, while Constantine’s account is valid, subsequent Kievan development tipped the scales increasingly in favor of agriculture .
 It is mainly in the eleventh and twelfth centuries that we see princes, boyars, and members of their retinues claiming ownership of rural estates . Some scholars date the development of private ownership of land to earlier times .
 Kievan exports, as has already been mentioned in the case of Byzantium, consisted of raw materials, in particular furs, wax, and honey .
 Other items for sale included flax, hemp, tow, burlap, hop, hops, sheepskin, and hides .
 In return, the Kievan Rus purchased wine, silk fabrics, and objects of art from Byzantium, and spices, precious stones, and various fine fabrics from Asia . In exchange, the Rusians purchased wine and fine fabrics .
 Byzantium also supplied naval stores, while Damask blades and superior horses came from the east . Byzantine forces also supplied superior horses and Damask swords .
 From the west the Kievan Rus imported certain manufactured goods, for instance textiles and glassware, as well as some metals and other items, such as Hungarian horses . From the end of the 19th century, the Rusians imported Hungarian horses, textiles, glassware and
 Russian merchants went abroad in many directions and foreign traders came in large numbers to Russia . They established themselves, sometimes as separate communities, in Kiev, Novgorod, Smolensk, Suzdal and other centers .
 The newcomers included Germans, Greeks, Armenians, Jews, Volga Bulgars, merchants from the Caucasus, and representatives of still other nationalities . They included Greeks, Greeks and Armenians .
 Russian traders were often organized in associations similar to Western guilds, not to mention less formal groupings . Russian traders themselves were often organizing in associations like those of the Western trade .
 Financial transactions and commercial activity in general enjoyed a high level of development . Financial transactions, commercial activity were also seen to have increased .
 Internal trade, although less spectacular than foreign commerce, dated from time immemorial and satisfied important needs . Internal trade was also important in the United States' history .
 Kiev, Novgorod, and other leading towns served as main centers, but it also spread widely throughout the land . Kiev was one of the most important cities in Russia .
 Some of this domestic trade stemmed from the division of the country into the steppe and the forest . The grain-producing south and the grain-consuming north were important prerequisites for exchange trade . Some of the trade was based on the division between the north and the south .
 Originally furs were used as currency in the north and cattle in the south . Furs were also used in the northern part of the country .
 Vladimir, Kievan minting began with, particular, silver bars and coins . Vladimir's first coin minting was made in 18th century .
 Foreign money too accumulated in considerable quantities in Kievan Rus . Foreign money also accumulated in Russia in the 1980s .
 In the steppe it acquired an extensive, rather than intensive, character, the peasant cultivating new, good, and easily available land as his old field became less productive . The peasant began to cultivate new land in the steppies as the old field was less productive.
 The trees had to be cut down and the ground prepared for sowing . The process is called podseka . The trees were cut down to prepare for the planting .
 When the soil became exhausted, a new field could be obtained only after further hard work . Moreover, when the soil was exhausted, it could be found after further work .
 Eventually a regular two-field system grew out of the perelog, with the land divided into annually rotated halves . Eventually the land was divided into two-fields, with each half rotated annually .
 East Slavs used a wooden plough as early as the eighth and seventh centuryp. Agricultural implements improved with time .
 Wheat formed the bulk of the produce in the south; rye, also barley and oats, in the north . Wheat, barley, oats, and oats were the main crops in the region .
 With the evolution of the Kievan state, princes, boyars, and monasteries developed large-scale agriculture . With the development of the state, prince and boyars developed large scale agriculture .
 The bulk of the population, the so-called smerdy, were agricultural and rural . Kievan Society is based in the Kievans .
 The majority of Kievan peasants seem to have been free at the dawn of history . The free peasantry remained an important element throughout the evolution of the state of the Kieva state .
 While not under the direct control of a prince or boyar, free peasants paid taxes or tribute . Free peasants were not under direct control, but were under the control of princes or boyars .
 Zakupy were half-free peasants who had fallen into forced labor for a set period when they could not pay back a landlord's loan . Zakupys were half free peasants who were forced to work for a period of time .
 At the bottom of the social pyramid were slaves . Slaves could be entered into by agreeing to work in a wealthy household, by selling oneself into slavery, by marrying a slave, and by birth .
 Kievan society was also known for the great number and significance of towns and urban classes . As we have noted, we have also noted that Kievans society was known for its importance of towns .
 50,000 inhabitants, making the Rus capital comparable to Paris and London in that period . Note the indication of classes who command and classes who labor .
 Novgorod may have had as many as 30,000 residents by the late twelfth century . The city may have been home to up to 30,500 residents . The population is thought to have peaked in the early 12th century .
 At the top of urban society, the prince and the ever-increasing princely family with its numerous branches, followed by the prince’s military retainers, the druzhina . The prince is one of the most powerful men in Russia, and his family is the most prominent
 The druzhina, along with the local aristocracy, formed the upper class of the country, known in the Russian Justice and other documents of the time as the muzhi . The latter, divided according to their importance and function, functioned into the senior and the junior druzh
 With the evolution of the Kievan state, the prince's retainers, comprised of various ethnic groups, and the local Slavic nobility fused into a single group . The boyars were to play an important role in Russian history under the name of the boyars .
 The majority of the urban population were liudi (Russian for “people”), mainly merchants, artisans, and laborers, and also differentiated into upper and lower .
 Because of the proliferation of towns and the urban economy in Kievan Rus, this middle class had considerable relative weight, more than its counterparts in other European countries at the time or in Russia in later periods .
 A special group consisted of people connected with the Church, both the clergy who married and had families and unmarried monks and nuns, together with others serving the huge ecclesiastical establishment .
 The Church operated hospitals and hostels, dispensed charity, and engaged in education, to mention only some of its activities .
 Many ‘injuries’ involved physical insults to the dignity and honor of elites, such as cutting a man’s beard or a slave striking a free man . As in other medieval societies honor was highly valued .
 All free men and women were protected to some degree, though the code clearly marked the higher value placed on men and elites .
 The chief Kievan political institutions were the office of prince, the duma or council of the boyars, and the veche or town assembly . They have been linked, respectively, to the autocratic or monarchic, aristocratic, and democratic aspects of the state . The
 While princes in Kievan Rus proliferated, the one in Kiev retained a special position . The prince in Kiev was the only prince in the region to have a special role .
 From the twelfth century he carried the title of the great, or grand, prince . He was also known as the great prince or grand prince .
 Princely tasks included military leadership, the rendering of justice, and administration . Princely task was to lead military, render justice and administer the country .
 In war the prince could rely first of all on his own druzhina, and after that on the regiments of important towns, and even, in case of need, on a mass levy, he says .
 Kievan military history proved to be unusually rich, and the organization and experience of Kievans armies left a legacy for later ages . The organization of the Kieva armies left an impressive legacy for future generations .
 In both justice and administration the prince occupied the key position . In both cases, he was a key figure in the administration .
 He had to work with elected as well as his own appointed officials . Yet he had to coordinate his efforts with the local elements .
 Princely government came relatively late and had to be superimposed on rather well-developed local institutions, notably so in towns . To repeat a point made earlier, princely . government came comparatively late and must have been superimposed .
 In part the law was introduced by Iaroslav the Wise and developed through several versions until its most stable form in the thirteenth century . The law also changed as society developed and as the power of the princes grew .
 The law indicates a relatively high development of Kievan society, especially in the fields of trade and finance . As we have partly seen, the law indicates that the law is a good indicator of a high development in society .
 Church courts had increasingly effective jurisdiction over sexual behavior, marriage, and family matters as well as particular matters involving religion and the Church . Dioceses fought against pagan priests, sorcerers, and folk healers .
 The boyar duma developed, it would seem, from consultations and the joint work of the prince and his immediate retinue, the senior druzhina, the prince .
 The higher clergy found a place in the duma . It expanded with the evolution of Kievan Rus, reflecting the rise of the boyar class and the conversion of Christianity .
 It would be quite incorrect to consider the boyar duma as analogous to a parliament, although it might be compared to its immediate predecessor, the curia regis . It remained an extremely important institution in its customary capacity as the constant adviser and collaborator of the prince .
 We know of a few occasions when the senior druzhina refused to follow the prince because he had failed to consult it . The senior Druzhina would not follow the Prince because he hadn't consulted it .
 The democratic element in the Kievan state found a certain expression in the veche or town meeting similar to the assemblies of freemen in the “barbarian” kingdoms of the West . Finally, the democratic element was found in the town meeting .
 All heads of households could participate in these gatherings, held usually in the market place and called to decide such basic issues as war and peace, emergency legislation, and conflicts with the prince .
 The frequently unruly practice of decision by unanimity can be described as an application of direct democracy, ignoring such principles as representation and majority rule . The veche practice is often unruly .
 The veche derived from prehistoric times and thus preceded princely authority with which it never became fully coordinated . It never was fully coordinated until it became a princely institution .
 In the Kievan period, the veche in Kiev itself played an especially significant role . There were other vecha in action all over Russia during the same period .
 The most far-reaching development of this institution was to occur a little later in Novgorod, Russia .
 Old customs and beliefs have left but the slightest trace in documents of the earlier period . No systematic attempt to record the national epic was made until the middle of the nineteenth century .
 It is generally admitted that the survival of folklore has suffered important modifications in the course of time . Moreover, it is generally . admitted that . it is . generally admitted . that it has suffered . important modifications to folklore .
 Any attempt to present a comprehensive survey of Russian cultural developments previous to the seventeenth century meets with insurmountable obstacles and is necessarily incomplete and one-sided . Under these conditions, any attempt to . present . a comprehensive . survey of Russia's cultural developments prior to the . seventeenth
 The early literary efforts of native origin were hardly more than slavish imitations of the Byzantine patterns . Early literary efforts were hardly as good as those of the 19th century .
 Kievan Russia, like the golden days of childhood, was never dimmed in the memory of the Russian nation . Yet, Kieva Russia, still has a place in the heart of the nation .
 In the pure fountain of her literary works anyone who wills can quench his religious thirst . In her venerable authors he can find his guide through the complexities of the modern world, he can .
 It would be difficult to underestimate the importance of religion in Russian life, even before the momentous conversion to Christianity starting in the late tenth century .
 The pre-Christian East Slavic culture that Christians would call ‘pagan’ was a deeply spiritual and mystical culture . Its influence would not entirely vanish with the rise of Christianity, but it would not completely vanish .
 A richly varied set of beliefs and practices, combining various Indo-European influences, included a cult of the dead . A view of the natural world as filled with gods and spirits . A fluid sense of the boundaries between humans, animals, and nature .
 East Slavic paganism lacked elaborate organization or institutional development . There is evidence of open air religious sites, especially marked by statues of gods atop hills . Worship may have been led by priests .
 We know of a large pantheon of deities, many with parallels in other Indo-European cultures . Svarog, a god of the heavens, fire, and light; Dazhbog, the sun god; and Perun, a thunder god .
 The question of the persistence of paganism after Christianization has long been a source of controversy . The question has been debated for centuries .
 Some historians, notably Church historians, have declared that the new religion for centuries retained only a superficial hold on the masses, which remained stubbornly heathen in their true convictions and practices .
 Some scholars speak of dvoeverie, meaning a double faith, a term used originally by such religious leaders of the time as St. St. Louis . Some scholars say it means double faith . The term was originally used by St. Charles II of the Catholic Church .
 Modern historians have tended to speak of syncretism rather than view Christianity as merely a superficial veneer over an essential paganism . Modern historians tend to view syncreticism as an essential part of paganism, rather than Christianity .
 Byzantine origin and model as well as changes made to fit Russian circumstances . Rich in content and relatively well known, it revealed the tremendous impact of its Byzantine origin .
 The resulting product has been both unduly praised as an organically Russian and generally superior type of Christianity and excessively blamed for its superficiality and derivative nature .
 In certain respects Kievan Christianity could not even copy that of Byzantium, let alone surpass it . In drawing a balance it should be made clear that in certain respects it could not be copied .
 Theology and philosophy found little ground on which to grow in Kievan Rus and produced no major fruits . Thus theology and philosophy failed to produce major fruit .
 Kievan religious writings in general closely followed their Byzantine originals and made a minimal independent contribution to the Christian heritage . In fact, in fact, they were closely followed by the original Byzantine originals .
 Kievan Christianity did grow and develop on its own . Yet in another sense Kievans Christianity grew and developed its own.
 It represented the religion of an entire, newly baptized people with its special attitudes, demands, and ethical and esthetic traditions . It represented, after all, the religion .
 Byzantine Christianity became gradually apparent in the emergence of Kievan saints, the growth of church architecture and art, in the creative growth of the church architecture . The total influence of Byzantine Christianity on Russian society and culture became evident in the development of the Orthodox Church in the region .
 Kievan saints, who, it might be added, were sometimes canonized with considerable delay and over pronounced opposition from Byzantium, included Vladimir the baptizer of Russia, Olga the first Christian ruler of Kiev .
 Of these 48 A HISTORY OF RUSSIA princes, Boris and Gleb deserve special notice as reflecting both Kievan politics and in a sense of a sense—in their lives and canonization—Kievan mentality . The two princes are one of Russia's most famous princes
 Vladimir and his Bulgarian wife, were murdered, allegedly, by their half-brother Sviatopolk, in the fratricidal struggles preceding Iaroslav the Wise’s accession to power . Vladimir and Bulgarian wife were murdered in the death throes of the 16th
 They were elevated to sainthood as innocent victims of civil war, but also, in the case of Boris, because they preferred death to active participation in the deplorable conflict . Boris and Boris died in the civil war in 1945 .
 Both were monks and associated with establishment of monasticism in Russia . Monastery of the Caves near Kiev is associated with creation and organization of the Monastery .
 Russian Christians represented dissimilar religious types . Yet they possessed unlike personalities . They left different impacts on Russian Christianity .
 St. Anthony took his monastic vows on Mount Athos, and his very name recalled that of the founder of all monasticism, St.Anthony . Anthony was born in the same place as St. Athos .
 Anthony the Great followed the classic path of asceticism and struggle for the salvation of one’s soul . Anthony the . Great, followed the traditional path of . asceticistism and struggled for the . salvation of the soul .
 His disciple, Theodosius, made his major contribution in developing the monastic community and in stressing the social ideal of service to the needy .
 The advice, if need be, could become an admonition or even a denunciation . The advice could be taken to the streets of New York City .
 Monasteries spread throughout the land, although in Kievan Rus, in contrast to later periods of Russian history, they clustered in and near towns . Following the lead and the organizational pattern of the Monastery of the Caves near Kiev, monasteries were followed .
 At the end of the Kievan period the Russian Church, headed by the metropolitan in Kiev, encompassed sixteen dioceses, a doubling from St. St. Petersburg .
 The Russian metropolitan and Church remained under the jurisdiction of the patriarch of Constantinople . The patriarch of the Patriarch of Constantinople remained under his jurisdiction .
 In the days of Kiev only two metropolitans are known to have been Russians . Hilarion in the eleventh century and Clement in the twelfth century .
 The link with Byzantium contributed to the strength and independence of the Russian Church in its relations with the state . The link helped the strength of the church's independence with the Russian state, the author says .
 The period witnessed a remarkable cooperation, rather than conflict, between Church and state . But in general the period witnessed cooperation, not conflict, from state .
 Church in Kievan Rus obtained vast holdings of land and pre-empted such fields as charity, healing the sick, and sheltering travelers, in addition to religious functions .
 Canon law extended not only to those connected with the ecclesiastical establishment but, especially on issues of morality and proper religious observance, to the people at large . Canon law also extended to those in the public, not just ecclesiastical, but to the public .
 The Church also occupied a central position in Kievan education, literature, and the arts, as we shall see . The Church's role in the arts was a central role in education and literature .
 The overall impact of religion on Kievan society and life is much more difficult to determine . The impact on religion on society and society is difficult to establish, says historian .
 The Byzantine stress on God the Father, the ruler of heaven and earth, is in contrast to the Byzantine stress . The East Slavs may have been influenced by the closeness to nature of the pagan East Slav, or the kenotic element in Christianity .
 Christian principles did affect life in Kievan Rus. Christian principles affected life in the region .
 Kievan literature and especially its ethical norms, such as the concept of the good prince which emerges from Vladimir Monomakh’s Testament, the constant emphasis on alms-giving in the writings of the period, and the sweeping endorsement of Christian standards of behavior . Their influence
 The language of the Russians too was affected by their conversion to Christianity . Language and Literature has been affected by the conversion of Christianity . Russian language was also affected by conversion .
 Cyrillic alphabet has been associated with the baptism of the country . The writing itself has been originally devised by St. St. Peter the Apostle, the founder of the Cyrillian .
 Methodius was one of the apostles to the Slavs, in the second half of the ninth century for the benefit of the Moravians . Methodius is believed to have been Methodius of Methodius, the first of the first apostles to Slavs .
 Cyril invented the older Glagolithic alphabet and that Cyrillic was a somewhat later development carried out by one of his disciples, probably in Bulgaria .
 The conversion firmly and permanently established the written language in Russia . While there exists some evidence, notably in the early treaties with Byzantium, that the Russians had been acquainted with writing before 988 .
 The liturgy itself, as well as the lesser services of the Church and its other activities, were conducted in Church Slavonic, readily understandable to the people, not in Greek, nor in Latin as in the West . To repeat, the liturgical liturgy was conducted in Slavonic
 A written literature based on the religious observances grew quickly and before long embraced other fields as well . It has since become a popular form of written literature .
 Kievan literature reached from oral creations to written works by particular authors or communities . The boundaries could blur between sacred texts and secular texts .
 The great bulk of Kievan folklore has been lost, but enough remains to demonstrate its richness and variety . Although it is likely that the great bulk has been . lost .
 This folklore was often very ancient but continued to develop in order to incorporate new Kievan experiences . This folklore continued to be very ancient and continued to evolve with new experiences .
 Ritual songs to accompany agricultural work, festivals and holidays were common . Life-cycle events such as marriage, childbirth, and death were very common .
 Kievan folklore also included folktales, sayings, proverbs, and riddles . Folktales and sayings included proverbs and riddle sayings .
 They represent one of the several great epic cycles of Western literature . They are comparable in many ways to the Homeric epic of the Greeks, or to the Serbian epic .
 Members of the first group, concerning whom little information remains, belong to hoary antiquity . They overlap with or even become part of mythology, and seem often to be associated with forces or phenomena of nature . The first group is the first, the second, the third, the last,
 The prince and the Russian land are always ready, and powerfully able, to defend the prince and Russian land . The Russian prince is always ready to defend himself and his country, says the Russian ambassador .
 They are also not afraid to speak frankly to him and even abuse him for wrongdoing . But they are also afraid to say he has done nothing wrong .
 They tend to be less disciplined soldiers than rugged individualists . They also tend to have less discipline and less discipline .
 The Jewish Khazars may appear in the person of the legendary Zhidovin, the Jew, who is viewed with contempt . Tugor Khan of the Polovtsy may become the dragon Tugarin .
 The junior bogatyri express the peculiarly Kievan mixture of a certain kind of knighthood, Christianity, and the unremitting struggle against the steppe peoples . They express a mixture of Christianity and Christianity .
 Ilia of Murom, Dobrynia Nikitych, and Alesha Popovich stand out as the favorite heroes of the epic . Ilia is one of the most famous characters in the world .
 Alesha Popovich, as the patronymic indicates, comes from the clerical class . His characteristics include bragging, greediness, and a certain shrewdness .
 In addition to the great Kievan cycle, we know of some Novgorod byliny that will be mentioned later in a discussion of that city-state . We also know of a few stray epic poems not fitting into any cycle .
 Kievan written literature, as already noted, developed in close association with the conversion to Christianity . Written literature developed in association with conversion .
 Church service books, collections of Old Testament narratives, canonical and apocryphal, known as Palaea . Palaea after the Greek word for Old Testament, sermons and other didactic works, hymns, and works of saints .
 Among the more prominent pieces one might mention the hymns composed by St. John Pauline . St. Pauline composed a number of hymens .
 Hilarion’s best-known work, a sermon On Law and Grace, begins with a skillful comparison of the law of Moses and the grace of Christ . He proceeds to a rhetorical account of the baptism of Russia and a paean of praise to St. St
 At the same time, the chronicles belong more with the historical than the religious literature . They are a model of history writing that both records the basic facts about the past and frames the narrative in arguments about good and evil .
 The very important Primary Chronicle, to which we have often referred and which formed the basis of most later chronicles, strongly influenced how Russia’s early history would be viewed . The Primary Chronicle is one of the most important chronicles in Russia .
 The film is said to have been a masterpiece of art and science . It has been praised for its richness of detail and realism . It also established legends and interpretations .
 The Primary Chronicle idealizes Kievan princes for military prowess, learning, piety, and devotion to the greatness and honor of Russia . It blames them for their “sins” of fighting one another rather than the country’s enemies .
 The Lay of the Host of Igor (Slovo o polku Igoreve, often more simply translated as the Tale of Igor’s Campaign) is a brilliant poetic account of the unsuccessful Russian campaign against the Polovtsy in 1185 .
 A number of scholars have argued that it was a modern forgery . However, most specialists continue to regard it as a genuine expression of Kievan culture .
 The narrative shifts from the battlefront to Kiev, where Grand Prince Sviatoslav learns of the disaster, and to Putivl, where Igor’s wife Iaroslavna speaks her celebrated lament .
 The story concludes with Igor’s escape from his captors and the joy of his return to Russia . Igor's escape ends with his return from his Russian captors .
 Scholars have described a type of nationalism in the Lay’s devotion to ‘the Rus land’ and its struggle against enemies . The unknown author eulogizes warriors and appeals for unity among the princes .
 The Lay is written in magnificent language which reproduces in haunting sounds the clang of battle or the rustle of the steppe . It deserves praise for its impressive imagery, its lyricism, the striking treatment of nature .
 St. Peter of Alexandria is a fresco in the Church of the Savior on the Nereditsa, Novgorod, 1197 or stone .
 Wooden architecture, like folk poetry, stems from the prehistoric past of the East Slavs . Wooden architecture is a form of folk poetry .
 Stone architecture and written literature were both associated with the conversion to Christianity, and both experienced a fundamental Byzantine influence . Stone architecture, written literature and stone architecture were also associated with Christianity .
 Kiev-born rebels had already developed creatively in their new environment and produced valuable results . But they should by no means be dismissed as merely derivative, they should not be dismissed .
 Borrowing and adapting, to be sure, form the very core of cultural history . Borrows and adapting form the core of our cultural history.
 Because wood is highly combustible, no wooden structures survive from the Kievan period, but some two dozen of the stone churches of that age have come down to our times .
 Crosses in their basic form, that of a cross composed of squares or rectangles, and in many other characteristics, are a cross . Crosses are made up of squares, rectangles and rectangles . The shape of the cross is similar to the shape of Jesus Christ .
 From the beginning they also incorporate such Russian attributes as the preference for several and even many cupolas and, especially in the north, thick walls, small windows, and steep roofs to withstand the inclement weather . But from the beginning, they also incorporated such features such as several cupolas
 The architects of the great churches of the Kievan age came from Byzantine or partly Byzantine culture, such as the Slavic lands in the Balkans and certain sections of the Caucasus . They also included native Russians .
 Architecturally, the cathedral repeats the features of the Church of the Intercession on the Nerl but is more richly decorated . The cathedral is located in the centre of the city in central Italy .
 Interior contains carved stone reliefs of saints, birds, lions, panthers, and plants . The interior contains carved stones, birds and lions .
 Sophia in Kiev is considered the most splendid surviving monument of Kievan architecture . Sophia was built in 1037 and the years following . Sophia is considered one of the most important monuments in the world of architecture .
 Modeled after a church in Constantinople and erected by Greek architects, it follows the form of a cross made of squares, with five apses on the eastern or sanctuary side, five naves, and thirteen cupolas . The church was built in the style of a Greek church in
 The interior of the cathedral contains columns of porphyry, marble, and alabaster, as well as mosaics, frescoes, and other decoration . The sumptuous interior of . the cathedral is covered in marble, marble and marble .
 Sophia is a favorite Byzantine dedication of churches to Christ as Wisdom . It was built by Greeks around 1052, and became the center of the life of that city and territory . Sophia is one of the favorite Byzantine dedications of Christ's Wisdom .
 Igor Grabar says the St.S. St. Basilica was one of the most outstanding artworks in the world . Grabar: "Igor Grabar's work was outstanding from the artistic point of view" Grabar also says the work was the best of the world's
 Erected by a Russian master, Peter, in 1119-30, this building with its three apses, three cupolas, and unornamented walls of white stone produces an unforgettable impression of grace .
 The architecture of the Kievan period achieved especially striking results in the twelfth and the first half of the thirteenth century in the Vladimir-Suzdal area, which became at that time also the political center of Russia . The architecture was particularly striking in the eastern part of
 The churches of that region illustrate well the blending of the native tradition with the Romanesque style of the West together with certain Caucasian and, of course, Byzantine influences .
 The best remaining examples include the two cathedrals in Vladimir, that of the Assumption of Our Lady, which later became the prototype for the cathedral by the same name .
 Built in 1166-71 and representing a rectangle with three apses and a single cupola, it has attracted praise for harmony of design and grace of form and decoration .
 Other forms of art also flourished in Kievan Rus, especially in connection with churches .
 Byzantine tradition dominated all these branches of art, and although many masters practicing in Russia came from Byzantium or the Balkans, a Russian school began gradually emerging .
 St. Mary's was to have a great future, especially in icon-painting, in which it was to be painted .
 Alipii of the Monastery of the Caves and other Kievan pioneers started what has often been considered the most remarkable artistic development in Russian history . Alipi is considered one of Russia's most remarkable artists .
 Fine Kievan work in illumination and miniatures in general, as well as in different decorative arts, has also come down to our time . Fine works in illumination, miniatures and decorative arts have also been important in the past .
 Sculpture proper was banned from the churches, because of the negative attitude of the Eastern Church . The Russians and other Orthodox peoples were limited to miniature and relief sculpture .
 Reliefs, however, did develop, reaching the high point in the Cathedral of St. Louis Cathedral .
 Popular entertainment, combining music and elementary theater, was provided by traveling performers, the skomorokhi, whom the Church tried to suppress as immoral and as remnants of paganism . The Church tried continuously to suppress .
 The scope and level of education in Kievan Rus remain controversial subjects, beclouded by unmeasured praise and excessive blame . Concluding Remarks: The scope of education remains controversial subjects .
 The Kievan culture outlined here could not have developed without an educated layer of society . On the positive side, it seems obvious that the culture developed without the help of educated society .
 Kievan sources, such as the Primary Chronicle and Vladimir Monomakh’s Testament, express a very high regard for learning . Moreover, as Kliuchevsky, Dmitrii Chizhevski, and others have emphasized, Kiev sources express
 Reports of schools in Kiev and other towns, of monasteries fostering learning and arts, and of princes who knew foreign languages, patronized scholars, and generally supported education .
 Discoveries centering on Novgorod indicate a considerable spread of literacy among artisans and other broad layers of townspeople . Beyond that, discoveries center on Nov.gorod show that literacy spread in the city .
 The bulk of the Kievan population, in particular the rural masses, remained illiterate . Still it would appear that the bulk of . the . rural masses remained illiterated .
 Even a brief account of Kievan culture indicates the variety of foreign influences that it experienced and their importance for its evolution . The Kievans are a small but diverse group of cultures that have been influenced by foreign influences .
 First, foremost stands Byzantium, but it should not obscure other significant contributions . First and foremost stands Byzantine, but that's not enough .
 The complexity of the Kievan cultural heritage would become even more apparent had we space to discuss, for example, the links between the Kiev and the Iranian epic, the musical scales of the East Slavs and of certain Turkic tribes, or the development of ornamentation in Kiev
 In general, these influences stimulated, rather than stifled, native growth—or even made it possible . In the past, the influence of these influences on native growth may have stifled growth .
 Kievan Rus had the good fortune of being situated on the crossroads, not the periphery of culture, of culture . Rus was born in Russia, but was not on the periphery, but on the center of culture.
 Too much emphasis has been placed on the destruction of Kievan civilization and the loss of its unique qualities . Perhaps too much emphasis should be placed on destruction of the civilization, the author says .
 On all sides the infidels were victoriously invading the Russian land. And on all sides, infidel were victorious, the Russians were victorious .
 The institutions and culture of Kievan Rus created bonds of unity that prevented this age of division and defeat, in particular during the dark first hundred years following the Mongol conquest .
 These bonds include a common religion, language, literature, art, and art . A rich heritage in the economy, society, and politics, they say .
 The metropolitan in Kiev headed the Church of the entire realm, and the grand prince, also in Kiev, occupied the seat of the temporal power of the state . The grand prince was also the head of the church of the whole realm .
 Both offices outlived by centuries the society that had created them . Both remained of major significance in Russian history .
 The concept of one common ‘Russian land,’ so dear to Kievan writers and preachers, persisted and grew . No less important, the concept of a common "Russian land" persisted and growing .
 The Kievan legacy ensured a type of national survival of the Russians and made possible their future historical role . Indeed, it has been argued, the Kievans legacy ensured the Russian future .
 Moscow state that would emerge on the eastern European plain looked, and often was, strikingly different from its Kievan predecessor . Admittedly, the powerful Moscow state would emerge from the east .
 It affirmed and treasured at least a part of its Kievan inheritance . And it affirmed . And . it affirmed and . treasured . at least part of that part of the . inheritance, it said .
 Critics, it bears noting, have seen a certain nationalist mythologizing in this narrative . Critics have also noted that this narrative is being mythologized .
 Many historians today see the appanage era as one of crisis and survival, but also one of transforming changes and of competition between alternative paths forward . Moscow would prove dominant, crushing the others, crushing them .
 Historians have tended to speak of the Kievan and appanage periods as “medieval Russia” and the establishment of the centralized Muscovite state as marking the beginning of the “early modern” period, thus deemphasizing the uniqueness of Russian
 The twin terrors of Kievan Rus, internal division and invasion from abroad, prevailed in the age which followed the collapse of the state, the author says . The twin terror of the Kievans state was the result of its collapse .
 The new period has been named after the udel, or appanage, the separate holding of an individual prince . The udel is the name of a separate holding, or separate holding .
 In his will a ruler would divide his principality among his sons, thus creating with a single act several new political entities . Typically, in his will, a ruler's principality would be divided between his sons .
 Subdivision followed upon subdivision, destroying the tenuous political unity of the land . Subdivision of land was the most destructive subdivision of the area .
 As legal historians have emphasized, private law came to the fore at the expense of public law . As legal historian has emphasized, this is not the first time private law has come to the forefront of the law .
 The political life of the period corresponded to—some would say was determined by—the economic, which was dominated by agriculture and local consumption . The economic life of this era corresponded with that of the 19th century .
 Much Kievan trade, and in general a part of the variety and richness of the economy, disappeared . Much of the  economy of Kievans Rus, disappeared.
 The parceling of Russia in the appanage period combined with population shifts . Population shifts; political, social, and economic regrouping; and even the emergence of new peoples. Russia's parcealing of Russia was combined .
 These processes began long before the final fall of Kiev, on the whole developing gradually . The processes began before the fall of the Kiev, Kiev, began to develop gradually .
 Their total impact on Russian history may well be considered revolutionary . But their total impact may well have been revolutionary .
 As the struggle against the inhabitants of the steppe became more exhausting, migrants moved from the south to the southwest, the west, the north, and especially the northeast .
 The final terrible Mongol devastation of Kiev itself and southern Russia only helped to emphasize this development . The final Mongol devastation was the devastation of the city itself and the region of southern Russia .
 The areas which gained in relative importance included Galicia and Volynia in the southwest, the Smolensk and Polotsk territories in the west, Novgorod with its huge holdings in the north, as well as the principalities of the northeast, notably Rostov,
 Population movements led to the colonization of vast lands in the north and northeast of European Russia . The new expansion radiated from such old Kievan centers as Novgorod, Rostov, and Suzdal .
 The ultimate split was in part caused by the collapse of the Kievan state and the subsequent history of its population, in particular by the fact that southwestern and western Russia, where the Ukrainian and Belorussian nationalities grew, experienced Lithuanian and Polish influence .
 Appanage Russia was characterized not only by internal division and differentiation but also by external weakness and, indeed, conquest . Russia's internal division was characterized by internal weakness and internal weakness .
 The Mongol domination over the Russians lasted from 1240 to 1380 or even 1480 depending on whether we include the period of a more or less nominal Mongol rule . The Mongol rule lasted between 1240 and 1380 .
 Russia became subject to aggression from numerous other quarters as well . But divided Russia has also been subject to aggressive aggression from other quarters .
 The western and southwestern parts of the country fell to the Lithuanians . The Lithuanian state represented a successor state to that of Kiev . The Poles eventually fell to Kiev and the Poles .
 Novgorod to the north had to fight constant wars against the German Knights, the Swedes, and the Norwegians, in addition to the Lithuanians . The city had to face constant wars with the Germans, the Scandinavians and the Swedish Knights during the time .
 With the collapse of the Kievan state and the Mongol conquest, Russia lost its important international position . A few principalities, such as Novgorod, acted vigorously on the diplomatic stage .
 In contrast to the earlier history of the country, a relative isolation from the rest of Europe became characteristic of appanage Russia . Russia is cut off from many former outside contacts and immersed in local problems and feuds .
 Isolation, together with political, social, and economic parochialism, led to stagnation and even regression, which can be seen in the political thought, the law, and most, although not all, fields of culture of the period .
 The exceptions, however, are also significant, including the development of alternative political models in Novgorod and other locations and a vital if conflicted resurgence in religious thought and art . The exceptions to the exceptions are also important, though .
 The Russian economy would not permanently remain at the dead level of local agriculture . Russia would not be able to rely heavily on agriculture in the country . Russia's economy has been hit by a series of scandals in recent years .
 The weak appanage principalities constituted easy prey for the outside aggressor or even for the more able and ambitious in their own midst . Politically, they were easy prey to the outside or for themselves .
 Moscow's victory over Russia's rivals was a major success for Russia . Russia's victory in Moscow was the only country not to be ruled out of Russia .
 The successful Muscovite “gathering of Russia” marked the end of the appanage period and the dawn of a new age . The successful ‘gathering’ of Russia marked the beginning of the new age.
 Together with political unification came economic revival and steady, if slow, cultural progress . The entire development reversed the basic trends of the preceding centuries . The country's development was reversed by political unification .
 The terminal date of the appanage period has been variously set at the accession to the Muscovite throne of Ivan III in 1462, or Vasilii III in 1505, or Ivan IV, the Terrible, in 1533 .
 There was no one here to moan, or cry—neither father and mother over children, nor children over father and . mother; neither brother over brother, nor relatives over relatives—but all lay together dead . There were no one to moan or cry, nor to cry, but
 The Mongols—or Tatars as they are called in Russian sources’'''—came upon the Russians like a bolt from the blue.’�'’
 “Tatars” referred originally to a Mongol tribe . They appeared suddenly in 1223 in ‘Tatars,’ in “The Tatars’s first appeared in 12th century .
 Tatars of the Russian sources were mostly Turkic, rather than Mongol, linguistically and ethnically . With the expansion of the Mongol state, the Tatars became more likely to be Turkic .
 Mongols in-A’sia at/Death of Kublai Khan 1294 re southeastern Russia and smashed the Russians and the Polovtsy in a battle near the river Kalka, only to vanish into the steppe .
 They returned to conquer Russia, in 1237—40, and impose their long rule over it . But they returned and conquered Russia, and imposed it on it . They returned and ruled Russia for centuries .
 Mongolian-speaking tribes had lived for centuries in the general area of present-day Mongolia and in the adjoining parts of Manchuria and Siberia . Unknown to the Russians, the Russians discovered the tribes .
 The Chinese, who watched their northern neighbors closely, left us informative accounts of the Mongols . The Chinese left us an informative account of their neighbors .
 The Mongols are preoccupied exclusively with their flocks, they roam and they roam . They possess neither towns, nor walls, neither writing, nor books; they conclude all agreements orally .
 From childhood they practice riding and shooting arrows...and thus they acquire courage necessary for pillage and war . From childhood, they practice shooting arrows .
 When there is no hope, a timely flight is not considered reprehensible . As long as they hope for success, they move back and forth; when there are no hope there's no hope .
 They all feed on the meat of the animals which they kill...and they dress in their hides and furs . They dress in furs and hides .
 The strongest among them grab the fattest pieces . The old men, on the other hand, eat and drink what is left . The strongest are the old men .
 They respect only the bravest; old age and feebleness are held in contempt . The bravest respect only those who are not old age or old age .
 Mongols generally directed their efforts to fratricidal strife among the many tribes, their rivalries skillfully fanned by the Chinese . While excellent fighters and warlike, the Mongols were not warlike .
 Only an extraordinary leader managed to unite the Mongols and suddenly transform them into a power of world significance . The Mongols became a powerful force in the Middle East in the early 20th century .
 Temuchin was born probably in 1155 or 1162 and a son of a tribal chief . Became head of all the Mongols with the title of Jenghiz Khan in 1206 .
 Jenghiz Khan is one of the decisively important figures in history . Khan remains something of an enigma in his life . Khan's life and legacy remain unknown .
 It has been suggested that he was inspired by an urge to avenge the treasonable poisoning of his father and the subsequent humiliation of his family .
 Jenghiz Khan apparently came to believe in his sweeping divine mission to re-establish justice on earth . Khan seems to have had an unshakable conviction in the righteousness of his cause .
 The new Mongol ruler joined to this determination and sense of mission . He has a remarkable intelligence and outstanding military, diplomatic, and administrative ability .
 Jenghiz Khan invaded the independent Chin Empire in northern China in 1211, piercing the Great Wall . After uniting the Mongols, he subdued other neighboring tribes, and then invaded Chin Empire .
 The western campaigns of Jenghiz Khan and his generals proved to be still more notable . His western campaigns were still notable .
 Mongols smashed the Muslim states of Central Asia and reached the Caucasus . In spite of bitter resistance, the Mongols fought back and reached Caucasus .
 It was through Caucasian passes that they staged a raid into southern Russia to defeat the Russians and the Polovtsy on the river Kalka in 1223 .
 Before his death he had made provisions for succession, dividing the empire among four sons . The leadership was to be preserved by the leadership of one of them with the title of ‘great khan” a position which fell to the third son .
 Jenghiz Khan’s successors continued his sweeping conquests . They spread Mongol rule to Turkestan, Armenia, Georgia, and other parts of the Caucasus . Russia, Russia, Persia, Mesopotamia, Syria, Korea, Korea and all of China .
 Kublai Khan ruled as Great Khan from 1259 to 1294 . Mongol dominion stretched from Poland and the Balkans to the Pacific and the Arctic Ocean .
 Mongols had penetrated deep into central Europe, defeating the Poles, the Germans, and the Hungarians in the process . The Mongols were defeated by the Poles and the Germans .
 Mongols' success was due to their excellence as highly mobile cavalry, their endurance and their endurance, and their disciplined and coordinated manner of fighting . It stemmed rather from the effective strategy of the Mongols, their excellence .
 These assets acquired particular importance because the military forces of the invaded countries, especially in Europe, were frequently cumbersome, undisciplined and uncoordinated . The assets acquired special importance because of the lack of coordination in Europe's military .
 The Mongols held occupied territories with the aid of such devices as newly built roads, a courier system, and a crude census for purposes of taxation . Mongols used roads and courier system to hold territory .
 Batu was a grandson of Jenghiz Khan and a nephew of Ugedey . He succeeded his father Juchi to the greater part of Juchi’s empire . Batu directed the Mongol invasion of Europe .
 He had some 150,000 or 200,000 troops at his disposal . Subudey to serve as his chief general . He was in charge of the troops at the time .
 Mongols crossed Urals in 1236 to attack first the Volga Bulgars . The Mongols attacked first the Bulgars, but first the Urals were attacked by first the Mongols . Mongols were defeated by the Bulgarians in 1237 .
 In 1237 they struck at the Russian eastern principality of Riazan, coming unexpectedly from the north . After that, in 1237, they struck again, striking in the eastern Russian principality .
 In the Mongol strategy, the conquest of Russia served to secure their flank for a further major invasion of Europe . The Mongol invasion of Russia was intended to secure the flank of the Mongol empire .
 Many of them stayed to protect their own appanages rather than come to the aid of invaded principalities or make any joint effort . Characteristically, many of them remained to protect themselves rather than help other nations .
 The town of Riazan was besieged and captured after five days of bitter fighting and its entire population massacred . The town was captured after the defeat of a Russian army .
 Mongols attacked Suzdal territory with its capital of Vladimir, the seat of the grand prince . Suzdal was attacked by the Mongols in 1237/38 in the winter of 1237-38 .
 The sequence of desperate fighting and massacre recurred on a larger scale and at many towns . The grand prince himself and his army perished in the decisive battle near the river Sit .
 The Mongols succeeded in conquering the strongest section of the country . Thus, in a matter of several months, the Mongols were able to take control of the strongest part of the nation .
 Mongol cavalry moved with great speed on frozen rivers -- the only successful winter invasion of Russia in history . Furthermore, they attained their objectives by means of a winter campaign, the Mongol cavalry .
 Spring thaw forced Mongols to abandon advance on Novgorod and retreat to southern steppe . Spring thawed terrain made terrain virtually impassable for Mongols, forcing them to retreat .
 They spent the next year and a half in preparation for a great campaign as well as in devastating and conquering some additional Russian territories, notably that of Chernigov .
 Mongol assault of 1240, continued in 1241 and the first part of 1242, aimed at more than Russia . The Mongol assault began in 1240 and 1242 .
 Hungarian king of Hungary ordered to submit to Mongol rule . In fact, it had been preceded by an order to the king of Hungay to submit .
 Kiev, Ukraine, was overrun by the Nazis in the early 1900s . They took Kiev by storm, exterminated the population, and leveled the city . Overcoming the stubborn defenders, they took Kiev and exterminated its population .
 The same fate befell other towns of the area, whose inhabitants either died or became slaves . The towns were either either killed or were slaves .
 After Kiev, the Mongols swept through the southwestern principalities of Galicia and Volynia, laying everything waste . The Mongols laid everything waste, laying it waste .
 One Mongol army defeated the Poles and the Germans, the most important battle taking place at Liegnitz in Silesia in 1241 . Another army smashed the Hungarians, while another smashed the Poles . The Mongolians defeated the Germans and the Poles, while the Hungars were defeated
 Mongols occupied the Hungarian plain; their advance guard reached the Adriatic . Undeterred by the Carpathian Mountains, the Mongols moved on to the Adratic .
 Many historians believe that only the death of Great Khan Ugedey saved a number of European countries . The Mongols were unable to reduce fortresses in central Europe .
 Mongol leader Batu decided to retrench in the spring of 1242 . In 1242 he withdrew his armies to the southern steppe, subjugating Bulgaria, Moldavia and Wallachia .
 All of Russia, including the northwestern part that escaped direct conquest, remained under Mongols' sway . Although the Mongols retreated to the east, all of Russia remained under their sway .
 Once this astonishing military campaign was concluded, the Mongol elite resumed, at least for part of each year, their nomadic and pastoral life . The Mongol elite continued to live nomadic, pastoral life in Mongolia .
 Mongol rule led to the establishment of new Mongol cities and the rebuilding of some Russian towns as administrative and commercial centers .
 Batu established his headquarters in the lower Volga area in what became the town of Old Sarai and the capital of the domain known as the Golden Horde . Batu set up his headquarters there in what is now known as Old Sarai .
 Golden Horde constituted first a part of the Mongol Empire and later, as the central ties weakened, an independent state . The Golden Horde was formed from the Mongol empire to the Mongolian Empire .
 A department in Old Sarai, headed by a daruga, handled Russian affairs . The department was headed by the darugas .
 Cities like Old Sarai became cosmopolitan centers with growing numbers of officials, merchants, and craftsmen, as well as increasingly sedentary Mongol rulers .
 Local and international commerce became a key activity of the cities of the Golden Horde . The collection of tribute and taxes was a key part of the city's economy .
 By the reign of Khan Uzbeg , the Golden Horde reached its zenith as a wealthy and powerful administrative and commercial state . The Golden Horde was the most powerful administrative state in the world .
 Uzbeg also initiated the conversion of his people to Islam, which brought increasing ties to the larger Muslim world . Uzbeig also initiated a conversion to Islam . His people were also converted to Islam.
 Mongol dominion over Russia meant that the Russian rulers recognized the Mongol overlordship, that the Mongols, initially the great khan in Mongolia and subsequently the potentate of the Golden Horde, invested the Russian grand prince with his office .
 The Mongols collected tribute from the Russians, at first by means of their own agents and afterwards through the intermediacy of Russian princes . Further, it meant that the Mongols collect tribute from Russia, first by themselves and afterwards by the princes .
 Russians occasionally had to send military detachments for the Mongol army .
 We know of several such levies and of Russians serving in Mongol forces as far away from their homeland as China . The Mongolian army is said to have been at war with China .
 Mongols maintained effective control over Russia for almost a century and a half, from 1240 to 1380 . In general, although the Mongols interfered little in Russian life, they maintained an effective control .
 In 1380 the prince of Moscow Dmitrii succeeded in defeating the Mongols in a major battle on the field of Kulikovo . The prince of the Russian city of Moscow was victorious in the battle .
 Mongols managed to stage a comeback, but their invincibility had been destroyed and their rule greatly weakened . The Mongols were defeated in the Mongols' defeat of the Mongolian Empire .
 Still, another century passed before the ‘Mongol yoke’ was finally overthrown . The ‘mongol’ yoke was eventually overthrown by the Mongols in 1883 .
 Only in 1480 Ivan III of Moscow renounced his, and Russian, allegiance to the khan, and the Mongols failed to challenge his actions . Only in the 1480 in Russia, Ivan III renounced and died of his Russian allegiance .
 The relationship between the Mongols and Russia has long been a topic of intense scholarly controversy . The impact of Mongol rule on Russian history has been debated for decades .
 Scholars argue about the reasons for Mongol success, the extent of the destruction, the nature of the Mongols and their rule . The extent to which Mongols influenced Russian politics, society, and culture is debated .
 The conversion of the Mongols to Islam intensified the narrative of alien rule, especially in Church sources . The Mongols were converted to Islam .
 A thorough reconsideration of the problem of the Mongols and Russia occurred in the twentieth century among Russian émigré intellectuals . The Mongols were a major source of tension between Russia and Russia .
 A new school proclaimed Russia’s fundamental affiliation with parts of Asia, thus bringing the Mongol period of Russian history to the center of interest . A new, so-called Eurasian, school proclaims Russia's affiliation with Asia .
 Eurasian school interpreted Mongol impact largely in positive and creative terms . George Vernadsky’s more ambiguous account was more ambiguous .
 Vemadsky saw many positive influences that would leave their mark on the later Muscovite state . He also emphasized negative influences, including the destruction of the market for crafts and the smashing of cities and urban democratic institutions .
 Cities in the direct path of the invading Mongols were burnt and leveled . The population of these towns was massacred to the point of extermination . Villages and fields were ravaged .
 These and other contemporary accounts seem to give a convincing picture of the devastation of the Mongol invasion even if we allow for possible exaggeration . The Mongol invasion was likely to have been devastating even if it was exaggerated .
 Mongol rule had long-lasting effects of devastation and massacre . Mongol rule also had negative consequences for Mongol rule in the region .
 The Mongol occupation of the southern Russian steppe deprived the Russians for centuries of much of the best land . It contributed to the shift of population, economic activity, and political power to the northeast .
 It also did much to cut Russia off from Byzantium and in part from the West, and accentuate the relative isolation of the country typical of the time .
 It has been suggested that, but for the Mongols, Russia might well have participated in such epochal European developments as the Renaissance and the Reformation . The Mongols are thought to have influenced the development of the Renaissance .
 The financial exactions of the Mongols laid a heavy burden on the Russians precisely when their impoverished and dislocated economy was least prepared to bear it . Russia's impoverished economy was at its worst when it suffered the financial burdens of Mongols .
 Rebellions against the Mongol taxes led to new repressions and penalties . Rebellions led to the introduction of new taxes and penalties for those who protested against them .
 The entire period, and especially the decades immediately following the Mongol invasion, acquired the character of a grim struggle for survival . The advanced and elaborate Kievan style of life and ethical and cultural standards in rapid decline .
 We learn of new cruel punishments established by law, of illiterate princes, of an inability to erect the dome of a stone cathedral, and of other clear signs of cultural regression . We also learn of the inability to build a stone Cathedral, or erect a dome .
 Constructive contributions of the Mongols to Russian history were often of a limited nature . Constructive, positive contributions of Mongolians to Russia were often limited to specific and limited .
 Mongol interest in international commerce may have helped restore at least this part of the Russian economy . Charles Halperin and other recent historians have argued that Mongol interest helped restore the economy .
 Mongol influences have to be qualified to include Mongol influences in Mongol culture .
 The financial measures of the Mongols together with the census and the Mongol roads added something to the process of centralization in Russia . The census and Mongol roads also added something .
 These taxes had as their aim an exaction of the greatest possible tribute and as such proved to be neither beneficial to the people nor lasting . Yet these taxes were not beneficial to them nor lasting, they were not as long as possible .
 The invaders replaced the old ‘smoke’ and ‘plough’ taxes with the cruder and simpler head tax . Head tax did not at all take into account one’s ability to pay .
 Russian princes, as intermediaries, took over from Mongol tax collectors . This innovation disappeared when Russian princes took over .
 Rampant corruption further vitiated the financial policy of the Mongols . The Mongols' financial policy was a major source of instability in the region .
 Russian armies and tactics of the appanage period, based on foot soldiers, evolved directly from those of Kiev, not from the Mongol cavalry . As to military matters, where the invaders did excel, the invasion did excel .
 The cavalry, however, was to influence later Muscovite gentry horse formations . The cavalry was used in the creation of the Muscovan gentry cavalry .
 The Mongols deserve only limited credit for bringing to Russia the postal service or the practice of keeping women in seclusion in a separate part of the house .
 A real postal system came to Russia as late as the seventeenth century and from the West . The Mongols merely resorted to the Kievan practice of obligating the local population to supply horses, carriages, boats, and other aids to communication for the use of officials .
 The seclusion of women was practiced only in the upper class in Russia . It probably reflected the general insecurity of the time to which the Mongols contributed their part .
 Mongols acquired this practice late in their history when they adopted the Muslim faith and some customs of conquered peoples . The Mongols themselves, it might be added, acquired this .
 Many historians have questioned how determining or essential these were . Turning to the key question of political, social, and cultural influences, many historians have also questioned how important these were.
 Influence and borrowing, in this interpretation, is viewed as quite different than causation . Agency is shifted much more to the Russian side, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The argument that the Muscovites learned cruelty, deceit, and oppression from the Mongols has been seen to be unfair to Mongols themselves and an overly rosy view of Kievan behavior . Similarly, the argument that Muscova learned cruelty from the Mongolols is seen
 Even the argument that autocracy arose from the need to create a force strong enough to overthrow the Mongols has been criticized as reading post-Mongol developments, more the result of the internal history of Muscovy .
 Moscow certainly made use of Mongol institutions; but borrowing is not the same as causation . Moscow certainly used to borrow from Mongol institutions, but borrowing isn't the same thing .
 Society and culture were even less influenced by the Mongols . Mongols generally kept apart from the Russians, limiting their interest in their subjects to a few items .
 Religion posed a formidable barrier between the two peoples, both when the Mongols were still pagan and later when the Golden Horde became Muslim . The Mongols and Golden Horde were both still pagan when they were still Muslim .
 The Mongols were perfectly willing to leave the Russians to their own ways . Indeed, they patronized the Orthodox Church .
 Mongol and Russian societies also bore little resemblance to each other . Mongol, Russian and Mongol societies also have little resemblance . Mongol society also had little resemblance with each other.
 Their institutions and laws were unsuitable for a much more complex agricultural society . Their institutions, laws and institutions, they say, are unsuitable to a complex society .
 A comparison of Mongol law, the code of Jenghiz Khan, to the Pskov Sudebnik, an example of Russian law of the appanage age, makes the difference .
 Even the increasing harshness of Russian criminal law of the period should probably be attributed to the conditions of the time rather than to borrowing from the Mongols . Even the . increasing . harshness . of the . laws of the era should probably attributed to . the conditions in Russia .
 The Eurasian argument also tends to misrepresent the nature of the Mongol states, writes Andrew Hammond . The Mongol state is the largest in the world, with many Mongolian states .
 Far from having been particularly well organized, efficient or lasting, they turned out to be relatively unstable and short-lived . Far from being well organized or efficient, they were relatively unstable . The U.S. was not particularly organized or lasting .
 In 1260 Kublai Khan built Peking and in 1280 he completed the conquest of southern China, but in 1368 the Mongol dynasty was driven out of China . The Mongol dynasty in Persia lasted only from 1256 to 1344; and the Mongol Central Asiatic state with
 Mongols never established their own dynasty in the country, acting instead merely as overlords of the Russian princes . In the Russian case the dates are rather similar to that of the Mongols .
 Mongol states continued to suffer from arbitrariness, corruption, and misrule in general . While the Mongol states lasted, they continued to be rent by dissensions .
 Mongols borrowed virtually everything from alphabets to advisers from conquered peoples to enable their states to exist . Not only did the Mongols fail to contribute a superior statecraft, but they had to borrow virtually everything . The Mongols failed to contribute to a better statecraft .
 An empire could be won on horseback, but not ruled from the saddle, advisers say . As one of these advisers remarked, an empire could not be won by horseback but not by the saddle .
 True, cruelty, lawlessness, and at times anarchy in that period also characterized the life of many peoples other than the Mongols, the Russians included .
 70 A HISTORY OF RUSSIA is a look at the history of Russian history . The history of Russia and its people is known as Russia's most turbulent period .
 Mongols receded to the steppe, clan life, and the internecine warfare of Mongolia . Not so so the Mongols, who, after their sudden and stunning performance on the world scene, receded . The Mongols are known as the Mongolians .
 When the Muscovite state emerged, its leaders looked to Byzantium for their high model and to Kievan Rus for their historical and still meaningful heritage . The Muscvite state looked to Byzantine for their model .
 Historians studied the growth of serfdom, the rise of the gentry, or the nature of princely power in Muscovite Russia, established significant connections with the Russian past and Russian conditions, not with Mongolia .
 Even for purposes of analogy, European countries stood much closer to Russia than did the Mongol states . European countries were much closer than Mongol states, even though they were not .
 From the Atlantic to the Urals absolute monarchies were in the process of replacing feudal division . In fact, from the Atlantic . to the . Urals . absolute monarchs were in . the process in the . process of . replacing feudal divisions .
 Vernadsky’s affirming the importance of the Mongol impact by contrasting Muscovite with Kievan Rus appears to miss the point . Therefore, Vernadky‘s affirms the importance . of the . importance of Mongol impact, however, seems to miss
 There existed many other reasons for changes in Russia; and, needless to say, other countries changed during those centuries without contact with the Mongols .
 Lord Novgorod the Great was an important political alternative to the centralized autocracy that would come with the growth and domination of the Muscovite state . The Russian state was one of the most impressive and important states of appanage Russia .
 Novgorod would come to represent, for the Russian political opposition of the nineteenth century and after, a symbol of Russia’s suppressed democratic heritage . Indeed, the memory of a relatively free, democratic, and cosmopolitan Nov.gorod .
 Novgorod’s role in defending Russian lands from invasion by Western powers became part of its semi-mythic status in Russian history . The city is famous for its role as a Russian city of the same name .
 Novgorod rose as the capital of northern Russia as well as the greatest trading center and, indeed, the leading city of the entire country . When Kievan might and authority declined and economic and political weight shifted, the city rose as a leading city .
 Located in a lake area, in the northwestern corner of European Russia, it came to rule enormous lands . It ruled enormous lands, stretching east to the Urals and north to the coast line .
 The principality of Novgorod and its style of life and culture possess even greater interest than its size, wealth, and power . Historian: The unusual political system of the principality is worth even more interest than the size and wealth of the country .
 Archaeological work finds evidence of numerous towns in the Novgorod region by the eighth century . The towns may have been built cooperatively by both Slavs and Finno-Ugric peoples .
 In the ninth century, according to the chronicles, the Scandinavian Prince Riurik was invited to rule . In the 9th century, possibly due to conflicts between these tribes, the prince was invited .
 Gorodishche was the residence of the Novgorod princes from the ninth to the fifteenth centuries . His men built up the town three kilometers from Nov.gorod, which remained the residence .
 Novgorod itself began to develop in the early tenth century as a commercial center but also the residence of the landowning elites . The city became a major city in the 10th century .
 The legend that the Novogorodians ‘invited’ their prince remained part of the political culture of Novgorodians . Excavations at Gorodishche indicate that the coming of Scandinavian princes and the settlement of Gorodichche in the ninth century can
 During the hegemony of Kiev, Novgorod retained a position of high importance . During the reign of the Kiev-era Soviet-era, the city was a major city of importance .
 Novgorod was at the crossroads of the main eastern European trade routes . It was both the northern base of the celebrated north-south route “from the Varangians to the Greeks” and linked to the main east-west trade routes by means of the Volga
 The ruling princes wanted control of this important region . Naturally, the ruling princes desired control of the region .
 The city seems to have remained outside the regular Kievan princely system of succession from brother to brother . The city has remained outside of the regular princely succession .
 It was often ruled by sons of the grand princes of Kiev who, not infrequently, themselves later ascended the Kievan throne . It was ruled by the sons of Kiev's grand princes .
 Vladimir, Iaroslav the Wise, and Vladimir Monomakh’s son Mstislav all were at some time princes of Novgorod . Vladimir, Mstisav the Wise and his son Vladimir were princes of the city .
 Iaroslav the Wise came to be closely linked to Novgorod where he ruled for a number of years before his accession to the Kievan throne . Even the Russian Justice has been considered by many scholars as belonging to the Novgorhodian period of his activities .
 Novgorod repeatedly offered valuable support to the larger ambitions and claims of its princes . The same Iaroslav the Wise was in his bitter struggle with Sviatopolk for the Kievan seat .
 The evolution of authority and power within Novgorod proved to be even more significant than the interventions of the Novgorodsians on behalf of their favorite princes . The evolution was even more important than the intervention of the princes .
 Novgorod refused to accept the prince allotted to the city in 1136 . It is with the expulsion of a ruler in the 1136 that the city embarked upon its peculiar political course .
 After that date the prince of Novgorod became in essence a hired official of the city with strictly circumscribed authority and prerogatives . The prince became an official in the Russian capital after his father's death .
 In 1156 Novgorod obtained virtual independence in religious administration too by seizing the right to elect its own archbishop . Novgorhod obtained virtual autonomy in religious adminstration too in 1156 .
 Under the new system the Novgorodian veche selected three candidates for the position of archbishop . Next, one of the three was chosen by lot to fill the high office; then, one was chosen to fill it . Finally, he was elevated to his new ecclesiastical rank
 The emergence of Novgorod as an independent principality formed a part of the general process of collapse of the Kievan state accompanied by the appearance of competing regional entities which were frequently mutually hostile to each other .
 Novgorod’s defense of Russian lands from foreign invasions, stemming from its location in the northwestern corner of Russia, might well have had a greater historical significance than its wars against other Russian principalities . The city's defense of its lands may well have been greater significance than
 Alexander became the prince of Novgorod and later the grand prince of Russia at a particularly difficult time in the history of his country . Alexander was born in 1918 and became the first Russian prince to become a grand prince .
 Alexander was born in 1219 and died in 1263 . He was also forced to deal with major assaults on Russia from Europe . Alexander had to face the Mongol invasion and the imposition of Mongol rule .
 Swedes and Teutonic Knights were among those to attack . The Teutsonic Knights, the Swedes, and the Teutsons also attacked . Finnish and especially strong Lithuanian tribes applied additional pressure .
 The conversion of all these peoples to Roman Catholicism, as well as their subjugation and Germanization, constituted the aims of the Teutonic Knights who had begun as a crusading order in the Holy Land and later transferred their activities .
 Alexander led the Novgorodians to a victory over the advancing Swedes on the banks of the Neva River in 1240 . Alexander seized the initiative in the year in which Kiev fell to the Mongols .
 Teutonic Knights had begun their systematic attack on northwestern Russian lands in 1239 . They succeeded in 1241 in capturing Pskov . In 1241, they succeeded in capturing the city .
 Having defeated the Swedes, Alexander Nevskii turned against the new invaders . The Swedes were defeated in the battle of their homeland .
 The crucial battle took place on April 5, 1242, on the ice of Lake Chud, or Peipus, in Estonia .
 It became known in Russian historical tradition as ‘the massacre on the ice’ and has been celebrated in song and story . Prokofiev's music and Eisenstein’s brilliant film Alexander Nevskit film has been widely celebrated .
 The massed force of mailclad and heavily armed German knights and their Finnish allies struck like an enormous battering ram at the Russian lines . The lines sagged but held long enough for Alexander Nevskii to make an enveloping movement with a part of his troops and assail an enemy
 Alexander Nevskii's victories were important, but they represented only a single sequence in the continuous struggle of Novgorod against its western and northwestern foes . The victories were only one sequence in a continuous struggle for Novgorhod against its Western and northwestern enemies .
 Between 1142 and 1446 Novgorod fought the Swedes twenty-six times, the German knights eleven times, Lithuanians fourteen times, and the Norwegians five times . The Swedes fought the Germans eleven times and the Lithuanians 14 times .
 The Livonian and Teutonic orders merged in 1237 . The German knights then included the Livonian, Teutons and Livonian orders .
 The principality together with other Russian lands submitted to the khan . Although the Mongol invasion failed to reach Novgorod, the principality submitted . The khan's Mongol forces failed to make it to the city .
 Alexander Nevskii was the grand prince of Russia from 1252 until his death in 1263 . He was a favorite of the khan and thus the grand Prince of Russia .
 Alexander Nevskii was canonized by the Orthodox Church in the sixteenth century . He preserved the principality of Novgorod as well as some other Russian lands from ruin .
 Novgorod remained one of the most important Russian principalities during the appanage period . The city was one of Russia's most important principalities .
 Tver played a significant role in the rivalry between Moscow and Tver as well as in the struggle for Moscow and Lithuania . Tver was a key part of the struggle between Tver and Moscow, Lithuania .
 As Moscow “gathered’s lands, declaring Novgorod an inseparable part of the Moscow grand prince's “patrimony,” the position of Novgorhod became increasingly difficult .
 Novgorodians began to call their city Great Novgorhod as a defiant counterweight to the title of the Grand Prince . Novgorodorians called their city 'Great Novgorods' as a defiance to their Grand Prince's title . The city is now known as Great Nov
 Ivan III of Moscow justified his anti-Novgorod policy by claiming that the Novgorod leadership planned to shift their alliance to the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and to renounce Orthodoxy . Ivan III claimed that the decision was made to shift alliance to Lithuania .
 Many Novgorodian boyars sought such an alliance, though draft agreement ensured religious independence and the protection of Orthodoxy . Draft agreement was reached in order to resist Moscow’s pressures .
 In 1471, Ivan III defeated the Novgorodian army and the city surrendered to him . The initiators of the alliance with Lithuania were executed . Ivan III was victorious in 1471 .
 According to a later Muscovite account, Novgorodians at veche assemblies “spoke senseless and depraved things,” such as “we do not want to be called his patrimony.” According to another account, “We do
 Moscow was not to be stopped, and complete subjugation came after a new assault in 1477-78 . But Moscow would not be able to stop the rebels .
 Muscovites severely suppressed all opposition, exiling many people, and incorporated the city organically into the Moscow state . Muscovees severely suppressed the opposition and ex-expressed many people .
 Its population at the time of its independence numbered more than 30,000 people .
 As already noted, this was a major commercial center connected to both north-south and east-west trade .
 Novgorod played a major role in revitalizing the entire Russian economy in the fourteenth century, especially through the import of European silver in return for products of agriculture, hunting and fishing .
 The ruble was introduced in the late thirteenth century of Russia's monetary unit, the ruble, made of silver . One lasting effect of the trade was the introduction of the new monetary unit .
 Like other medieval towns, Novgorod suffered from crowding because everyone wanted to dwell within the walls . The city suffered from overcrowding because of its walls and its walls .
 The rich families and their servants lived in large houses built in solid blocks . The poorer inhabitants used whatever area they could obtain .
 Sophia side stood, of course, the cathedral itself as well as the ancient kremlin, or citadel, of the city . The cathedral, or cathedral, was located on the Sophia side .
 The Novgorodians enjoyed the advantages of fire protection, streets ingeniously paved with wood, and a wooden water pipe system, the principles of which they had learned from Byzantium .
 Local initiative, organization, and autonomy constituted the distinguishing traits of Novgorod. Local initiative and autonomy were key to the success of the city, Nov.gorod .
 Several block houses in the city composed a street which already had the status of a self-governing unit with its own elected elder . The street already had a status of being self-governed by an elder .
 Hundreds in turn combined into quarters, or kontsy, which totaled five . Hundreds of people were divided into quarters or quarters .
 The piatina holdings of a particular konets usually radiated from its city boundary . The city's piatin holdings were usually located within the boundaries of the city .
 Novgorodian territories did not belong to the piatina lands and were managed by the city as a whole . It should be added that distant Novgorhodian territories didn't belong to piatinas .
 Novgorodians, especially after the 1136 uprising, imposed a growing set of severe and minute restrictions on prince’s power and activities . The ruling prince formally commanded the army and played a central role in justice and administration .
 We have the precise terms of a number of such contracts between princes and the city, the earliest concluded with Alexander Nevskii’s brother Iaroslav in 1265 . The earliest such a contract was concluded with the brother of Alexander Nevskyi, Iaros .
 As in most of these contracts, the prince promised to follow ancient Novgorodian custom in his government . He promised not to dismiss officials without court action, and not to hold court without the posadnik .
 He had to establish his headquarters outside the city limits; he and his druzhina could not own land in Novgorod or trade with the Germans . His remuneration as well as his rights to hunt and to fish were all regulated in great detail .
 The grand prince of Moscow or at least a member of the Muscovite ruling family came to hold the office of prince in Novgorod . However, his power there remained quite limited .
 The posadnik and the tysiatskit, elected by the veche, shared executive duties with the prince . If need be, they protected the interests of the city from the prince, especially if need be . The veche was elected by a veche .
 The posadnik served as the prince’s main associate and assistant, who took charge of the administration and the army in his absence . He was the prince's main assistant and assistant .
 He has sometimes been regarded as a representative of the common people of Novgorod .
 The archbishop of Novgorod must also be mentioned, . In addition to performing the highest ecclesiastical functions in the principality, he continuously played a leading role in political affairs . He also advised secular authorities and reconciled antagonistic factions .
 The power of the Novgorodian veche, or town council, was considerable . As can can be seen, the power of this town council was considerable.
 It invited and dismissed the prince, elected the posadnik and the tysiatskii . The selection of the archbishop was determined by the selection of three candidates for that position .
 It decided the issues of war and peace, mobilized the army, proclaimed laws, raised taxes, and acted in general as the supreme authority in Novgorod . It was also the supreme power in the city .
 The veche could be called together by the prince, an official, the people, or even a single person, through ringing the veche bell .
 The removal of the bell by the Muscovites in 1478 symbolized the end of the independence of Novgorod and of its peculiar constitution .
 Novgorod is considered a democratic republic by scholars and anti-absolutist Russians . The veche, made up of all the free people in the city, decides key questions collectively . This power of the veche has led many scholars to describe Novgorhod as a democratic
 Novgorod was a "boyar republic," emphasizing elite domination of the veche and of town officials . Ianin, perhaps the leading specialist today on the history of the region, calls it a boyar republic . He calls it an elite enclave of Russia .
 Research indicates that voting members of the veche were most likely limited to boyars and other owners of large urban homesteads .
 Ianin acknowledges that the entire urban public had access to the veche assembly . The assembly gathered in the open air near the Cathedral of St. Mary's .
 St. Nicholas could influence discussions and decisions with loud cries of approval or dissent . Nicholas is the son of former President George W. Bush .
 The veche is often bogged down in violent factional quarrels promoted by its practices of direct democracy and unanimity of decision .
 The Novgorodians won respect as independent and self-reliant people who managed their own affairs . The city was known for its self-managed nature .
 The archbishop made many solemn appearances at the veche in a desperate effort to restore some semblance of order . A legend grew up that the statue of the pagan god Perun, dumped into the river when the Novgorodians became Christian, reappeared briefly to leave a stick with
 The increasing challenges to their independence from Moscow and the growing wealth of boyars and other elites, along with this endemic disorder, may explain why, as will be seen, Novgorodian politics has moved in an increasingly oligarchical direction .
 The Council of Notables rose into prominence in Novgorodian politics, both because the veche could not conduct day-to-day business efficiently . The veche was a reflection of the actual distribution of wealth and power in the principality .
 Presided over by the archbishop, it included a considerable number of influential boyars, notably present and past holders of the offices of posadnik and tysiatskii, as well as heads of the kontsy and hundreds .
 The Council elaborated the legislative measures discussed or enacted by the veche . The veche could often control the course of Novgorodian politics . The Council is the body of the Russian state .
 It effectively represented the wealthy, so to speak aristocratic, element in the principality . It was effectively represented by the wealthy and aristocratic element in principality.
 It exhibited a remarkable degree of elaboration, organization, and complexity, as well as high juridical and humanitarian standards, says CNN.com .
 The prince, the posadnik, the tysiatskii, and the archbishop, all had their particular courts . The prince and the posads had their own courts. The archbishop had his own courts .
 A system of jurymen, dokladchiki, functioned in the high court presided over by the posadnik . Jurymen, ten in number, consisted of one boyar and one commoner from each of the five kontsy .
 Judicial combat, after a solemn kissing of the cross, was used to reach right decision in certain dubious cases .
 Although the death penalty was not unknown, they consisted especially of fines and, on particularly grave occasions, of banishment . Banishment with the loss of property and possessions which could be pillaged at will by the populace .
 In contrast to the general practices of the time, torture occupied little, if any, place in the Novgorodian judicial process, torture was not common in the time .
 The Novgorodian Chronicle at times refers to a great slaughter when it speaks of the killing of several persons . Much evidence reflects the high regard for human life characteristic of the city of Novgorhod .
 It exploited the enormous wealth of northern Russian forests, principally in furs, but also in wax and honey, for export to foreign markets . It served as an intermediary point on extensive trade routes going in several directions .
 Manufactured goods, certain metals, and other items, such as herring, wine, and beer, were typical imports . Manufacturers, metals and certain metals were typical imported goods .
 Novgorod traded on a large scale with the island of Gotland and with the ports of the Baltic coast line . Its merchandise also reached England, Flanders, and other distant lands .
 Many merchants, especially from Gotland and Germany, came to Novgorod, where they enjoyed autonomy and a privileged position . Many merchants came to the city to work in the Russian city .
 Novgorodians engaged for a long time in active trade . Yet, some scholars failed to appreciate this point . Novgorodsians themselves engaged in a long-standing trade .
 Novgorodians went to foreign lands and established commercial communities abroad . The two churches on the island of Gotland and other evidence are attested by the two churches .
 It was in the second half of the thirteenth century, with the beginnings of the Hanseatic commercial league of northern European cities and the growth of its special ships vastly superior to the Novgorodians .
 Soviet research emphasized the significance of landed wealth, together with the close links between the two upper-class groups in Novgorod .
 In any case social differentiation in Novgorod increased with time, leading to political antagonisms, reminiscent of Italian cities and their conflicts between the rich and the poor .
 The boyars consolidated their power in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries and threatened Novgorod’s independence . A few powerful families controlled all high offices in the city .
 Boyar consolidation of power was also a response to growing popular discontent, including an anti-boyar uprising in 1418 . Boyar consolidating power came after an uprising against the boyar in 1419 .
 These attitudes would have fateful consequences for boyar ability to win popular support in their efforts to resist Moscow . Most important, these attitudes would be crucial to boyar's success .
 At the time when social tensions inside Novgorod increased, the city also found it more difficult to hold its sprawling lands together . The city was also found to be struggling to hold on to its land .
 In line with Novgorodian political practice, piatina towns, with their surrounding countryside, received some self-government, although their posadniki and tysiatskie were appointed rather than elected .
 Viatka, in fact, became independent in the late twelfth century and Pskov in the middle of the fourteenth century . Gradually decentralization increased, with Vatka becoming independent in late twittitt century .
 Novgorod had to struggle continuously for the security and allegiance of many of its territories against the princes of the northeast . Muscovite rulers came to be ably represented by the powerful and successful Muscotite rulers .
 The veche was banned, the election of the posadnik was abolished, and the veche bell was carted off to Moscow . The election was abolished and veche bells were carted away from Moscow .
 Novgorod, in spite of its swollen size, had remained essentially a city-state . The outcome of their conflict had been in a sense predetermined by the fact that Novgorhod, in . a sense, had been predetermined .
 Devoted to its highly specific and particularistic interests, it flourished in the appanage period when it stood out because of its wealth and strength and when it could utilize the rivalries of its neighbors .
 By controlling its prince it had escaped subdivision into new appanages . Furthermore, by controlling the prince it escaped subdivision . Furthermore by controlling it . It had escaped subdivisions .
 Russia failed to compete with Moscow in uniting the Russian lands . But it proved unable to unite the Russian states .
 When Novgorod fell into the hands of the Moscow prince in 1478, it seems that the boyars found no defenders among the common people . The boyars apparently preferred Ivan III to their own oligarchic government .
 In contrast to other appanage principalities, it contained sufficient wealth to continue Kievan cultural traditions on a grand scale . It contained enough wealth for continued cultural traditions .
 Novgorod became famous for its church architecture and its icon-painting, as well as for its vigorous and varied literature . While Russian culture in the appanage period will be discussed in a later chapter .
 Evidence of widespread literacy in Novgorod and the surrounding region is significant . Especially significant is evidence that widespread literacy is widespread in Russia .
 It was assumed that the population, even its elites, were illiterate . It was long assumed that . Even elites, even those in the country's elite, were literate .
 Soviet archaeologists discovered hundreds of 80 A HISTORY OF RUSSIA documents written on birch-bark . Novgorod .
 Continued archaeological work has uncovered more than a thousand texts, dating from the eleventh to the fifteenth centuries . Many more certainly remain buried, and many more probably remain buried .
 Documents reveal literacy extending from boyars to artisans to servants, including women . Usually succinct businesslike messages, these documents reveal literacy .
 Novgorod's peculiar political and social order also required a high cultural level, says author . Since they were evidently rare in other towns, their preponderance here suggests that they are rare in Novgorhod .
 Novgorodian literature embraced writings of such archbishops of the city as Moses and Basil . travelogues, in particular accounts of visits to the Holy Land; and extremely useful chronicles, together with oral tradition .
 The illuminated so-called Ostromirovo Gospel of 1056-57, of Novgorodian provenance, had long been considered the oldest surviving Russian manuscript . In 2000 it lost its precedence to three wax tablets containing Psalms 67, 75, and 76, dating apparently from
 The culture of Novgorod survived the political downfall of the city to exercise a considerable influence on Moscow and on Russia in general . Indeed, as is frequently the case, the culture survived the downfall of Nov.gorod to exercise considerable influence .
 Novgorodian writings express a strong and constant attachment to the city, its streets, buildings, and affairs . The Chronicle of Nov.gorod and other Novgorhodian writings . Nov. Gorodians have a strong attachment to their city .
 Novgorodian literature has been described as strikingly realistic, pragmatic, and businesslike, even when dealing with religious issues . The general tone of Novgorhodian literature is described as remarkably realistic and pragmatic .
 Two Novgorodian boats once reached the paradise mountain as they sailed in a distant sea . Efrosimius even visited paradise and brought back to his abbot three apples, while St Agapius took some bread there .
 Visitors described the Novgorodians as an extremely vigorous and active people, whose women were equal to men and prominent in the affairs of the city .
 The heroes of Novgorodian literature also reflect the life of the city . The city is famous for its culture and its literature .
 The main protagonists of the Novgorodian cycle of byliny included the extraordinary businessman and traveler Sadko . The irrepressible and irresponsible young giant Vasilii Buslaev, whose bloody forays against his neighbors could be checked only by his mother .
 Novgorod is one variant in the evolution of the lands of Kievan Rus after the decline of Kiev . The history of the city is remarkable in itself, and attracts further attention .
 Novgorod's peculiar qualities stemmed directly from the Kievan—and to some extent pre-Kievan period period . These qualities represented, sometimes in an accentuated manner, certain salient . characteristics, sometimes accentuated in a manner, may have been accentuated .
 The urban life and culture of Novgorod, the important position of its middle class, its commerce, and its close contacts with the outside world all link the city to the mainstream of Kievan history . The city's urban life, culture and commerce are linked to the Kie
 The veche too, of course, had had had a significant role in Kievan life and politics .
 The democratic political evolution characteristic of Novgorod also occurred in a few other places, especially in another northwestern Russian town, Pskov . The democratic evolution of Nov.gorod is characteristic of the city's history .
 Pskov had a prince whose powers were even more restricted than those of the prince of Novgorod . The prince had a veche which in some ways exceeded that of the larger town in importance .
 Pskovian veche acted as a court for serious crimes . The veche was a court in addition to its other functions .
 The town had two elected posadniki as well as the elders of the kontsy, but no tysiatskii . It was subdivided, much like Novgorod, into streets and konts . The town was also subdivided into streets .
 Being much smaller than Novgorod, Pskov experienced less social differentiation and social tension . The city was much larger than Nov.gorod and had less social differences .
 Pskov was given the title of "little brother" by Novgorod at one point . He participated fully in the high development of urban life and culture typical of Nov.gorod . On the other hand, he participated fully .
 Pskovian architects obtained wide renown, while the legal code issued by the Sudebnik of 1397, with supplements until about 1467, is an impressive compendium of highly developed Russian medieval law .
 Never a rival of the Muscovite state, Pskov constantly needed its help against attacks from the west . The city was actively connected to the west through trade, including association with the Hanseatic League .
 When the Muscovite state fully incorporated Pskov around 1511, the town lost its special institutions, all of its independence, and its commercial and middle-class way of life . The town, after suffering 82 A HISTORY OF RUSSIA deportations, lost its
 In spite of brilliance and many successes, the historical development of Novgorod and Pskov proved to be, in the long run, abortive . The historical development in the Russian cities proved to have been abortive, writes Alexander Vasskov .
 Novgorod represented one important variation on the Kievan theme, two others were provided by the evolutions of the Russian lands . While the history of Nov.gorod was one of the most important variations, two other evolutions were provided .
 As in the case of Novgorod, these areas formed parts of Kievan Rus and participated fully in its life and culture . The areas formed part of the Russian city and were fully part of its history .
 In fact, the southwest played an especially important role in maintaining close links between the Russians of the Kievan period and the inhabitants of eastern and central Europe . The northeast gradually replaced Kiev itself as the political and economic center of the Russian state .
 With the collapse of the Kievan state and the breakdown of unity, the two areas went their separate ways . The two areas are now living separate ways in Russia .
 Novgorod's independent evolutions stressed certain elements in the Kievan heritage and minimized others to produce strikingly different, yet intrinsically related, societies . Like the development of Nov.gorod, their independent . evolutions stress certain elements of the Kiesvan heritage .
 The territory directly west and southwest of the Kiev area was divided into Volynia and Galicia . The area was also divided between the two regions . The Kiev area is now known as the Kiev region .
 The larger land, Volynia, sweeps in a broad belt, west of Kiev, from the foothills of the Carpathian Mountains into Belorussia . The larger region is known for its mountainous foothills and foothills .
 Galicia is located along the northern slopes of the Carpathians, irrigated by such rivers as the Prut and the Dniester . Galicia represented the furthest southwestern extension of the Kievan state .
 Ae J HU N/G AR ¥ Ne. S >Re Galich™ My : 2 > Ne ttt gKamenets) \, UKRAINE ae J . HU . N/A ¥ Ne .
 Vladimir-in-Volinia ranked high as a princely seat, while the entire area was considered among the more desirable sections of the state . Vladimir in Volinia was considered as one of the most desirable parts of the country .
 The culture of Volynia and Galicia formed an integral part of the Kievan culture . It experienced particularly strong foreign, especially Western, influences .
 Some historians question whether this region, though once part of Kievan Rus, should be called “Russian” at all . The region's eventual division and incorporation into Poland and Hungary, and, later, modern Ukraine, is a question shaped by local characteristics .
 As Kiev declined, the southwest and several other areas rose in importance . The southwest of Ukraine rose to prominence in recent years .
 Iaroslav Osmomysl was one of Galicia's ablest and most famous rulers . His name means “of eight minds” and to denote his wisdom .
 After Iaroslav Osmomysl's death in 1187, Andrew, king of Hungary, made an abortive effort to reign in the principality . Andrew was followed by the rule of his son Vladimir who died in 1197 . Vladimir was the last ruler of the princip
 Roman of Volynia united the two southwestern lands and also extended his sway to Kiev itself . After Vladimir, Galicia obtained a strong and celebrated prince, Roman .
 Roman campaigned THE SOUTHWEST AND THE NORTHEAST 85 successfully against the Hungarians, the Poles, the Lithuanians, and the Polovtsy . Roman campaigned the South West and the North East successfully .
 Byzantium sought his alliance, while Pope Innocent III offered him a royal crown, which Roman declined . Roman declined the offer of a crown .
 Roman died in a Polish ambush in 1205, leaving behind two small sons, the elder, Daniel, aged four . The elder son, Roman, was killed in the same Polish ambush . Daniel died aged four, Roman was four .
 After Roman’s death, Galicia experienced extremely troubled times marked by a rapid succession of rulers, by civil wars, and by Hungarian and Polish intervention .
 From 1221 to 1264 it was ruled by Roman’s able son Daniel . Volynia had a more fortunate history, and was ruled in 1264 by Daniel .
 Daniel turned to Galicia and brought it under his own and his brother's jurisdiction . Following his complete victory in Volynia, he turned to the Galicia .
 Daniel also achieved fame as a creator of cities, such as Lviv . Lviv replaced Kiev as an emporium of eastwest trade, and to an extent replaced Kiev .
 His rule witnessed, in a sense, the culmination of the rapprochement between Russia and the West . Putin's rule witnessed a sense of the end of Russia's isolation in Russia .
 Daniel accepted a king’s crown from the pope in 1253, the only such instance in Russian history . His son Roman married into the Austrian reigning house . Daniel accepted the pope's crown from 1253 .
 Daniel’s work, however, received a shattering blow from the Mongol invasion . The Mongol invasion of Mongolia destroyed Daniel's work .
 The Mongols laid waste Galicia and Volynia, and the Russians of the southwest, together with their compatriots elsewhere, had to submit to the overlordship of the khan . Galicia .
 Volynia and Galicia began to decline after the death of Daniel in 1264 and death of his son Leo in 1301 .
 Their decline lasted for almost a century and was interrupted by several rallies, but they were finally absorbed by neighboring states . The decline lasted nearly a century .
 Volynia gradually became part of the Lithuanian state, which will be discussed in a later chapter of this chapter . It is discussed in the later chapter .
 Galicia experienced intermittently Polish and Hungarian rule until the final Polish success in 1387 . Galicia was ruled by the Poles and Hungarians until 1387.
 Galicia’s political allegiance to Poland contributed greatly to the spread of Catholicism and Polish culture and social influences in the southwestern Russian principality, at least among its upper classes .
 The internal development of Volynia and Galicia reflected the exceptional growth and power of the boyars . Galicia's internal development reflected the boyar's exceptional growth, power .
 The landed proprietors of the southwest often arrogated to themselves the right to invite and depose princes, and they played the leading role in countless political struggles and intrigues . Ancient and well-established on fertile soil and in prosperous towns .
 One of the boyars, Vladislav, occupied briefly the princely seat of Galicia in 1210 . It was the only occasion in ancient Russia when a Princely seat was held by anyone other than a member of a princely family . In 1210, a certain Vlad
 Mikhail Vladimirsky-Budanov and other specialists have noted such remarkable activities of Galician boyars as their direct administration of parts of the principality, in disregard of the prince, and their withdrawal in corpore from the prince .
 Princely authority in Galicia and Volynia represented a later, more superficial, and highly circumscribed phenomenon . By contrast with the authority of the boyars, princely authority was a later and more superficial .
 Only exceptionally strong rulers, such as Jaroslav Osmomysl, could control the boyars . The boyars were ruled out of control by the boyararans .
 The veche in Galicia and Volynia could not consistently curb their power . It did play a role in politics and at least occasionally supported the prince against the boyars . However, the veche was not consistently able to curb its power .
 It should be noted that the rise of the boyars in southwest Russia resembled in many respects the development of the landlord class in adjacent Poland and Hungary .
 The northeast, like the southwest, formed an integral part of the Kievan state . The northeast and the southwest of the state were once part of each other .
 Rostov and Suzdal belonged with the oldest towns in Russia . Rostov, Suzdal and Rostov are among Russia's leading towns . The region is known for its culture of culture and culture .
 Its princes, deriving from Vladimir Monomakh, participated effectively in twelfth-century Kievan politics . The princes were the sons of Vladimir Monmakh, who died in 2011 .
 When Kiev and the Kievan area declined, the political center of the state shifted to the northeast . The so-called princedom of Vladimir-Suzdal covered large territories in the central and eastern parts of European Russia .
 Andrei Bogoliubskii sacked Kiev in 1169 and won the office of the grand prince of the principality . He transferred its seat to his favorite town of Vladimir in the northeast, Vladimir .
 Andrei Monomakh was the first independent prince of Suzdal . He was the son of the celebrated Iurii Dolgorukii . Andrei had already won the grand princedom, but kept it in Kiev .
 Andrei Bogoliubskii fell victim to a conspiracy in 1174 . His achievements of building up his principality and emphasizing the authority of the princes of Suzdal remained .
 Andrei’s brother Vsevolod was the third Russian grand prince with that name . Andrei's work was resumed in 1176 by his brother, known as VseVolod III, because of his big family .
 Vsevolod ruled until his death in 1212 and continued to build towns, fortresses, and churches, to suppress opposition, and to administer the land effectively .
 As grand prince he made his authority felt all over Russia . At the same time, as grand prince, he made it felt all around Russia .
 It will be remembered that the Mongol invasion dealt a staggering blow to the Russian northeast . The Mongol invasion of the region was a devastating blow to Russia .
 The grand prince at the time, Iurii, a son of Vsevolod III, fell in battle, the Russian armies were smashed, and virtually the entire land was laid waste . The grand . prince at . the time of the . invasion, the . Russian army was
 After the Golden Horde established its rule in Russia, the northeastern principalities had some advantages . Yet, after the Golden . Horde established itself, the Northern .
 In contrast to the steppe of the south, they remained outside the zone directly occupied by the Mongols and on the whole could slowly rebuild and develop . The steppe remained outside of the area directly occupied .
 A certain distance from the invaders, it might be added, gave them an advantage not only over the old Kievan south, but also over the southeastern principality of Riazan .
 The seat of the grand prince stayed in the northeast with the descendants of Vladimir Monomakh . The seat remained in the northeastern part of the Russian republic .
 Following the death of Andrei in 1304, Mikhail of Tver ruled as grand prince until he was killed by the Mongols at the court of the Golden Horde in 1319 . Iaroslav’s son and Alexander Nevskii's nephew, Mikhail, ruled until he
 Mikhail was succeeded by his rival, a grandson of Alexander Nevskii, Iurii, or George, who became the first prince of Moscow to assume the office of grand prince . Mikhail was the first grand prince to assume office of Moscow . Mikhail died at the age of 92 in
 The position of the grand prince, with its location in the northeast, continued as a symbol of Russian unity . But, in other respects, division prevailed .
 Appanages multiplied as princes divided their holdings among their sons . Appanage grew in size and spread across the world .
 On the death of Vsevolod III, the Viadimir-Suzdal princedom had already split into five principalities . The Viadsdal principcedom continued to divide further .
 Some princes inherited tiny territories, while others could not be provided for . Some princes had to find service with more fortunate members of the family . Others could not provide for and had to work with others .
 A proliferation of appanages, characteristic of the northeast, occurred also in the western lands and in the southeastern principality of Riazan, in fact .
 Rostov, Suzdal, and some other towns and areas of the northeast formed integral and important parts of Kievan Rus . They generally lay, in contrast to the southwest, in a wilderness of forests with no definite boundaries and hence with great possibilities of expansion .
 The late Kievan and especially the appanage periods. That expansion took place in the late Kiesvan . The expansion of the area began in the mid-Kievan period .
 This celebrated ‘colonization’ of new lands was considered by S Soloviev, Kliuchevsky, and some other specialists to have been decisive for subsequent Russian history .
 The princes played a major role in the expansion by providing economic support, protection, and social organization for the colonists . The princes provided social and economic support for colonists .
 In the new pioneer society, there existed little in the nature of vested interests or established institutions to challenge princely authority .
 Andrei Bogoliubskii had already transferred his capital from ancient Suzdal to the new town of Vladimir . His chief political opponents were the boyars from the older sections of his realm .
 The Mongol invasion and other wars and disasters of the time contributed to the growth of princely authority . They shattered the established economic and social order and left it to the prince .
 The prince often acted simply as the proprietor of his principality, entering into every detail of its life and worrying little about the distinction between public and private law . The increasing dependence on local economy, together with the proliferation of appanages, meant that .
 The role of the prince in the northeast came to bear little resemblance to that of the princes in Novgorod or in Galicia . With the passage of years, the role of . the . prince in . the northeast . came to resemble that of those in the . northeast of the
 Kliuchevsky and other Russian historians seem to overstate the case when they select the evolution of the northeast as the only authentic Russian development and true continuation of Kievan history . The northeast is the only Russian development of the Northeast .
 Russian areas such as Smolensk, Chernigov and Riazan should not be denied their full share of Kievan inheritance .
 The northeast of Russia has been a key part of Russia's history for centuries . But we should not minimize the significance of the northeast in Russian history, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 The conditions of its emergence, all characteristic of the northeast, included the breakdown of Kievan unity and the existence of a more primitive style of life in a forest wilderness inhabited also by Finnic-speaking tribes .
 Moscow rose to ‘gather the Russian lands’ and initiate a new epoch in Russian history . Moscow was a northeastern principality, Moscow, that rose to 'gather Russian lands' and initiate new epoch .
 In the Moscow prince northern Russia became accustomed to see the eldest son of the Russian church, the closest friend and collaborator of the chief Russian hierarch . Northern Russia came to consider Moscow as a city on which rests a special blessing of the greatest saint .
 Princeling from the banks of the Moscow River, who, a century and a half earlier, had acted as a minor plunderer, lying around a corner in ambush for his neighbors .
 The unification of Great Russia took place through the destruction of all local, independent political forces, in favor of the single authority of the Grand Prince . VASILII KLIUCHEVSKY: "Unification of Russia was through destruction of local political forces"
 "antiquity and tradition" of Russian law was doomed by historical circumstances . But these forces were the bearers of ‘antiquities and tradition,” of Great Russian life, he says .
 To create a new system of life on the ruins of the old became a task of the Grand Prince which sought not only unity, but also complete freedom in ordering the forces and the resources of the land .
 The descendents of a minor princeling, based in what was still a modest rustic town in the fourteenth century, transformed the course of Russian history . In the century following the Mongol subjugation of Russia, descendants of the princeling transformed Russia .
 In the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, Moscow became the center of a mighty and expanding dynastic state . Moscow was fortified by great wealth and extensive lands defined as the ruler’s “patrimony”
 The traditional description of this process as a “gathering of the Russian lands” with implications of necessity and national destiny, has long influenced much of the historiography of this .
 Grand Prince Iurii Dolgorukii “laid the foundations of the town of Moscow,” meaning that he built the city wall . Under the year 1156, the chronicler notes that he laid the foundations for Moscow .
 Moscow originated as a princely village or settlement prior to 1147 . It would seem, then, that about the middle of the twelfth century it became a walled center, that is, a town .
 Moscow was located in Suzdal territory, close to the borders of the principalities of Novgorod-Seversk and Riazan . Moscow was the capital of the Suzdal principalities .
 In the fourteenth century, it possessed a modest wooden fortress flanked by a commercial and artisan settlement and farms . The fortress was built in the 14th century, surrounded by commercial and . artisan settlements .
 We know little of the early Muscovite princes, who changed frequently and apparently considered their small and insignificant appanage merely as a stepping stone to a better position . One might mention at least one Vladimir who was one of the younger sons of Vsevolod III and probably
 Daniel concentrated his efforts both on building up his small principality and on extending it along the flow of the Moscow River .
 Daniel succeeded in seizing the mouth of the river and its lower course from one of the Riazan princes . He also had the good fortune of inheriting an appanage from a childless ruler .
 The rivalry between Moscow and Tver was to continue for almost two centuries . It was determined in large part which principality would unite the Russian lands .
 In 1317 or 1318 Iurii married a sister of the khan of the Golden Horde, the bride having become Orthodox, and received the appointment as grand prince . The bride had become Orthodox and the bride became Orthodox .
 During the resulting campaign against Tver, the Muscovite army suffered a crushing defeat, and, although lurii escaped, his wife fell prisoner . During the campaign, lurii's wife was taken prisoner .
 The Tver prince had to appear at the court of the Golden Horde, where he was judged, condemned, and executed . The prince was executed at the end of his life .
 By 1322 the khan had made Michael's eldest son, Dmitrii, grand prince . lurii accepted this decision, but apparently continued his intrigues, traveling in 1324 to the Golden Horde .
 In 1325, he was met and dispatched on the spot by Dmitrii, who was in turn killed by the Mongols . He was killed in 1325 .
 In 1327 a punitive Mongol expedition, aided by Muscovite troops, devastated Tver . Alexander escaped to Pskov and eventually moved to Lithuania .
 In 1337 Alexander was allowed to return as prince of Tver, but in 1338 he was ordered to appear at the court of the Golden Horde and was executed . In 1338 Alexander was executed by the Golden Heralom .
 Iurii’s younger brother Ivan Kalita, prince of Moscow, obtained the position of grand prince . He held the position from 1328, or according to another opinion from 1332, until his death in 1341 .
 Ivan Kalita means ‘John the Moneybag’ and Ivan I remains the prototype of provident Moscow princes with their financial and administrative talents . Ivan I is a Russian prince of the 1930s and 1940s .
 Grand Prince of the Golden Horde gathered tribute for the khan from other Russian princes . He retained office of grand prince, but also received commission of gathering tribute for khan .
 Vladimir simply added to his own principality, keeping the capital in Moscow . The capital of Vladimir was in Moscow, but the capital remained in the city of Vladimir .
 He ransomed Russian prisoners from the Mongols to settle them on Muscovite lands . Ransomed prisoners from Mongols . He settled them in Muscotite lands on Muscotites lands .
 Ivan Kalita managed to increase the territory of his Princcedom severalfold . All in all, he was able to increase his territory of Russia .
 Moscow became religious capital of Russia in Ivan Kalita’s reign . Kalita was also in charge of Moscow's religious capital . Moscow was also known as religious capital in Russia .
 In 1326 the head of the Russian Church, Metropolitan Peter, died while staying in Moscow . Metropolitan Peter died in Moscow in 1326 .
 He came to be worshipped as a saint and canonized, his shrine bringing a measure of sanctity to Moscow . His shrine is now in Moscow, Russia's biggest shrine in Russia .
 In 1328 Ivan Kalita persuaded Peter’s successor, Theognost, to settle in Moscow . In 1327 Ivan Kalitas persuaded Peter's successor, Peter‘Theognost’, to live in Moscow, Russia .
 From that time on, the metropolitans “of Kiev and all Russia” added immeasurably to the importance and prestige of the upstart principality and its rulers . The title “Kiev’s” was added to the principality
 The presence of the metropolitan not only made Moscow the spiritual THE RISE OF MOSCOW 93 center of Russia, but, as we shall see, it also proved time and again to be helpful to the princedom in diverse material matters . Indeed, the presence of Moscow the
 Simeon, surnamed the Proud, was confirmed as grand prince by the khan of the Golden Horde in 1341 . His son was confirmed to be the grand prince following the passing of Ivan Kalita in 1340 .
 Simeon’s appellation, his references to himself as prince “of all Russia,” and his entire bearing indicated the new significance of Moscow . The Russian prince was a prince of all Russia and his bearing indicated new significance .
 Simeon the Proud continued his predecessor’s work of enlarging the Muscovite domain proper . In addition to emphasizing his authority over other Russian rulers, he emphasized his authority .
 He died in 1353 at the age of thirty-six, apparently of the plague which had devastated most of Europe .
 In his testament Simeon the Proud urged his heirs to obey a remarkable Russian cleric, Alexis, who was to become one of the most celebrated Muscovite metropolitans . Alexis was to be one of Russia's most celebrated clerics .
 Alexis played a leading role in affairs of the Muscovite state during the reign of Simeon the Proud’s weak brother and successor, Ivan the Meek, which lasted from 1353 to 1359 . Alexis, in fact, played a key role in the affairs
 Metropolitan traveled repeatedly to the Golden Horde to deal with the Mongols . Besides overseeing the management of affairs in Moscow, he treated with other Russian princes .
 Alexis was one of the leading figures in the Muscovite pantheon of saints . Alexis’s wise leadership of Church and state contributed to his enshrinement . Alexis is one of Russia's most famous saints .
 If Mongol power declined, that of Lithuania, led by Olgerd, grew . The Moscow princes had to turn increasing attention to the defense of their western frontier .
 Ivan the Meek's death resulted in a contest for the office of grand prince . Prince Dmitrii of Suzdal and Ivan’s nine-year-old son were protagonists in the contest .
 Dmitrii of Suzdal claimed seniority over the Muscovite prince . He was descended directly from Vsevolod III, who was a generation older than him . He claimed to have seniority .
 Dmitrii of Suzdal abandoned his headquarters in Vladimir without a fight . Ivan the Meek’s son became firmly established as the Russian grand prince .
 The Kievan system of succession failed to find sufficient support in the northeast . It was the first time the system was considered a viable option in the region . The system failed to get enough support in northeast .
 Grand Prince Dmitrii Donskoi reigned in Moscow for three decades until his death in 1389 . He was known as the Grand Prince of the Don, after his victory over the Mongols .
 In 1367 stone walls replaced wooden walls in the Kremlin . Metropolitan Alexis played a major role in the government . The early part of his reign saw the growth of Muscovite territory .
 It also witnessed a bitter struggle against Tver supported by Lithuania . Tver was supported by Lithuanian state-backed Tver .
 Prince Michael of Tver obtained from the Golden Horde the title of grand prince . He tried to destroy his Muscovite rival .
 Twice, in 1368 and 1372, Lithuanian Olgerd of Lithuania reached Moscow and devastated its environs, although he could not capture the fortified town itself .
 Dmitrii managed to blunt the Lithuanian offensive and make peace with Lithuania, after which he defeated Tver and made Michael recognize him as grand prince . He made Tver recognize him and made him grand prince of Russia .
 Muscovite troops also scored victories over Riazan and over the Volga Bulgars, who paid tribute to the Golden Horde . The Golden Horde was defeated by the Muscvite army .
 Dmitrii’s fame rests on his victorious war with the Golden Horde itself . But his fame rests upon his victory in the battle against the Golden horde itself .
 The Mongol hegemony in Russia experienced its first serious challenge since the time of the invasion . As Moscow grew and as civil strife swept through the Golden Horde, civil strife .
 Dmitrii had successfully defied Mongol decision to make Michael of Tver grand prince . He had defeated the Volga Bulgars, whose principality was a vassal state of the Golden Horde .
 A series of incidents and clashes involving the Russians and the Mongols culminated, in 1378, in Dmitrii’s victory over a Mongol army on the banks of the Vozha River . The Russians and Mongols were involved in a series of clashes between them and the
 Clearly the Mongols had either to reassert their mastery over Moscow or give up their dominion in Russia . The Mongols were either either reasserting their mastery or giving up their control of Moscow .
 A period of relative stability in the Golden Horde enabled the Mongol military leader and strong man, Mamai, to mount a major effort against Dmitrii . Mamai was Mamai's strong man .
 Mamai set out with his troops to meet with forces of Grand Prince Jagiello of Lithuania for joint invasion of Muscovite lands . The Mongols made an alliance with Lithuania, and Mamai's troops set out to meet in the upper Don area .
 Dmitrii crossed the Don, seeking to engage the Mongols before the Lithuanians arrived . The Lithuanian decided to seize the initiative and cross the Don . The Mongols were killed by the Lithuanian troops in the 18th century .
 Medieval sources -- old chronicles and epic poem Zadonshchina -- magnify the size of the opposing forces . Medieval sources—old chronicles and epic poems dramatically magnify the size of opposing forces. Medieval sources .
 The Russians brought at least 150,000 men against at least 300,000 Mongol warriors . It was said to have been at least 200,000 Russian troops .
 Historians believe the numbers were closer to 20,000-50,000 troops under Dmitrii and 90,000 under Mamai . Modern historians believe the number was closer to 50,000 .
 The decisive battle, known as the battle of Kulikovo field, was fought on the eighth of September 1380 where the Nepriadva River flows into the Don . The Russians selected streams to limit the effectiveness of Mongol cavalry .
 The terrain was such that the Mongols could not simply envelop Russian positions, but had to break through them . The Mongols were not able to simply enveloped Russian positions but broke through them, the Russian commander says .
 The last Russian reserve came out of ambush in a forest upon the exhausted and unsuspecting Mongols . The battle ended in a complete rout of Mamai’s army .
 Lithuanian forces failed to reach Kulikovo by some two days and turned back . Jagiello chose not to fight Dmitrii alone and turned his forces back .
 The great victory of the Russians laid to rest the belief in Mongol invincibility . The Mongolians were defeated by the Russians in the 17th century .
 The new victor of the Don rose suddenly as the champion of all the Russians against the hated Mongol oppressors . What is more is more, the new victors rose suddenly to be the champion .
 Some Russian rulers failed to support Dmitrii, and those of Riazan even negotiated with the Mongols . Some twenty princes rallied against the common enemy in an undertaking blessed by the Church .
 The logic of events pointed beyond the developments of 1380 to a new role in Russian history for both the principality and the prince of Moscow .
 The years following the great victory at Kulikovo saw a reversal of its results . Nevertheless, the years after the victory, Russia rose to prominence in Russia .
 Only two years later, in 1382, the Mongols came back, led this time by the able Khan Tokhtamysh . In fact, only two years after, the Mongolians came back .
 Tokhtamysh swore that he had decided to stop the fighting and that he and his small party wanted to be allowed within the walls merely to satisfy their curiosity . Once inside, the Mongols charged their hosts and, by seizing a gate, obtained reinforcements and hence control of Moscow
 Tokhtamysh retreated, with an enormous booty, rather than face Dmitrii’s army . The capital and many of the lands of the principality were desolated and its resources were virtually exhausted .
 Dmitrii had to accept the overlordship of the Mongol khan, who confirmed him as the Russian grand prince . The Mongolian khan confirmed him in return for his role in Russia .
 After Kulikovo, the Mongol grip on Russia lacked its former firmness . Still, after Kulikovsky, the Russian government still has a grip on Moscow .
 Dmitrii Donskoi spent the last years of his reign in strengthening his authority among Russian princes, especially those of Tver and Riazan . He spent his last years in assisting the rebuilding and economic recovery .
 Dmitrii Donskoi died in 1389 at the age of thirty-nine . His son Vasilii became grand prince without challenge either in Russia or in the Golden Horde .
 Vasilii I's long reign, from 1389 until his death in 1425, deserves attention for a number of reasons . His reign was the longest of its kind, lasting between 1389 and 1425 years .
 The cautious and intelligent ruler continued the traditional policy of the Muscovite princes of enlarging their own principality and of making its welfare their first concern . The cautious ruler continued very successfully .
 Vasilii I acquired several new appanages as well as a number of individual towns with their surrounding areas . Thus, Vasiliis I acquired . Several new villages and towns .
 He waged a continuous struggle against Lithuania for western Russian lands . Also waged a long-standing struggle against Lithuanian territory .
 Grand Prince Vitovt of Lithuania scored some victories over his Russian son-in-law . Vasilii’s persistent efforts led to a military and political deadlock in much of the contested area .
 After the conclusion of a treaty with Lithuania in 1408, a number of appanage princes in the western borderlands switched their allegiance to Moscow .
 Relations with the East presented as many problems as relations with the West, says President Obama . Relations between the East and the West were difficult, he says .
 In 1395 Moscow barely escaped invasion by the army of one of the greatest conquerors of history, Tamerlane . In 1391 Moscow had smashed Tokhtamysh. in 1391 and in 1395 .
 Tamerlane’s forces actually devastated Riazan and advanced upon Moscow, only to turn back to the steppe before reaching the Oka River . The Russian city was devastated by the fall of Riaz, but turned around and reached Moscow .
 Around 1400 Muscovite troops laid waste the land of the Volga Bulgars, capturing their capital Great Bulgar and other towns . The Muschevite army captured the capital of Great Bulgar .
 In 1408 the Golden Horde, pretending to be staging a campaign against Lithuania, suddenly mounted a major assault on Moscow to punish Vasilii I for not paying tribute and for generally disobeying and disregarding his overlord . The Golden Horde attacked Moscow in 1408 .
 The Mongols devastated the principality, although they could not capture the city of Moscow itself .
 The protagonists in the protracted struggle were Vasilii I’s . Iurii, who died in 1434, whose cause was taken over by his sons . Vasili I. II succeeded his father at the age of ten and succeeded his uncle at age of 10 .
 Prince Iurii claimed seniority over his nephew, and represented, in some sense, a feudal reaction against the growing power of the grand princes of Moscow and their centralizing activities . The prince's claim to seniority was based on his nephew's seniority .
 By 1448, after several reversals of fortune and much bloodshed and cruelty, the Muscovite prince had prevailed . Vasilii the Squint-eyed was blinded of both Vasiliis the Squints-eyed and of himself, henceforth known as Vasili the
 Vasilii II managed, although at a very heavy cost, to expand his principality at the expense of his rivals . He defeated the Squint-eyed and Dmitrii Shemiaka and also of some other appanage princes .
 Relations with the Mongols continued to be turbulent as the Golden Horde began to break up and Moscow asserted its independence . The Mongols were the most powerful of the Mongolian empire .
 In 1445 Vasilii I was badly wounded and captured in a battle with dissident Mongol leaders . He soon regained his freedom for a large ransom . Vasili I was captured in 1445 .
 Kasim, a descendant of Jenghiz Khan, was rewarded with the principality for his assistance in the struggle against Dmitrii Shemiaka . Vasilii II had taken into his service Mongol nobles with their followers fleeing from the Golden Horde .
 The creation of this Mongol princedom subject to the grand prince of Moscow was only one indication of the decline of Mongol power .
 Crimean state recognized Ottoman suzerainty in 1475 . Turkish troops occupied several key positions on the northern shore of the Black Sea . In 1475 the Crimean state acknowledged Ottoman sueranty .
 Of course, the khans of the Golden Horde tried to stem the tide and, among other things, to bring their Russian vassal back to obedience . The Golden Horde was one of the most powerful and most powerful factions in the world .
 Khan Ahmad directed three campaigns against Moscow, in 1451, 1455, and 1461, but failed to obtain decisive results . Khan Ahmad failed to win decisive results in his three campaigns .
 For practical purposes, Moscow can be considered as independent of the Mongols after 1452 at least . The formal abrogation of the yoke came only in 1480, although the formal .
 Vernadsky regards the establishment of the principality of Kasimov as a decisive turning point in the relations between the forest and the steppe . The opening of the Kasimov principality was a turning point of Russian history .
 Vasilii II’s long reign from 1425 to 1462 also witnessed important events in Europe which were to influence Russian history profoundly, although they did not carry an immediate political impact like that implicit in the Golden Horde .
 At the Council of Florence in 1439, with Byzantium struggling against the Turks for its existence and hoping to obtain help from the West, the Greek clergy signed an abortive agreement with Rome, recognizing papal supremacy . The agreement was an attempt to get help from Rome .
 Isidore, a Greek, participated in the Council of Florence . He proclaimed its results during a solemn service and read a prayer for the pope . The Russian metropolitan is a Russian metropolitan .
 After the service he was arrested on orders of the grand prince and imprisoned in a monastery, from which he escaped before long to the West . After the war he was imprisoned in the monastery, he escaped from the West to escape .
 A council of Russian bishops in 1443 condemned the Church union, deposed Isidore, and elected Archbishop Jonas metropolitan . Archbishop Jonas was elected Metropolitan of Moscow .
 The administrative dependence of the Russian Church on the Byzantine came to an end . The Russian Church was dependent on the Eastern Roman Empire for centuries .
 Many Russians remained suspicious of the Greeks even after they repudiated the short-lived Union of Florence . Furthermore, many Russian remained suspicious even after the Greeks repudiated their Union .
 In 1453 Constantinople fell to the Turks, who proceeded to acquire complete control of the Balkan peninsula and of what used to be the Byzantine Empire . The Turks then went on to take over the Balkans and the rest of the Ottoman Empire .
 Ancient Russia had its most important religious and cultural ties with Byzantium and the Balkan Slavs . As well as the appanage period as well as in the days of Kiev, it was with Byzantine and Slavs in ancient Russia .
 The success of the Turks contributed greatly to the weakening of ties with Russia, writes Andrew Hammond . Russia is now isolated in the world, he says .
 It also strengthened Muscovite xenophobia and self-importance and various teachings based on these attitudes . As we shall see, it also strengthened xenophobia .
 It should be noted that this boost to Muscovite parochialism occurred at the very time when the northeastern Russian princedom was being transformed into a major state that needed Western knowledge .
 The Reigns of Ivan III and Vasilii II are considered to be the end of the appanage period and the beginning of a new age in Russian history, that of Muscovite Russia . Ivan III's reign extended from 1462 to 1505 .
 Moscow's two reigns provide a fitting climax to the story of the rise of Moscow . Moscow is now one of the world's most powerful cities .
 Ivan III absorbed such old rivals as Novgorod and Tver and established virtually a single rule in what used to be appanage Russia . But it remained for Ivan III to absorb such old rivalries as Tver . Ivan III was Ivan III's first ruler of Russia .
 Ivan III successfully asserted full Russian independence from the Mongols . Also, it was Ivan III who, at the conclusion to the developments described earlier in this chapter, successfully asserted Russian independence .
 The position and authority of the grand prince of Moscow, continuing their long-term rise, acquired attributes of majesty and formality unknown in the appanage period . And it was in his reign that the position and . authority of Moscow continued their rise .
 Vasilii II was only 22 when he died, but was fully prepared to succeed him . He had already acted for several years as his blind father’s chief assistant and even co-ruler .
 The following catalogue of events might give some indication of the nature and diversity of the process . 98 A HISTORY OF RUSSIA the process. the process began in Russia .
 In 1463, Ivan III purchased the patrimony of the appanage princes of Iaroslavl, and in 1474 the remaining half of Rostov, Rostov . In 1474, the town was completed by Ivan III, according to Lev Cherepnin .
 In 1472 he inherited an appanage, the town of Dmitrov, from his childless brother Iurii . In the same year he conquered the distant northeastern northeastern land of Perm, inhabited by a Finnic-speaking people .
 In 1481 the Muscovite grand prince obtained another appanage after the death of another brother, Andrew the Little . The Muscova prince obtained the title after Andrew died in 1481 .
 In 1485 he forced Prince Michael of Vereia to bequeath to him Michael's principality, bypassing Michael's son, who had chosen to serve Lithuania . Prince Michael was bypassed by his son, choosing to serve his country .
 In 1489 he annexed Viatka, a northern veche-ruled state founded by emigrants from Novgorod . He annexed the veche state in 1489 . In 1490, he annexed the state, which was ruled by his father .
 Ivan III seized the town of Uglich from his brother, Andrew the Big, and imprisoned Andrew for failing to carry out his instructions to march with an army to the Oka River, against the Mongols . In 1493 Ivan III captured Andrew and imprisoned him .
 Muscovite grand prince inherited half of his principality and was appointed warden of the other half bequeathed to Ivan of Riazan’s young son . Around 1500 he inherited the half of the principality from Prince Ivan of . Riaz .
 Novgorod collapsed because of both the Muscovite preponderance of strength and its own internal weaknesses . The city's internal weaknesses allowed it to collapse because of its own strength and weaknesses .
 After the treaty of 1456 imposed by Vasilii II on Novgorod, the boyar party in the city turned to Lithuania as its last hope .
 The common people of Novgorod, on the other hand, apparently had little liking either for Lithuania or for their own boyars . Lithuania's Lithuanian boyars are considered the most powerful in Russia .
 In the crucial campaign of 1471 Novgorodian troops made a poor showing . Archbishop’s regiment refused outright to fight against the grand prince of Moscow .
 Ivan III had the Novgorodians at his mercy after winning the decisive battle fought on the banks of the Shelon River . Ivan III died at the hands of his son, Ivan III .
 They had to promise allegiance to the grand prince and his son, pay a large indemnity, and cede to Moscow some of their lands . They also had to cede their lands to Moscow .
 The new arrangement, which meant a thorough defeat and humiliation of Novgorod, left its system and position essentially intact, could not be expected to last . Russia's new arrangement means the new arrangement is unlikely to last, but it is not expected to survive .
 The authorities of Novgorod soon refused to recognize Ivan III as their sovereign and tried again to obtain help from Lithuania . And indeed, they soon tried to get the help of Lithuania .
 In 1478 the angry grand prince undertook his second campaign against Novgorod; because Lithuanian help failed to materialize, the city finally surrendered without a battle to the Muscovite army .
 Ivan III executed some of his opponents as traitors, exiled others, and transferred a number of Novgorodian boyar families to other parts of the country, seizing their lands .
 Novgorod became an integral part of the Muscovite state . Further large-scale deportations took place in 1489, and the city became part of Russia . The city became a city of its own .
 Tver’s turn came next; this principality offered even less resistance than Novgorod . The principality of Tver, Russia, was founded in 1903 . Tver was the first Russian principality to break into Russia .
 Another Tver prince named Michael also tried to obtain Lithuanian help against the expanding might of Moscow . The prince signed an agreement in 1483 with Casimir IV of Lithuania and Poland .
 Michael declared himself an obedient ‘younger brother’ of the Muscovite ruler . Michael repudiated the agreement and declared himself a ‘Younger Brother’ Ivan III .
 In 1485 his messages to Casimir IV were intercepted and his plans discovered by Moscow . Yet in 1485 he tried to resume relations with Lithuania; his messages were intercepted . His plans were discovered by the Kremlin .
 Michael's support among his own followers collapsed, and he escaped to Lithuania . While the town surrendered without battle to the Muscovite army, the city surrendered .
 When Michael died in Lithuania he left no heir, ending the greatest rival family to the princes of Moscow . Michael was the son of the Russian princes .
 In contrast to Novgorod, the incorporation of Tver, which was a northeastern principality, presented no special problems to Muscovite authorities . Tver was incorporated in 1881 .
 The sum of Ivan III's acquisitions, large and small, meant that very few Russian appanages remained to be gathered . Even these few, such as Pskov or the last half of Riazan, survived because of their cooperation with Moscow .
 Ivan III's ambitions were not limited to the remaining Russian appanages . Ivan III was not only interested in the remains of the Russian empire .
 The grand prince of Moscow considered himself the rightful heir to all the former Kievan lands, which in his opinion constituted his lawful patrimony . He considered himself to be a rightful heir .
 Ivan III made his view of the matter clear in foreign relations, and at home he similarly emphasized his position as the sole ruler of the whole country . Ivan III also emphasized his role in Russia as a sole ruler .
 In 1493 he assumed the title of Sovereign—gosudar in Russian—of All Russia . He was the first monarch to assume the title in Russia .
 Ivan III's claim to the entire inheritance of the Kievan state represented above all else a challenge to Lithuania . Lithuania had extended its dominion over vast western and southwestern Russian territories following collapse of Kiev .
 After Ivan III acquired Novgorod and Tver, a number of appanage princes in the Upper Oka area switched their allegiance from their Lithuanian overlord to him . The area is a border region between Lithuania and Moscow .
 Lithuania failed to reverse their decision by force and accepted the change in an agreement in 1494 . Lithuania accepted the agreement in the 1494 agreement in order to reverse it by force .
 New defections of princes to Moscow, this time farther south, led to war again in 1500 . But new defections led to the return of the Russian princes .
 The Russians won the crucial battle on the banks of the Vedrosha River, capturing the Lithuanian commander, artillery, and supplies . The Russians captured the commander and supplies, capturing him and his commander .
 By the peace treaty of 1503, Lithuanians recognized as belonging to the grand prince of Moscow those territories that his armies had occupied . By the treaty, the Lithuanians were able to claim the territories .
 Ivan III obtained parts of Smolensk and the Polotsk areas and much of Chernigov-Seversk, a huge land in southern and central European Russia based on the old principality of Chernigov . Ivan III also acquired parts of the Smol
 Another peace treaty in 1503 ended the war which Moscow had effectively waged to defend the principality of Pskov against the Livonian Order .
 Ivan Ill’s successes in other Russian states and in foreign wars enormously increased his domain . All in all, Ivan Ill's successes in Russia and abroad greatly increased his domains, he says .
 This definitive lifting of the Mongol yoke, however, represented something of an anticlimax compared to the catastrophe of Mongol invasion or the epic battle of Kulikovo . It was a major victory for the Russians, but it was a far cry from the Mongol invasion .
 Ivan III became grand prince without being confirmed by the khan . Following the practice of his father Vasilii II, he limited his allegiance to the Golden Horde to the sending of “presents” instead of the regular tribute .
 Mongol punitive expeditions in 1465 and 1472 were checked in the border areas of the Muscovite state . Mongol punitive expedition was checked in 1472 and 1465 .
 Khan Ahmad decided on an all-out effort against the disobedient Russians . Ivan II publicly renounced any allegiance to the Golden Horde in 1480 . Khan Ahmad was Khan Ahmad's first ruler of the Golden Haul .
 He made an alliance with Casimir IV of Lithuania and Poland and invaded Muscovite territory . He made a treaty with Casimim I of Poland and Casimir I of Lithuania .
 Ivan IIL in turn, obtained the support of Mengli-Geray, the Crimean khan, and disposed his forces so as to block the Mongol advance and above all to guard river crossings .
 The main Mongol and Muscovite armies reached the opposite banks of the Ugra River and remained there facing each other . The Mongol army was defeated in the battle of Ugra .
 The Mongols had failed to cross the river before the Muscovites arrived, and they did not receive the expected Lithuanian and Polish help . These countries had to concentrate on beating back the Crimean Tatars who had made a large raid into Lithuania .
 When the river froze, Mongols suddenly broke camp and rushed back into the steppe . The Russians began to retreat, and the Mongols began to flee .
 Apparently they were frightened by an attack on their home base of Sarai that was staged by a Russian and Tatar detachment . The attack on Sarai is believed to have been staged by the Russians and the Tatar .
 Khan Ahmad’s effort to restore his authority in Russia collapsed . In any case, Khan Ahmad's effort to regain his authority collapsed .
 Shortly after, he was killed during strife in the Golden Horde, and around 1500 the Horde itself fell under the blows of the Crimean Tatars . He was killed by the Tatars in 1500 .
 Ivan III was married to a Byzantine princess, Sophia, or Zoe, Paleologue, in 1472 . The marriage was the first of Ivan III's reign . Sophia was the Byzantine princess .
 The marital alliance between the grand prince of Moscow and a niece of the last Byzantine emperor, Constantine XI, was sponsored by the Vatican in the hope of bringing Russia under the sway of the pope . Constantine XI had perished on the walls of Constantinople in the final Turkish assault .
 These expectations failed utterly, yet for other reasons, the marriage represented a notable occurrence . It was a notable event for the couple .
 It fitted well into the general trend of elevating the position of the Muscovite ruler . Specifically, it fitted well with the trend of . elevating . the position .
 St. George created a complicated court ceremonial on the Byzantine model . He developed a complex court ceremonial based on the model .
 He also proceeded to use the high titles of tsar and autocrat . He instituted the ceremony of coronation as a solemn church rite .
 The word autocrat originally referred to the complete independence of the Muscovite sovereign from any overlord, and thus to the termination of the Mongol yoke . The word itself and the attendant concept of power and majesty were Greek, just as tsar stemmed from the Roman, and
 Ivan III engaged in an impressive building program in Moscow, inviting craftsmen from many countries to serve him . Ivan III also engaged in a large number of impressive building programs .
 Moscow princes portrayed themselves as inheritors of the sacred mantle of the Byzantine throne . The Moscow princes are seen as inheriting of the ancient throne .
 The Muscovite ruler took the attitude of a distant superior toward his collaborators, especially after his Byzantine marriage . He took a distant attitude toward his allies, even after his marriage .
 Ivan III refused to be drawn into broader schemes or sacrifice any of his independence . Ivan III asserted his importance and role as the successor to the Kievan princes .
 He declined papal suggestions of a union with Rome and of a possible re-establishment of a Muscovite ruler, of a Christian emperor in Constantinople .
 Ivan III was succeeded by his son Vasilii III, who ruled from 1505 to 1533 . Ivan III died at the age of 1505 . He ruled the country until his death in 15033 .
 The Muscovite ruler fought Lithuania, staging three campaigns aimed at Smolensk . The town was finally captured in 1514; the treaty of 1522 confirmed Russian gains .
 He exercised pressure on the khanate of Kazan, advancing the Russian borders in that direction . He supported a pro-Russian party which acted as one of the two main contending political factions in the turbulent life of the city and state .
 Vasilii III had diplomatic relations with the Holy Roman Empire and with the celebrated Turkish sultan Suleiman I, the Magnificent, and even with the founder of the Mogul Empire in India, Babar Babar .
 The Russians behaved with extreme caution not to pay excessive honors to his empire, thus to demean the prestige of their ruler . Ironically, in the case of this last potentate, of whom next to nothing was known in Moscow, the Russians behaved very carefully .
 The so-called German suburb of Moscow was established by Ivan III and Vasilii III . It was in the reigns of Ivan III, Vasiliy III .
 He sternly ruled boyars and members of former appanage princely families who had become simply servitors of Moscow . The boyars ruled the boyars, members of . former . appanages . families .
 The abandonment of Muscovite service in favor of some other power was judged as treason . In contrast to the practice of centuries, but in line with Ivan III's policy, abandoned service was judged treason . Abandonment of service was considered treason .
 These and other issues connected with the transition from appanages to centralized rule were to become prominent in the following reigns .
 As we have noted, contemporaries had every reason to be surprised (and written sources suggest they were) at the spectacular rise of Moscow and its transformation of the political landscape .
 Moscow, after all, began with very little and for a long time could not be compared to such flourishing principalities as Novgorod or Galicia . Moscow, of course, has a long history of having very little, as well as a flourishing city .
 Even in its own area, the northeast, it started as a junior not only to Rostov and Suzdal but also to Vladimir, and it defeated Tver in a long struggle which it appeared several times to have lost .
 In explaining the rise of Moscow, historians have emphasized several factors, many of which have already become apparent in our brief narrative . Historians have emphasized factors, such as the importance of Moscow's rise in Russia .
 One of the earliest and most basic explanations is geographical, an argument already developed by S Soloviev . The first explanation was geographical, and the second is geographical .
 Moscow’s geographic advantage included location at the crossing of three roads, the most important of which was the route from Kiev and the entire declining south to the growing northeast, which brought both settlers and trade .
 There were no mountains or other natural obstacles to hem in the young principality . This offered opportunities for expansion across the flowing plain .
 It stood in the midst of lands inhabited by the Russian, and especially the Great Russian, people, which, so this traditional argument runs, provided a proper setting for growth in all directions .
 Experts have tried to estimate exactly how close to the geographic center of the Russian people Moscow was situated . Moscow is situated in the center of Russia's two main dialects .
 Central location within Russia cushioned Moscow from outside invaders . Central location to make an additional point, cushioned city from outside invasion .
 Novgorod, not Moscow, had to meet enemies from the northwest, while in the southeast Riazan absorbed the first blows . The situation was a most helpful situation in the case of Tamerlane’s invasion .
 Moscow's location of the Muscovite state cannot be denied, although this is not the only factor . All in all, the considerable significance of the location of Moscow for the expansion of the state can't be denied .
 The Moscow River served as an important trade artery, and as the Muscovite principality expanded along its waterways it profited by and in turn helped to promote increasing economic intercourse . The Moscow river is one of the most important rivers in Russia .
 Soviet historians treated expansion of Moscow largely in terms of the growth of a common market . Soviet historians in particular treated expansion in Moscow largely as growth of the Soviet Union market .
 Muscovite princes were successful in developing agriculture in their domains and supporting colonization . Another economic approach emphasizes the success of the Muscvite princes in developing agricultural land .
 These princes, it is asserted, clearly outdistanced their rivals in obtaining peasants to settle on their lands . Their energetic activities ranging from various inducements to free farmers to the purchase of prisoners from the Mongols .
 As a further advantage, they managed to maintain in their realm a relative peace and security highly beneficial to economic life . As a result, they also managed to keep in their sphere of relative peace .
 The political argument focuses partly on the condition and policies of the Mongol horde and the clever policies of Moscow princes in dealing with the khans . The Moscow princes were able to deal with the Khans and the Mongols .
 From the fourteenth century on, the Mongol Empire was slowly fracturing and weakening, though it experienced periods of revival . The Mongol Empire suffered periods of stagnation and decay .
 Devastations by the Black Plague, a fraying commercial network due to problems in the Balkans and China, and violent conflicts for power within the horde created opportunities .
 The princes of Moscow demonstrated complete obedience to the khans, and indeed eagerly cooperated with them . While the Mongols retained their strength, the princes of . Moscow demonstrated . complete obedience .
 In this manner they became established as grand princes after helping the Mongols to devastate the more impatient and heroic Tver and some other Russian lands to their own advantage .
 They collected tribute for the Mongols, thus acquiring some financial and, indirectly, judicial authority over other Russian princes . In addition to the tribute they collected tribute, they also acquired financial and judicial authority .
 As the horde fractured and Moscow strengthened, the relationship between Russia and the U.S. has changed .
 New Muscovite princes continued to present themselves to the khan to receive a patent for the throne . Vasilii II named his son heir without asking for the permission of the Khan .
 The rituals and tangible manifestations of homage and fealty were increasingly being ignored . But, as we have seen, many of the the rituals and . rituals were being ignored, as well as those ignored .
 Ivan III renounced allegiance to the horde, he completed this gradual but transformative process, which the Mongols no longer had the strength to stop or undo . Ivan III finally renounced his loyalty to the Mongol horde, which he completed .
 A major factor in the success of Moscow were its ruling princes . As this suggests, a major factor was the power of Moscow's ruling princes.
 Moscow has generally been considered fortunate in its princes, and in a number of ways . Moscow has a history of luckier princes, including the recent Prince of Wales .
 Moscow princes had the advantage of continuous male succession without interruption or conflict . For several generations the princes of Moscow, like the Capetian kings who united France, had the advantages of continuous succession . The Russian princes were able to hold the throne for several generations .
 The sons of the princes of Moscow were lucky not to have uncles competing for the Muscovite seat . In particular, for a long time, the sons of Moscow princes were lucky to avoid having uncles .
 The classic struggle between ‘the uncles and nephews’ erupted in the reign of Vasilii II . Direct succession from father to son possessed sufficient standing and support in the principality of Moscow .
 Early rulers found it expedient to devote themselves to their small appanage instead of neglecting it for more ambitious undertakings elsewhere .
 It is generally believed that the policies of the Muscovite princes made a major and massive contribution to the rise of Moscow . It is believed to have made a significant contribution to Moscow's rise .
 From Ivan Kalita to Ivan III and Vasilii III these rulers stood out as ‘the gatherers of the Russian land” as skillful landlords, managers, and businessmen, as well as warriors and diplomats .
 They all acted effectively even though, for a long time, on a petty scale . They acted effectively, even though they all acted on a small scale, on petty scale. They were effective, but they were petty .
 The relative prosperity, good government, peace, and order prevalent in the Muscovite principality attracted increasingly not only peasants but also, a fact of great importance, boyars, as well as members of other classes, to the growing grand principality .
 Last Muscovite tysiatskii was abolished in 1374 . Vasilii Veliaminov, the last Muscovanite tiskii, died in 1375 .
 Ivan III and Vasilii III completed the process of incorporating rival princes into their own aristocracy and army . The expanded boyar estate was treated carefully by Ivan III .
 In order to ensure boyar loyalty, the early Moscow princes consulted with them about matters of state . They ensured their considerable local wealth and power as landed magnates as landed lords .
 The Church, in fact, led the way in unifying Russia . One can argue that the church, in Russia, has helped unify the country .
 In the wake of the Mongol invasion, the hierarchs of the Church strove to unite the entire ecclesiastical realm of Orthodox Rus, including Lithuania and the Kievan southwest .
 Ecclesiastical unity pointed logically toward the idea of political unity . Ecclesiastic unity was an attempt to unite the church and society .
 In the early fourteenth century, the seat of the metropolitan moved to Moscow, making it a religious capital long before it could claim any effective political domination over most of the country .
 The prince could represent himself, and be so blessed by the Church, as protector of the entire Orthodox community . Not least, the prince could also represent himself .
 Sergius Monastery north of Moscow, was a fountainhead of a broad monastic movement . It quickly became a most important religious center, rivaled in all Russian history only by the Monastery of the Caves near Kiev .
 Church leaders appear to have supported Moscow’s efforts to unite the Russian lands politically . There is controversy among historians about this, but historians say there is controversy about this .
 The greatest service of the religious leadership was probably in their frequent intervention in princely quarrels and struggles, through advice, admonition, and occasionally even excommunication . This intervention was usually in favor of Moscow .
 The construction of new myths and symbols of political legitimacy was also a crucial aspect of Moscow's success . Moscow's new mythos and myths were also crucial aspects of its success, says historian .
 Moscow princes’ claim of all Russian rule violated the traditional rules of succession of the Kievan era, which required brothers to inherit the throne of the grand prince before sons . It is important to remember that the Moscow princes' claim to be all Russian rulers violated the tradition of succession
 According to dynastic traditions, the Daniilovichi were illegitimate rulers . Thus, according to dynastations, they are illegitimate rulers of the Daniilovaichi .
 They used the backing of the khan to help them overcome this obstacle, but this was a weak and fading source of legitimacy . They used to use this to overcome the problem, but it is fading in legitimacy .
 Until the nineteenth century Russian sources of political sacrality were mainly borrowed, quite explicitly, from recognized foreign civilizations, especially ancient Rome, Byzantium, and universal Christianity . As Richard Wortman has argued, until the . nineteenth . century, Russian sources were mainly . borrowed,
 Moscow princes vigorously and creatively emphasized their ties to Byzantium . The Moscow princes had their inheritance of its sacred mantle after Constantinople fell to the Turks in 1453 .
 Ivan III’s marriage to Sophia Paleologue, his creation of a new state seal combining the Byzantine double-headed eagle with the Muscovite crest of St. St. Peter the Apostle . Ivan III created the state seal with the double-head eagle of the St.
 George killing the dragon, and his adoption of the titles tsar and autocrat, were all part of the process . George killed the dragon and adopted the title tsar . George's death was part of this process .
 It was also during the reigns of Ivan III and Vasilii II that additional myths of descent were developed and propagated, including that Christianity was brought to Russia by St. St. Ivan .
 Muscovite princes could trace their ancestry back to the Roman emperors, says Andrew the Apostle . The regalia worn by the ruler had been given to the Rus princes by the Byzantine emperor .
 Moscow as the Third Rome, to be discussed later, served similar purposes . The doctrine of Moscow as a Third Rome was discussed later .
 Ivan II hired Italian architects to rebuild the Moscow Kremlin as a sign of Moscow’s new preeminence, both as a symbol and as a means to impress Russians and foreigners alike . More tangibly, Ivan II. hired Italian architect to rebuild Moscow Kremlin .
 Judgments of the nature and import of the rise of Moscow are even more controversial than descriptions and explanations of that process . Moscow's rise of the Russian capital has been controversial .
 Most prerevolutionary Russian historians praised it as a great and necessary achievement of the princes of Moscow and of the Russian people .
 Soviet historians came to the same view, and this argument has been enshrined in the official post-Soviet history curriculum and in statements about the national past .
 This interpretation has often been questioned, including by prerevolutionary Russian historians like Alexander Presniakov, by many contemporary Western scholars today, and, understandably, by Polish, Lithuanian, and Ukrainian historians .
 The vaunted "gathering of Russia" consisted in a skillful aggression by the Muscovite princes against both Russians and non-Russian nationalities . The inhabitants of Novgorod and Pskov were deprived of their liberties, subjugating everyone to despotism, writes
 Both sides are substantially correct, stressing as they do different aspects of the same complicated phenomenon . As is frequently the case in major historical controversies, both sides of the debate is substantially correct .
 Without necessarily taking sides on this or other related issues, we shall appreciate a little better the complexity and the problems of the period after devoting some attention to the economic, social, and cultural life of appanage Russia .
 The medieval boyardom represents an institution of the same nature with the feudal seigniory, just as our medieval rural commune represents, as has been demonstrated above, with the commune of the German Mark .
 The “service people” was the name of the class of population obligated to provide service and making use, in return, of private landholdings . The "service people" were the class obligated to . provide service .
 The basis for a separate existence of this class is provided not by its rights, but by its obligations to the state, the judge said . "The basis for its existence is provided ... by the state," he said .
 "These obligations are varied, and the members of this class have no corporate unity," the author says . "They have to be united, and that's not the case," she says .
 Scholars agree that tilling the soil represented the main occupation of the appanage period . Tilling was the main agricultural activity of the Kievan Rus period .
 Rye, wheat, barley, millet, oats, and a few other crops continued to be the staples of Russian agriculture . Rye was the staple crop of Russia's agriculture in the 1930s and 1940s .
 The centuries from the fall of Kiev to the unification of the country under Moscow saw a prevalence of local, agrarian economy, an economic parochialism corresponding to political division . The centuries between the fall and unification of Moscow saw the prevalence of the economy .
 The decline of the south and Mongol invasion of the Mongol invasion, the Russians lost much of their best land . The Russians had to establish or develop agriculture in forested areas and under severe climatic conditions .
 The bubonic plague reached northeast Russia in the mid-fourteenth century and would recurrently appear over the next hundred years . Some scholars estimate a loss to the plague of as much as 25 percent of the population .
 The northeast, to which many fled, experienced a slow economic recovery, with trade as a driving force . Notwithstanding the terrible effects of conquest and plague, the northeast has experienced an economic recovery .
 The Mongol invasion produced new mobility in the population . Some towns, such as Moscow and Tver, benefitted from the arrival of migrants .
 By the fourteenth century, we see a new growth in such towns of artisanal manufacturing, including carpentry, tanning, weaving, and metalwork . We see a growth in urban construction, notably churches and fortifications, notably in medieval towns .
 Luxury and artistic crafts sharply declined, largely because of the poverty characteristic of the age, but they survived in some places, principally in Novgorod . With the rise of Moscow, the new capital gradually became their center .
 In the northeast too we see signs of new development by the fourteenth century . Even apart from Galicia, not to mention the city and principality of Novgorod, where trade retained great importance, in the northeast .
 The Mongol Empire established a commercial network that extended from China to the Mediterranean . Russian princes and cities were drawn into this trade trade .
 The Mongols encouraged Russian trade with the Baltic states, along the ancient Volga trade artery, and along the Don River . Genoese and Venetian colonies that appeared by the Black Sea were also encouraged .
 Russians continued to export such items as furs and wax and to import a wide variety of products, including textiles, wines, silverware, gold objects, and other luxuries . Russians also continued to import wine, wine, textiles and silverware .
 By the late fifteenth century, Moscow became the dominant power controlling and benefiting from this growing merchant trade network .
 The vast majority of the population tilled the soil, but even most magnates earned their wealth from control of agricultural land and people . Still, we should not forget that the vast majority tills the soil and that most of the country tilled its soil .
 Commercial interests and the middle class in general had remarkably little weight in the history of the rising Muscovite state . Commercial interests in Russia were remarkably little significant in the early 20th century .
 The Question of Russian Feudalism is closely tied to the issue of feudalism in Russian history . The question of the social structure of appanage Russia is closely linked to feudalism .
 Most recent histories of this era no longer show much interest in this concept for interpreting appanage society . It still deserves consideration as a means of viewing Russia in a comparative European frame .
 Nikolai Pavlov-Silvansky offered a brilliant and detailed defense of the idea that Russia too had experienced a feudal stage . The Russian historian said that Russia also had a feudal period .
 Pavlov-Silvansky’s thesis became an object of heated controversy in the years before the First World War . The thesis became the subject of heated debate over the years leading up to World War One .
 After the Revolution, Soviet historians proceeded to define ‘feudal’ in extremely broad terms . Soviet historians then applied this concept to the development of Russia all the way from the days of Kiev to the second half of the nineteenth century .
 Outside the Soviet Union, a number of scholars accepted at least a few feudal characteristics as applicable to medieval Russia . Pavlov-Silvansky's work was published in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Russia was divided into numerous independent principalities and privileged boyar holdings, that is, seigniories . Russia was indeed divided into various principalities, and many of them were seigneiorates .
 Pavlov-Silvansky, it should be noted, believed that the pomestiia, characteristic of the Muscovite period of Russian history, already represented a significant category of landholding in the appanage age . He believed that pomstiia already
 The barons, counts, dukes, and kings of the West found their counterparts in the boyars, service princes, appanage princes, and grand princes of medieval Russia . The boyars and service princes were the boyarars and appanages princes of Russia .
 Boyar service, especially military service, based on free contract, provided the foundation for the hierarchy of vassal relationships . Boyar is based on the basis of the free contract of service .
 Special ceremonies marked the assumption and the termination of this service . Special ceremonies, comparable to those in the West, marked the end of the service .
 Appanage Russia knew such institutions as feudal patronage, commendation, and the granting of immunity to landlords . Landlords were granted immunity to the right to govern, judge, and tax their peasants without interference from higher authority .
 Vassals of vassals appeared, so that one can also speak of sub-infeudation in Russia . Vassalists appeared in Russia, and they were also sub-influenced by the Russians .
 Pavlov-Silvansky’s opponents, however, presented strong arguments on their side . Pavlov Silvansky: "I’m not going to give up on the idea that I’ve never been in prison"
 Russian landlords acquired estates through inheritance, not as compensation for service . Landlords retain the right to serve whom they pleased, thus retaining the right .
 The estate of an appanage landlord usually remained under the jurisdiction of the ruler in whose territory it was located . No matter whom the landlord served, the estate of the landlord was under .
 Numerous institutions and even entire aspects of Western feudalism either never developed at all in Russia, or, at best, failed to grow there beyond a rudimentary stage . Furthermore, numerous institutions and entire . aspects of European feudalism . never developed in Russia .
 Such was the case, for example, with the extremely complicated Western hierarchies of vassals, with feudal military service, or with the entire phenomenon of chivalry . Such was also the case in the West, with vassal hierarchies, military service and chivalry.
 Serfdom became firmly established in Russia only after the appanage period . Even the position of the peasants and their relationship with the landlords differed markedly in the East and the West .
 Many developments in Russia bear important resemblances to the feudal West . Yet, on the other hand, many developments in the country bear resemblance to the West .
 As already indicated, Russian social forms often appear to be rudimentary, or at least simpler and cruder, versions of Western models . The Russian social form often appears to be simpler or cruder than those of Western society .
 Scholars speak of the social organization of medieval Russia as incipient or undeveloped feudalism . A number of scholars say that medieval Russia's feudalism was not developed as early as medieval Russia .
 feudalism proved to be particularly weak when faced with the rising power of the grand princes and, especially, of the autocratic tsars . That feudalism was particularly weak in Russia .
 Scholars who emphasize the comparability of pre-Muscovite Russia to many aspects in western Europe are more likely to use the term “medieval” than “feudal” and often extend this back into the Kievan era as well .
 This more open term, with its sense of betweenness and transition, sees many commonalities without forcing Russia into the straightjacket of having to be identical to European societies in social and political form .
 Scholars of western European history tend to avoid the term ‘feudalism’ precisely because its rigid definition masks important differences and processes of change within western Europe itself .
 Questions of periodization and definition remain very important . Still, questions are still very important.
 The social structure of appanage Russia represented a continuation and a further evolution of the society of the Kievan period, with no sharp break between the two . Appanage society and Institutions were a continuation of the culture of the period .
 The already huge Kievan princely family proliferated and differentiated further during the centuries that followed the collapse of a unitary state .
 The appanage period naturally proved to be the heyday of princes and princelings, ranging from grand princes to rulers of tiny principalities . Even princes who had nothing to rule were forced to find service with relatives .
 Grand princes emerged in several other regional centers, notably Tver and Riazan . The lesser members of a particular branch of the princely family paid homage to their more powerful elder .
 The expansion of Moscow ended this anarchy of princes, and with it the appanage period . Moscow's expansion of the Russian capital ended the anarchy of the princes .
 Next came the boyars, followed by the less aristocratic ‘free servants’ of a prince who performed a similar function . The boyars were the most aristocratic "free servants" of the prince, who performed similar functions .
 In 1332 a boyar with a following of 1,700 persons entered the service of the grand prince of Moscow, while shortly after his arrival another boyar left it . For instance, in 1332, in .1332 a . boyar . with a retinue of
 As already emphasized, members of the upper classes of appanage Russia were landlords .
 The immunities they received to govern their lands no longer extended to jurisdiction in cases of major crimes . They acted as virtual rulers of their large estates, levying taxes and administering justice, although it is worth noting that, as Moscow rose, the immunities .
 With the rise of the Moscow state came an important change in the pattern of land ownership in Russia . Land ownership has changed dramatically in the past .
 Through most of the appanage period, apart from court and Church lands, the dominant form of land tenure was the hereditary form known as votchina . Private lands were private lands that could be bought, sold, or inherited .
 Ivan III and after, conditional pomestie landholding became increasingly common . The Moscow grand prince seized votchiny and either changed their tenure or replaced them with conditional tenure .
 Pomestiia were given at the complete discretion of the prince in return for military service . The prince was awarded Pomestia at the end of his reign in the Roman Empire .
 As long as a pomestiia owner remained in the prince’s service or could ensure that a brother or son could provide service after his death, the family remained in a family . As long .
 Unlike a votchina, a pomestie could not be sold or mortgaged to raise money . Unlike a vodchina it could not have been mortgaged or sold for money .
 The key purpose of the pomestie system was for Ivan III and his successors to provide a livelihood for their military servitors and ensure their loyalty . Ivan III's successors used the system to provide the livelihood of their military servants .
 Traders, artisans, and the middle class as a whole experienced a decline during the appanage period . The middle class suffered a decline .
 Novgorodians were relatively few in number and politically ineffective . Members of that layer of society were relatively little in number, politically ineffective.
 It is generally believed that their position worsened during the centuries following the collapse of the Kievan state .
 Political division, invasions, and general insecurity increased the peasant’s dependence on the landlord and consequently his bondage, thus accelerating a trend that had already become pronounced in the days of Kiev . Political division and invasions increased the peasants' dependence on their landlord .
 As a larger and larger percentage of the peasants ceased to be free farmers and found themselves on the estates of magnates or monasteries, traditional freedoms were reduced . Traditional freedoms have been reduced in the past .
 Evidence that peasants valued their traditional freedoms can be seen in acrimonious court cases against landlords .
 Peasants had traditionally moved to new lands as old ones grew less productive . Peasant farmers had traditionally left their land to move to new land in order to survive .
 In the fifteenth century, in order to ensure a reliable supply of labor for landlords, various state regulations began to limit this practice . The practice began to be restricted in the 15th century .
 The 1497 law code stipulated that a peasant could leave his master only during a two-week period once a year, around St. St. Peter the Apostle .
 St. George’s day in the late autumn, after the harvest, provided his accounts had been settled . The former king was given the title 'St. George's day'
 Many peasants, especially in the north, had no private landlords, a fortunate situation for them, even though they bore increasingly heavy obligations to the state . It should be noted, however, that many peasants, including in the northern part of the country, had .
 The slaves, kholopy, of the Kievan period continued to play a significant role in the Russian economy, performing all kinds of tasks in the manorial households and estates .
 A small upper group of kholopy occupied important positions as managers and administrators on the estates . In fact, a small . group of . kholopes occupied important . positions on estates .
 Mikhail Diakonov suggested that in the Muscovite principality, as in France, court functionaries and their counterparts in most noble households were originally slaves, who were later replaced by the most prominent among the free servitors .
 In the period which followed the fall of Kiev, the Church in Russia maintained and developed its strong and privileged position . The church in Russia maintains its strong position in Russia .
 In a time of division it profited from the best and the most widespread organization in the country, and it enjoyed the benevolence of the khans and the protection of Russian, especially Muscovite, princes .
 Ecclesiastical lands received exemptions from taxation and sweeping immunities . They were more attractive to peasants because of their relative peace, good management, and stability .
 The Church, or rather individual monasteries and monks, often led the Russian penetration into the northeastern wilderness . The Church led the Russians to the region .
 Sergius alone founded more than thirty monasteries on or beyond the frontier of settlement . Sergiius founded over 30 monasticies in the area .
 The greatest addition to ecclesiastical possessions came from continuous donations . Bequeathing of estates or parts of estates in return for prayers for one's soul .
 It has been estimated that at the end of the appanage period the Church in Russia owned over 25 percent of all cultivated land in the country . The Church is estimated to have owned 25 percent .
 As we shall see, these enormous ecclesiastical, particularly monastic, holdings created major problems both for the religious conscience and for the state . As we will see, they created problems for religious conscience, the state and the church itself .
 Recent scholars have argued, princely authority, even in Moscow, was not as absolute as the grand princes might have wished . On the other hand, many recent scholars have . argued, Princely authority in Moscow was not . as absolute . as they often tried to demonstrate .
 Princes, of course, played a major social role throughout the appanage period . Princes also played a role in the development of the English monarchy .
 Princely wills and testaments deal indiscriminately with villages and winter coats . They acted as managers and even proprietors of their principalities, as illustrated .
 Princely activities became more and more petty; public rights and interests became almost indistinguishable from private . Indeed, princely activities become more petty, and public rights were almost indistinguishable .
 Their power proved all the more dangerous because it faced few effective counterweights . Their power was especially dangerous because of the lack of effective counterweight counterweight .
 After the absorption of Novgorod, Pskov, and Viatka, the veche disappeared from Russian politics . The veche was absorbed by the cities of Nov.gorod and Pskova .
 The so-called boyar duma, as will be seen in later chapters, ultimately supported rather than circumscribed the authority of the ruler . And, as well as later chapters of the book, it ultimately supported the ruler's authority .
 "One should not exaggerate autocratic power, however, especially in these early years," he says . One should not overestimate the power of the president, however .
 Many historians now caution that beneath the surface of growing autocracy was the persistence of a ruling class of grand princes and high boyars who ruled by consultation and consensus-building .
 Treaties, trade agreements, military actions, and law codes had to be witnessed by the leading boyars and agreed to by these assembled magnates . Treaties and trade agreements were witnessed and agreed by the boyars . The boyars had to witness and agree to agreements .
 According to this influential but still controversial argument, formulaic statements in legal decisions under Ivan III and Vasilii III, such as “the Grand Prince decreed with the boyars...” should be viewed not as mere formality, but as reflecting a complex structure of negotiated
 If we consider nothing but its literature, the period that extends from the Tatar invasion to the unification of Russia by Ivan II] of Moscow may be called a Dark Age . Ivan II of Moscow of Moscow .
 Its literature is either a more or less impoverished reminiscence of Kievan traditions or an unoriginal imitation of South Slavonic models . It is either an impoverished re-imagination of the language or a less original imitation of models .
 Literature does not give the true measure of Old Russian culture, says author . But here more than ever it is necessary to bear in mind that literature does not .
 The fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, the Dark Age of literature, were at the same time the Golden Age of Russian religious painting . The Golden Age was also known as Russian religious paintings .
 The Russian icon was the most significant artistic phenomenon of ancient Russia . It was the fundamental and preponderant means, and at the same time a gift, of its religious life .
 In its historical origin and formation the icon was an expression of the highest artistic tradition, while in its development it represented a remarkable phenomenon of artistic craftsmanship .
 The hard centuries that followed the collapse of a unitary state witnessed a certain retardation, and even regression, in many fields of culture . Certainly, the hard centuries of the . collapse of the unitary . state witnessed some retardation .
 Impoverishment and relative isolation had an especially adverse effect on education in general and on such costly and difficult pursuits as large-scale building in stone and certain luxury arts and crafts .
 Literature too seemed to have lost much of its former artistry and élan . Literature also seemed to be losing its former élan and artistry .
 Russian historian Dmitrii Likhachev: The writing of chronicles became paler, laconic, and lacking the broad Russia-wide horizon of eleventhand chronicles .
 The decline in many areas of activity coincided with probably the highest achievements of Russian creative genius in a few fields, including wooden architecture and icon painting . However, the decline in these fields coincided with the best achievements of the country's creative genius .
 Some writers have described such great vitality in religious life in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries as to speak of a ‘Russian spiritual renaissance” expressed in religious art, the flowering of monasticism, and intense concern with questions of faith and morals .
 Religion in appanage Russia reflected, in its turn, the achievements and failings of the period, as it continued to occupy a central position in life and culture of the people .
 In an age of division, the unity and organization of the Church stood out in striking manner . The unity of the church stood out against division in a striking manner.
 In the early fifteenth century the Orthodox Church in Russia had, in addition to the metropolitan in Moscow, fifteen bishops, of whom three, those of Novgorod, Rostov, and Suzdal, had the title of archbishop .
 Jonas became metropolitan in 1448 after suspicions of the Greek clergy had been aroused in Russia by the Council of Florence . Jonas broke the old Russian allegiance to the Byzantine See and inaugurated the autocephalous, in effect independent period in the history of the Russian Church . Jonas was the
 Administrative unity within the Russian Church proved impossible to preserve . Administrative unity among church members proved impossible .
 The growing division of the land and people between Moscow and Lithuania resulted in the establishment of a separate Orthodox metropolitanate for the Lithuanian state . The final break with Moscow came in 1458, the first break with the city of Moscow .
 The Church played a major role in the economic and political life of appanage Russia . It influenced almost every important development of the period, from the rise of Moscow to the colonization of the northeastern wilderness .
 The exact impact of the Church in its own religious and spiritual sphere remains difficult to determine . But the exact impact on the Church's religious, spiritual sphere is difficult to see .
 It has been argued that the ritualistic and aesthetic sides of Christianity prevailed in medieval Russia, finding their fullest expression in the liturgy and other Church services .
 Russian Christianity should not be underestimated in this period any more than during the hegemony of Kiev . Still, the ethical and social import of Russian Christianity must be underestimated, says the author .
 Many specialists credit the teaching of the Church with the frequent manumission of slaves by individual masters . This is often by means of a provision in last wills and testaments .
 Christian standards of behavior remained at least the ideal of the Russian people . Christian standards were at least an ideal of Russian people, according to the author .
 Saints continued to reflect the problems and aspirations of the Russians . Saints continue to reflect Russia's aspirations . Saints continued their success in Russia .
 The strongest impression on the Russian religious consciousness was made by St. Peter the Apostle . St. Paul the Apostle was a member of the St. Vladimir Putin's family .
 Sergius, who died in 1392 at the age of about seventy-eight, began as a monk in a forest wilderness and ended as the recognized spiritual leader of Russia . Sergio was a monk who lived in the forest and became a spiritual leader .
 His blessing apparently added strength to Grand Prince Dmitrii and the Russian army for the daring enterprise of Kulikovo .
 Although he refused to be metropolitan, he became in effect the moral head of the Russian Church . He refused to become metropolitan, becoming in effect in effect a moral head .
 The Holy Trinity-St. Sergius was founded north of Moscow and that came to be known as the Holy Trinity . It was the first church to be built north of the Russian city .
 Sergius Monastery became one of the greatest religious and cultural centers of the country and the fountainhead of a powerful monastic movement . The Monastery is located in the heart of the city in the city of Santoire .
 Sergius tens and hundreds of thousands of pilgrims continued to come annually from all over Russia to his burial place in one of the churches in the monastery .
 As in the case of many other saints, the chief explanation of the influence of St. St. Francis is that he is a Catholic saint . He is considered to have influenced many of the world's religions .
 Sergius lies in his ability to give a certain reality to the concepts of humility, kindness, brotherhood, and love which remain both beliefs and hopes of the Christians . The author of the book, "Sergius," is published in Rome, Italy, at the end of
 Sergius tried constantly to help all who needed his help and that he stressed work and learning as well as religious contemplation and observance . He stressed work, learning and religious contemplation as well .
 Sergius spread the Christian religion to vast areas in northern Russia, founding scores of monasteries . The founder of the first monasticastic monastery in Russia founded in the 13th century .
 Following the Orthodox tradition, the Zyriane could worship God in their native language . Thus, following tradition, they could worship .
 Intellectual life in medieval Russia centered on matters of religion . Concerns often encompassed many other areas of human activity .
 The appanage era was marked by a religious ferment around a series of dissenting trends, from the perspective of the established Church . It concerned key questions of theology and faith but also of everyday life and social morality .
 Russia stayed outside of the rationalist and reforming currents that developed in Western Christendom . But it did not remain totally unaffected by them . Russia stayed out of the West .
 Significantly, Russian religious movements stressing rationalism and radical reform emerged in western parts of the country and especially in Novgorod . The Russian religious movement was formed in the 1980s and 1990s .
 In the second half of the fourteenth century, in Novgorod, the teaching of the so-called strigolniki acquired prominence . The teaching was taught in the second part of the 14th century .
 Radical sectarians denied the authority of the Church and its hierarchy, as well as all sacraments except baptism . They wanted to return to the time of the apostles . An extreme faction within the movement even renounced Christ and sought to limit religious observances to prayer to God .
 The protest began apparently over the issue of fees for the sacraments . It might be noted that the dissidents came rapidly to adhere to increasingly radical views .
 The strigolniki was a sect of the Russian strigoliki in the early fifteenth century . It was banned by the population and authorities in Novgorod and Pskov, together with disagreements .
 Later in the century, however, new heretics appeared, known as the Judaizers . The heretics were later known as heretics .
 Their radical religious movement has been linked to the arrival in Novgorod in 1470 of a Jew Zechariah, or Skharia, and the spread of his doctrines .
 The Judaizers in effect accepted the Old Testament, but rejected the New . They considered Christ a prophet rather than the Messiah .
 Through the transfer of two Novgorodian priests to Moscow, the movement obtained a foothold in the court circles of the capital . The movement has become a major influence in Russia's court circles .
 Joseph of Volok led the ecclesiastical attack on the heretics . Joseph was an abbot of the Volokolamsk abbot . He led the attack .
 Ivan III cruelly suppressed the Judaizers, having their leaders burned at the stake . They were condemned by the Church council of 1504, and Ivan III, finally ceding to the wishes of the dominant Church party, suppressed them .
 Controversies within the Russian Orthodox Church at the time had an even greater historical significance than did challenges to the Church from the outside . Controversy within the church had greater significance than those of the outside.
 Joseph of Volok again occupies a central position as the outstanding leader of the first-named faction . The most important and celebrated dispute of the age pitted the “possessors” against the ‘non-possessor”
 Joseph of Volok and the possessors believed in a close union of an autocratic ruler and a rich and powerful Church . The possessors are believed to have believed in the union of the ruler and the Church .
 The prince, or tsar, was the natural protector of the Church with all its lands and privileges . The prince was a natural protector .
 In return, he deserved complete ecclesiastical support . His authority extended not only to all secular matters but also to Church administration, he said .
 The possessors emphasized, too, a formal and ritualistic approach to religion, the sanctity of Church services, rituals, practices, and teachings, and a violent and complete suppression of all dissent .
 The non-possessors, who because of their origin in the monasteries of the northeast, have sometimes been called the “elders from beyond the Volga,” had as their chief spokesman Nil Sorskii—or Nilus of Sora—a
 Non-possessors objected to ecclesiastical wealth and monastic landholding . The non-possessiones objected to monastic wealth .
 The Church and the state should be independent of each other . The state, which belonged to a lower order of reality, had no right to interfere in religious matters, he says .
 The possessors differed in the teaching of the Church among Holy Writ, tradition, and human custom . They considered only Holy Writ—that is, God’s commandments—as completely binding .
 Even those who challenged the foundations of the Church were to be met with persuasion, never with force . The Church was to meet those challenges with persuasion rather than force .
 Ivan III sympathized with non-possessors in the hope of acquiring monastic lands . Their views, especially on relations of Church and state, suited on the whole the rising absolutism of Moscow, although it seems plausible .
 Joseph of Volok died in 1515, subsequently to be proclaimed a saint . Other high clerics continued his work, notably Daniel, who became metropolitan in 1521 . Daniel was a member of the Council of the Holy Lands .
 Nil Sorskii’s chief followers were declared to be heretics in council councils of 1524 and 1531 . Even as late as 1554-55, some of Nil's followers had been declared heretics . Nil's supporters were declared as heretics at councils of
 The possessors championed the rise of the authority of the Muscovite rulers and the interests of those elements in Russian society which favored this rise . In explaining the controversy between the possessors and the nonpossessors, many scholars have emphasized that . Many scholars, including Soviet historians
 The non-possessors, on the other hand, reflected the aristocratic opposition to centralization, the author says . Non-Possessors reflected their high social connections, reflected their social connections .
 The non-possessors may be considered to have derived from the mystical and contemplative tradition of Eastern monasticism, especially as practiced on Mount Athos . In a different context, that of the history of the Orthodox Church, that . of the . Orthodox Church . may be
 The possessors and the non-possessors expressed two recurrent attitudes that devoted Christians have taken toward things of this world . Christians have been burdened as they have been by an incompatibility between the temporal and the eternal standards and goals .
 The non-possessors resemble the Franciscans in the West as well as other religious groups that have tried hard to be in, and yet not of, this world . Non-possession is a form of religion that is not of the world .
 Even after all the sixteenth-century councils they remained an important part of the Russian Church as an attitude and a point of view .
 The medieval debate about the proper balance between living in the social world and seeking to better it through moral action and charity would reappear often in times of dynamism and uncertainty in Russian history, notably at the beginning of the twentieth century .
 The seemingly secular intellectual problem of political authority, the question of the position and power of the ruler, also often acquired a religious coloring . The question of political power has also often become a religious question .
 This became especially important as Moscow rose to ‘gather Russia’ and as its princes turned into autocratic tsars . This was especially important in Moscow as it rose to "gather" Russia .
 Moscow’s role as a legitimate new center of universal Christendom was important . Especially important were markers of succession from both Byzantium and ancient Rome .
 The princes of Moscow came to be connected to the Roman emperors . Still more grandly, the princes of Russia came to terms with the Roman emperor .
 According to the new genealogy, Augustus, a sovereign of Rome and the world, in his old age divided his possessions among his relatives, placing his brother Prus as ruler on the banks of the Vistula . The new genealogists say the Roman king divided his assets among
 Vladimir is a fourth-generation descendant of Riurik and Vladimir Monomakh . Vladimir is the fourth generation descendant of St. Vladimir . Vladimir was born of Vladimir, Vladimir of the same name, and Vladimir's father, Vladimir . He is a descendant of Vladimir the third generation of
 Christianity in Russia was antedated and St. Christian in Russia was abolished . The genealogy of the princes of Moscow was re-evaluated in the 17th century .
 The doctrine of Moscow as the Third Rome has received divergent interpretations from scholars . The most interesting doctrine is that of Moscow being Moscow as a Third Rome .
 Some scholars have stressed the secular political implications of this notion of Moscow’s universal role, including connecting it to the growth of Russian authoritarianism and imperialism . Others have said it is linked to Russia's authoritarianism .
 Philotheus was concerned with the preservation of the true faith, not political expansion . He thought of Churches, not states, and that he was concerned about preservation of true faith . It is, therefore, necessary to emphasize .
 Philotheus, like many churchmen of his age, included a warning to ambitious secular rulers . Also, he warned of the dangers of ambitious rulers .
 Muscovite rulers in their foreign policy never endorsed the view of Moscow as the Third Rome . They remained uninterested in the possibility of a Byzantine inheritance, while at the same time determined to recover the inheritance of Kiev princes .
 The literature of the appanage period has generally been rated rather low . Literature and the Arts is generally thought to have been poor in the past .
 Surviving material is insufficient to enable us to form a definitive view of the scope and quality of appanage literature . As a qualification it might be added that, in the opinion of certain scholars, some scholars, are not satisfied with surviving material .
 Mongol conquest of Russia gave rise to a number of factual narratives as well as semi-legendary and legendary stories . Mongol conquests of Russia have given rise to many of the world's greatest tales .
 These interpretations of the events were interpreted as divine punishment for the Russians’ sins . The Russians were killed by the Soviet invasion of Crimea .
 The best artistic accounts of the catastrophe can be read in the series dealing with the Mongol ravage of Riazan and in the Lay of the Destruction of the Russian Land .
 The Story of the Massacre of Mamai is written with considerable artistry some twenty years after the event . It tells about the departure of Prince Dmitrii from Moscow, the grief of his wife, the visit of the prince to the blessed Sergius of Radonezh .
 Another wellknown account of Kulikovo, the Zadonshchina composed at the end of the fifteenth century, is a weak imitation, both in its poetic devices and in its ideological advocacy of unification of Russia against its enemies .
 The expansion of Moscow, as seen from the other side, inspired the Tale about the Capture of Pskov, written by a sorrowing patriot of that city . The tale is a tale of the capture of the captured city of Moscow .
 Chronicles in Novgorod and elsewhere continued to give detailed and consecutive information about developments in their localities . Chronicles in Russia continued to provide detailed information on developments in the region .
 Accounts of the outside world can be found in the sizeable travel literature of the period . Accounts of outside world are found in travel literature from the same period .
 Afanasii Nikitin’s celebrated Wanderings beyond the Three Seas is a narrative of this Tver merchant's journey to Persia, Turkey, and India from 1466 to 1472 . The book chronicles the journey of a Russian merchant to Persia and Turkey .
 Other interesting records of travel during the period include those of a Novgorodian named Stephen to the Holy Land in 1350, of Metropolitan Pimen to Constantinople in 1389 and of a monk Zosima to Constantinople, Mount Athos, and Jerusalem in 1420 .
 Church literature continued to be produced on what must have been a considerable scale . Church literature, including sermons, was produced on a large scale .
 Lives of saints composed in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries are characterized by simplicity and biographical detail . Lives of Abraham of Smolensk, Alexander Nevskii, Michael of Chernigov, and Metropolitan Peter, are characterized .
 A new style, artificial, pompous, and opposed to realistic description, came to the fore with the fifteenth century . Unfortunately for the historian, a new style was artificial and pompous . The historian says that the style was not realistic and that it was the result .
 This style came from the southern Slavs and was introduced by such writers as Cyprian in his life of St. St. Peter the Apostle .
 The southern Slavs exercised a strong influence on appanage literature and thought, as for example in the formulation of the doctrine of Moscow as the Third Rome .
 Russian wooden architecture, to say the least, represents a remarkable achievement . The Russian wooden structure is one of the world's most famous wooden structures .
 No buildings survive from the Kievan and pre-Kievan eras, no buildings survived from those early times . Although it dates, without doubt, it is without doubt that it dates back to the early days . It is believed to date back to when it was in the K
 It is only with the appanage and the Muscovite periods that we can trace the consecutive development of this architecture and study its monuments . It is the only time when we trace the development of the city's architecture .
 A klet or srub, a rectangular structure of stacked beams, each some twenty or twenty-five feet long, constituted the basis of ancient Russian wooden architecture . A klets or srubs were the basis for ancient Russian architecture .
 A steep, twoslope roof offered protection and prevented accumulation of snow . moss and later hemp helped plug cracks and holes in the roof .
 At first the floors were earthen, later wooden floors were constructed . The floors were originally wooden . At first, floors were made out of wood .
 Generally the two were linked by a third small structure, a passageway, which also contained the door to the outside . The two small structures are linked by the third small small structure .
 A peasant household consisted of three separate, although connected, units . The peasant household was formed from three separate but connected units . Peasant household was a common household .
 As the owner became more prosperous, or as his sons started families of their own, additional kleti were built and linked to the old ones . The ensemble grew, somewhat haphazardly, as a conglomeration of distinct, yet joined, structures .
 After the Russians accepted Christianity, they adapted their wooden architecture to the Byzantine canons of church building . The wooden architecture of the churches was adapted to accommodate Christianity .
 The high two-slope roof of the large klet was crowned with a small cupola topped by a cross . The high roof was topped with a large cupola with a cross topped by the cross .
 Churches of this simple ancient type can be seen on old icons, and a few of them in northern Russia have come down to our times . A few of these churches were built in the seventeenth century .
 In particular, the roofs of the churches became steeper and steeper, until many of them resembled wedges . The roofs of many churches became more and more steeped, making them resemble wedges.
 Russian church builders early demonstrated a liking for more cupolas . In contrast to the Byzantine tradition of building churches with one or five cupolas, the Russians built churches with more cupola .
 Sophia in Kiev had thirteen cupolas, and another Kievan church, that of the Tithe, had twenty-five . The Tithe in Kiev was one of the most famous churches in the world, with twenty-seven cupolas .
 Numerous wooden churches also possessed many cupolas, including a remarkable one with seventeen and another with twenty-one . A remarkable one had a cupola with 17 and another had twenty-21 .
 The Russians translated Byzantine stone church architecture into another medium, wood . They also developed it further in a creative and varied manner . The Russians not only translated the architecture into wood, but they also .
 Especially original and striking were the so-called tent, or pyramidal, churches, of which some from the late sixteenth and seventeenth centuries have escaped destruction .
 The idea of the eternity and immensity of the church of Christ is expressed here with unbelievable power and utmost simplicity . The church's eternity is expressed in unbelievable power, utmost simplicity, the author says .
 The simplicity of outline has attained in them the highest artistic beauty, and every line speaks for itself, because it is not forced .
 Weidle wrote of undeveloped Gothic in Russia, an approach not unrelated to the general concept of Russian feudalism . The approach is similar to the concept of undedevelopeded Gothic .
 Architecture in stone experienced a decline in the appanage period, although stone churches continued to be built in Novgorod and in lesser numbers in some other centers .
 Ivan III invited foreign specialists to Moscow and initiated stone building on a large scale . Ivan III's visit to Moscow marked the turning point for Ivan III, who initiated stone construction .
 The most important result of the revival of stone architecture was the construction of the heart of the Kremlin in Moscow, a fitting symbol of the new authority, power and wealth of the Muscovite rulers .
 Ivan III repeatedly invited Italian architects and other masters to come to work for him in Moscow . Ivan III sent a special agent to Venice in 1474, and repeatedly invited them to Moscow .
 The volunteers included a famous architect, mathematician, and engineer, Aristotle Fieravanti, together with such prominent builders as Marco Ruffo, Pietro Solario, and Alevisio .
 Fieravanti, who lived in Russia from 1475 to 1479, erected the Cathedral of the Assumption in the Kremlin on the Vladimir model, but with some differences . The Cathedral was built on the same model as the Cathedral in Vladimir .
 In 1490 architects from Pskov constructed in the same courtyard the Cathedral of the Annunciation, a square building with four inside pillars, three altar apses, five cupolas, and interesting decorations .
 Vladimir architecture reflected the dominant influence of Vladimir architecture, but also borrowed elements from the tradition of Novgorod and Pskov and from wooden architecture .
 Ivan III ordered the construction of a new Cathedral of the Archangel in place of the old one . Ivan III also worked on the Kremlin courtyard, still working on a new Kremlin courtyard .
 Alevisio accomplished this task between 1505 and 1509, following the plan of the Cathedral of the Assumption, but adding such distinct traits as Italian decoration of the facade .
 The three cathedrals of the Annunciation, the Assumption, and the Archangel Michael became, so to speak, the sacred heart of the Kremlin . They served, among other functions, as the place for the weddings, coronations, and burials of the rulers of Russia .
 As with the cathedrals, probably the greatest interest attaches to the palace in the Kremlin in Moscow . The palace is located in the heart of the Russian capital .
 Stone structures often replaced the earlier wooden ones piecemeal . Stone structures were often replaced by stone structures .
 Italian architects also rebuilt walls and erected towers in the Kremlin, while Alevisio surrounded it with a moat by joining the waters of the rivers Moscow and Neglinnaia .
 Icon painting came to Russia with Christianity from Byzantium . Icon painting was first introduced to Russia by Byzantine Christians .
 The Russians modified their Byzantine heritage and to develop the rudiments of an original style . However, apparently quite early the Russians proceeded to modify their heritage .
 In the centuries which followed the collapse of the Kievan state several magnificent Russian schools of icon painting came into their own . The Russian schools are known for their icon paintings .
 To understand their role in the life and culture of the Russians, one should appreciate the importance of icons to a believer . A believer finds in them a direct link with the other world and, in effect, a materialization of that world .
 Iconic icons are an attempt to grapple with fundamental Christian doctrines such as the incarnation and transfiguration of the universe . They represent, on the other, one of the most radical and powerful attempts .
 In the appanage period, pictorial representation provided otherwise unobtainable information and education for the illiterate masses . And, in the 19th century, it also provided education and information .
 The first original Russian school of icon painting appeared in Suzdal at the end of the thirteenth century . It flourished in the fourteenth century and merged early in the fifteenth with the Muscovite school .
 Suzdal icon of Saints Boris and Gleb and that of Archangel Michael on a silver background provide excellent examples of the icon painting of Suzdal . Suzdal is famous for its icon paintings of the saints and Archangel Michael .
 The icons are often in the grand style, large in size, massive in composition, and full of figures and action . They are often large and large in composition and full in composition .
 The Novgorodian school reached its highest development around the middle of the fifteenth century . Its influence continued after the fall of the city, and its influence continued .
 In the second half of the fourteenth century a distinct school formed in and around Moscow . A distinct school of art was formed around Moscow in the mid-14th century .
 Andrei Rublev, the most celebrated icon painter of all times, lived approximately from 1370 to 1430 . Rublev was one of Russia's most celebrated icons painter .
 The few extant works known to be Rublev’s, especially his masterpiece, demonstrate exquisite drawing, composition, rhythm, harmony, and lyricism . Rublev's masterpiece, a representation of the so-called Old Testament Holy Trinity, demonstrates exquisite drawing and composition .
 The composition is simple and harmonious; following its own rhythm, free from any emphasis or heaviness, it obeys a movement clearly discernible and yet hardly noticeable . The composition follows its own rhythms, following their own rhythm .
 The impression of harmony, peace, light and integrity which this icon produces, is a revelation of the spirit of St. St. Mary's spirit, says author .
 Scholars have noted the unusually gentle portrayal of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit . It is based on the Old Testament story of three angels who visited Abraham and Sarah . The emphasis on God as contemplative, peaceful, and loving .
 This interpretation emphasizes the beauty, gentleness, harmony, and human intimacy in Rublev’s images of Christ and other sacred figures . Rublev: This interpretation of Rublev's images emphasizes beauty and gentleness of Christ .
 Dionysus stood out as the greatest continuer of the traditions of Rublev and the Muscovite school . He was active in the first decade of the sixteenth century .
 Contemporaries mentioned his name immediately after Rublev’s, and his few remaining creations support this high esteem . Rublev's name was mentioned immediately after his name .
 The icons of Dionysus are distinguished by a marvelous grace, especially in the delineation of figures, and by a certain perfection and polish .
 For subjects he often chose the Virgin Mary, the protectress of the city of Moscow, and the Holy Family . He often chose subjects of choice were the protectresses of Moscow and the holy family .
 The works of Rublev and Dionysus set the high standard of icon paintings, not only in Russia, but also generally in the Orthodox East .
 In addition to the icons, some valuable frescoes have come down to us from the appanage period .
 Located in old churches, they include works possibly of Rublev and certainly of Dionysus and his followers . They are thought to have been found in churches .
 The art of the miniature continued to develop, achieving a high degree of excellence in the fifteenth century . The miniature art continued to grow in the 15th century .
 The so-called Khitrovo Gospels of the beginning of the fifteenth century and some other manuscripts contained excellent illustrations and illumination . The Khitrov Gospels were among the best illustrations .
 Large-scale sculpture was not unknown in ancient Russia . The Orthodox Church continued its ban on statuary . Even large-scale sculptures were not unknown .
 Miniature sculpture, which was permitted, developed in a remarkable manner . Miniature sculptures, which were permitted, were developed in remarkable manner.
 Russian artists cut figures one inch and less in height to represent saints, scenes from the Gospels, and trees, hills, and buildings as background .
 The most famous practitioner of this difficult art was the monk Ambrosius, whose work is linked to the Holy Trinity-St. Trinity . His work was linked to St. Trinity-Holy Trinity, the most famous work of the monks .
 In spite of general poverty, certain artistic crafts, especially embroidery, also developed brilliantly in the appanage period .
 Much of this culture was oral and ephemeral and thus few sources were left to us . We know relatively little about popular songs, stories, and games, for much of it .
 These secular entertainers joined migration of people to the northeast . Persisting since Kievan times, they joined migration to northeast . Performers have been performing for centuries .
 Illustrations in manuscripts in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries show musicians, dancers, actors, jugglers, and animal trainers performing in flamboyant costumes .
 It appears that these traveling performers found greater tolerance in the appanage northeast than in Kievan Rus or in Muscovite Russia . The power of the state was strong enough to ban them in 1648 .
 Church condemned skomorokhi's public performances as sinful acts linked to paganism, witchcraft, and Satanism . Still, the Church continued to fight against them, condemning them as Satanists .
 As such, skomorokhi often found it safer to remain on the road moving from town to town and village to village .
 Mongol devastation and the relative isolation and poverty characteristic of the age led to a diminution in culture and learning . As already indicated, the Mongol devastation .
 The decline of Russian towns played an especially significant role in this process . Kievan culture had been essentially urban. The decline was especially significant .
 Documents of the appanage period, we find mention of illiterate princes, and we note repeated complaints on the part of the higher clergy of the ignorance of priests .
 Some learning and skills did remain to support the cultural development outlined in this chapter . Yet some learning and . skills remained to support .
 They were preserved and promoted largely by the monasteries, as happened earlier and under comparable conditions in the West . Not only by the Holy Trinity-St. Trinity, but also by the great Holy Trinity of St. James, they were preserved in the monastic world .
 St. Sergius Monastery north of Moscow, but also by such distant ones as that of St. Seregius . Monastery near Moscow, Russia, is home to a number of Russian monasteries .
 The first century after the Mongol invasion seems to have been the nadir . The first 100 after the Mongols invasion seemed to be the worst of the first century .
 With the rise of Moscow, education and learning in Russia began a painful ascent . Education and learning began to rise in Russia with the help of Moscow .
 This state from the very beginning was not simply Lithuanian, but Lithuanian-Russian . This state of Lithuania was formed from the beginning of the 20th century . Lithuanians are now Lithuanians-Russian, and Lithuanians themselves .
 A union of Poland with Lithuania and her Ruthenian lands, added to those already connected with Poland, could indeed create a new great power . The union could be strong enough to check both German and Muscovite advance, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The amazing success of a plan which would seem almost fantastic was a turning point in the history not only of that region but also of Europe . It was a 'turn point' for the history of the region and Europe .
 The ideological center of the new commonwealth of Poland and Lithuania was to be found in the political model that was taking shape within the Polish Kingdom . The political model involved growing privileges and political rights for the nobility .
 These privileges and rights, or, in stronger terms, freedoms, constituted the foundation of ideological union, binding the new territories to the Polish center without war . Poland's new territories were bound to the center of the Polish government without war, the author says .
 The guarantee that this expansion and the resultant union would be successful was found not mainly in the authority and charisma of the ruler, or in the administrative and military apparatus, but in the creation of a relatively broad and united elite . The guarantee of this expansion was found in the . creation of
 In this political model, the source of ‘charisma’ was those rights and privileges that would allow a gradual evolution from subjects to citizens . The source of "charisma" in the model was those very rights and . privileges .
 The history of the western Russian lands was linked for centuries to the social systems and fortunes of Lithuania and Poland . In effect, the history of western Russia was linked to those of Lithuania, Poland .
 Historians have argued that the growing power of Lithuania, especially after its increasing association with Poland and the adoption of Polish political models, represented an alternative for Russia . Some historians have even argued that Lithuania's growing power was a more democratic and Western alternative .
 Russian differences and rivalry would play an important role in Russian history . These differences would play a key role in Russia's history, says Russian historian .
 Lithuanians, whose language belongs to the Baltic subfamily of the IndoEuropean family, appeared late on the historical scene, although for a very long time they had inhabited the forests of the Baltic region . Lithuanians are considered part of the Lithuanian state .
 The pagan Lithuanians deftly preserved their independence, established a growing state of their own, and dramatically expanded to the east and south . Situated between Catholic Poland, the Teutonic Knights, Orthodox Russia, and the Mongols, Lithuanians flourished in their own state of Lithuania .
 Teutonic Knights forced Lithuanian tribes into a semblance of unity under the leadership of Mindovg, or Mindaugas, whose rule is dated approximately 1240-63 . It was apparently the same who attacked Novgorod, the same as the Knights .
 Mindovg accepted Christianity and received a crown from Pope Innocent IV only to sever his Western connections and return to paganism . Mindovig accepted Christianity but returned paganism and returned to Christianity .
 A period of internal strife and rapidly changing rulers followed his assassination . His assassination was followed by rapid changes of rulers .
 Viten, or Vytenis, managed to unite the Lithuanians again in the thirteenth century .
 He ruled as grand prince from 1295 to 1316, acted energetically at home and in foreign relations . He died fighting the Teutonic Knights .
 Viten’s brother Gedymin reigned from 1316 to 1341 . He has been called the true founder of the Lithuanian state . Viten's brother Viten reigned between 1316 and 1341.
 He completed the unification of the Lithuanian tribes . He strove hard to organize his possessions into a viable political unit .
 Some Kievan territories, notably in the Polotsk area, had already become parts of the Lithuanian principality under Mindovg . With Gedymin, that principality began a massive expansion into Russia . Some of the territory had already been part of the Lithuania .
 Gedymin’‘s famous son Olgerd, or Algirdas, carried the work of his father much further . The famous son died in 1377, and his work was carried out by his father .
 Olgerd expanded eastward with a stunning rapidity . Assisted by his valiant brother Keistut, or Kestutis, who undertook the heavy task of blocking the formidable Teutonic Order in the west .
 The lands that he brought under his authority included, among others, those of Volynia, Kiev, and Chernigov, and a large part of Smolensk .
 In the process, he defeated the Polish effort to win Volynia and fought successfully against the Mongols . The Mongols were defeated in the process of defeating the Polish .
 Three times he campaigned against the Muscovite state, and twice he besieged Moscow itself . He failed to capture it or force the issue otherwise, although he failed to .
 Lithuanian expansion into Russia has more explanations than one . Lithuania has been expanding into Russia in recent years . Lithuanian President Barack Obama is expected to make a visit to Russia in 2015 .
 Internal division and foreign invasions had made the Russian power of resistance extremely low . Obviously, internal divisions and foreign invasion made it very difficult to resist .
 The Lithuanians could not be compared in destruction and brutality to the invasions of the Mongols or the Teutonic Knights . Their domination, in a sense, did not represent foreign rule for the Russians . But it should also be noted that the attacks of the Lithuanian could not
 Lithuanian rulers sought ecclesiastical endorsement of their role as rulers of Orthodox people . They sought and won from the patriarch in Constantinople a new metropolitanate for Lithuania, Kiev, and the western Orthodox lands .
 Lithuanian rulers found much of value in the more developed culture of Kievan Rus . In addition, the Lithuanian ruler found value in more developed Russian culture . Lithuanians found much value in culture of the Rus Rus .
 The Lithuanian army, administration, legal system, and finance were organized on the Russian pattern . Russian became the official language of the new state, and Russian became official language .
 Lithuanian state could well be considered another variation on the Kievan theme and an heir to Kiev, rather than a foreign body imposed upon Russia . Not surprisingly, then, Lithuania could be considered a variation of the same theme . Lithuania is now the only country in the world to have
 Moscow is the other successful heir to Europe's most successful cities . And this made its rivalry with Russia all the more fundamental and significant .
 These two expanding states had been rivals over control of both territory and commercial markets and routes in the region .
 In 1386, following the dynastic agreement of Krewo of 1385, Jagiello or Jogaila married Queen Jadwiga of Poland . Olgerd’s son and successor Jagiellon reigned from 1377 to 1434 . Jagie
 In 1392 Jagiello had to recognize his cousin, Keistut's son Vitovt, or Vytautas, as a separate, although vassal, grand prince of Lithuania . In 1413, the arrangement extended in 1413 to subsequent rulers of the two
 Casimir IV ascended the Polish throne in 1447 without relinquishing his position as grand prince of Lithuania . Casimir also held the position of grand prince in Lithuania until 1447, when he died .
 Poland exercised a major and increasing influence on Lithuania after 1385 . Whether with the same or different rulers, Poland exercised major influence .
 The late fourteenth and early fifteenth century was a remarkable period in the history of the Lithuanian state . The Lithuanian State was formed in the early 15th century .
 Moldavia, Wallachia, and Bessarabia accepted Lithuanian suzerainty from 1387 to 1396 . Moldavia was the only Moldavia to have accepted sueranty from Lithuania .
 Vasilii I married Vitovt’s daughter and generally recognized and cooperated with expanding Lithuanian rule in the region . The struggles over Novgorod and Pskov were the only struggles .
 Lithuania controlled much of the original Rus lands by the end of Vitovt’s rule . Lithuanians were continuing to move eastward, as evident in treaties .
 In 1410 Vitovt personally led his army in the crucial battle of Tannenberg, or Griinwald . The joint forces of Poland and Lithuania crushed the Teutonic Knights, thus eliminating this deadly threat to both Slav and Lithuanian .
 The Lithuanian prince’s great defeat came in 1399, when his major campaign against the Mongols met disaster at their hands . The prince's great defeat was the death of the Mongolian prince .
 Some historians believe that had Vitovt won rather than lost on the banks of the Vorskla, he could then have asserted his will successfully against both Moscow and Poland .
 Jagiello's marriage, in the last analysis, proved more important for Lithuania than Vitovt’s wars or the Lithuanian-Muscovite marriage alliance . lt marked the beginning of a Polonization of the country .
 Jagiello forsook Orthodoxy for Roman Catholicism to marry Jadwiga . Significantly, in order to marry her, Jagiellus forsook the Orthodoxy to Roman Catholicism .
 The clergy, naturally, came to Lithuania from Poland, and the Church became a great stronghold of Polish influence . The clergy became a major source of influence in Lithuania .
 Three of the first four bishops of Vilnius were definitely Poles . Poles constituted the majority in the Vilnian chapter even at the end of the fifteenth century . The Poles constituted a majority in Vilnus chapter even in the end-of-the-15th century .
 Lithuanians went to the great Polish university at Cracow, which provided the much-needed training for the Lithuanian elite . To obtain higher education, unavailable at home, Lithuanians go to the Polish university . The university provided the training for Lithuania's elite .
 Russian historians often fail to appreciate the powerful attraction of Polish culture of the late Middle Ages and Renaissance .
 Polish specialists, ranging from architects and artists to diplomats, appeared in Lithuania . Naturally too, Polish specialists also appeared .
 The Church's influence extended, of course, to society, economics, and politics . But, to return to the Church, its influence extended beyond religion proper, education, and culture .
 The bishops sat in the council of the grand prince, while many clerics, highly esteemed for their education, engaged in the conduct of state business .
 Polonization was the most extensive at the court and among the upper classes . Polonisation was the greatest at the courts and among upper classes. Polonizing was the highest level of socialization among the court's aristocracy .
 Poland, with its sweeping privileges and freedom for the gentry, proved to be extremely attractive to Lithuanian landlords . Poland's sweeping freedoms and freedom was also attractive to the Lithuanian landlord .
 Polish language and Polish customs and attitudes, stressing the independence and honor of the gentry, came gradually to dominate Lithuanian life . Polish language, Polish customs, attitudes and attitudes came to dominate Lithuania .
 In 1413 forty-seven Polish noble families established special relations with the same number of Lithuanian aristocratic families . Each Polish noble family offered its coat of arms to its Lithuanian counterpart .
 As Lithuania grew closer to Poland, historians have argued, it ultimately ceased to be a successor state to Kievan Rus . The Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth was formed in the early 19th century .
 The Union of Lublin of 1569 formally cemented Lublin's relationship with Poland . Lublin and Poland were a confederation of two states in 1569 .
 Lithuanian magnates (including Slavs who became part of the Lithuanian elite) feared losing power and status . petty gentry, by contrast, expected to benefit .
 Only when Sigismund II Augustus, the King of Poland and Grand Duke of Lithuania, proceeded to detach a large section of Russian territories from Lithuania and incorporate them into Poland, did the Lithuanian magnates accept his proposals for unification .
 The Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth (Rzeczpospolita in Polish) was known as Poland . The Kingdom of Poland and Grand Duchy of Lithuania were more commonly known as the Commonwealth . Foreigners often referred to it simply as Poland, especially as time passed
 The alliance lasted, in various forms, until the partitions of Poland in the eighteenth century . The alliance was formed in the early 1800s .
 Historians have debated the nature of political and social relations in this new multiethnic, two-state confederation . The confederation was a crucial event in the histories of several peoples . Historians say it was crucial to the history of several nations .
 Admirers of the Commonwealth emphasize the unique rights and liberties of the combined class of Polish and Lithuanian noblemen . They mainly involved extending the “golden liberties” belonging to the Polish szlachta to nobles in the Lithuanian lands .
 The political order of the Commonwealth was built on a strong aristocracy with many rights and privileges and a weak king . A weak king was the weak king, but a strong aristocrat was the king .
 Parliament or diet, known as the Sejm, was the main institution enacting noble rule . The parliament or diet was the most powerful institution in the country .
 Through the Sejm, the Polish-Lithuanian szlachta elected the king (though from the ruling dynasty) and could oppose any royal decree . The szlacta could also oppose any king's decree .
 Critics have underscored the elements of national inequality in the alliance of Poland and Lithuania, even before 1569 . Critics say the alliance was based on national inequality .
 New arrangement can still be seen as fundamentally a Polish victory . Despite formal equality between Lithuania and Poland, the new arrangement is seen as a victory for the Lithuanians .
 The Kingdom of Poland kept the Russian lands that it had just annexed from Lithuania . The Russian lands constituted the entire southern section of the principality and over a third of its total territory, including some of the richest areas .
 Polish culture (including Roman Catholicism) was a dominant and spreading force, though formally there was a policy of tolerance for the multiple religions of the Commonwealth . Roman Catholicism was a major factor in the development of Polish culture .
 Poland was naturally the senior partner in the new commonwealth . Despite the many protections and rights granted Lithuanians, Poland was the most senior partner . Poland is now the most powerful country in the world .
 Historians have suggested that Poland had become a type of empire . Some historians have suggested it had become an empire . Poland's history has been described as an empire by historians .
 Russian, Ukrainian, and Belarusian historians have paid particular attention to the fate of the non-Polish Slavic populations in this new state . Historians have paid special attention to their fate .
 Poland’s annexation of Kiev and other southern areas of the Lithuanian principality meant that the Orthodox Slavic population found themselves with less autonomy and influence of a largely Polish and Catholic population .
 Despite the many privileges that the Polish system gave the nobility, the vast majority of the population lacked any such rights . Not least, despite the privileges the nobility received, the majority of Polish population lacked such rights.
 Lithuanian, or LithuanianRussian, presents particular interest as the great, unsuccessful rival of Moscow for the unification of the country . The Lithuanian State and Russian History .
 A major line of argument, developed by Liubavsky and others, attributes the victory of Moscow and the failure of Vilna to the differences in the evolution and structure of central authority in the two states .
 In a word, princely absolutism in Moscow trumped decentralized power and weak central authority in Lithuania . Lithuania is now the only country in the world to have a strong democracy .
 Critics have characterized this argument as merely a justification of authoritarianism . Many might find the Lithuanian model more politically attractive than autocracy, but it cannot be so easily dismissed .
 Muscovite autocracy reached unprecedented heights in the reign of Ivan the Terrible . The authority of Lithuanian grand princes sank to a new low in the Lithuanian kingdom .
 Lithunia increasingly relied on the administration of local officials and the landlord class in general .
 The Muscovite system proved to be the stronger in the battle of the Muscove system .
 Important causes, of course, lay behind the contrasting evolutions of the two states, say experts . Important causes also lie behind the differences between the states .
 Moscow arose in a relatively primitive and pioneer northeast, where rulers managed to acquire a dominant position in a fluid and expanding society . To refer to our earlier analysis, the princedom of Moscow arose .
 Lithuanian principality came to include primarily old and well-established Kievan lands . It emerged from the Baltic forests, and included well-known Kieva lands . Lithuanian Principality, on the other hand, emerged from Baltic forests .
 It encompassed much of the Russian southwest, and its economic, social, and political development reflected the southwestern pattern, which was characterized by the great power of the boyars .
 The same noble families frequently occupied the same land in the seventeenth as in the sixteenth or fifteenth centuries . The votchina landholding remained dominant, while the pomestie system played a secondary role . At times they were extremely rich, even granting loans to the state
 The rulers found this entrenched landed aristocracy, as well as, a lesser degree, the old and prosperous towns, too much to contend with . They had to accept restrictions on princely power .
 Poland served as a model of an elective monarchy with sweeping privileges for the gentry . Poland presented an entire gentry culture and way of life . Poland was a model for the monarchy, but it also presented a culture of its own .
 Lithuania's social and political structure evolved out of its own past . Polish influences supported the rise of the gentry, supplying it with theoretical justifications and legal sanctions . Lithuanian gentry were supported by Polish influences .
 Ethnic and religious diversity in Lithuania also had a large influence in Lithuania . Lithuanian history was also influenced by Lithuania's ethnic and religious traditions .
 By contrast, expanded Lithuania was a multiethnic and multiconfessional polity that included Orthodox, Catholics, pagans, Jews, and Muslims speaking a great variety of languages .
 This, too, encouraged the formation of a federal rather than a unitary state . This was the case for a federal state, not a state of a state .
 In the end, as already indicated, it became a junior partner to Poland rather than a serious contender for the Kievan succession . Poland is a major rival to the Netherlands .
 Scholars still debate the relationships between Ruthenian and Russian . The ancestor of modern Belarusian and Ukrainian was spoken in the northeast of the region .
 Scholars generally agree that the separation was fully visible in the fourteenth century . Scholars say the roots of differentiation extended further back, even if it was longer .
 Many influences altered these tongues, including the fragmentation of the appanage era and the deepening divide between Lithuanian and Polish controlled lands and Muscovite Russia .
 The Great Russians came to be associated with the Muscovite realm, the Ukrainians and the Belorussians with Lithuania and Poland . As such, the Great Russians were associated with Lithuania, Poland and Lithuania .
 Russians preserved their political unity in the Kievan state or had Lithuania-Russia become the new center rather than Moscow . One can speculate that events would have taken a different shape .
 Political separation tended also to promote cultural differences, although all started with the same Kievan heritage . Political separation also promoted cultural differences in the Netherlands .
 Strong Latin European influence by way of Poland in the areas now known as Ukraine and Belarus would prove crucial in helping to nurture a distinct identity there . Poland's influence would be crucial in the region's identity, says historian .
 The Russian Orthodox Church too, as we.know, finally split administratively, with a separate metropolitan established in Kiev to head the Orthodox in the Lithuanian state . A separate metropolitan in Kiev was established in 2010 to head Orthodox in Lithuania .
 The division of the Russians into the Great Russians, the Ukrainians, and the Belorussians, reinforced by centuries of separation, became a major factor in subsequent Russian history . The Great Russians were divided into Great Russians and Ukrainians .
 The coup of 1564 was carried out by a coalition of the townsmen and the petty vassals . Just as the ‘reforms’ had been the work of the bourgeoisie and the boyars, the coup of the 1564 had been carried out in 1564 .
 The new system which he set up was madness, but the madness of a genius . MIKHAIL POKROVSKY: 'The new system was madness. It was madness but it was madness of genius'
 Muscovy, unlike Europe, did not define political relations as corporate privileges and legal rights . Muscovies, unlike European countries, had political relations not defined as corporate rights .
 The Labour Party relied on personal loyalties to structure politics, and maintained a complex political reality behind a facade of political simplicity . The party's political reality was hidden behind a complex reality, rather than a facade .
 Ivan the Terrible, Muscovite absolutism came fully into its own . Areas taken by Ivan the Ternble, 1533-54, and Theodore, 1584-98 .
 Ivan IV was the first Muscovite ruler to be crowned tsar . He used the title regularly and officially in governing his land and conducting foreign relations . Ivan IV became the first tsar to have this action approved by Eastern patriarchs .
 Ivan the Terrible’s actions, rather than his titles or ideas, offered a stunning demonstration of the new arbitrary might of the Muscovite, and now Russian, ruler . Nevertheless, it was Ivan's actions, not his titles, rather his ideas, that offered a
 Ivan the Terrible remains the classic Russian tyrant in spite of such successors as Peter the Great, Paul I, and Nicholas I . This image of Ivan the tyrant has been accompanied by a great deal of debate among historians, as our epigraphs suggest .
 The new regent acted in a haughty and arbitrary manner, disregarding the boyars and relying first on her uncle, the experienced Prince Mikhail Glinsky, and after his death on her lover, the youthful Prince Telepnev-Obolensky .
 Boyar rule—if this phrase can be used to characterize the strife and misrule which ensued—followed her demise . Boyar ruled the country for more than a decade .
 The Shuiskys and the Belskys were the two princely houses who ruled the regency . The regency was disputed between the Shuisky and Belsky royal family .
 Twice the Metropolitans themselves were forcibly changed during the struggle, one of them, Joseph, being done to death . Joseph's death was the death of Joseph, the son of Joseph .
 The Shuiskys prevailed, and three successive members of this family held power in turn . Three generations of the Shuisky family were in control of the government .
 Their use of it was entirely selfish, dictated not even by class interests but simply by those of family and favour . They used it as a weapon for their own use, not their own interests .
 All evidence indicates that Ivan IV was a sensitive, intelligent, and precocious boy, Ivan IV . Ivan IV is a sensitive and intelligent boy, according to the author of the book .
 He learned to read early and read everything he could find, especially Muscovite Church literature . He learned early to read and read early to prepare for war .
 "The same boyars who formally paid obeisance to him as autocrat and treated him with utmost respect, neglected, insulted, and injured him in private life," he said .
 "They deprived him at will of his favorite servants and companions and ran the palace, as well as Russia, as they pleased," he said .
 Bitterness and cruelty, expressed, for instance, in his torture of animals, became fundamental traits of the young ruler’s character . Bitterness became a part of his character, expressed in his torturing animals .
 At the age of 13 Ivan IV suddenly turned on Andrei Shuisky, who was arrested and dispatched by the tsar’s servants . At the time of the attack, Shuisky was a member of the Shuisky family .
 The year 1547 is commonly considered the introduction to Ivan IV's effective reign . Ivan IV was born in 1547 . The year was the beginning of Ivan's reign .
 In that year, at the age of 16, he decided to be crowned, not as grand prince, but as tsar . He decided not to be a grand prince but a tsar, and was crowned in 1903 .
 Ivan’s coronation with this title was groundbreaking, as was the entire ceremony itself and the special mass that followed . While earlier rulers had occasionally used the term “tsar,’tar” was groundbreaking . Ivan was the first Russian ruler to use the title
 The elaborate and awe-inspiring coronation ceremony was adapted from the Byzantine ritual . It served to endow the tsar with sacred authority and to indicate his legitimate descent from the sacred rulers in Byzantium .
 A great fire, followed by a riot, swept Moscow in the same year as a great fire and a riot . The city was swept by the fire and rioting of the same time as the fire .
 As the city burned, even the belfry of Ivan the Great in the Kremlin collapsed . crazed mobs killed an uncle of the tsar and imperiled the tsars' own life .
 The tsar himself experienced one of the psychological crises which were periodically to mark his explosive reign . The Russian tsar experienced a series of psychological crises during his reign .
 Ivan IV's rule was described as the first, the good, half of Ivan IV’s rule . What followed has traditionally been called the first half of his rule .
 The young tsar worked with a small group of able and enlightened advisers . The Chosen Council included Metropolitan Macarius, a priest named Sylvester, and a court official of relatively low origin .
 In 1549 he called together the first full full zemski sobor, an institution similar to a gathering of the representatives of estates in other European countries . The institution will be discussed in a later chapter .
 The general purpose of his many reforms, as will be seen, was not to overturn traditional political relationships but to systematize and regularize them . The purpose of these reforms was to regularize and normalize them, he says .
 In 1551 a great Church council, known as the Council of a Hundred Chapters, took place . The Council of the Hundred Chapters took place in 1551 .
 Its decrees did much to regulate the position of the Church in relation to the state and society as well as to regulate ecclesiastical affairs .
 The Church lost the right to acquire more land without the tsar’s explicit permission, a regulation which could not, however, be effectively put into practice . Significantly, the Church was not allowed to acquire land without tsar's explicit permission .
 Metropolitan Macarius and his associates accomplished a great deal in tightening and perfecting the organization of the Church in the sprawling, but now firmly united, Russian state .
 A number of new canonizations in 1547 and 1549 were incorporated into a single Church calendar . One interesting aspect of this process was their incorporation of different regional Russian saints . The new calendar was published in 1549 .
 Ivan also presented to the Church council his new legal code, the Sudebnik of 1550, and the local government reform, and received its approval . Ivan presented his legal code to the church council . Ivan received approval of the new law and local government .
 The new law code signified the regime’s determination to establish more effective rule by systematizing administrative and legal practices . New law code signed into law by regime's determination to set up effective rule .
 This was a reform that mainly brought order to existing norms rather than rejecting them . However, this was the reform that brought order into existing norms, rather than rejected them .
 Article 98 restated the traditional rule that the monarch must consult with his boyars when considering new laws . Article also restated a traditional rule of consulting with the monarch when considering laws .
 The institution of a novel scheme of local government deserves special attention . It is one of the more daring attempts in Russian history to resolve this perennially difficult problem .
 The new system aims to eliminate corruption and oppression on the part of centrally appointed officials by means of popular participation in local affairs . The system is aimed at the elimination of corruption .
 Various localities have already received permission to elect their own judicial authorities to deal with crime . Localities had already been given permission to vote for judicial authorities .
 Locally elected officials replaced centrally appointed governors . Now, in areas whose population guaranteed a certain amount of dues to the treasury, other locally elected officials replace them .
 Even where governors remained, the people could elect assessors to check closely on their activities and impeach them when necessary . And even if governors remained in the U.S., they could elect them to be impeached .
 We shall return to the Muscovite system of government in a later chapter of this book . But we shall return .
 Ivan IV established general regulations for military service of the gentry in 1556 . In 1556 Ivan IV set up general regulations . Ivan Istov IV established regulations for general military service for gentry .
 The new rules set a definite relationship between the size of the estate and the number of warriors and horses the landlord had to produce on demand . While this service had existed for a long time, it remained without comprehensive organization .
 In 1550 and thereabout Ivan the Terrible and his advisors also engaged in an army reform . The reform included new emphasis on artillery and engineering as well as development of the southern defense line . Ivan's army reform also included the development of a southern defense .
 First permanent, regular regiments, known because of their chief weapon as the streltsy or musketeers, were added to the Russian army . The first permanent, permanent regiments were known because the chief weapon was musketeer .
 Most important, a new phase appeared in the struggle against the peoples of the steppe . Most important was the struggle for the people of steppe. Most important is the struggle to protect the people's rights .
 After Ivan IV became tsar, Russia remained subject to constant large-scale raids by a number of Tatar armies, particularly from Kazan, Astrakhan and Crimea .
 The Muscovite state was devastated by repeated invasions in search of booty and slaves . The Muscasian state was forced to guard the southeastern frontier .
 Ivan the Terrible's reign indicated that the Tatars were increasing their strength and improving their coordination . The Tatars are believed to have increased their strength in the early years of Ivan's reign .
 In 1551, the Russians began an offensive against the nearest Tatar enemy, the khanate of Kazan, conquering some of its vassal tribes and building the fortress of Svi .
 Crimean Tatars, assisted by some Turkish janissaries and artillery, invaded Muscovite territory, aiming for Moscow itself . The Tatars fought the great campaign against Kazan in 1552, but were unable to reach Kazan .
 Only after they had been checked and withdrawn to the southern steppe could the Russians resume their advance on Kazan . The Russians had to withdraw to the south of Kazan to be checked .
 The tsar’s troops surrounded the city by land and water, and after a siege of six weeks stormed it successfully, used powder to blow up some of the fortifications . After a six-week siege, the tsar's troops surrounded it by land, water and land
 Russian heroes of the bitter fighting included commanders Prince Mikhail Vorotynsky and Prince Andrei Kurbsky . The Russian heroes included commanders Mikhail Vorotsky and Prince Kurbssky .
 It took another five years to establish Russian rule over the entire territory of the khanate of Kazan .
 The Russians turned their attention to the mouth of the Volga, to Astrakhan . The conquest of Kazan on the middle Volga was followed by the conquest of the city of Astrakhana .
 They seized it first in 1554 and installed their candidate there as khan . It was then seized by the Muslim side of the river .
 The Russians seized Astrakhan once more in 1556, at which time the khanate was annexed to the Muscovite state . After this vassal khan established contacts with the Crimea, the Crimea was seized by the Russians .
 Of the three chief Tatar enemies of Russia, only the Crimean state remained, with its Ottoman suzerain looming behind it . The Crimean state was one of Russia's three chief enemies of Tatar .
 Crimean forces invaded the tsar’s domain in 1554, 1557, and 1558, but were beaten back each time . Crimean forces were defeated each time in three attempts to invade .
 On the last occasion the Russians counter-attacked deep into the southern steppe, penetrating the Crimean peninsula itself . The last time the Russian forces were able to penetrate the steppe and the Crimean Peninsula .
 Another major war was waged at the opposite end of the Russian state, in the northwest, against the Livonian Order . Another major battle was waged in the same region, in Russia's northwest .
 It started in 1558 over the issue of Russian access and expansion to the Baltic beyond the small hold on the coastline at the mouth of the Neva .
 The first phase of this war, to 1563, brought striking successes to the Muscovite armies . The first stage of the war was in 1563 .
 In 1558 alone they captured some twenty Livonian strongholds, including the town of Dorpat . Dorpat was originally built by Iaroslav the Wise and named Iuriev . The town was one of the most famous in the world .
 In 1561 the Livonian Order was disbanded and its territories were secularized . Its last master, Gotthard Kettler, became the hereditary Duke of Courland and a vassal of the Polish king .
 The resulting Polish-Lithuanian offensive failed, and the Russian forces seized Polotsk from Lithuania in 1563 . Yet the resulting offensive failed and Russia seized the city .
 Ivan IV and his assistants had many interests in the outside world other than war . Ivan IV had many other interests in life outside of war . His assistants were not interested in war .
 Authorities of the Hanseatic League and of the Livonian Order refused to let them through Ltibeck . Only a few of their number ultimately came to Russia on their own .
 In 1553 an English captain, Richard Chancellor, reached the Russian White Sea shore near the mouth of the Northern Dvina . Richard Chancellor was in search of a new route to the East through the Arctic Ocean .
 He went on to visit Moscow and establish relations between England and Russia . He established direct relations between the two countries .
 The agreement of 1555 gave the English great commercial advantages in the Muscovite state, for they were to pay no dues and could maintain a separate organization under the jurisdiction of their own chief factor .
 Arkhangelsk—Archangel in English—on the Northern Dvina became their port of entry . Arkhangelk --Archangel in English—was the name of the first Russian city in the region of the region . It was the first city of the Dv
 The first Russian mission to England returned with some specialists in medicine and mining .
 As a result of Ivan’s reforms, wars, and diplomatic initiatives, historians have argued, Russia was becoming a modern state, an empire, and a world power . Historians have argued that Ivan's reforms were part of Russia's growing power .
 He broke with the Chosen Council and turned violently against many of his advisers and their associates, and then, as his suspicion and reach expanded, against the boyars as a whole .
 The second part of Ivan’s reign reflected a radical effort to overcome the conservative tradition of Russian politics . Ivan's attempt to overcome conservative tradition was rooted in family relations and established custom .
 Ivan was fighting, in this view, for a personal and absolute rule that, notwithstanding its roots in previous reigns, was a departure from the past in both political theory and governmental practice . Ivan's rule was an absolute rule, not an absolute one, but a departure in the past
 "What is certain is that his efforts proved, at least in the short term, devastating to political life, society, and the economy," says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: "His efforts proved ... devastating to ... society, society and economy"
 In a sense, a conflict between the tsar and the boyars followed logically from preceding history . The tsar, the boyar, was the son of the Tsar, who died in 1881 .
 Muscovite absolutism rose to its heights with Ivan the Terrible, the boyar class . Boyar class represented one of the few possible checks on the sovereign'‘s power .
 Muscovite rulers had striven hard and successfully to destroy the boyars . The boyars remained partly linked to the old appanage order, which was destroyed by Muscvites .
 The size and composition of the Muscovite boyardom reflected the rapid growth of the state . The size, composition and composition reflected the state's rapid growth in the past .
 In the first half of the fifteenth century some 40 boyar families served the Muscovite ruler . The number of the families had increased to over 200 in the early 15th century .
 Muscovite boyars included descendants of former Russian or Lithuanian grand princes . Boyar families from other parts of Russia transferred their service to Moscow . Boyars were descendants of appanage princes, appanages princes, and members of boyar families who had transferred to Moscow
 The power of the Muscovite boyars, however, should not be overestimated . The boyars' power is not overestimated.
 Ivan the Terrible's reign was plagued by petty squabbles and intrigues against one another . The situation was a deplorable situation during the early years of Ivan's reign .
 Muscovite system of appointments, the notorious mestnichestvo, based on a hierarchical ranking of boyar families, added to the boyar disunity . It severely constrained the ruler’s freedom to appoint state officials and military commanders .
 The most common interpretation of Ivan's changed attitudes focuses on personal events in Ivan's life that may have profoundly disturbed him . Ivan’s changed attitudes may have been caused by personal events, such as personal events .
 In 1553 the tsar fell gravely ill and believed himself to be on his deathbed . The tsar died in 1553 after falling ill and thought he was dying .
 Ivan the Terrible never forgot this troubling experience . Although the oath to Dmitrii was finally sworn, Ivan never forgot what happened .
 Shortly afterwards some boyars were caught planning to escape to Lithuania . Shortly afterwards they were caught trying to escape .
 In fact it led to the break between the tsar and his advisers, Sylvester and Adashev, who disapproved of the proposed offensive in the Baltic area, preferring an assault against Crimean Tatars .
 Ivan the Terrible’s young and beloved wife Anastasia died suddenly in 1560 . In 1560 Ivan and his wife died suddenly . Ivan and Anastas died together in the wake of his death .
 Sylvester and Adashev believed to have participated in a plot to poison her . The tsar was not allowed to appear in extraordinary judicial proceedings in the course of which they did not appear .
 The priest was apparently exiled to a distant monastery; the layman was thrown into jail where he died . The layman died in jail where the priest died .
 Ivan the Terrible's wrath descended upon everyone connected with the Chosen Council . Ivan the Great's wrath was soon to descend on everyone connected to the chosen council .
 Adashev’s and Sylvester's relatives, associates, and friends perished without trial . The two men were executed without trial in the Soviet Union .
 Two princes lost their lives merely because they expressed disapproval of the tsar’s behavior . Two princes were killed because of their opposition to the Russian tsar .
 The escapees included a famous commander and associate of the tsar, Prince Andrei Kurbsky . He spent the rest of his life organizing forces and coalitions against his former sovereign .
 Kurbsky is best known for the remarkable letters he exchanged with Ivan the Terrible in 1564-79 . He will demand our attention when we deal with the political thought of Muscovite Russia .
 In late 1564 Ivan IV suddenly abandoned Moscow for the small town of Aleksandrov some sixty miles away . Ivan IV abandoned Moscow in 1564 and moved to the town 60 miles away from the capital .
 A month later two letters, addressed to the metropolitan, arrived from the tsar . The tsar sent the letters to the city's metropolitan . A month after the letters arrived, two of the letters were sent from Russia .
 Ivan IV expressed his desire to retire from the throne . He denounced the boyars and the clergy . Ivan IV wrote a series of letters in which he denounced the clergy and boyars .
 In the letter to be read to the masses, he emphasized that he had no complaints against the common people . Yet, in the letter, he said that he was not complaining about the people .
 In confusion and consternation, the boyars and the people of Moscow begged the tsar to return and rule over them . The tsar's reign was ruled by the Russian boyars, the people and the boyarars .
 It was originally part of a part of Moscow where Ivan the Terrible built a new palace . It came to stand for a separate jurisdiction within Russia which consisted of some twenty towns .
 The tsar set up a separate state administration for the oprichnina, paralleling the one in existence which was retained for the rest of the country . Now known as the zemshchina, it was kept in place for rest of country .
 Ivan the Terrible pretended to be a baptized Tatar prince Simeon, to whom he pretended to render homage . Much later there was even established a new and nominal ruler, a baptised Tatar Prince Simean .
 Our knowledge of the structure and functioning of the oprichnina administration remains fairly limited. We are not sure how much of this information has been given to us .
 Platonov suggested that after the reform of 1564 the state had actually one set of institutions, but two sets of officials . The state of Russia was abolished in 1564 after the reforms of the same period .
 In any case, new men under the direct control of Ivan the Terrible ran the ophennina, whereas the zemshchina stayed within the boyar duma and old officiaidom .
 Many landlords in the territory of the oprichnina were transferred elsewhere, while their lands were granted to the new servitors of the tsar . In fact, many landlords in Russia were transferred to the tsars .
 The term oprichnina also came to designate especially this new corps of servants to Ivan the Terrible . Oprichniki is the name of a corps of political police, sometimes known as gendarmes or political police .
 Their purpose was to destroy those whom the tsar considered to be his enemies . The tsar's aim was to kill those whom he considered his enemies, the Russians .
 According to various accounts, they dressed in black and rode black horses, to which they affixed the head of a dog and a brush . The horses were used as symbols of biting the tsar’s enemies and sweeping them away .
 Boyars and other people linked to Prince Kurbsky, who had escaped to Lithuania, fell first . Boyars, others linked to the prince, were killed in the fall of 2008 .
 The tsar’s cousin, Prince Vladimir of Staritsa, perished in his turn, together with his relatives, friends, and associates . Prince Vladimir died alongside his relatives and friends in the Russian Revolution .
 The estates of the victims and the villages of their peasants were confiscated by the state, and often plundered or simply burned . The estates were often confiscated and burned .
 Metropolitan Philip, who dared remonstrate with the tsar, was thrown into jail and killed there by the oprichniki . Metropolitan Philip was thrown in jail after he remonstrating with tsar .
 Entire towns, such as Torzhok, Klin, and, especially, in 1570, Novgorod, suffered utter devastation and ruin . Entire cities such as Klin and Torzhuk suffered from the devastation .
 It looked as if a civil war were raging in the Muscovite state, but a peculiar civil war, for the attackers met no resistance . It looked like a war was raging in Russia, but it was not a war .
 It might be added that the wave of extermination engulfed some of the leading oprichniki themselves . It might also be added .
 In 1572 Ivan the Terrible declared the oprichnina abolished, although division of the state into two parts lasted at least until 1575 .
 Ivan the Terrible appeared to have lost his emotional balance following the death of his first wife . Ivan's first wife died at the end of his reign .
 His six subsequent wives never exercised the same beneficial influence on him as had Anastasia . His six other wives never had the same positive influence as hers . He has been married to more than a decade of women .
 The tsar was increasingly given to feelings of persecution and outbreaks of wild rage . He was increasingly seen to be increasingly prone to violent outbursts of rage .
 Ivan the Terrible's life became part of a nightmare which he had brought into being . After the oprichnina began its work, Ivan's life was part of the nightmare that he brought in being .
 Maliuta participated in tortures and executions, including dismemberment, crucifixions, skinning victims, and worse . With Maliuta Skuratov and other op-niki the sovereign participated in the torture .
 Ivan the Terrible struck his son and heir Ivan with a pointed staff and mortally wounded him in 1581 . In 1581, in a fit of violence, Ivan hit his son with a pointing staff . Ivan's son Ivan was the son of Ivan and the heir of Ivan the
 Ivan the Terrible's cruelty and piety was echoed in the images of Ivan in folklore . Ivan's cruelty was a paradoxical mix of cruelty and religious devotion . Ivan was known for his cruelty and devotion to the poor .
 Popular songs and stories portray a ruler who could be wrathful, despotic, cruel, unjust, and terrifying, but also merciful, forgiving, generous, just, and respectful of subordinates and comrades, even when they cross him with good advice .
 A Soviet autopsy of his body indicated poisoning, though most historians today doubt these findings . The Soviet autopsy was thought to have been of poisoning .
 While oprichnina was raging inside Russia, enemies pressed from the outside . Russia's anti-Russian forces pressed from outside of Russia .
 Crimean Tatars failed to take Astrakhan in 1569, but Khan Davlet-Geray led them to Moscow in 1571 . In 1571, Davlet Geray led the Tatars to Moscow itself .
 They withdrew from Muscovite state only after laying waste to a large area and capturing an enormous booty and 100,000 prisoners . They withdrew only after destroying a large part of the Muscvite state and capturing a large booty .
 The following year, however, a new invasion by the Crimean Tatars met disaster at the hands of a Russian army . The Crimean Tatar invasion was met by the Russian army in 1918 .
 The war was started by Ivan the Terrible with the aim of expanding Russia to the Baltic sea in order to develop overseas trade . Recent scholars have argued that his purpose was limited to gaining tribute to replenish the treasury .
 Poland-Lithuania, Sweden, and Denmark partitioned Livonia among themselves in the early 1560s . Denmark and Denmark joined forces to stop Russian efforts in the region .
 The new ruler brought stability and enhanced his reputation as an excellent general . He added stability to the country's stability .
 The following year they captured Polotsk and Velikie Luki, although, in exceptionally bitter combat, they failed to take Pskov . The next year, the Russians were able to capture Polotski, but they were unable to take it .
 By the treaties of 1582 with Poland and 1583 with Sweden, Russia had to renounce all it had gained during the first part of the war and even cede several additional towns to Sweden . Russia renounced all its gains in the first two years of war and ceded several
 Ivan the Terrible's move to the Baltic failed dismally . After some twenty-five years of fighting, Ivan's move into the Baltic was unsuccessful . The move failed to end the conflict .
 The Muscovite state lay prostrate from the internal ravages of the oprichnina and continuous foreign war, writes Alexander Kironin .
 Ivan the Terrible made Russia into a multiethnic empire, a state whose subjects included non-Slavic, nonChristian indigenous peoples . The move pregnant with consequences for the rest of Russia’s history .
 The first key step was Moscow’s conquest of the Tatar khanates of Kazan and Astrakhan . Russia also gave Russia control of the important Volga region .
 The next stage, especially after movement west was hampered, was eastward expansion into Siberia . "The next stage was to expand into Siberia. The next step was to move eastward into Siberia," historian says .
 Even before the Mongol invasion the Novgorodians had penetrated beyond the Urals . Even prior to the Mongols, Novgorodsians had advanced beyond Urals.
 Russians used northern routes to enter Siberia by both land and sea . By the middle of the sixteenth century, they had already reached the mouth of the Enisei . The Russians used to reach Siberia by sea and land .
 The initiative for greater penetration and conquest of Siberia, however, came not from the state but from the Stroganov family . The family's initiative for the greater penetration of Siberia came from the family, the Russian state .
 In the sixteenth century, the Stroganovs developed large-scale industries, including extracting salt and the procurement of fish and furs, in northeastern European Russia, especially in the Ustiug area .
 After the conquest of Kazan, the Stroganovs obtained from the government large holdings in the wild upper Kama region, where they maintained garrisons and imported colonists .
 Their quest for furs led them increasingly to look to the forests across the Ural Mountains, in other words, to Siberia . Their quest to find furs in Siberia led them to look at the forests in search of furs .
 The indigenous peoples of the region, mostly shamanist tribes, resisted these incursions . The so-called khan of Sibir, or Siberia, was encouraged by their nominal suzerain .
 Stroganovs sent an expedition against the Siberian khanate in 1582 . In 1582 the Stroganova sent a mission against the Russian khanates .
 It consisted of perhaps 1,650 cossacks and other volunteers, led by a cossack commander, Ermak . It was led by the commander of the Russian army .
 The Russians defeated the natives in repeated engagements and seized the headquarters of the Siberian Khan Kuchum . Greatly outnumbered, but making good use of their better organization, firearms, and daring, the Russians defeated .
 Ivan the Terrible appreciated the importance of this unexpected conquest, accepted the new territories into his realm, and sent reinforcements . Ivan accepted the invasion and sent troops to take over .
 The conquest of the Siberian khanate had to be repeated in 1584 . The conquest marked in effect the beginning of the Russian control of western Siberia .
 Tiumen, a fortified town, was built there in 1586, and Tobolsk was built in 1587 and subsequently became an important administrative center . The town was also known for its fortified town of Tumtenen, which was later established as an administrative center in the
 In general, the judgments of historians have fallen into two categories . Historians' judgments have fallen in two categories: "Historians" and "historians' opinions"
 The most traditional view emphasizes the tsar’s pathological character, indeed madness, focusing on the division of the reign into a first, good, half . The tsar listened to his advisers, and a second, bad, half, when he became an insane, bloodthirsty
 This view derives from the accounts of Andrei Kurbsky and some other contemporaries . This view is based on the accounts from Andrei Kurbsky .
 Karamzin adopted this view in his extremely influential history of the Russian state, and it was accepted by many later scholars . The view was adopted by many of the later scholars, including many later historians .
 Many scholars today, while acknowledging Ivan’s increasingly ‘disordered personality” and much that was irrational, tyrannical, and cruel in his rule, focus on explaining his actions, even his brutality, in the context of fundamental Muscovite needs and problems .
 Even non-pathological arguments emphasize different purposes and logics, such as different logics . The argument is not just a debate over whether or not it should be .
 Disagreement about the first part of Ivan’s reign mainly concerns how to interpret the efforts at standardization and centralization .
 Some see evidence of political “modernization” in the development of a larger and more efficient central administration, a more coherent set of legal rules and procedures, a stronger army and a loyal middle service class .
 Other scholars have argued that these were efforts mainly at political “mobilization, not modernization . But other scholars have said that these efforts were efforts to political ‘mobilize’ not modernization.
 This was not a freer society, nor one developing a Western-style independent civic sphere, but a society better harnessed to the state’s needs . The state was not freer, nor developing a western-style free-thinking civic sphere . This was a society harness
 The oprichnina evokes particularly heated historiographical debate . Turning to the second part of Ivan’s reign, it evokes heated historical debate . Ivan's reign was the second half of his reign .
 Even the bitterness and cruelty of the struggle have been seen as stemming less from the tsar’s character than from the difficulty of the task and the extent of noble resistance . Even the cruelty and cruelty have been thought to have stemmed from the fact that the struggle was difficult and noble
 It can be argued that the tsar began with relatively mild measures and turned to severe punishments only after boyar Opposition continued . The tsar's actions were relatively mild, but severe punishments were only after the boyar opposition .
 Ivan the Terrible’s reign can be seen as parallel to those of Louis XI in France or Henry VIII in England, who similarly suppressed their aristocracies .
 Critics note that there were no real domestic threats to the monarchy . Critics say the boyars and even princely clans were already largely under control .
 Ivan was attacking political ‘problems’ that his predecessors had already solved by less dramatic means . Ivan: “Ivan’s attack was on political “problems that had already been solved” Ivan: In other .
 This was not, she argues, the stereotypical view of boyar power as a venal, obstructionist, and disorderly force . Ivan was determined to act heroically at first and more insanely as his frustrations grew or his mind become disordered .
 Muscovite chronicles and histories show a heroic struggle by the monarch against selfish boyars . Not surprisingly, this model of heroic struggle was also the official view that appeared in Muscvite chronicle and histories .
 They advised the sovereign and provided military and administrative leadership . They also provided military, administrative leadership.
 This was not an ideal and harmonious system—though this was how its boyar defenders portrayed it . The system was not ideal, but this is how it was portrayed by its defenders .
 It was marked by interest groups, rival factions, disagreements over policy, and much balancing of power .
 Many symbols and rituals of autocracy were signs of the unity of the kingdom and set a limit on conflict among the boyars . As such, the many symbols of autocrisy were signs .
 This was a messy political system with lots of jockeying for influence, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "This was a mess of messy politics and a messy system"
 Ivan and Ivan were not in the boyar elite . But it may have seemed that way to Ivan and to gentry and servitors not in boyar .
 The oprichnina, in this case, can be seen as an effort to break out of this restrictive system . It is not the first time a woman has been allowed to take part in a fashion show .
 The clash between real Muscovite politics and the idea of autocratic power might be extended to the whole of Ivan’s experience until he launched the oprichnina . This clash may extend to the entire of Ivan's experience until the op richnina was launched .
 Ivan the Terrible's actions in the context of Russian history and comparative politics remain . Yet, after all the able and valuable explanations, there are grave doubts remain .
 If we accept the argument that there was no real threat to his power and that boyar influence was not really dysfunctional, then the best remaining explanation is that these threats and deficiencies seemed real to Ivan . Ivan seemed to see these deficiencies and deficiencies as real to him, says historian .
 This, in turn, leads to either what might be called the ideological and semiotic explanation or to the psychological explanation . This, of course, leads us to either an ideological or a psychological explanation or an ideological explanation .
 The first argues that Ivan believed so fully in the myth of the tsar’s absolute power that he wished to make it real . The second argues that Istov believed so much in the . myth that he wanted to make the . tsar's absolute power .
 The second, and still widespread, argument focuses on Ivan’s inner demons . Ivan's inner demons are the reason for the book's success .
 Even Soviet scholars, who did the most to interpret Ivan the Terrible in terms of a purposeful, modern state overcoming resistant remnants of feudal fragmentation, recognized Ivan’s suspiciousness and cruelty .
 Few historians doubt that Ivan’s childhood experiences had a troubling influence on him . Ivan's childhood experiences may have had a disturbing effect on him, historians say .
 Few would disagree that Ivan IV was a disturbed and erratic figure . Still, few would disagree with that . Ivan IV is a disturbed figure .
 Ivan the Terrible was the ruler of a huge state, with very few institutionalized limitations on his power to act . Ivan was not just a private person but the ruler . He was not only a private individual but a ruler of an enormous state .
 The reign of Ivan IV's eldest surviving son Theodore, or Fedor, 1584-98, gave Russia a measure of peace . The Reign of Theodore was the longest of Ivan's reigns .
 Physically weak and extremely limited in intelligence and ability, but well meaning as well as very religious, the new tsar relied entirely on his advisers . The tsar was very religious and very well-meaning as well meaning .
 Boris Godunov's advisers performed their task fairly well . Fortunately, these advisers, especially Boris, did well . Vladimir Putin has been criticized for his handling of the economy .
 An important and extraordinary event of the reign consisted in the establishment of the patriarchate in Russia in 1589 . The establishment of a patriarchate was an important event in the reign .
 Boris Godunov managed to obtain consent of the patriarch of Constantinople, Jeremiah, to elevating the head of the Russian Church to the rank of patriarch, the highest in the Orthodox world . The Russians managed to get the consent of Jeremiah to elevate the Patriarch of Constantinople .
 Later all Eastern patriarchs agreed to this step, although with some reluctance . Later all patriarchs in the Middle East agreed with this step .
 Metropolitan Job became the first Muscovite patriarch . Metropolitan Job was Boris Godunov’s friend, Metropolitan Job, who later became Metropolitan Job . Job was Metropolitan Job's friend, who became the head of Metropolitan Job in Russia .
 The new importance of the Russian Church led to an upgrading and enlargement of its hierarchy through the appointment of a number of new metropolitans, archbishops, and bishops . The Russian Church is now the world's most important Catholic Church .
 This strengthening of the organization of the Church proved to be significant in the Time of Troubles . The strengthening of this type of organization proved important in the time of the Troubles.
 The reign ended in 1595 with the return of the Muscovite state of the towns and territory near the Gulf of Finland which had been ceded by the treaty of 1583 .
 In 1586, an Orthodox Georgian kingdom in Transcaucasia begged to be accepted as a vassal of the Russian tsar . The kingdom was beset by Muslims, but was accepted by the tsar in 1586 .
 Georgia lay too far away for more than a nominal, transitory connection to Russia in the sixteenth century . The request pointed to one direction of later Russian expansion .
 Theodore’s reign also witnessed, in 1591, the death of Prince Dmitrii of Uglich in a setting which made it one of the most famous detective stories of Russian history . Theodore's reign also saw the death in which it was made famous .
 Nine-and-a-half-year-old Dmitrii, the tsar’s brother and the only other remaining male member of the ruling family, died in Uglich . He died in the courtyard of his residence in the city of Uglchich .
 The populace accused the child’s guardians of murder and killed them . The populace rioted, accused them of murder, and the child's guardians were killed .
 An official investigating commission declared that Dmitrii had been playing with a knife and had injured himself fatally while in an epileptic fit .
 Dmitrii was murdered on orders of Boris Godunov who had determined to become tsar himself . Many contemporaries and later historians concluded that he had been murdered . Many historians concluded he was murdered in order to become a tsar .
 Allegations of murder arose immediately following Prince Dmitrii’s apparently accidental death . Later Verndansky established that no first-hand evidence of an assassination exists at all .
 Pushkin's play and Musorgsky’s opera, Boris Godunov, were both written in the play and opera . But scholars may well remain satisfied with Platonov‘s and Verndansky’�s explanation .
 Even if Boris Godunov did not murder Dmitrii, he made every other effort to secure power, he did not kill him . Even if he didn't murder him, he tried to secure his position in power .
 Boris Godunov came from a Mongol gentry family converted to Orthodoxy and Russified, himself virtually illiterate . He showed uncanny intelligence and abilities in palace intrigue, diplomacy and statecraft .
 He capitalized also on his proximity to Tsar Theodore, who was married to Boris’s sister, Irina . Boris's sister was also married to the Tsar .
 Boris Godunov was the effective ruler of Russia in about 1588 . He defeated his rivals at court and became effective ruler in 1588.
 Boris Godunov stood ready and waiting to ascend the throne when the tsar died in 1598, without an heir . Boris stood ready to take over the throne in the Russian throne .
 His reign was to be not so much a successful consummation of his ambition as a prelude to the Time of Troubles . His reign, however, was not so successful as a successful .
 The Time of Troubles—Smutnoe Vremia, in Russian—refers to a turbulent, confusing, and painful period of Russian history at the beginning of the seventeenth century . Boris Godunov’s accession to the Muscovite throne in
 This classification immediately suggests the complexity of the subject . This classification suggests the complex nature of the topic .
 Two models downplay the importance of foreign intervention in Soviet history . They see the conflict as rooted chiefly in internal problems . These two models also downplay foreign intervention .
 The dynastic aspect stemmed from the fact that with the passing of Tsar Theodore the Muscovite ruling family died out . With the death of the Tsar, the family became extinct in Russia .
 For first time in Muscovite history there remained no natural successor to the throne . For the first time, there were no natural successors to the monarch . The first time there was no natural heir to the kingdom .
 The dynastic issue emerged through the accidental absence of an heir . The national issue resulted largely from the centuries-old Russian struggle in the west and in the north .
 Poland and Sweden felt compelled to take advantage of the sudden Russian weakness . Poland, and to a lesser extent Sweden, took advantage of Russia's weakness .
 The complex involvement of Poland, especially, reflected some of the key problems and possibilities in the history of eastern Europe . Poland's complex involvement in the region reflected the key issues and possibilities of the region's history .
 The social disorganization, strife, and virtual collapse that made the dynastic issue so critical and opened the Muscovite state to foreign intrigues and invasions . For it was the social disorganized, strife and collapse that led to the collapse .
 The Time of Troubles can be understood only as the end product of the rise of the Muscovite state with its attendant dislocations and tensions . The time of the time can only be understood as the result of the rising of Russia .
 Russian social structure has exhibited a certain lack of complexity and differentiation . Russian history has often been said to represent a cruder or simpler process than western European countries .
 While this approach must be treated circumspectly, it must not be dismissed, says the author of the book .
 We noted earlier that it might be appropriate to describe appanage Russia in terms of an incipient or undeveloped feudalism . Russia might be best-suited to describe it as a precursor to a feudal state .
 The rise of Moscow meant a further drastic simplification of Russian social relations . Moscow has a history of simplifying social relations with Russia .
 To expand and defend its growing territory, the Muscovite state relied on service people, that is, on men who fought its battles and also performed administrative and other work for the government .
 The service gentry was supported by their estates . The service people were later known as the gentry, or simply simply gentry .
 The pomestie, the estate granted for service, became basic to the Muscovite social order . In this manner, the pomstie, an estate granted to service, was a basic part of the social order in Russia .
 Muscovite government confiscated most of the holdings of the Novgorodian boyars and even half of those of the Church . After the acquisition of Nov.gorod, in its continuing search for land suitable for pomestiia, the Muscavite government .
 Hereditary landlords too, it will be remembered, found themselves obligated to serve the state . Landlords too, as well as the state, have been forced to do so .
 The rapid Muscovite expansion and the continuous wars on all frontiers, except the north and northeast, taxed the resources of the government and the people to the breaking point . The rapid expansion of the Muscavite empire taxed the Russian government and its people .
 Muscovite authorities made frantic efforts to obtain more service gentry . Muscove authorities made desperate efforts to get more service members . The Russian capital is now in the throes of a crisis .
 Small landholders in the areas of Novgorod and Pskov and an ever-increasing number of Mongols, some of whom had not even been converted to Christianity, became members of the Muscovite service gentry .
 When Moscow succeeded in the “gathering of Russia” and the appanages disappeared, the princes and boyars failed to make a strong stand against Muscovite centralization and absolutism . The princes, boyars didn't make a stand against centralization
 Many of them, indeed, were slaughtered, without offering resistance, by Ivan the Terrible . Many of the victims were slaughtered without resistance . Ivan's death was the result of his brutal slaughter .
 It has been argued that the Muscovite government displaced the appanage ruling elements all too rapidly, more rapidly than it could provide effective substitutes . Notably, it has argued that it has not been able to provide effective alternatives .
 The resulting weakening of the political and social framework contributed its share to the Time of Troubles, writes David Cameron . The resulting weakened of the social and political framework contributed to the crisis, he says .
 Boris Godunov’s death led to the decline in the tsar's authority after his death . And so did the boyar reaction following the decline of the tsars’ authority .
 As the Muscovite state expanded, centralizing and standardizing administration and institutions, towns also suffered . Towns also suffered as the state centralized and subjugated the interests of other classes .
 They became administrative and military centers at the expense of local self-government, commercial elements, and the middle class as a whole . They became centers for the military, economic and political reasons .
 Novgorod and Pskov were most famous towns in Russia, but similar changes occurred in many other towns as well . This transformation occurred most strikingly in Novgorhod and Piskov .
 Most important, however, was a deterioration in the position of the peasants, who constituted the great bulk of the people . The peasants were the most important losers of the Soviet Union .
 They provided the labor force on the estates of the service gentry, and, therefore, were affected immediately and directly by the rise of that class . They, of course, provided . The labor force for the estates .
 The growth of the service gentry meant that more and more state lands and peasants fell into gentry hands through the pomestie system . More and more of the state lands were given to the gentry through the system .
 Gentry landlords, themselves straining to perform burdensome state obligations, squeezed what they could from the peasants . The peasants were forced to live with the burden of state obligations .
 The ravages of the oprichnina brought outright disaster to the already overtaxed peasant economy of much of central Russia . Furthermore, the ravages brought out an economic crisis in Russia's countryside .
 Famine, which appeared in the second half of Ivan the Terrible’s reign, was to return in the frightful years of 1601-3 . Famine was to be returned in the next few years of the reign .
 The Russian conquest of the khanates of Kazan and Astrakhan opened up fertile lands to the southeast . The government encouraged migration to consolidate the Russian hold on the area .
 The peasants had to be prevented from fleeing if their masters were to retain the ability to serve the state . But this policy could not be reconciled with the interests of the service gentry, whose peasants had been prevented fleeing .
 Muscovite authorities made an especially determined effort to secure and guarantee the labor force of the gentry . In the last quarter of the sixteenth century, Muscvites made a determined effort .
 The state also tried to curb Church landholding, and especially to prevent the transfer of any gentry land to the Church .
 Serfdom as such finally became fully established in Russia . Furthermore, serfdom was finally established as a fully-fledged form of serfdom .
 The long-term process of the growth of serfdom will be discussed later . The government's dedication to the interests of the service gentry at least contributed to it .
 The peasants continued to flee to the borderlands in spite of all prohibitions . Hard-pressed economically and increasingly deprived of their rights, the peasants continued fleeing .
 The shattering impact of the oprichnina provided another stimulus for the growth of that restless, dislocated, and dissatisfied lower-class element which played such a significant role during the Time of Troubles .
 The cossacks were to act as another major and explosive element in the Time of Troubles . Combining military organization and skill, the spirit of adventure, and a hatred of the Muscovite political and social system, they were linked socially to the broad masses . The c
 Dissatisfied elements in the Russian state included also a number of conquered peoples and tribes, especially in the Volga basin . Dissatisfies elements included also conquered peoples, tribes and tribes .
 The gentry itself, while a privileged class, had many complaints against the exacting government . It was not the first time the gentry had complained about the government .
 Conditions and problems varied in the different parts of the huge Muscovite state, and that the Time of Troubles included local as much as national developments .
 The Russian north, for example, had no problem of defense and very few gentry or serfs . Russia's north had no problems of defense, and very little gentry and serfs.
 A brief general account can pay only the scantest attention to these local variations . The interested student must be referred to more specialized literature, beginning with the writings of Platonov .
 With the passing of Theodore, the Muscovite dynasty died out and a new tsar had to be found . Boris Godunov and the First False Dmitrii were born in Moscow . The First False Tsar was born in 1903 .
 Boris Godunov formally ascended the throne only after being elected by a specially convened zemskii sobor and implored by the patriarch, the clergy, and the people to accept the crown .
 He proved to be, or rather continued, an intelligent and able ruler . He proved himself to be an intelligent ruler .
 Boris Godunov even thought of establishing a university in Moscow, but abandoned this idea because of the opposition of the clergy . The clergy was opposed to the idea of a university being established in Moscow .
 In foreign policy, Boris Godunov maintained peaceful relations with other countries and promoted trade . He concluded commercial treaties with England and with Hansa .
 Boris Godunov’s brief reign, 1598-1605, witnessed tragic events . The Russian king was assassinated in 1605, 1616, in the wake of his assassination .
 The crops failed again in 1602 and also, to a considerable extent, in 1603 . The crops were also failed in 1601 and 1602 .
 Government tried to feed the population of Moscow free of charge, direct supplies to other towns, and find employment for the destitute . But its measures availed little against the calamity .
 It has been estimated that more than 100,000 people perished in the capital alone . It is estimated that over 100,00 people died in the city alone .
 Starving people devoured grass, bark, cadavers, animals and, sometimes, even other human beings .
 Large bands of desperate men roamed and looted the countryside and sometimes gave battle to regular troops . The bands were a characteristic phenomenon of the Time of Troubles . Large bands roamed the countryside, looting and sometimes giving battle to troops .
 At this point rumors to the effect that Boris Godunov was a criminal and a usurper and that Russia was being punished for his sins began to spread . At the end of the war, Russia was believed to have been punished .
 It was alleged that he had plotted to assassinate Prince Dmitrii; it was alleged further that in reality another boy had been murdered . The prince had escaped and would return to claim his rightful inheritance, it was claimed .
 Most historians believe that False Dmitrii was in fact a certain Grigorii Otrepiev, a young man of service class origin, who had become a monk and left his monastery .
 Apparently he lived in Moscow in 1601 and early 1602, but escaped to the cossacks when authorities became interested in his assertions and decided to arrest him .
 False Dmitrii met with the king in Cracow and promised to convert Russians to Roman Catholicism . The Sejm refused to support a military adventure in support of False Dmitryi . The king refused to back a military campaign in support .
 He did win the support of the Jesuits for his commitment to spreading Catholicism and certain Lithuanian and Polish aristocrats . But he did win support for the Jesuit for spreading Catholicism .
 His betrothal to Marina Mniszech, the daughter of a powerful Polish aristocrat, was possibly his own adoption of Catholicism . His marriage was likely to have strengthened his bond with the Polish aristocracy .
 The role of the Muscovite boyars in the rise of False Dmitrii remains less clear . By contrast, the role of Muscavi boyars is less clear in Russia .
 Many scholars have become convinced that important boyar circles secretly supported False Dmitrii in order to destroy Boris Godunov . Yet, the paucity of evidence and frequent absence of evidence has led some to doubt the existence of the boyar circle .
 The entire False Dmitrii episode has been described as a boyar stratagem . Indeed, the entire False Dmitryi episode was described as an act of boyar tactics . The False Dmitryrii story has been dubbed a 'boyar'
 Boris Godunov, in an effort to defend his position, turned violently against the boyars around the throne, instituting in 1601 a veritable purge of them . The boyars were purged from the throne by Godunova .
 False Dmitrii invaded Russia in October 1604 at the head of some 1,500 cossacks, Polish soldiers of fortune, and other adventurers . In October 1603, he invaded Russia at the height of the 16th century .
 Much of southern Russia, including such large centers as Chernigov, welcomed False Dmitrii . In a number of places authorities and population wavered in their stand, but failed to offer firm resistance .
 Dissatisfaction and unrest within the Muscovite state proved to be more valuable to the pretender’s cause than Polish and Lithuanian aid . ‘Dissatisfaction’ and unrest in Muscova proved more valuable than Polish or Lithuanian help .
 False Dmitrii’s motley forces suffered repeated defeats, but regrouped and reappeared . The Russian state of the Crimean War was founded in 1881 .
 False Dmitrii entered the capital in triumph on June 20, 1605 . Boris Godunov's wife and his young son and successor Theodore were deposed and murdered in Moscow .
 The people believed it was the return of the true tsar to ascend his ancestral throne . The people rejoiced at what they believed to be the miraculous return to the throne .
 On the eve of the riots that overthrew the Godunovs, Vasilii Shuisky himself had already publicly reversed his testimony and claimed that in Uglich Prince Dmitrii had escaped the assassins, who killed another boy instead .
 Followers of False Dmitrii, such as Fedor Basmanov, succeeded the supporters of Godunov around the throne . The supporters of False Dmitryrii succeeded the followers of the throne in Russia .
 A Greek cleric, Ignatius, replaced Boris Godunov’s friend Job as patriarch . Job was Job's friend Job, who was among the first to side with the pretender .
 The new tsar returned from disgrace, prison, or exile the boyars who had suffered during the last years of his predecessor's reign . The tsar's reign was one of the most turbulent periods of his reign .
 Those regaining favor included Philaret, formerly Fedor Romanov, the abbot of a northern monastery whom Boris Godunov had forced to take holy orders and exiled . Philaret was forced into holy orders after being forced out of the monastery .
 False Dmitrii has been described as an unpreossessing figure with no waistline, arms of unequal length, red hair that habitually stood up, a large wart on his face, a big ugly nose, and an expression both unsympathetic and melancholy . He has been
 Some scholars see him as a modernizer who ran afoul of conservative boyars . Some scholars have seen him as an modernizer . Others have said he was a modernist .
 Others have described him as relying closely on the boyars and even as beginning to establish a model of gentry influence according to the Polish model .
 There are little evidence that President Obama's social policies favored peasants . Likewise, there is little evidence of claims that his social policies favor peasants .
 His main concern, it seems, was to protect the interests of his most loyal noble servitors, not to improve the conditions of their bondsmen . He seems to have been trying to protect his loyal servitors .
 He refused to be anyone’s puppet, and failed to honor his promises concerning the introduction of Catholicism into Russia . ‘I refuse to be a puppet,’ he refused to honor any of his promises to introduce Catholicism .
 Instead of acting on these promises, he propounded the grandiose project of driving the Turks out of Europe . He proposed the project to drive them out of the continent, he said .
 Dmitrii repeatedly failed to observe the established traditions and etiquette . False Dmitriis failed to follow the established tradition and etiquette of Russian diplomacy .
 False Dmitrii had already served his purpose, Platonov and many other specialists say . The main argument rested simply in the fact that he had already been serving his purpose .
 The boyars had utilized him successfully against the Godunovs and now made arrangements to dispose of him in his turn . The boyarars had used him successfully .
 Rumors spread almost immediately after False Dmitrii’s victory that the new tsar was, after all, an impostor . Vasilii Shuisky and his brothers began to spread rumors to the effect that he was an imposter .
 False Dmitrii believed himself to be the true heir to the throne . Caught and condemned to death, they were instead exiled and, after several months, entirely pardoned by the clement tsar .
 The next important event of the reign was the tsar’s marriage to Marina Mniszech, which increased tensions . The tsar's marriage to the then-wife of the same woman, Marina, increased tensions in Russia .
 Marina, however, remained a Catholic . She brought with her another large group of Poles with her .
 Prince Vasilii Shuisky and other boyars led into Moscow a very large military detachment stationed nearby . The night of May 26 led the Russian troops to Moscow .
 Their coup began under the slogan of saving the tsar from the Poles, but as it progressed the . tsar himself was denounced as an impostor . The coup began with the . slogan 'saving the tsars from the . Poles', but as . it progressed, the ts
 False Dmitrii tried to escape, but was handed over to the rebels and death by a guard of the streltsy, apparently after they had been persuaded by the mother of the prince of Uglich, the nun Martha, that their tsar was an impostor .
 Prince Vasilii Shuisky became the next tsar with no greater sanction than the wishes of his party and the endorsement shouts of a Muscovite crowd .
 Historians who see in Vasilii Shuisky’s declaration an effective limitation of autocracy seem to overstate the case . The tsar's assurances reflect his ties to the boyars as well as the efforts of the latter to obtain minimal guarantees against the kind of persecution practiced
 It appears that the boyars acquired a certain freedom under the new monarch and often behaved willfully and disobediently in their relations with him . The boyars were often disobedient in relations with the monarch .
 The government tried to assure the people that False Dmitrii had been an impostor who had won the throne by magic and had forced the nun Martha and others to recognize him .
 With the deposition and murder of False Dmitrii, state authority in the land was further weakened . The forces of discontent and rebellion grew in size and strength . The Bolotnikov Revolt and the Second False Dmitryrii were both successful .
 The Russians had seen four tsars within 13 and a half months . The once firm government control and leadership had collapsed in intrigue, civil war, murder, and general weakness .
 Whatever advantages the changes brought to the boyars, the masses had gained nothing, and their dissatisfaction grew . Then too, whatever advantages the . changes brought . the . boyars . But the . masses had . gained nothing . and their . dissatisfaction grew.
 In effect, Vasilii Shuisky’s unfortunate reign, 1606-10, had no popular sanction and very little popular support, representing as it did merely the victory of a boyar clique . The reign of Shuisky lasted for 1606 to 10 years .
 An enemy of Vasilii Shuisky, Prince Grigorii Shakhovskoy, and others roused southern Russian cities against the tsar . The tsar was an enemy of Shuisky .
 Disorder swept towns on the Volga, and in Astrakhan in the far southeast the governor, Prince Ivan Khvorostinin, turned against Vasilii Shuisky .
 In other places local authorities refused to obey the new ruler . Similarly in other places, local authorities refuse to obey .
 Rumors persisted that False Dmitrii had escaped death, and people rallied to his mere name . Rumors persist that he escaped death .
 Serfs and slaves started numerous and often large uprisings against their landlords and the state . Serfs, slaves and slaves were often subject to many large and often violent protests against their owners and their state .
 On occasion they joined with indigenous peoples, such as the Finnic-speaking Mordva, who on their part also sought to overturn the oppressive political and social system of Muscovite Russia .
 The rebellion in the south, led by Shakhovskoy and by Bolotnikov, presented the gravest threat to the government and in fact to the entire established order . The rebellion presented the "gravest threat" to the Russian government, says Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 He told Shakhovskoy that in Poland he had met Tsar Dmitrii, who had survived Vasilii Shuisky’s attempt to kill him . Bolotnikov was appointed as commander of his army by the Tsar . He said he had appointed Bolot
 The rebel armies rallied the lower classes in a war against authority and property . Beyond fighting in the name of the rightful tsar, the rebels rallied lower classes .
 Some sources—largely based on the testimony of pro-Shuisky forces, so this is uncertain—identify manifestoes calling on the poor to fight for their own interests, to rise up and kill their masters . For which they would be rewarded with their lands, wives,
 In October 1606, the southern armies came to the gates of Moscow, Russia . They were checked by government forces commanded by the tsar’s brilliant nephew, Prince Mikhail Skopin-Shuisky .
 In 1607 a huge government army surrounded the rebels in Tula and forced them to surrender . After a bitter four-month siege and a partial flooding of the town, they were forced to surrender in 1607 .
 Shakhovskoy was exiled to the north; Bolotnikov was also exiled and, shortly afterwards, blinded and drowned . Bolotkovsky was exiled and drowned in the early years .
 The rebels were also undermined by their inability to produce Tsar Dmitrii in person . The rebels failed to produce the Tsar in person.
 False Peter claimed to be Tsar Theodore’s son, born allegedly in 1592, although this son never existed . False Peter was a different pretender, who claimed to have been Theodore's son, but never existed. False Peter never existed in Russia .
 As order collapsed and disorganization spread, more and more pretenders appeared . As order collapses, disorganisation spread, as order collapsed, more than ever .
 The cossacks produced them in large numbers and with different names . They claimed in that strange manner, it would seem, a certain legal sanction for their bands and movements . Cossacks in particular produced .
 False Dmitrii, the second, became a national figure in Russia . But it was a national hero for the second time .
 He emerged in August 1607, shortly before the fall of Tula . He was too late to join Shakhovskoy and Bolotnikov, but soon became a center of attraction .
 The new False Dmitrii was a Russian prince who claimed to be the Tsar who defeated the Godunovs and was deposed by a conspiracy of the boyars . He was also a Russian Prince who defeated Russia's Godunova, who died in 2011 .
 In contrast to the first pretender, he certainly realized that he was an impostor . His lieutenants also had no illusions on that score .
 Nothing is known for certain about the second False Dmitrii’s identity and background .
 The earliest mention in the sources locates him in a Lithuanian border town, in jail . He was found in jail in the town of Vilnica, Lithuania .
 In spite of unpromising beginnings, the new pretender quickly gathered many supporters . But he has been accused of being a 'brutally flawed' candidate .
 After the defeat of Shakhovskoy and Bolotnikov he became the focal point for forces of social discontent and unrest . He became a focal point of social unrest .
 He attracted a large following of cossacks, soldiers of fortune, and adventurers, especially from Poland and Lithuania, including several famous Polish commanders .
 Marina Mniszech recognized him as her husband and later bore him a son . The nun Martha declared him her child . Marina's husband was later found to be her husband .
 Vasilii Shuisky made the grave mistake of underestimating his new enemy and of not acting with vigor in time . Shuisky's actions should have been more effective, he says .
 In the spring of 1608 the second False Dmitrii defeated a government army under the command of one of the tsar’s brothers . The army approached Moscow and defeated the government army .
 Prince Mikhail Skopin-Shuisky again prevented the capture of the capital, but he could not defeat or dislodge the pretender . The pretender was defeated by the Prince of Russia in the 18th century .
 Southern Russia and a number of cities in the north recognized his authority . Southern Russia recognized him as a Russian president .
 Moscow and Tushino, so close to each other, maintained a constant clandestine intercourse . Moscow and Moscow were so close that they maintained an intimate relationship .
 Many Russians switched sides; some families served both rulers at the same time . Many Russian families served as rulers of both sides .
 A garrison of 1,500 men, reinforced later by another 900, withstood for 16 months the siege of a force of up to 30,000 troops . According to traditional accounts, a force numbering, according to tradition, up to a force was up to the size of 30,
 The Felon of Tushino’s rule in those northern Russian cities proved to be ephemeral once they had a taste of his agents and measures . Also, the Felon . also, the rule in . those northern . Russian cities which had recognized his authority proved to
 In February 1609, Vasilii Shuisky made an agreement with Sweden, obtaining the aid of a detachment of Swedish troops 6,000 strong, commanded by Jakob De la Gardie . In return for abandoning all claims to Livonia, ceding a border district, and promising
 Prince Mikhail Skopin-Shuisky, assisted by the Swedes, cleared northern Russia of the Felon of Tushino’s troops and bands . The siege of the Holy Trinity-St.S. lifted the siege .
 Moscow relieved Moscow of its rival Tushino neighbor, the Sergius Monastery . The monastery was located near the Kremlin in Moscow, Russia's second largest city .
 King Sigismund III of Poland allowed his son Wladyslaw to become the Russian tsar on certain conditions . After his departure, the entire camp was disbanded, the Russian gentry in Tushino were forced to leave .
 Sigismund III granted the request and signed an agreement in February 1610 with Russian emissaries from Tushino . By that time had ceased to represent any organized body in Russia . The agreement was signed in 1610, 1610 .
 Polish king declared war on Muscovite state on the ground of its anti-Polish alliance with Sweden . The Polish king had become deeply involved in Russian affairs in the autumn of 1609 .
 His advance into Russia, however, had been checked by the heroic defense of Smolensk .
 The invitation to Wladyslaw, however, gave him an added opportunity to participate in Muscovite affairs . The invitation also gave him a chance to take part in the Russian parliament .
 Prince Mikhail Skopin-Shuisky entered Moscow at the head of his army in 1610 . Prince Mikhail entered Moscow in March 1610 with his army . He was the son of Prince Mikhail Skopin Skuisky .
 In early May he died suddenly, although he was only about twenty-four years old . He was the youngest person to die in the country's history .
 Rumor had it that he had been poisoned by Dmitrii Shuisky’s wife . She wanted to assure the throne to her husband after the death of childless Tsar Vasilii .
 Polish commander, Stanislaw Zolkiewski, defeated Dmitrii Shuisky when the latter tried to relieve Smolensk, and marched on Moscow . The Polish commander defeated Shuisky in the battle .
 In the area occupied by Polish troops, the population swore allegiance to Wladyslaw . In the region occupied by the Polish government, the majority of the area swore allegiance .
 At this turn of events, the Felon of Tushino too advanced again on Moscow, establishing himself once more near the capital . At this time, the Russian capital was in danger .
 The boyar duma in the persons of seven boyars, with Prince Fedor Mstislavsky as the senior member, took over the government, or what there was left of it . The government was overthrown by the end of the war .
 The great rally of the Russian people, as it has long been described in traditional accounts of how the Time of Troubles was overcome, found inspiration in an essentially national and religious determination to save the country from foreign rulers .
 The increasing prominence of the national and religious struggle also explains the important role of the Church during the last years of the Time of Troubles . This increasing . prominence of national and . religious struggle . explains the importance of the . role .
 dynastic and social issues retained their significance during those years . Yet, needless to say, dynastic . issues remained significant during that period .
 Any neat classification of the elements which, together, produced the fantastically complicated Time of Troubles is of necessity arbitrary and artificial . In fact any neat classification . of the . elements which . together, together . produced the . fantastically . complicated time of . Troubles .
 Muscovite boyars, clergy, and ranking service gentry opinions differed . At the gathering of Muscvites boyars and clergy, opinions differed.
 Those proposed for the throne included Prince Vasilii Golitsyn, and a boy, Michael Romanov, Metropolitan Philaret’s son . However, the candidacy of the Polish prince Wladyslaw, which found backing especially among the boyars, prevailed .
 Probably Wladyslaw profited from a general lack of enthusiasm for another boyar tsar . Probably . probably Wladylaw .
 He was one of the only two strong and active candidates in the field . The other was the Felon of Tushino who had much support among the lower classes and in Moscow itself .
 In August 1610, Muscovites reached an agreement with the Polish commander Zolkiewski concerning the invitation to Wladyslaw to rule Russia . Conditions were similar to those offered to the Polish prince earlier by the Tushino group, although they acquired a boyar,
 An impressive embassy headed by Prince Vasilii Golitsyn, Metropolitan Philaret, and other dignitaries departed for Sigismund III’s headquarters near Smolensk .
 The Felon of Tushino fled again to Kaluga, while Zolkiewski’s troops entered Moscow . Zoliewski's forces entered Moscow, while the Felon fled again . The Felons fled again in Kaluga .
 He objected to the conversion of Wladyslaw to Orthodoxy and the lifting of the siege of Smolensk . He objected especially to conversion of the Polish king to Orthodox .
 Russian leader wanted to become Russian ruler himself and without conditions . But his real intention was to become Russia's ruler himself, he says .
 Sigismund III arrested the Russian representatives, except those few who endorsed his claims, and sent them to Poland where they were to remain for nine years . He proceeded openly to develop his campaign to win the Russian throne .
 Poles held Moscow as well as a large area in the western part of the country . Poles were again enemies of the Russians, and they held Moscow . The Poles were once enemies of Russia, and now they hold Moscow .
 The Swedes had declared war on the Russians after Moscow had sworn allegiance to Wladyslaw . The Swedish government declared war against the Russians in 1877 .
 They advanced in the north, threatened Novgorod, and before long claimed the Muscovite throne for their own candidate, Prince Philip . Prince Philip was the son of Prince Charles, who died in 1881 .
 With the collapse of Wladyslaw’s candidacy, the Felon of Tushino again increased his following . Much of eastern Russia turned to him for leadership .
 Innumerable bands of lawless men were roaming and devastating the land . Innormous bands were roaming the land. Innormously bands of outlaws were roaming .
 Russian proverb: “there is no evil, but that it brings some good” But at least the issues gradually became clearer .
 Sigismund III's rejection of the arrangement to put Wladyslaw on the Russian throne eliminated one major alternative for the Russians . The future of the Polish king was likely to be a major problem for Russia .
 Swedish and especially Polish aggression led to a national rally . More important still, Swedish aggression . Poland's invasion of Sweden led to an anti-war rally .
 The Felon of Tushino was killed by one of his men in a settlement of personal accounts in December 1610 .
 The Church headed the rally in the absence of a tsar and because of the impotence of the boyar duma and other branches of government in Polish-occupied Moscow .
 Patriarch Hermogen in Moscow declared the Russians released from allegiance to Wladyslaw . Through trusted emissaries he sent manifestoes to other towns, urging them to organize an army and liberate the capital .
 The patriarch’s appeals had a strongly religious as well as national character, for the Poles were Catholic . Hermogen feared especially the extension of the Uniate jurisdiction to Muscovite territories .
 Other clerics and laymen joined the patriarch in trying to arouse the people . The patriarch was joined by a group of laymen and clerics to try and arouse people .
 Procopius Liapunov formed an army of gentry, peasants, certain remnants of Skopin-Shuisky’s troops . The first response came from Riazan .
 As Liapunov’s army marched on Moscow in early 1611, it was joined by other forces, including former troops of the Felon of Tushino and cossacks led by Ivan Zarutsky .
 First national army was headed by Procopius Liapunov, Trubetskoy, and Zarutsky . It acted also as the government of the Muscovite state .
 In particular, it contained a council of representatives who concerned themselves with state legislation and policy .
 The Poles retreated under pressure, burned most of the city, and entrenched themselves principally in the Kremlin . The Poles had but a small garrison in Moscow, but retreated under under pressure .
 Procopius Liapunov was killed in July 1611 . The cossacks were furious because certain legislative measures in the interest of the gentry were passed .
 Deprived of its leader and unwilling to cooperate with the cossacks, the gentry army disbanded . The army was forced to withdraw from the Russian army and disbanded .
 In June 1611 the main Polish army finally captured Smolensk . The population of the town had been reduced from 80,000 to 8,000 in the course of the siege .
 In Pskov, a new pretender appeared, sometimes called the third False Dmitrii . The third False Dmitryrii appeared in the city of Pskova .
 In Kaluga Marina Mniszech and her son by the Felon of Tushino, known as the Little Felon, constituted another center of attraction for dissatisfied elements .
 The magnitude of the Russian recovery should not be underestimated . Still, the magnitude of Russia's recovery should be underestimated, experts say .
 Patriarch Hermogen, of Abbot Dionysus of the Holy Trinity-St. Trinity, appealed to Pope Francis . Pope Francis, Pope Francis and Pope John Paul III appealed to the Pope to accept the Pope's decision .
 The new liberation movement began in the town of Nizhnii Novgorod, on the Volga . Sergius Monastery, and of others, were among those involved .
 Kuzma Minin, a local butcher and elected representative of the townspeople, is a leader in the town . The butcher is a member of the local council .
 He took charge of raising the needed resources for a new national army . He also raised the funds for the country's new army .
 The people of Nizhnii Novgorod donated a third of their possessions to the cause . The people soon organized a large army, with the help of other northeastern towns .
 Prince Dmitrii Pozharsky was convalescing near Nizhnii Novgorod from wounds received as a general in Liapunov’s army . Command was entrusted to a veteran warrior, Prince Dmitryi Pozarsky, who was convaling
 The entire movement marked a religious, as well as a national, revival, accompanied by fasting and prayer . The movement was marked by a religious and national revival .
 The second national army, just like its predecessor, acted as the government of the Muscovite state as well as its military force . Just like its predecessors, the army acted as a government and military force in the Soviet Union .
 It too apparently contained an assembly of representatives from different localities, something in the nature of a traveling zemskii sobor .
 In early September 1612, the second national army reached Moscow and besieged the Poles . The Poles were defeated by the Russian army in 1612 .
 The cossacks blockading the city remained neutral . One part of them joined Minin and Pozharsky, while another, with Zarutsky, went to the borderlands .
 In early November the Russians stormed Moscow and, after bitter fighting, captured Polish positions in the heart of the city, in particular in the Kremlin . The Russians stormed the city in early November, capturing Polish positions near the Kremlin in Moscow .
 All Polish efforts, finally led by Sigismund III himself, to come to the aid of the Polish garrison in Moscow failed . All efforts to help failed, including the death of the garrison in Russia .
 The first aim of the victors was to elect a tsar and thus establish a firm, legitimate government in Russia and end the Time of Troubles . The victors' aim was to end the time of the tsar .
 It included the clergy, the boyars, the gentry, the townspeople, and even some representatives of peasants . It was almost certainly of the state peasants of northern Russia rather than of serfs .
 of possible candidates for tsar was first reduced by the decision to exclude foreigners . The original caption was “on Red Square after the zemskii sobor, the Muscovite people are asked who they want for ruler” of Moscow .
 Through Ivan the Terrible’s marriage to Anastasia Romanova, Michael Romanov was related to the old dynasty . The Romanov family is still living in Russia .
 The people remembered Anastasia, Ivan the Terrible’s good first wife and her brother, Nikita Romanov, who dared defend some of the victims of the violent tsar .
 Metropolitan Philaret, Nikita’s son and Michael's father, who was a prisoner of the Poles at the time of the zemskii sobor, added to the advantageous position of the family . The family is famous for its role in World War II . Metropolitan Phil
 In particular, Paul Miliukov and others have stressed that he stood closer to the Tushino camp and had much better relations with the cossacks than other boyars . In Russia, the boyar was a major ally of the Soviet Union in the 1930s .
 In February 1613, the zemskii sobor decided in favor of Michael Romanov . Thus, in February 1614, the Romanov family was re-elected to the throne .
 Special emissaries were dispatched to different parts of the Muscovite state to sound local opinion . Next, special emissary was dispatched to Moscow to speak to the locals .
 Michael Romanov was elected to rule Russia as tsar, and the title was to pass on to his future descendants .
 It took additional time to persuade his mother and him to accept the offer . It took more than two years to persuade him and his mother to accept .
 As this suggests, we should pay close attention to how this political outcome was justified . We should be paying close attention, especially to how it was justified, he says .
 The “election” of a tsar by representatives of the whole nation was certainly not endorsed as a political principle, nor was rule justified by ideas about the will of the nation and thus popular sources of sovereignty . The "election’s election’ was not endorsed by
 Michael Romanov was a legitimate heir to the throne, a descendent of Riurik and St. St. Nicholas II . The Romanov family is a descendant of the Russian tsar, who died in 1918 .
 Autocracy as a principle and as a political order survived essentially unimpaired . Autocratic rule of law was essentially unchanged in the period of 1598-1613 . Autocracies as principle and political order survive essentially unimpeired .
 At the end of it all, autocracy may have appeared more than ever the only legitimate form of government and the only certain guarantee of peace and security . Autocracy may be the only guarantee of security and peace in the Middle East .
 State centralization was certainly strengthened in the wake of these years of political and social disorganization . State centralized was strengthened after the years of disorganisation, he says .
 The local self-government that had developed in Ivan the Terrible's reign did not outlast the Time of Troubles . It was replaced by a local government that had been set up in Ivan's reign .
 The Church, too, gained authority and prestige as the great champion of the interests of the country and the people . The Church was the most effective organization in the land that had survived the collapse of the secular order .
 These movements were attached to notions of a better tsar not a different form of rule . As for popular opposition, it can be seen that these movements were still attached to ideas of a new tsar . It was seen that the opposition was attached to a different kind of rule altogether .
 The brutal violence and looting committed by followers of the various pretenders likely discredited, at least for a time, the idea of a new popular movement led by a new alternative tsar . At the same time, it also discredited the idea that a new tsar would be a popular movement
 Most historians share this general emphasis on the persistence and strengthening of autocracy but emphasize different elements of continuity and change . Most historians emphasize continuity and continuity of autocratic rule .
 Scholars are not in accord, for example, about which social groups most benefitted . Scholars say social groups were most likely to have benefited from the social change .
 According to Platonov and many other historians, the big losers were the boyars and the common people . The main winners were the autocratic state and the middle service nobility, the historian says .
 The boyars attained their greatest power in the reign of Vasilii Shuisky and the period immediately following his deposition . The boyarars were the most powerful of the boyars in Russia .
 The boyar influence failed to last and the state returned with its former authority, while the boyars, many of their families decimated during the Time of Troubles, became unequivocally servants of the tsar . The boyars' families were further decimated in the time of the Time
 Serfs, slaves, fugitives and fugitives fought for Bolotnikov, for the various pretenders, and also in countless lesser armies and bands . The serfs and slaves, including the uprooted, together with the cossacks, fought for the Cossacks .
 The decades that followed the Time of Troubles saw a final and complete establishment of serfdom in Russia . It was a further subjugation of the toiling majority to the interests of the gentry .
 The middle service gentry, along with the richest merchants, were perhaps the biggest social beneficiaries . This was less a change than a continuation of social-political relationships already in place in the sixteenth century .
 The invitation to ascend the Muscovite throne was sent to Wladyslaw by the service gentry in Tushino . We have some sense of further changes this class may have desired from the documents .
 The conditions of the offer included full protection of the Orthodox Church in Russia and freedom of religion, for Wladyslaw was a Catholic . The conditions included a prohibition against serfs leaving their masters and a guarantee that slaves would not be freed .
 It has been argued that the gentry succeeded in defending its interests during the Time of Troubles . Still, it was argued, it has also been argued, that it succeeded in preserving and in part re-establishing the political and social order in which it already occupied the central position
 Perhaps the most important consequence of the Time of Troubles was the state’s heightened authority and legitimacy . Perhaps, therefore, the state's heightened authority was its heightened authority . The state's authority was heightened in the time of the Troubles .
 The historian S Soloviev argued that this era helped bring about the victory in Russia, at long last, of the concept of state over that of family and clan .
 The Time of Troubles nurtured a newer sense of national identity . No less important, though much more complex in its long-term potential, the time of the Troubles fostered a new sense of identity .
 Many historians, including Platonov, would point to the important growth of national sentiment in the fight against foreign intervention, aristocratic reaction and popular anarchy .
 Platonov had the beneficial effect of nurturing a new recognition of public, as against private, rights and duties by sovereign and subject alike .
 Many liberal writers have viewed the survival of autocratic power as contributing to the social subordination of the majority of Russian subjects, and of non-Russians, as the empire expanded .
 Kliuchevsky emphasized the long-term significance of the Time of Troubles, though not in the same way as Soviet historians would later do .
 Kliuchevsky noted the abandonment of the tradition of patient suffering by the common people . He noted the legacy of devastation and discord that pointed to the great popular rebellions of later years .
 The peculiar role and importance of the pretenders, he added, demonstrated the Russians’ political immaturity . He said they demonstrated the Russian’s political immaurity .
 It is the continuation and the result of the past just as it is the preparation for the future . It is also the preparation of the future, says the author of the book . "It's the continuation of the present and the future," she says .
 "It is essentially an age of transition, which lays the groundwork, and rapidly, for the reforms of Peter. Peter. It's essentially an era of transition," he says of the country .
 Michael Romanov assumed power over a devastated country with the capital itself, as well as a number of other towns, burned down . The capital itself and other towns were burned down.
 The treasury was empty, and financial collapse of the state appeared complete . The state's financial collapse was complete, and the state was empty .
 In Astrakhan, Zarutsky rallied the cossacks and other malcontents, continuing the story of pretenders and social rebellion so characteristic of the Time of Troubles . He had Marina Mniszech and the Little Felon in his camp, .
 Many roaming bands, some of them several thousand strong, continued looting the land . Some of the land was looted by thousands of roaming bands .
 Muscovy remained at war with Poland and Sweden, which had seized Smolensk and Novgorod . Sweden promoted their own candidates to the Muscovite throne, Prince Wladyslaw and Prince Philip .
 The 16-year-old tsar asked the zemskii sobor not to disband, but to stay in Moscow and help him rule . Under the circumstances, the tsar wanted the sobor to stay with him in Moscow .
 The zemskii sobor, while its personnel changed several times, in fact participated in the government of Russia throughout the first decade of the new reign of Russia .
 Platonov and others have pointed to the naturalness of this alliance of the ‘stable’ classes of Muscovite society with the monarchy .
 The tsar’s advisers, few of whom showed ability, at first included members of the Saltykov family, relatives on his mother's side . Few of them showed ability at first .
 In 1619, Michael's father, Metropolitan Philaret, returned from imprisonment in Poland, was made patriarch, and became the most important man in the state . Michael's son Michael was born in 1619 .
 Philaret received the title of Great Sovereign, with the result that the country had two great sovereigns . Documents were issued in the names of both of Philaret and his successor . Philaret was the first great sovereign of the country .
 Philaret's real power lay in his ability and experience and especially in his forceful character that enabled him to dominate his rather weak son . Philaret’s real power was his ability, experience and experience .
 In 1613 and the years following, the most pressing problems were those of internal disorder, foreign invasion, and financial collapse .
 Within some three years the government had dealt effectively with the disorder, in spite of new rebellions . The government was able to deal with the problems within three years of the disorder .
 Authorities made concessions to the cossacks and amnestied all bandits, provided they would enroll in the army to fight the Swedes . Authorities made certain concessions to cossack, including enrolling the army .
 Then they proceeded to destroy the remaining opponents, group by group . Then they went on to destroy them, killing each other .
 In 1614, government troops seized Astrakhan, whose citizens had already rebelled against Zarutsky’s brutal rule, and soon captured the three .
 Zarutsky impaled, the Little Felon hanged, and Mniszech soon died in prison . Zarutski was impaled and hanged in prison, but he soon died .
 Tsar Michael's government could also claim success in checking foreign aggression and stabilizing international relations, although at a price . Everything considered, everything considered, could also be a success .
 Sweden, with its new king Gustavus II, or Gustavus Adolphus, occupied elsewhere in Europe, concluded peace in Stolbovo in 1617 . Sweden's new king was occupied in Russia, but the peace was concluded .
 According to the agreement, the Swedes returned Novgorod and adjacent areas of northern Russia, but kept the strip of territory on the Gulf of Finland, thus pushing the Russians farther from the sea . The agreement was reached in 1877 .
 Wladyslaw’s campaign of 1617-18 reached but failed to capture Moscow . The Poles had greater ambitions; however, an understanding was reached after Wladylaw‘s campaign . The Polish army was defeated in 1618 .
 By the truce of Deulino of 1618, Poland kept Smolensk and certain other gains in western Russia . The truce was to last for 14 years .
 Russian prisoners, including Philaret, were allowed to return home . It was by the terms of this agreement that Russian prisoners were allowed home . Philaret was the last Russian prisoner to return to Russia .
 Poland kept its gains in western Russia and received 20,000 rubles . Wladyslaw finally withdrew his claims to the Muscovite throne . Poland again kept gains in Russia and, besides the money, received . Poland finally withdrew its claims .
 During Michael's reign important events also occurred south of the Muscovite borders . Michael was one of the most successful monarchs of the time .
 In 1637 Don cossacks, on their own, seized the distant Turkish fortress of Azov by the sea of the same name . Cossacks seized the Turkish fortress Azov in 1637 . In 1638, the Don seized Azov from a Turkish fortress .
 In 1641 a huge Turkish army and navy returned, but in the course of an epic siege of four months could not dislodge the intruders . The siege lasted for four months, but the Turkish army could not be dislodged .
 Having beaten back the Turks, the cossacks offered Azov to Tsar Michael . Having beaten the Turks back in the Crimean War, the Cossacks were given Azov by the Tsar . The cossack offered the Crimean peninsula to the tsar .
 The tsar endorsed the latter opinion, and the cossacks had to abandon Azov . Azov was one of the most important cities in Russia .
 In the Azov area, as in the area of the Gulf of Finland, the next Russian effort was to be led by Peter the Great . The next effort was led by the Great. In the same area, the Russian efforts were led by Vladimir Putin .
 Financial stability proved to be more difficult to attain than security at home or peace abroad . Financial stability was more important than security in the U.S.
 In 1614 an extraordinary levy of ‘the fifth money’ in towns, and of corresponding sums in the countryside, was enacted . An extraordinary levy was enacted in 1614 .
 Experts dispute whether this impost represented one-fifth of one’s possessions . Experts say the impost is one-in-five of one's possessions . Draconian nature is obvious, experts say .
 At the end of Michael's reign, as in the beginning, the financial situation remained desperate . On the whole, enough funds obtained for the state to carry on its activities .
 The Reigns of Alexis and Theodore Michael died in 1645 at the age of forty-eight . His only son Alexis or Aleksei, a youth of sixteen, succeeded him as tsar .
 Alexis left a favorable impression with many contemporaries, as well as with subsequent historians . Known as Tishaishii, the Quietest One, in spite of his outbursts of anger and general impulsiveness, Alexis was known as the quietest one .
 Kliuchevsky called Alexis “the kindest man, a glorious Russian soul” Alexis was one of the pioneers of the new Russian interest in the West . Alexis was the epitome of Muscovite culture and as one of Russia’s pioneers of
 Even if we allow for a certain exaggeration and stylization in Kliuchevsky’s celebrated analysis, there remains the image of an attractive person, remarkably sensitive and considerate in his relations with other people . The absolute ruler who was not at all a despot was
 Alexis had been brought up in the Muscovite religious tradition . He continued to observe fasts and rituals throughout his life . Alexis was a dedicated and well-informed churchgoer . He was born Alexis in Moscow .
 At the same time he developed an interest in the West and Western culture, including architecture and also the theatre, which was an innovation for Russia .
 Moscow is facing major popular uprisings, including in Moscow itself . Not least, he was faced with major popular protests .
 The tsar was a weak ruler and much depended, especially in the earlier years of rule, on relatives and other advisers, who often failed him . Making matters worse was the tsar's weak ruler, and his family often failed .
 The boyar Boris Morozov, Alexis’s Western-oriented tutor, became especially prominent after the accession of the new sovereign . Prince Ilya Miloslavsky, Alexis's father-in-law, was particularly prominent after his accession .
 Morozov acted with intelligence and ability, but his efforts to replenish the treasury antagonized much of the urban population . The increase in the salt tax and the sale of hitherto forbidden tobacco, to which the Church objected, antagonized many of the population .
 Narrow selfishness, greed, and corruption characterized the behavior of Miloslavsky and his clique . The behavior of the clique was described as narrow selfishness .
 Begun by artisans and tradesmen, they were soon joined by soldiers and some gentry . Begun in 17th century, they are now known as the first of the Great Warzburgs .
 Townsmen presented the young Tsar Alexis with a petition protesting the poor administration of the city and especially the high tax burden . The petition was presented to the young tsar Alexis . Townsmen protested the city's poor administration .
 Alexis refused to accept the petition of the people and instead ordered arrests . Alexis ordered arrests instead of accepting the petition and instead ordering arrests .
 Large crowds attacked homes and property of the ruling elite . Soon, large crowds were in the streets attacking homes and properties .
 A number of officials were brutally lynched by the crowd or executed . The head of the chancellery that managed the city was executed . Morozov and Miloslavsky survived .
 Uprisings swept through many other towns, inspired by news of the Moscow rebellion . Many were inspired by the news of that uprising in Moscow .
 In 1650, new rebellions against rich merchants and city officials arose in Novgorod and Pskov, suppressed by troops sent from the capital . New rebellions in 1650 were suppressed by soldiers sent from Moscow .
 Discontent and rebellion continued, however, especially in response to the government's continuing efforts to raise money to fund new wars .
 Not only were taxes raised but the government attempted to increase its currency by debasing silver coinage with copper . The government tried to increase the currency by changing the silver to copper .
 This reform proved no more successful than similar efforts in other countries, it led to counterfeiting and inflation . This reform led to inflation and counterfeiting in the United States .
 The greatest rebellion of the reign, headed by Stepan, or Stenka, Razin, occurred in 1670-71 . The rebellion was long remembered and romanticized in Russian folklore . Stepan or Razin was the head of the Russian Revolution .
 Razin attracted attention as a daring freebooter who raided Persia and other lands along the Caspian Sea and along the lower Volga . Razin was a chieftain of a community of Don cossacks . He is one of Russia's most famous freebooters .
 Among the cossacks of the Don River region discontent with Moscow had been growing . It was partly due to strong pressure to return runaway serfs who fled to cossack lands and material sanctions .
 In the spring of 1670, Razin led his cossacks up the Volga with the declared aim of eradicating the “boyar-traitors” in Moscow . Razin’s main goal was to eradicate the ‘boyar’traitors
 All accounts agree on the ferocious brutality of the insurgents, though no less brutal than the government's suppression of this and other rebellions . The insurgents would literally tear their enemies apart and defile their corpses .
 Violent acts have been seen as symbolic gestures, typical of many popular revolutions, to cleanse society of privilege and oppression . Along with widespread burning and looting, these violent acts are seen as symbols of the revolution .
 In different ways, it has been argued, all these rebels shared resentment against the growing Muscovite state and the traditional freedoms that the state was eroding . It has been suggested that the rebels were resentful of the growing state .
 The rebels seized Volga towns from Astrakhan to the outskirts of Simbirsk, where regular Muscovite troops finally stopped them . The rebels were finally stopped by the regular Russian troops, which included several regiments trained in the Western manner .
 Razin and some of his followers escaped to the Don, but in 1671 he was seized by loyal cossack authorities and sent to Moscow . He was tortured and then executed by quartering in Red Square .
 Several months later Astrakhan, the last center of the rebellion, surrendered . Several months after the rebellion began, Astrakhana surrendered . The Russian city was the last city to stand out against the rebels .
 In addition to suppressing uprisings, the government took steps to improve administration and justice in order to assuage popular discontent . The government has taken steps to better administration, justice and to ease discontent .
 Of major importance was the introduction of a new legal code, the Ulozhenie of 1649 . The new code was introduced in 1649, introducing a new code of legal code .
 The new code provided the first systematization of Muscovite laws since 1550 . Approved in principle by the especially convened zemskii sobor of 1648 .
 It marked a great improvement over its predecessors, though it also finally made serfdom complete, and was not to be superseded until 1835 . It also made it complete, but was not superseded .
 The extension of Muscovite jurisdiction to Ukraine in 1654 represented an event of still greater and more lasting significance . It was still greater than the annexation of Crimea to Ukraine, which was ruled by Muscas .
 After 1569, the land after 1569 found itself under Polish, rather than Lithuanian, control .
 Association with Poland meant increasing pressure of Polish social order, pressure of Catholicism on Orthodox Ukrainian people . Orthodox Ukrainian society was based on exclusive privileges of the gentry .
 The so-called Uniate Church was established in 1863 . It was a Church linked to Rome but retained Eastern ritual, Slavonic language in its services . The term “Uniate” is seen as derogatory by many today, who prefer Eastern Catholics .
 Orthodox community split violently on the subject of union, each side anathemizing the other . Polish government chose to proceed as if the union had been entirely successful . Uniate Church replaced the Orthodox in the eastern part of the realm .
 Most Orthodox bishops in the Polish state favored the union, but the majority of the Orthodox people did not . The union was approved by both sides of the line, but not by the majority .
 Lay Orthodox brotherhoods and a small, diminishing, but influential group of Orthodox landed magnates helped the Church of the people . Lay Orthodox brothers and land magnates were among those who helped the church .
 Mykhailo: The Crimean Tatars and Turkey staged daring raids in all directions . They staged daring attacks on both sides of the border . The raids included raids on the Crimean Tatar Tatars, the Crimean Tatar and Turkey .
 The cossacks developed a distinctive society, both military and democratic . Their offices were elective and a general gathering of all cossack made the most important decisions . Cossacks had their offices elective, and their decisions were made by a gathering .
 The Polish government faced difficulties in trying to control the cossacks . The cossackers were a key part of the Polish government .
 Stephen Bathory established a definite organization for the “host” and introduced the category of registered cossacks . Bathory and his successors allowed them very considerable autonomy, but also established the organization for ‘host’
 Polish policy had some success in developing economic ties between cossack upper stratum and Polish gentry . Polish policy helped to develop economic and social ties between the cossacks and the gentry in Poland .
 The same well-established cossacks retained ethnic and religious links with the Ukrainian people . They generally supported the Ukrainians against Polish rule . Yet, they retained ethnic ties with the Ukrainians .
 The hetmans and registered cossacks, who after the expansion in 1625 numbered 6,000 men, found themselves often with divided loyalties . After the expansion, they had to be reared in Poland, and after 1625, they were reared .
 The unrecognized cossacks viewed Polish rule as bringing only serfdom and Catholicism . However, the peasants and unrecognized Cossacks also opposed Polish rule . Polish rule was considered a form of tyranny in Russia .
 From 1624 to 1638 a series of cossack and peasant rebellions swept Ukraine . Cossacks and peasants revolted in Ukraine from 1624 until 1638 .
 Only with great exertion and after several defeats, Polish army and government finally prevailed . The Polish government and Polish army eventually prevailed in the battle .
 The ruthless Polish pacification managed to force obedience for no longer than a decade . Poland's ruthless pacification forced the country's citizens to submit to orders of obedience .
 In 1648 the Ukrainians rose again under an able leader Bogdan, or Bohdan, Khmelnitsky in what has been called the Ukrainian War of Liberation . The Ukrainians rose in 1648 under the leadership of Bogdan or Bohd, Khmkhnitsy .
 Ukrainians turned again to Moscow after some brilliant successes, achieved with the aid of the Crimean Tatars, and two abortive agreements with Poland . The Ukrainians turned to Moscow for the first time in the past .
 In 1625, 1649, and 1651, Muscovite government had failed to respond to the Ukrainian request . If acceded to, it would have meant war against Poland .
 Moscow’s willingness to support Khmelnitsky in war against Poland-Lithuania may have been due to Poland's relative weakness militarily after losses to the cossacks . The desire to regain Russian lands that had been lost to Lithuania, which, because of the
 In Pereiaslavl in January 1654, an important but controversial treaty was signed that brought the Ukrainian cossack host and its lands into a union with Moscow . The treaty signed in 1654 brought Ukraine and its land to Moscow .
 The agreement was signed by a representative rada, or council, headed by Khmelnitsky . Representatives of the Moscow tsar and representatives of the Russian tsar .
 No final text has survived and scholars continued to debate, sometimes vociferously, what was agreed to and what was actually agreed to . No final texts have survived, and scholars continue to debate .
 In return for this union, many historians argue, the cossacks retained considerable autonomy and rights . Many historians argue that this was more than could have been won from Poland or Turkey . The cossack's union was made possible in return for autonomy .
 Other historians have insisted that the new arrangement represented unconditional acceptance of the authority of Moscow .
 In subsequent decades and centuries, Ukrainians acquired good reasons to complain of the Russian government . The Russian government abrogated entirely the considerable autonomy granted to Ukrainians after they had sworn allegiance to the Muscovite tsar .
 Ukrainians would play a very important part in Muscovite government and culture . At the same time, Ukrainians would have greater closeness to the West . Ukrainians would also play an important role in government, culture and government .
 Ukrainians distinguished themselves as leading supporters of Westernizing reforms in Russia . In particular, many Ukrainians have shown themselves as Westernizing supporters of Russia .
 Poland-Lithuania declared war on Russia in response to the new cossack-Muscovite alliance . Poland and Lithuania declared war against Russia .
 The brutal Thirteen-Years War, which included intervention by Sweden at one point, ended in 1667 with the Treaty of Andrusova . The brutal war ended with a treaty of peace between Russia and Russia .
 A very important effect of this war, as reflected in the treaty, was a further expansion of the Moscow state . The treaty was reflected in Russia's annexation of Crimea, which was a major source of power .
 The Dnieper became the new boundary between Poland-Lithuania and Muscovy . Ukraine on the left bank was ceded to Moscow, with right-bank Ukraine remaining under Poland .
 Kiev was to be left for two years under Muscovite rule . Kiev, on the right bank, was an exception, for it was left under two years of rule .
 Kiev stayed under Moscow beyond the assigned term, as did Smolensk, granted to the tsar for 13 and a half years . The treaty of 1686 confirmed the permanent Russian possession of the cities .
 Muscovite state also fought an inconclusive war against Sweden that ended in 1661 . It managed to defend its new possessions in Ukraine in a long struggle with Turkey that lasted until 1681 .
 In Ukrainian history the period following the Union of Pereiaslavl, Bogdan Khmelnitsky’s death in 1657, and the Treaty of Andrusovo is vividly described as ‘the Ruin’ and its complexities rival those of the Russian Time of Trou
 Ukraine is divided by a number of competing leaders who usually played off Poland against Moscow . Hetman Petr Doroshenko even paid allegiance to Turkey . Ukraine is one of the most divided countries in the world .
 Constant and frequent fratricidal warfare decimated the people and exhausted the land . Constant and often fratrialidal warfare decimated the people . The land was exhausted .
 Muscovite hold on left-bank Ukraine remained, and the arrangement of 1654 acquired increasing importance with the passage of time . The arrangement became more important as the Muscovicite hold in Ukraine remained .
 Alexis's reign was the second half of his reign . He ruled the Russian Orthodox Church . He was the patriarch of the Orthodox Church in Russia . Alexis died in 1883 .
 The strong-willed cleric exercised a powerful personal influence on the younger and softer monarch . He exercised a strong personal influence over the younger monarch .
 Alexis even gave Nikon the title of Great Sovereign, thus repeating the quite exceptional honor bestowed upon Patriarch Philaret by his son, Tsar Michael . Alexis also named Nikon the Great Sovereign . Nikon was given the title by Tsar Alexis .
 The new patriarch, expressing a viewpoint common in the Catholic West, claimed that the church was superior to the state . He endeavored to assert his authority over the sovereign’s .
 Nikon was deposed and defrocked in the Church council of 1666-67 . Nikon was a member of the Eastern Orthodox Church of Russia . The council was held in Russia and Russia .
 The former Great Sovereign ended his days in exile in a distant monastery . He is now living in a monastery .
 Patriarch Nikon's reform of Church books and practices resulted in a permanent cleavage among Russian believers . The measures of Patriarch Nikon that had the most lasting importance concerned a reform .
 The same ecclesiastical council of 1666—67 that upheld Nikon upheld his reform was also upheld by Nikon . Nikon was a member of the council of the same council .
 The last decade of Tsar Alexis’s reign passed in religious strife and persecution . The last ten years of Alexis's reign was marked by religious strife .
 Alexis’s successor Theodore, his son by his first wife, became tsar at the age of 14 and died when he was twenty . Theodore, who died at age of twenty, was tsar of Russia from 1914 to 1918 .
 Simeon of Polotsk was a sickly and undistinguished person, whose education, it is interesting to note, included not only Russian and Church Slavonic, but also Latin and Polish taught by a learned theologian and writer .
 Theodore’s brief reign, 1676-82, has been noted for the abolition of mestnichestvo . Theodore's brief reign was noted for his abolition of the practice . Theodore was born in 1676—82, and died in 1777 .
 It was in 1682 that this extremely cumbersome system of service appointments at last disappeared . It made it easier later for Peter the Great to reform and govern the state . The system of appointments was in effect until 1682 .
 If one keeps in mind the basic distinction between a legitimate and a tyrannical order, that the first subserves the welfare of the subjects and the second the personal wants of the sovereign, then the Russian government must be considered closely related to tyranny . The Russian government has been accused of
 The key to Muscovy’s achievement, and the secret of the success of the Muscovite princes, was in the development of a stable political system in which these princes became the focal point—and the hostages— of an oligarchy of boyar clans .
 It was these clans, closely organized extended families of tradition-bound cavalrymen, that provided the crucial nucleus of the military forces of the Muscovite princes . These clans were the principle players in the game of politics at the court .
 In the interstices of the autocratic state, society developed many spheres of autonomy . People conducted their lives in ways quite unconnected with the controlling agenda of the tsarist regime .
 Implements included wooden or iron ploughs, harrows, scythes, sickles, and sickles . Implementments included plough, harrow, sickle and sickle .
 Cattle-raising, vegetable-gardening, and, particularly in the west, the growing of more specialized crops such as flax and hemp, as well as hunting, fishing, and apiculture, constituted some of the important peasant occupations .
 This was accompanied by the rise of strip farming, whereby villages divided fields into long narrow strips and distributed these among families in order to spread the risks and coordinate land with labor .
 In most of the country, yields remained low, due to both primitive implements and poor soil and weather conditions . Yields remained low due to primitive implements, poor soil, weather conditions and primitive implements .
 This was all made much worse by a terrible economic crisis in the second half of the sixteenth century, brought on by the effects of the oprichnina, deadly epidemics, civil war, and growing gentry exploitation of peasants .
 Many peasants fled to the borderlands, making labor shortages and exploitation even worse . The borderlands are the source of labor shortages, making exploitation worse .
 The sixteenth-century economic depression also affected trade, crafts, manufacturing, and urban life generally . The depression was also a major economic depression in the 1500s .
 The Russian economy remained far less developed than in Western Europe at that time . After the Time of Troubles, however, we see impressive new growth, largely stimulated by the expanding Moscow state .
 Russia continued to sell raw materials to other countries, and its foreign trade received a boost from the newly established relations with the English and the Dutch .
 The Russians, however, lacked a merchant marine, and their role in the exchange remained passive . The Russians lacked the merchant marine and their involvement remained passive.
 Domestic trade increased, especially after the Time of Troubles, and profited from a new commercial code promulgated in 1667 .
 The mining of metal and manufacturing had to provide, first of all, for the needs of the army and the treasury . The mining industry was a major source of gold and silver .
 The Stroganov family engaged in various undertakings, especially in extracting salt, and the Morozovs, so prominent in Alexis’s reign, developed a huge business in potash . Among the latter were the Stroganova family which engaged in several undertakings . Alexis
 Foreign entrepreneurs and specialists played a leading role in the growth of Muscovite mining and manufacturing . We shall return to them when discussing Western influences on Muscovy .
 As a result of intensified and more varied economic activity, regional differentiation increased . Regional differentiation increased as a result .
 Metalwork developed in the Urals, the town of Tula, and Moscow, while salt enterprises centered principally in the northeast .
 Muscovite Society Serfdom was the foundation of the Muscovanite economic and social system . It was founded in the early 19th century Muscvites .
 Serf labor supported the gentry and thus the entire structure of the state . Serf work supported the state's structure . Serfs labor supported gentry .
 The peasant could rarely pay off his obligations . Although made for a period ranging from one to ten years, the agreements tended to continue .
 His annual contributions to the landlord’s economy often constituted merely interest on the loan . Indeed, he often contributed only interest to his landlord's economy .
 The need to ensure a reliable source of agricultural labor, especially the gentry service class, led to demands for limitations on peasant mobility . In turn, the need to protect agricultural labor led to limitations on peasants' mobility . The need for agricultural labor also led to the need for restrictions on
 The peasant was allowed to leave his master only once a year, around St. Peterborough . Gradually it became possible for the peasants to leave their master only a few times .
 St. George’s day in late autumn was provided, provided, of course, his debts had been paid . It would be a happy day for the monarch, provided he had paid his debts .
 Enserfment remained incomplete until the seventeenth century . While these development preceded the rise of the Moscow state, enserfments remained incomplete .
 The growth of pomestie agriculture meant that bondage spread rapidly as lands with peasants were granted by the tsar to his gentry servitors . The tsar granted the lands to his servitors in 1881 .
 The government continued to promote the interests of the gentry, in particular by its efforts to limit or eliminate peasant transfer and to stop peasant flights . The government also continued to try to stop peasants transferring and stopping peasant flights.
 While no law directly establishing serfdom was ever issued, some legislative acts contributed to that end . No law directly established Serfdom .
 In particular, the government proclaimed forbidden years, that is, years when peasants could not move . The peasants were not allowed to move even around St. Peter the Apostle .
 We know, for example, of such legislation in regard to many categories of peasants in 1601 and 1602 . We know that such legislation was passed in 1602 and 1603 .
 The first census, taken from 1550 to 1580, also helped the growth of serfdom by providing a record of peasant residence and by listing children of serfs in the same category as their parents . Further, in 1607 and other years, the state legislated penalties for
 The new code eliminated any statute of limitations for fugitives . It also imposed heavy penalties for harboring runaways . The code also imposes heavy penalties .
 The government also established special teams to search the countryside for fugitives .
 The Ulozhente in essence assumed the caste principle “once a serf always a Serf” and gave full satisfaction to the gentry . Although a few highly special exceptions remained, there were exceptions to the rule .
 After 1649 the government continued to consider serfs its responsible subjects rather than merely gentry property . However, in fact their position in relation to their masters deteriorated rapidly .
 Serfs were at the mercy of the landlords, who came to exercise increasing judicial and police authority on their estates . Their obligations were undefined, the serfs were left at the empower of the landlords .
 Serfdom in Russia appeared simultaneously with a centralized monarchy not with any kind of feudalism . It is worth noting that serfdom was not feudalism, but it was in fact a central monarchy .
 As much as 85 percent of the population of Muscovy in the seventeenth century were serfs . Smaller numbers of state peasants and monastery peasants were likely to be treated less harshly .
 Perhaps 10 percent of the population were slaves, who continued to play a significant role in large households and on large estates . Slaves continued to be a significant part of the slave trade .
 More people joined this category during the disturbances and disasters of the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries by selling themselves .
 With the growth and final triumph of serfdom, the distinction between slaves and serfs became less and less pronounced . The distinction between slave and serfedom was less pronounced, with the distinction becoming less pronounced.
 State peasants constituted the bulk of the population in the north and the northeast . State peasants were state peasants in the northern and northeast .
 Towns played a key role in control and development of the lands of the expanding Russian state . Towns were a key part of the expansion of the Russian state in the 1920s .
 The main classes of townspeople were merchants, . subdivided into several hierarchical groups, and artisans . Artisans and merchants were the main groups of people .
 1649 Ulozhenie regulated urban life in the interests of order and especially taxation . The government levied the greater part of its taxes in the towns .
 In response to petitions from urban communities, the law abolished tax-exempt suburbs, which were mainly controlled by the Church or wealthy merchants, merging all urban groups into the “black town of taxpayers”
 Merchants and artisans, like peasants, had become a closed and hereditary caste, with sons following the occupation of their fathers, and an immobile one . Merchants, artisans had become .
 They ranged from extremely rich and influential boyars to penniless servitors of the tsar who frequently could not meet their service obligations . The tsar's servants were often penniless and often unable to meet their obligations .
 Landlords gradually coalesced into a fairly homogeneous class of service gentry . Yet, as already indicated, with the growth of the pomestie system and the uniform extension of state service, differences diminished in importance .
 The history of mestnichestvo, or precedence, illustrates well the adaptation of ancient Russian princely and boyar families to Muscovite state service and their complex relation to the ruler .
 " Matters of family standing and honor, based on histories of service, were far more important than experience or ability," says President Obama . "Family standing" was "more important than ability"
 The boyars valued their own and their families’ “honor’s and “just position” extremely highly, the boyars said . The family of the boys is said to be extremely proud of their actions .
 Some boyars were determined to eat sitting on the floor rather than at a table they considered below their rank . The boyars even decided to eat at the table they were considered below .
 Until recently, historians were uniformly negative about mestnichestvo, and thus viewed its abolition in 1682 as a logical move by an absolutist state that required greater simplicity and uniformity in state service and the possibility of rewarding merit .
 Historians tended to describe precedence quarrels as undermining the modernizing authority of the state and also preventing the aristocracy from uniting as a proper social estate . These historians tended to say the quarrels undermined the state .
 Recent research by historians such as Crummey and Kollmann has emphasized the positive functionality of mestnichestvo as ensuring elite loyalty and thus political cohesion and stability .
 Research suggests the state may have had more flexibility in appointments than critics of the system have suggested . Also, research suggests that the system may have been more flexible than critics have suggested.
 It can be argued that these measures did not alter the fundamental rigidity of a system that made it extremely difficult for a man of talent who did not belong to a leading aristocratic family to receive an important position in the state or military .
 The conservative arrangement can be seen as producing stability but not progress, says the author . Thus, this conservative arrangement produces stability, not progress .
 Debates over the reasons mestnichestvo was abolished reflect similar points of view . Debates have been ongoing over the years over why it should be abolished .
 The traditional explanation is that it was discarded in favor of a more rational system based on principles of uniformity, efficiency, and merit, which better served the interests of both the state and the lesser gentry .
 Others argue that the system simply grew ineffective as more and more ranks and campaigns were declared to be ‘without place” as the dying out of clans made precedence calculations increasingly difficult .
 In any case, it has been argued, the elite were finding new ways to protect their privilege, status, and honor .
 As can can be seen, our generalizations about social groups have mainly been about men . As can't be said to be about men, it's about women .
 We know relatively little about women in peasant, artisanal, or merchant families in the sixteenth and 17th centuries . We know little of women who lived in peasant or artisan families .
 Religious teachings and popular culture, as in other medieval societies in the West, taught that women were a dangerous temptation, impure, and morally weak . But also that women played an essential role in social life as mothers, as mothers .
 More evident, indeed famously so, because it so fascinated visiting foreigners, is the seclusion of elite women . The seclusion is evident in the Seclusion of some of the world's most famous women .
 Elite women in Muscovy were required to live in separate quarters from men . Elite women were excluded from public life and excluded from the public life .
 Marriage was mainly a way of building family alliances, especially when these could lead to greater political power for a man and his clan . Marriage was a way to build family alliances - especially when it led to political power .
 Some scholars have argued that this gave women hidden power in linking key families, conveying information, and smoothing conflicts between intermarried clans .
 It was also the case that women in Russia could own their own property, which was rare in Europe . Women in Russia are also allowed to own own properties, which is rare in the continent .
 Many specialists on Muscovy are likely to look behind what they view as the formal and ritualized face of absolutism . They see a complex but stable ‘game of power politics’ involving political maneuvering by powerful boyar clans .
 From this perspective, the kowtowing of the tsar’s “slaves” should be interpreted not literally but as a ritualized assertion of “rights” of membership and participation in this polity . The tsar's elevated status is symbolically
 Autocratic ideology can be seen as allowing different interpretations of the power of the tsar . Autocratic ideologies allow different interpretations to be interpreted by different people .
 On the one hand, as we have seen, rituals, symbols, and public rhetoric powerfully emphasized the ruler’s absolute and sacred power . On the other hand, rituals and symbols were used to emphasize the ruler's absolute power .
 The tsar was required to be a truly Christian ruler, governing in consultation with his best men, and always acting for the good of his people . On the other hand, these rituals and symbols reminded everyone that the tsar had to be truly Christian .
 In other words, the tsar’s legitimacy was grounded in both divine selection and religious and moral obligation . The tsar's legitimacy was rooted in both religious, moral obligation and divine selection, the author says .
 The complexity of the tsar’s formally autocratic power can also be seen in one of the most important court rituals in the seventeenth century . The Russian tsar's court rituals were the most significant court rituals .
 On Palm Sunday, the tsar, on foot, led an ass bearing the patriarch, symbolically reenacting Christ's arrival in Jerusalem . The tsar led the ass bearing Christ's patriarch on Palm Sunday .
 One interpretation is that this symbolized the tsar’s subservience before Christ and the Church and the subordination of the secular to religious government . The tsar is said to have been subservient to Christ and his government .
 His humility was a pious deed that demonstrated his sacred status and thus elevated his authority . In other words, his humility was his pious deed .
 The complexity of Muscovite politics can be seen when we turn to the main institutions of government . The need to examine both the official appearance of things and actual practice, can be found in Russia .
 The boyar duma and the zemskii sobor were part of the complex structure of Muscovite “autocracy” and for their suggestive resemblances to Western institutions . The terms themselves are probably of eighteenthor nineteenth-century coinage .
 The boyar duma of the Muscovite tsars represented, of course, a continuation of the boyar . The Muscsovite grand princes were the sons of the tsars and princes .
 In the conditions of a new age, it gradually underwent certain changes . However, in the new era, it has gradually undergone certain changes, it says .
 Although it still included the great boyars, an increasing portion of the membership were less aristocratic people brought in by the tsar, a bureaucratic element so to speak . Thus although it still . included the . great boyar .
 Large size interfered with work in spite of the creation of various special committees . Special committees were created to address the size of the committee .
 The boyar duma met very frequently, usually daily, and could be considered as continually in session . It met very often, often in session, and met daily .
 Kliuchevsky and others have demonstrated convincingly that the boyar duma was essentially an advisory body and that it did not limit autocracy . He says it was essentially a body of advisory body, not a government body .
 The boyar duma formed in effect an integral part of the supreme authority of the land rather than merely a government department or agency . But, on the other hand, the ever-present boyar .
 Muscovite formula for state decisions, ‘the sovereign directed and the boyars assented,” reminds one strongly of the English legal phrase ’King in Council,’ while the boyar duma itself bears resemblance to royal councils in different European monarchies .
 The boyar duma assumed the directing authority in the absence of the tsar from Moscow or in an interregnum, such as that which followed the deposition of Vasilii Shuisky .
 The nature of the zemskie sobory and their relationship to the Muscovite autocracy present even more complicated problems than does the boyar duma . The nature and relationship of the  zemskie soapory present even more complex problems than the boy
 Muscovite political practice showed little evidence of the clear disjunctions of modern political theory and that it was based on custom, not written constitutions . The Muscovyans' political practice is based on customs, not constitutions, according to the Muscovsky .
 They had much in common with certain Western institutions and especially with the so-called Estates General . They had a much more common with Western institutions than they did in Europe .
 These were usually supplemented by the townspeople and, on at least one occasion, in 1613, by the peasants . The peasants were also involved in the massacre .
 The estates would first meet separately, for instance, in the boyar duma or a Church council, and afterwards present their opinion to the entire zemskii sobor . Sometimes, as in the West, the estates would meet separately and then present their opinions .
 The assembly of 1471, called by Ivan III before his campaign against Novgorod, has usually been listed as a “forerunner’s” of the zemskie sobory . The assembly was held in 1471 before the campaign against the Russian capital .
 The first full-fledged zemskie sobory occurred in the reign of Ivan the Terrible, in 1549, 1566, 1575, and possibly 1580 . It dealt with such important matters as the tsar’s program of reforms and the Livonian War .
 Ivan the Terrible had left no testament and no formal law of succession existed in Muscovite Russia . In 1584, another zemskii sobor confirmed his son Theodore as tsar .
 The celebrated zemskii sobor of 1613 was elected Michael Romanov and his successors to rule Russia . The celebrated sobor was elected by the Romanov family of Russia .
 Alexis’s accession to the throne was confirmed by a zemskii sobor in 1645 . During his reign one sobor dealt with the Ulozhenie of 1649, another in 1650 with the disturbances in Pskov . Another in 1651-
 Many historians add to the list of zemskie sobory the gathering or gatherings of 1681-82 connected with the abolition of the mestnichestvo and the accession of a new ruler . Zemski sobory was a gathering or gathering of people gathered in 1681
 The zemskie sobory belonged dearly to Muscovite Russia . The period of their activity corresponded roughly to its chronological boundaries . But, in any case, the period corresponded to the chronological boundaries of the sobory .
 The key controversial issue in the literature on the zemskie sobory has been the scope of their authority and their exact position in the Muscovite order of things . The key issue is the scope and position of the sobory in Russia .
 The zemskie sobory aided and supported the policies of the tsars but did not limit their power . Kliuchevsky and some other leading specialists have shown that the  zemskie sobory aided and supported the  tsars .
 The question of restricting the sovereign’s authority never arose at their gatherings, the king says . The sovereign's authority was never restricted, he says .
 At least in the sixteenth century, members of the government were appointed by the government rather than elected . Members of the House of Representatives were appointed in the 15th century .
 In the Time of Troubles, with the collapse of the central government and an interregnum, a zemskii sobor emerged as the highest authority in the country . It proved only too eager to hand over full power to a new tsar .
 In the seventeenth as in the sixteenth century, membership in a zemskii sobor continued to represent obligation and service to the sovereign, rather than rights or privileges against the crown . membership in the sobor was still important in the seventteenth century as well as the six
 At most participants could state their grievances and petition for redress . The monarch retained full power of decision and action .
 During a large part of Michael's reign no subsidy was levied or benevolence extorted without the consent of zemskie sobory . Thus they had a hand on the purse strings, if they did not actually control state finances .
 The extension of the tsar’s jurisdiction to Ukraine depended on the opinion of a zemskii sobor . Again, such epoch-making decisions as such a decision depended on opinion of the sobor. The tsar's jurisdiction in Ukraine was extended to Ukraine by the
 These assemblies acted by no means simply as rubber stamps for the tsars . Besides, particularly in the seventeenth century, the elective principle persisting after the Time of Troubles .
 The Ulozhenie of 1649 represented the decision and initiative of a zemskii sobor that it forced on the government . For example, it has been argued that it was the result of a sobor in 1649 .
 In fact, the tsars and their advisers in the second half of the seventeenth century began to convene the zemskie sobory less and less frequently because of their possible threat to the position of the monarch .
 The assertion of absolutism in Russia against the zemskie sobory corresponded to parallel developments in a number of other European countries, such as France, where the Estates General did not meet between 1614 and 1789 .
 Unlike European bodies the role of the zemskii sobor was not defined by law or even custom . We know that its continued development was arrested .
 By the eighteenth century, the state saw no need to convene any such representative of ‘the land,” even for consultation . By the 18th century, there was no need for such a representative of the land . The state had no such need for consultation, even for
 The expansion of the Muscovite state brought with it centralization and standardization . The expansion was centralized and standardized in Russia .
 Law was at the center of the seventeenth-century drive for centralized regulation of society and the mobilization of resources . The state’s ambition often exceeded its real capacity, though .
 The uncounted legal peculiarities and local practices of the appanage era largely disappeared . Central control increased as a result of the law codes of 1497 and 1550 and later redactions .
 It was the first law code to be issued in print and widely disseminated . It was also the first of its kind . The law code was also issued .
 As we have seen, peasants and townsmen lost any remaining rights to move, and people were bound to a limited number of social ranks . People were able to move only if they had to accept social status .
 Social hierarchy was fixed in law . Punishments for insulting a person’s honor varied by the victim's social status . Punishment varied by social status of the victim .
 As the reach and interests of the state expanded, so did the bureaucracy . As the state's reach grew, as did its bureaucracy . The bureaucracy has expanded in recent years .
 The central administration developed through rather haphazard growth of different departments and bureaus . The central government has been in a state of chaos since the 1970s .
 By the seventeenth century these agencies, which came to be known as chancelleries or prikazy, already numbered about fifty . They continued to proliferate, as did the numbers of officials working in them, many of whom were literate and skilled .
 The authority of a prikaz extended over certain types of affairs, such as foreign policy . The authority extended over foreign policy and categories of people such as slaves and the streltsy .
 Some scholars see in the unwieldly Muscovite arrangement the wise intention to maintain mutual supervision and checks . Overlapping and confusion increased with time, although some scholars see it as wise .
 Local government constituted one of the weakest parts of the Muscovite political system . Local government was a weak part of Muscova's political system, according to reports .
 The problem, of course, became enormous as the state grew to gigantic size . The problem became enormous .
 As a ruler of Moscow acquired new territories, he sent his representatives, the namestniki and volosteli, to administer them . He sent representatives to administer new territories .
 The appointments, known as kormleniia, that is, feedings, were considered personal awards as well as public acts . The appointments were known as 'feedings' or 'feeds' and considered personal .
 The officials exercised virtually full powers and at the same time enriched themselves at the expense of the people, the government says . The officials "exercised virtually full power and enriched themselves," the court says .
 Both custom and law regulated “feeding’s relationships, setting limits on the amount of cash, goods, and services the population had to provide for its administrators . Local communities often viewed “feedings” as a useful way to draw administrators into a system of mutual obligation
 Local administration developed strongly in the sixteenth century . As we have seen, however, local administration developed in the 16th century .
 The enactments of that year provided for local zemskii institutions concerned with finance, administration, and justice . In addition to the local judicial and police officials, the enactments were already functioning to combat crime .
 Where the population guaranteed a certain amount of dues to the treasury, local elected town administrators replaced centrally appointed officials . Even where the latter remained, the population could elect assessors to check closely on their activities and, indeed, impeach them when necessary .
 Historians have shown the considerable development and broad competence of the institutions of local self-government in sixteenth-century Muscovy . These institutions did not last, although historians have shown that .
 After the Time of Troubles self-government was replaced by a centralized system of appointed governors, the voevody, who were all servitors of high Moscow rank with extensive military and civil powers .
 At the same time, the voevoda administration became an increasingly modern bureaucracy, following codified law and practicing regular accounting and reporting procedures . At the time, it was a modern bureaucracy .
 The demise of selfgovernment in the localities reminds us of the continued centralization of the Moscow state and of the weak development of social independence and initiative in old Russia .
 The expansion of the Muscovite state in the seventeenth century brought under the tsar’s scepter lands and peoples to the west, north, south, and east of the old Muscovaite principality .
 Historians have long argued that the expansion in the west was a reunification with ancient Russian lands . Most agree that expansion to the east and southeast had a “colonial” quality .
 The advance into the southern steppe continued after the conquest of the khanates of Kazan and Astrakhan . The advance of the steppe began in the early 2000s and 2000s .
 The Russians advanced 3,000 miles from the Ob River to the Pacific, exploring and conquering Siberia . The most spectacular expansion occurred in the direction of the less settled east . Actual settlement developed more slowly .
 Russians met little resistance because there were no strong political communities and local elites could easily be co-opted . Russians met relatively little resistance due to lack of strong political community and lack of local elites .
 Russian expansion limited in the west and north by the strong and ambitious states of Sweden and Poland-Lithuania . In the south, the Persian and Ottoman empires stood against Russian expansion outside of northern Asia .
 Russian colonists reached the borders of imperial China in the Amur region . The Chinese sent troops who forced the Russians to dismantle forts and step back from this frontier .
 Furs presented the main attraction in Siberia, where sable, ermine, beaver, and other valuable fur-bearing animals abounded . Furs were among the main attractions in Siberia .
 Furs constituted an extremely important item in Muscovite finance and foreign trade . Furs were extremely important items in the Muscvite economy .
 As Russian rule spread among the thinly scattered natives in Siberia, the natives were required to pay the iasak, a tax in furs, to their new sovereign .
 Central authorities expended great effort to limit the private acquisition of furs by the administrators in Siberia .
 In general, the annexation of Siberia has been compared to the European exploration of Africa and the American advance westward . The annexation was a highly profitable undertaking for the Muscovite state .
 Siberia escaped serfdom, and the state’s reach was always modest . With very few gentry and endless spaces for the fugitive, Siberia escaped Serfdom . The state of Siberia was more modest .
 In this light, Siberia acquired a certain mythic status in Russian culture . Siberia has become a mythic region in Russia .
 The question of how Russia ruled its many non-Russian subjects has been much debated . Only recently have scholars have researched this history closely, especially concerning the south and east .
 It is important to distinguish the more aggressive imperial policies of later centuries, however, from seventeenth-century practices . The difference likely being due to both limited capacity and a different approach to ruling non-Russians .
 The policy of the Muscovite state in Siberia, along with that of the Church, was oriented toward a mixture of toleration of local difference, co-optation and gradual integration . The policy was aimed at tolerating local difference and co-opting of local elites .
 Moscow placed great weight on winning over indigenous elites with promises of rewards, payments, and protection of their traditional power and privileges . In the early stages of conquest, Moscow placed much emphasis on winning them over .
 Natives were not forcibly baptized, though if they became Orthodox, they were treated as Russians . The condition that, among other things, excused them from paying the iasak might have given the government second thoughts .
 The government also tried to determine local needs and problems, to develop the local economy, and to extend paternalistic care to both natives and Russian settlers, as Lantzeff and others have described .
 Moscow was very far away, but local situation encouraged extreme exploitation and cruelty . The local situation encourages extreme exploitation, cruelty on the part of officials and other Russians, writes CNN.
 In general, as Russian settlement increased, indirect rule through local elites gave way to direct administrative authority from Moscow .
 Moscow preferred incentives and other noncoercive policies to the sort of interference and control that would come with the modernization of the empire in the 17th century . Still, most new lands remained undergoverned, with Moscow preferring incentives and non-coercives policies .
 The Emperor was seated upon an Imperiall Throne, with Pillars of silver and gold, which stood 3 or 4 stepps high . Pillars were placed on the Emperor's head, with a Crowne upon his head, his Scepter in his right hand and his Globe
 AsI was to goe out of the roome, I observed betwixt 20ty and 30ty great Princes and Councellors of State, sitting upon the left hand of the Emperor, who were all in long Roabes of Cloth of gold, imbro
 At my going out of the Doore, I bowed myself and they all rose up and putt of their Capps unto me . To them, at my . going out, at . my .going out of my . Doore . I bowed .
 Rome fell away long ago and lies prostrate, and the Poles fell in the like ruin with her, being to the end the enemies of the Christian . The Poles are now the enemies to the Christian.
 Among you orthodoxy is of mongrel breed; and no wonder—if by the violence of the Turkish Mahound you have become impotent, and henceforth it is you who should come to learn .
 In Russia under our princes and tsars the orthodox faith was pure and undiled . By the gift of God among us there is autocracy; till the time of Nikon, the apostate, the .
 Muscovite Russia existed in relative isolation by contrast, with Kievan Rus, for example . Muscvite Russia was known as Muschevite Rus, or Muscovy .
 It developed a distinctive culture based on religion and ritualism . It assumed a tone of self-righteousness and suspicion toward any outside influence .
 In reality, Muscovite culture served as links to the outside world . In reality the main elements were religion, language, law, and others .
 Muscovy represented, not simply a self-contained culture, but a transitional culture, where tradition vied with innovation and native culture interacted with foreign influences . In terms of time, too, Muscovies represented a transition culture, not just a self contained culture .
 Muscovites transformed their country and culture into one of the great states of modern Europe . And, after all, it was Peter the Great, who transformed the country into a modern nation .
 Religious belief, identity, and ritual played a powerful role in the growth and consolidation of the state . Religious belief and identity played a role in Russia's relation to the larger world, art and literature .
 Religion contributed both to a narrowminded, self-satisfied pride and the recognition of the need for reform . Religion contributed to the narrowminded and self-insulted pride of the nation, says author .
 The expansion and strengthening of the Muscovite state found a parallel in the evolution of the Church in Muscovy . As already mentioned, the expansion and strength of the state was found in a parallel to the Church's evolution .
 The Church councils of 1547, 1549, 1551, and 1554 strove to improve ecclesiastical organization and practices and eliminate various abuses . The councils were created in order to eliminate abuses of the church .
 In 1547 twenty-two Russians were canonized, and in 1549 17 more . In 1549 seventeen more were also canonized in Russia .
 The resulting consolidated national pantheon of saints represented a religious counterpart to the political unification of the country . The resulting religious unification was the result of the unification of India .
 The Hundred-Chapter council of 1551 dealt with many matters in the life of the Church . The council was formed in 1551 . It was the first council of its kind .
 Council of 1554 condemned certain Russian heretics and heresies which had roots either in Protestantism or in the teachings of the non-possessors . Council also condemned certain heretics which were either Protestant or had roots of Protestantism . Council condemned some of the heretics as
 The rising stature of the Russian Church at a time when many other Orthodox Churches, including the patriarchate of Constantinople itself, fell under the sway of the Muslim Turks . Muscovite confidence and pride was boosted by the rise of Russian Church .
 References to holy Russian land, to Holy Russia, date from the second half of the sixteenth century . References to the holy land date back to the 16th century, dating back to 15th century .
 Muscovy obtained its own patriarch in 1589, as a result of political pressure on Constantinople . In 1589 it was put to use as a basis for political pressure from the Ottoman Empire .
 Some later incumbents of this position would play major historical roles, as Hermogen, for example, did during the Time of Troubles and Philaret did during his reign of his son, Michael . As we have also seen, some of the incumbents have also played historical roles .
 Philaret adopted the title Great Sovereign (Velikii Gosudar), previously used only by tsars . Officially, state and Church were united in a ‘symphony’ of authority .
 The Church also fought to limit the competition of Catholicism and Protestantism in the Russian lands, a growing threat as Muscovy expanded .
 The Church began printing religious books to help spread and standardize faith and ritual . Church endeavored to gain better control of far-flung monasteries and parish priests .
 It should be added that the Church, especially the monasteries, enjoyed enormous wealth in land and other possessions in spite of repeated efforts of the government to curb its holdings .
 The great split or schism in the seventeenth century revealed serious weaknesses in the Muscovite Church . The great schism revealed serious weakness in the apparently mighty and monolithic Muscovaite Church.
 A growing awareness among the Church leadership of the need for reform in Russian religious life was the key historical context for the schism . The Church leadership was aware of the growing awareness of reform in religious life .
 Alexis was an active supporter of reform during his reign . Little was done, however, before the reign of Alexis, who was active supporter .
 These were years of religious and moral revival in the Russian Orthodox Church . They sought to improve the celebration of the liturgy and to bring a higher moral and spiritual tone to parish life .
 Historians have compared this to contemporary reform movements in the Protestant West and especially to the Catholic Reformation . Some historians have compared the reform movements to those of the Catholic West .
 Key figures were a group of clergymen known in history as the Zealots of Piety . Key figures included a group known as the 'Zealot of Pieties' The Zealots were known for their religious beliefs .
 The tsar’s confessor, Stefan Vonifatiev, was the celebrated archpriest Avvakum, or Habakkuk .
 They advocated better preaching, proper celebration of the liturgy, and bringing the moral teachings of Christ into everyday life . They advocated .
 Tsar Alexis made many of these policies into law, including banning skomorokhi and requiring the full-length service . The Tsar made the ban into law .
 Reform often led to opposition, sometimes violent, among laity and local priests . Reform led to violence among the laity, often violent, against the priests .
 Avvakum recalls in his autobiography being beaten up and chased more than once from provincial towns by mobs of ‘priests, peasants, and goodwives” who were enraged by his moralizing accusations against them .
 The movement for reform turned a fateful corner after Nikon, who had been close to the Zealots of Piety, was named patriarch in 1652 . Nikon was a close ally of the Zealot, who was close to Nikon .
 He continued efforts to promote greater piety and purity in religious life, such as prohibiting vodka on holy days .
 Problems arose over his efforts to bring Orthodox worship into conformity with the rest of Eastern Orthodoxy . Problems arose, however, over his attempts to bring Eastern Orthodox worship to conformity .
 For the religion in which ritual and tradition is so central, these were not trivial changes . For the sake of many, these are not trivial .
 With these reforms, and their backing by state power, the schism began in earnest . Indeed, it began with these reforms and they were backed by the state power .
 Many of the reformers turned against Nikon, complaining of his arrogance and intransigence in forcing these reforms . Nikon was accused of abandoning Russian traditions and of abandoning traditions .
 Nikon excommunicated, imprisoned, and exiled these former allies . Nikon's "usual aggressive manner" led him to excommunicate, imprisoned and exiled them .
 Russian Church councils approved his changes . Patriarch of Constantinople convened a council convened by the patriarch of Constantinople .
 Alexis grew impatient with the patriarch’s imperious manner and growing influence and wealth . Alexis grew impatience with his father's imperious ways and growing wealth .
 Nikon was deposed and the supremacy of the state over the Church was reiterated . But the reforms were completely endorsed by the reforms . Nikon was later deposed .
 Dissenters were ordered to submit or be in defiance of both Church and state . Dissent was ordered by the Church and State in the early 1900s .
 No dogmatic or doctrinal differences were involved, priests and laymen in considerable numbers refused to obey . Priests, laymen and priests refused to disobey .
 The Old Believers or Old Ritualists—starovery or staroobriadtsy—rejected the changes and hence rejected the established Church . The Old  Ritualists reject the changes .
 For them, rituals were themselves a manifestation of the divine and could not be changed, even in the name of greater uniformity with the rest of the Orthodox community . For them they could not change, even if they wanted to be uniformed .
 Avvakum's stunning autobiography represents the greatest document of Old Belief and one of the great documents of human faith . He perished at the stake in 1682 after being burned to death .
 The Solovetskii Monastery in the far north had to be captured by a siege that lasted from 1668 to 1676 . The siege lasted between 1668 and 1676 and lasted until 1676.
 Apocalyptic views had been growing throughout Russian society in these years . Early Old Believers saw in the Church reform and in Nikon the Antichrist .
 When government forces attacked Old Believer monasteries and villages, dissenters sometimes committed suicide by fire rather than submit . Dissenters committed suicide in the Old Believers' villages .
 It has been estimated that between 1672 and 1691 over 20,000 of them burned themselves alive in thirty-seven known communal conflagrations . It is estimated that over the course of the years, the majority of the dead burned themselves .
 With no canonical foundation and no independent theology to speak of, the Old Belief divided again and again, but it never disappeared . The Old Belief never disappeared, but never did .
 The main cleavage came to be between the popovtsy and the bespopovtsy . Those who had priests and those who had none had none were those who did not .
 Some dissenters bent all their efforts to obtain priests by every possible means, for instance, by enticing them away from the established Church . The popovtsy were enthused to get priests by entangling them with their families .
 The priestless, on the other hand, accepted the logic of their situation and organized their religious life along different lines . They accepted their situation in order to have a different religious life .
 It is from the priestless Old Believers that many Russian sects derive from .
 Russian history takes us well beyond Muscovite period of Russian history . But all this takes us to well beyond the Muscvite period .
 The raskol constituted the only major schism in the history of the Orthodox Church in Russia . It was formed in the early 1980s .
 Afanasii Shchapov and numerous others have stressed the social composition of the Old Believers and the social and economic reasons for their rebellion . The social composition and social reasons for the rebellion have been stressed .
 Dissenters were originally and continued to be mostly well-established peasants and traders . The dissenters were initially and continued, mostly well . established peasants .
 Their action could, therefore, be interpreted as a protest against gentry domination and the entire oppressive Muscovite system . The action could have been interpreted as an act of protest against the gentry .
 They reacted against increased ecclesiastical centralization under Nikon which led to the appointment of priests . Parish autonomy and democracy was also lost, they said .
 In addition to being democrats, the Old Believers expressed the entrepreneurial and business acumen of the Russian people, historians have claimed . The Old Believer expressed the business savvy of Russian people .
 "Over a period of time they made a remarkable record for themselves in commerce," says the author of the book . "They were very successful in commerce. They were very well known for their success."
 The drive for reform has been ascribed to the influence of the more learned Ukrainian clergy, and to the desire of the Muscovite Church and state to adapt their practices to include the Ukrainians and Belorussians . As to the other side, the drive .
 Alexis gave Ukrainian, Belorussian, and Greek scholars important roles as intellectual leaders of the Church . Alexis was part of a bid for Russian leadership of the whole of ecumenical Orthodoxy, according to S Zenkovsky, .
 The raskol has been the focus of this article on the Muscovite culture . It has also been the emphasis on the fundamental formalism, ritualism, and traditionalism of Muscovanite culture.
 Form and tradition in religion were part of its power and legitimacy and could not be compromised, says the Vatican . Form and traditions in religion "part of the power of its legitimacy and cannot be compromised"
 Religious ceremony and ritual served as a great unifying bond for believers, a connection to the past, and a part of the foundation of daily life . Rituals are a great part of religious ceremonies and rituals .
 Nikon and his followers refused to allow any local practice or insignificant variation to remain, thus on their part, too, confusing the letter with the spirit . The patriarch of Constantinople advised Nikon not to allow local practice .
 The raskol can thus be considered a tribute to the hold that Muscovite culture had on the people . It is considered a symbol of the hold held by the people of Muscova .
 Even if we allow for the exaggeration implicit in this view, many of the most ignorant and fanatical must also have joined the dissenters, the loss remains great . The loss is great, even if it is exaggerated .
 It certainly made it easier for Peter the Great to treat the Church in a high-handed manner . It made him easier for him to treat it in a manner .
 Muscovite thought and literature preoccupied certain Muscovanites minds . The true faith and the proper form of government preoccupied some of the true faith . The issue of the proper government preoccupied certain MusCovites minds.
 Ivan Peresvetov, who wrote in the middle of the sixteenth century, upheld the new power and authority of the tsar . The events of the Time of Troubles provided variations on this theme of proper government .
 The most famous debate on politics took place between Ivan the Terrible and Prince Andrei Kurbsky in two letters from the tsar and five from the fugitive nobleman, written between 1564 and 1579 . Edward Keenan famously argued that the exchange was fabricated in the early sevent
 He declared that, even if he were a tyrant, Kurbsky’s only alternative was patient suffering . Even if he was a tyrant he remained patient suffering, he said, as a Christian and a faithful subject .
 The prince bitterly attacked Ivan for his “leprous conscience,” “sophistic’” arguments, and sinful pride . The prince, on his part, bitterly attacked the prince, saying he had a sinful conscience .
 In foreign relations, as in domestic matters, Ivan the Terrible and other tsars reiterated the glory of autocracy and demanded full respect for it . In foreign . relations, the tsars insisted that autocracy was the best in the world .
 Literary life in Muscovy was rather meager compared with the riches of the contemporary West or even compared to Muscovite architecture and other arts, says author . But comparison with the West should not be the only way of interpreting Russian culture .
 Muscovy was far behind the West, but it's not clear if it's the same as the West . "Book culture" is a key part of the West's cultural identity, says the author .
 Printing arrived in Russia only in the 1560s, more than a century after Gutenberg, and produced far fewer volumes and far fewer secular works . Printing came into existence in Russia in the mid-1560s and produced fewer volumes .
 The lack of printed books is not the only measure of culture or even cultural change in the United States . But the lack of print books is also a measure of cultural change, says CNN.com .
 Pilgrims and beggars composed religious poems at venerated shrines, and the skomorokhi continued entertaining people, in spite of all prohibitions . Pilgrim and beggar performed religious poetry at shrines .
 Recent historians of popular Christianity have described a complex mixture of teachings with folklore and magic . They produce a vision of the world filled with spirits of all sorts, both good and evil . A rich body of ideas and practices about how to cope with trouble in this world .
 This vital popular culture, it should be noted, was not limited to the village or the poor . It was not only limited to those who were poor, it was also a vital culture .
 The Domostroi, or “house manager,” constituted one of the most noteworthy works of Muscovite Russia .
 Sylvester intended to instruct head of a Muscovite family how to run their households and lead their lives . The original version of the book dates back to 1556 .
 The Domostroi teachings reflect the ritualism, piety, severity, and patriarchal nature of Muscovite society . Domostrovite society was dominated by ritualism and ritualism . The domostrovii's teachings reflect a patriarchal society .
 Punish your son in his youth, and he will give you a quiet old age, and restfulness to your soul . Punish yourself in your youth. Punish him in his childhood, and give him restfulness .
 "If you love your son, punish him frequently, that you may rejoice later," says the author of the book "Punish him frequently"
 Domostroi is considered by some to be a kind of Muscovite summa . Other events in literature in literature, especially in the seventeenth century, have pointed in new ways .
 Avvakum’s autobiography of the early 1670s, a milestone in Russian literature, was written in an earthy spoken idiom . The Russian author was born in 16th century and died in 18th century .
 Metropolitan Macarius compiled hagiography and menologia . Menologia is a calendar of the lives of saints arranged under the dates of their respective feasts . The most important of the most important was compiled by Macarius .
 They also included theological and polemical works, sermons, and other items . They included theological works, polemans, and others .
 After Ukraine joined Muscovy, the more learned and less isolated Ukrainian clerics began to play a leading role in a Russian literary revival . Ukrainian clerics played a key role in the revival of Russian literature .
 Scholars have seen the emergence, in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, of a literary culture for the elite linked to European trends .
 The stories assumed a romantic, didactic, or satirical character and were usually full of adventure, which, as a rule, the religious writings of ancient Russia lacked . Coming through Poland, Ukraine, the Balkans, and sometimes more directly, the stories assumed .
 The stories acquainted Muscovites with the world of knighthood, courtly love, and other concepts and practices unknown in the realm of the tsars . Often, through the vehicle of such recurrent themes as the tales of the seven wise men or of Tristan and Isold
 Syllabic versification also came from the West, from the Latin and Polish languages, largely through the efforts of Simeon of Polotsk, who died in 1680 . The work was largely based on the work of the Polish poet of the same period .
 It remained the dominant form in Russian poetry until the middle of the eighteenth century . It remained dominant form until the mid-nineteenth century .
 Tsar Alexis established a court theater in 1672 under the direction of a German pastor, Johann Gregory . After some productions of plays arranged by private individuals, the theater was set up by the Tsar .
 Before long, a few Russian plays enriched the repertoire, which was devoted primarily to biblical subjects .
 Literary historians have described significant, even radical, cultural changes in late sixteenth-century and especially seventeenth-century Russian literature . The individual and the inward self were important issues in Russian literature, especially concerning the individual .
 Dmitrii Likhachev made a strong case for the “discovery of the value of the human personality” and the rise of “individualism” in Russian literature and art . The author also discussed the rise in individualism in Russian art and literature .
 Relatively secular tales, such as stories about Grudtsyn and Skobeev, and religious ‘Lives,” reveal a new more realistic concern with everyday experience, individual morality, human emotions, and personal suffering .
 Victor Zhivov, who has also described a new consciousness of self seventeenth-century Russian literature, has added that for understanding early Russian literature and culture it would be misleading to treat the secular and religious as separate, for both were present and interconnected .
 The boyars' wooden houses and the rulers’ wooden mansions—the so-called khoromy— evolved into remarkable conglomerations of independent units that compensated for their lack of symmetry .
 Examples of this type of building included the Stroganovs in Solvygodgodsk and Tsar Alexis’s huge summer palace in Kolomenskoe near Moscow .
 The principles of Russian wooden architecture found in rich St. Petersburg . Muscovite architecture found rich in the city of St. Catherine II .
 The cathedral was commissioned by Ivan the Terrible to commemorate the victory over the Mongols at Kazan in 1552 . It was named the Cathedral of the Intercession of the Virgin .
 A small chapel was later built as the burial site of the revered ‘holy fool” St. St. Francis . The small chapel is now used as a small chapel .
 St. Basil the Blessed at one end of Red Square, outside the Kremlin wall, provides the most striking illustration of this type of construction in stone .
 Built in 1555-60 by two architects from Pskov, Barma and Posnik, it has never ceased to dazzle visitors .
 This church consists of nine separate churches on a common foundation . It was originally known as the Cathedral of the Intercession of the Virgin . It consists in fact of 9 separate churches .
 All nine have the form of tall octagons—a narrower octagon on top of a broader one in each case—and the central church, around which the other eight are situated, is covered by a tent roof .
 Striking and different cupolas further emphasize the variety and independence of the parts of the church . Stunning cupolas also emphasize the diversity of the different parts of church .
 Bright colors and abundant decorations contribute their share to the powerful, if somewhat idiosyncratic, impression . Bright colors, abundant decoration contribute to the impression .
 In the second half of the seventeenth century the baroque style reached Muscovy through Ukraine . The style quickly gained popularity, developing into the so-called Muscovite, or Naryshkin . The last name referring to the boyar family that sponsored it is
 Moscow baroque replaced asymmetrical mixtures in older buildings with complex symmetries and replaced ‘Russian” ornamentation . Columns, pediments, volutes, gables, and other classical forms replaced “Russian’ ornamentation”
 The church was built in 1693 in the village of Fili, now part of Moscow, Russia . It provides an interesting example of Russian baroque architecture .
 The great Russian tradition of icon painting continued during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries but then was effectively terminated . The great icon painting tradition was effectively ended in Russia in the 16th century .
 The first, supported by the great merchant family of the northeast, was active from 1580 to 1630 . The first was active between 1580 and 1630, approximately .
 Its characteristics included bright backgrounds, rich colors, elaborate and minute design . A penchant for decorative elements and gold, for instance gold contours .
 Stroganov icons tended to become miniatures, “lovely and highly precious objects, if no longer great works of art” in the words of one critic . In fact, the Strogankov icons tend to be miniatures . Stroganova icons were often miniatures
 Procopius Chirin later joined the tsar’s icon-painters and even became Tsar Michael's favorite artist . Stroganov was an outstanding member of the Stroganova group .
 The tsar’s icon-painters dominated the scene in the second half of the seventeenth century .
 They found patronage in the so-called Oruzheinaia Palata or Armory, headed by an able and enlightened boyar, Bogdan Khitrovo . They were patronised by the boyar's son Bogdan .
 The tsar’s icon-painters developed a monumental style and reflected the influence of the West with its knowledge of perspective and anatomy . The Russian tsar's icon painters were influenced by the West .
 Simon Ushakov, who lived from 1626 to 1686, approximately, was the school’s celebrated master . He lived approximately between 1626 and 1686 .
 He pioneered use of new techniques and images in icon painting, including chiaroscuro shading on faces and realistic depiction of contemporary buildings and people .
 The school of the tsar’s icon-painters marked the end of a long road . However, it was not the first time they had painted icons of the Russian empire .
 Ushakov and his companions were praised for their ability to combine Byzantine and Western elements . But before long the West swept over the East, it was replaced by the West .
 Icon painting would, of course, persist, but it ceased to be a creative and leading art . Icon painting continued to be an important part of the American landscape .
 In the seventeenth century already we see the rise of secular painting . In the 17th century, secular painting became more popular in Europe .
 Ushakov organized a workshop for nonreligious painting at the Armory . This work ranged from maps to furniture decoration . The Armory was set up by the Russian artist .
 A very important, if still rare, development was the appearance of portrait painting toward the end of the seventeenth century . A portrait painting is a very important development .
 portraits of rulers and especially boyars, some of them shaven and wearing Polish styles, have been interpreted as a sign of the Westernization of Russian art . Some of the portraits of boyars are seen as signs of the growing cultural and social regard for the individual .
 Other arts also flourished in Muscovy, especially fresco painting and book illumination, along with artistic crafts such as religious wood-block prints, carving in wood , ceramics, enamel, precious metal work, and jewelry .
 The extent of literacy in pre-Petrine Russia remains controversial, not least because we lack good sources to measure it . Literacy and education remains controversial .
 Foreign observers at the time and many critical Russian elites described well-nigh total illiteracy and ignorance, and many historians have agreed . Many historians agreed .
 In this case, as in so many others, one has to strive for a balanced judgment . "One has to be careful not to make a judgment on whether or not," she says .
 Literacy was acquired from small schools in churches or monasteries or from relatives and tutors, including foreign ones, especially among the elite . But literacy was acquired through small schools or by relatives or tutors .
 Archival research has found a considerable growth in the production of primers and abecedaria in the late seventeenth century . The numbers printed would have only served a small minority of people .
 Studies of the swelling bureaucracy in the seventeenth century have concluded that most chancellery employees could read and write well enough to do their jobs . Most chancelleries employees could write and write enough for their jobs, studies show .
 Muscovite culture could not have existed without some enlightenment, says historian . The Muscovan culture that we have discussed in this chapter could have existed in the past, he says .
 Metropolitan Peter Mogila, or Mohila, founded an Academy modeled on Jesuit colleges in 1631 . In Kiev in Ukraine, which was more open to the West, Orthodoxy had to defend itself against Catholicism .
 In Moscow in 1648—49, Fedor Rtishchev built a monastery and invited some thirty Kievan monks to teach Slavonic, Latin, Greek, rhetoric, philosophy, and other disciplines .
 In 1666 Simeon of Polotsk established a school where he taught Latin and the humanities . He established the school in 1666 and taught Latin .
 After his death the school was reestablished by his student, Sylvester Medvedev, after his death .
 The Medvedev and the printing press schools combined to form the Slavonic-Greek-Latin Academy, headed by learned Greek monks, the Lichud brothers, Iloannicius and Sofronius . Later in the 1680s, the academy was headed by monks Ilo
 As planned, the Academy was to protect the faith and to control knowledge as well as disseminate it . The Academy was intended to protect faith and control knowledge .
 Kiev and Moscow clearly stood out as centers of Russian enlightenment . Some relatively advanced teaching also went on in such places as the Holy Trinity-St. Trinity . Kiev and St. Petersburg were centers of enlightenment .
 Muscovite school curriculum closely resembled that of medieval Europe at corresponding levels . Muscivite school curricula closely resembled medieval Europe's medieval levels . The Muscvite school system was similar to medieval Europe .
 In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries Russian textbooks in such fields as arithmetic, history, and grammar, dictionaries, and even elementary encyclopedias made their appearance . Sylvester Medvedev compiled the first Russian bibliography .
 Even if we make full allowance for Muscovite enlightenment, the fact remains that in a great many ways Muscovy lagged behind the West . The Beginnings of Self-Criticism is the beginning of the West's self-criticism .
 Russia experienced no Renaissance and no Reformation . It took no part in the maritime discoveries and the scientific and technological advances of the early modern period . Russia was not involved in the Reformation, but in the discovery of maritime discoveries .
 Deficiencies became most apparent in war and such practical matters as medicine and mining .
 It should be noted that the Muscovite government showed a continuous and increasing interest in the West and in the many things that it had to offer . The Muscovei government showed an increased interest in West .
 Diplomacy constituted one obvious contact between the Muscovite state and other European countries . Diplomacy was a key part of the relationship between Russia and Europe in the early 1800s .
 We traced the highlights of Russian foreign relations in previous chapters . These relations repeatedly included distant lands, such as England and Holland, as well as neighbors like Poland and Sweden .
 English merchant, Sir John Merrick, helped negotiate the Treaty of Stolbovo between Sweden and Russia . For instance, Merrick helped negotiate a treaty between Sweden, Russia .
 Tsar Alexis restricted English traders to Archangel after execution of Charles I . He helped the king’s son, later Charles II, with money and grain .
 As a special quarter in the city, it was a sign of both increased Western influence in Moscow and efforts to contain it . The special quarter has been a symbol of increased western influence in Russia .
 At the end of the sixteenth century foreigners in Muscovite service could be counted in hundreds, and even thousands, if we include Poles, Lithuanians, and Ukrainians . The foreign section of the tsar’s army consisted of 2,500 men .
 The Time of Troubles reduced these numbers, but with the reign of Michael the influx of foreigners resumed . The influx of foreign visitors to Ireland has since resumed .
 Tsar Alexis assigned them a northeastern suburb of Moscow, the so-called Nemetskaia Sloboda, or German Suburb . In 1652 Tsar Alexis was assigned them to a northeastern part of Moscow . The area is now known as the Nemetska
 The Russian word for German, nemets, derived from the Russian for dumb, nemoi, came to mean all Europeans except Slavs and Latins . Incidentally, the word nemets is the German word for the dumb .
 A visitor in the 1670s estimated that about 18,000 foreigners lived in Muscovy, mostly in the capital, but also in Archangel and other commercial centers .
 "The importance of the foreign community, in particular for the economic development of the country, far exceeded its numbers," she said . The importance of foreign community has far exceeded the numbers, she added .
 In addition to handling Russia's foreign trade, the newcomers began to establish a variety of manufactures and industries . Russia's economy has grown in recent years .
 Sir John Merrick, already mentioned as a diplomat, concentrated on producing hemp and fiber . Merrick was a diplomat .
 Andrew Vinius, a Dutchman, organized the industrial processing of iron ore and built the first modern ironworks in Muscovy . He organized the processing of the ore .
 Foreigners acted as military experts, physicians, and other specialists . Foreigners also acted as medical experts .
 Even at the end of the seventeenth century, Prince Vasilii Golitsyn remained rare . Thoroughly Westernized men such a Westernized man remained rare in Russia even at the time .
 Signs of change were widespread, even within the bounds of what remained a deeply religious society . But signs of change are widespread, with signs of growing change in the country .
 Russians were reading and even writing secular stories, constructing baroque buildings, and painting portraits . As we have seen, Russians were even reading secular stories and constructing buildings .
 Some began to eat salad and asparagus, to snuff and smoke tobacco in spite of all the prohibitions, and to cultivate roses . Some began eating salad, snuffing and smoking tobacco, and even cultivating roses .
 Western clothing gained in popularity . Audacious men also trimmed their hair and beards . Western clothing became popular .
 It might be added that the reformer’s wholesale condemnation of the existing order, although highly unusual, also had certain precedents in the Muscovite past .
 secular writers often complained that there was no justice in the land even when praising the Muscovite form of government, as in the case of Peresvetov . Not to mention the religious jeremiads, the secular writers also complained of injustice .
 More radical critics included Prince Ivan Khvorostinin, Juraj KriZanic, and Grigorii Kotoshikhin . Prince Ivan died in 1625 .
 KriZanic, a Croatian and a Catholic priest, spent eighteen years in the realm of the tsars, from 1659 to 1677 . He wrote nine books on religious, philosophical, linguistic, and political subjects .
 He combined an extremely high regard for Russia as the natural leader and savior of Slavdom with a sweeping condemnation of its glaring defects and its abysmal ignorance .
 KriZanic’s writings were apparently known to the Russian ruling circles . He was apparently a member of the ruling circles of the Russian government .
 Official in the foreign office escaped to Sweden in 1664 after some personal trouble . Kotoshikhin was an official in the Foreign Office .
 Before being executed in 1667 for the murder of his landlord, he wrote a sweeping denunciation of his native land . He was executed at the end of 1667 .
 Kotoshikhin emphasized Muscovite pride, deceit, and, again, the isolation and ignorance of the people, he said . Kotoshikin: "Muscovites are proud of their pride and deceit"
 The system that he condemned did not long outlast him, and its transformation came from forces born within Muscovite life and culture . As it turned out, the system did not last long .
 Entire Russia is your statue, reshaped by your expert skill, says PETER the Great . Entire . Russia is a statue of the great, says Peter .
 Count Kankerin: We became citizens of the world but ceased in certain respects to be citizens of Russia . Count KANKERIN: "We became citizens ... but ceased to be Russian citizens" Count Kankaerin says Russia is now one of the most powerful countries in
 Peter I replaced the antiquated landlord rule of Russia with a European chancellery regime . Everything that could be copied from Swedish and German legal codes...was transported .
 Peter the Great's reign began a new epoch in Russian history, known variously as the Imperial Age because of the new designation of ruler and land, the St. St. Peter . Peter's reign was the first of its kind in Russia .
 Peter has been seen as both a great Russian hero and as betraying and defiling Russian traditions . Peter is seen as a traitor to Russia and a great traitor to Russian tradition . Peter's actions are seen as defying and defying Russian traditions.
 Many have argued that Peter broke decisively with the backward Muscovite past . Others have argued he used old methods in the service of new goals . Peter often used old method in the best way to achieve his goals .
 The precise beginning of Peter the Great’s reign itself can be variously dated . Peter's reign lasted from 1682 to 1694 . The chronology of Imperial Russia is much clearer than those of earlier times .
 Before turning to the celebrated history of the reformer and his activities, we must consider these years when Peter's authority remained at best nominal . Peter was a nominal figure in the early years of his career .
 Tsar Alexis had been married twice, to Maria Miloslavskaia from 1648 to 1669, and to Natalia Naryshkina from 1671 until his death in 1676 . Alexis had a daughter with Natalia, who he married in 1671 .
 He had thirteen children by his first wife, but of the sons only two, Theodore and Ivan, both of them sickly, survived their father . He had 13 children by first wife but only Theodore survived his father .
 Peter was born on June 9, 1672, about a year after the tsar’s second marriage . Peter, strong and healthy, was born in Russia in 1672 .
 Alexis succeeded Alexis and died without an heir in 1682 . Theodore, as we know, succeeded Alexis . Theodore succeeded Alexis, as well as Alexis . Alexis died without a son, Theodore .
 In the absence of a law of succession, the two boyar families, the Miloslavskys and Naryshkins, competed for the throne . The two families were the two main contenders in the kingdom .
 Because of his youth, his mother became regent, while her relatives secured leading positions in the state . Because of her youth, her relatives and friends secured leads positions in state .
 Miloslavsky party, led by Alexis’s able and strong-willed daughter Sophia, inspired a rebellion of the streltsy, or musketeers, concentrated in Moscow .
 Leading members of the Naryshkin clique were murdered . Peter witnessed some of these murders . The Miloslavskys seized power. Peter witnessed the murders .
 The use of the Latin title ‘imperator’ appeared in portraits before he officially adopted it in 1721 . He was made the tsar tsar and made Sophia regent in 1723 .
 From 1682 to 1689 Sophia and her associates governed Muscovy, with Ivan V incapable of ruling . Peter I, together, with the entire Naryshkin party, kept away from state affairs .
 Sophia helped extend Russia’s relations with Europe and was increasingly receptive to new ideas and influences from abroad . Sophia was the first female ruler of Russia and helped extend its relations with the world .
 Prince Vasilii Golitsyn, her foreign minister and possibly her lover, played a particularly important role in her life . He is believed to have been her lover . He was the foreign minister of the Soviet Union .
 Golitsyn cherished vast projects of improvement and reform including the abolition of serfdom and education on a large scale . He spoke several foreign languages and arranged his own home and life in the Western manner .
 He did liberalize the Muscovite penal code, even if he failed to implement his more ambitious schemes . He did not implement some of his most ambitious schemes, however .
 Golitsyn’s greatest success came in 1686 when Russia and Poland signed a treaty of “eternal peace” that confirmed the Russian gains of the preceding decades, including the acquisition of Kiev, Kiev .
 The treaty set the stage for the war against the Crimean Tatars, who were backed by Turkey . Yet the same treaty was set up for the Crimean Tatar war against Turkey .
 This war, led by Golitsyn, proved disastrous to Muscovite arms and contributed to Sophia’s downfall . This war was led to the death of Sophia, who died in childbirth .
 Sophia, on her part, realized the insecurity of her office and desired to become ruler in her own right . Sophia was the first queen of the world .
 Fedor Shaklovity, appointed by Sophia to command the streltsy, tried to incite his troops to stage another coup, put Sophia on the throne, and destroy her opponents . In 1689 he apparently tried to instill a coup, but it was unsuccessful .
 Peter escaped in the dead of night from the village of Preobrazhenskoe, near Moscow, where he had been living, to the Holy Trinity-St. Peter . Peter escaped after hearing a report of a plot .
 In the days that followed, many boyars and gentry, many military units trained in the Western manner and even several of the streltsy, rallied behind Peter .
 In the end the sister capitulated to the brother without a fight and was sent to live in a convent . The sister was forced to live with her brother in the convent .
 Shaklovity and two of his aides were executed . Several other officers and boyars, including Vasilii Golitsyn, suffered exile . Shaklovy and two aides were also executed; several other officers were exiled .
 In August 1689, Peter won acknowledgment as the effective ruler of Russia . Ivan retained his position as co-tsar . Peter won recognition as effective ruler .
 At 17, Peter showed no desire to take personal charge of affairs . Still, at 17, at seventeen, he showed no interest in taking personal charge .
 The government fell into the hands of his mother Natalia and her associates, notably her brother, the boyar Lev Naryshkin, Patriarch Joachim, and Patriarch Hadrian .
 What followed has been described as a traditionalist reaction against the Westernizing direction of Sophia’s reign .
 Foreigners seeking to come to Russia were interrogated, and those already there were viewed with suspicion . Those already in Russia were seen with suspicion, according to Russian officials .
 The years 1689-94 witnessed the last flowering of Muscovite religiosity, ritualism, parochialism, and suspicion of everything foreign .
 Peter I finally assumed the direction of the state at the age of twenty-two . Natalia died in 1694, and Peter I took over the reign . Peter I became the first monarch to become a monarch in 1692 .
 The impression Peter I commonly made on his contemporaries was one of enormous strength and energy . His character, childhood, and youth, was that of Peter I . The impression that Peter I. commonly made . on his . contemporaries was that he made on . contemporaries .
 Almost seven feet tall and powerfully built, the tsar possessed astonishing physical strength and vigor . The tsar was almost 7 feet tall when he was assassinated in 1918 .
 This restless energy was a personality trait emblematic of his whole reign . The restless energy of the late king was a constant constant throughout his reign .
 "Willful and determined, he recovered quickly from even the worst defeats," he said . "He recovered quickly after the worst defeat," he added. "He was a great fighter, not just a fighter, but a fighter."
 He fancied himself a good dentist and pulled the teeth of his own courtiers . He even pulled his own teeth out of his courtiers' teeth .
 He studied the professions of soldier and sailor from the bottom up . He served first in the ranks and learned the use of each weapon before promoting himself to officer .
 Russian monarch wanted to be everywhere and see everything for himself, traveling indefatigably around his vast state as no Muscovite monarch had ever done . Characteristically, he wanted to travel around the world .
 In a still more unprecedented manner he went twice to the West to learn, in 1697-98 and 1717 . He went to Europe twice in 1717 to learn and learn .
 Peter I's mind can best be described as active and practical, able quickly to grasp problems and devise solutions . Peter I was born Peter I, a son of Peter III, who was born in London .
 He viewed Western civilization as a useable culture of rationality and technology, not refinement or liberal values . Or rather, Western civilization was not refined or refined, he said .
 At the same time, and not entirely unrelated to his imposing political persona, Peter could be violent, crude, and cruel . Peter could also be violent and crude, as well as being cruel .
 He personally beat nobles, friends, and other members of his court with his own cudgel when he felt this was needed .
 Of more political significance, he did not shy away from the bloody suppression of dissent . He was more political than just a dictator .
 In external relations, as will be seen, he styled himself a royal warrior . He styled himself himself himself as a royal .
 On a personal level, he reveled in public horseplay and could drink prodigiously when in company, demanding that others keep up . He revels in public play and revels at parties .
 Peter performed mock rituals of state and Church, sometimes lasting for days . Together with his closest advisors, Peter performed elaborate mock rituals .
 Interpretations of the Assembly have often viewed it as a way to ridicule tradition in preparation for overcoming it . Interpretation of the assembly has often been viewed as an attempt to mock tradition .
 In practical political terms, it can also be seen as a way of promoting camaraderie and bonding among Peter’s associates, as well as being a way, through humor and liquor, of uniting the men who would be leading Peter's efforts to transform Russia . Peter
 Peter the Great must not be confused with Ivan the Terrible, whom he, incidentally, admired . That said, Peter the . Great, however, must not . not . confuse Ivan the . Terrible .
 The reformer never lost himself in the paranoid world of megalomania and delusions of persecution . He even refused to identify himself with the state .
 He consistently made every effort to serve his country, to bring to it change and enlightenment . He consistently tried to bring the country to light up .
 Peter received no systematic education, barely being taught to read and write . Peter was barely able to learn to read or write and was barely taught to write .
 From a very early age he began to pick things up on his own and pursue a variety of interests . Instead of picking things up at his own, he has learned to be more focused on learning .
 He devoted himself to war games with a mixed assortment of playmates, including war games . He dedicated his life to the cause of war games in his childhood .
 As early as 1694 he established a dockyard in Archangel and constructed a large ship there all by himself . At first he built small vessels, but soon he built a large vessel .
 Peter went to the foreign quarter in Moscow for information and instruction . For information, he went to Russia's foreign quarter .
 He learned from a variety of specialists what he wanted to know most about military and naval matters, geometry and the erection of fortifications .
 The tsar apparently felt much more at ease than in the conservative, tradition-bound palace environment, which he never accepted as his own .
 The smoking, drinking, love-making, and rough good humor, and conglomeration of tongues, first discovered in the foreign quarter in Moscow, became an enduring part of Peter the Great’s life .
 Peter's mother tried to make him mend his ways by marrying him to Eudoxia Lopukhina in 1689 . Peter’s mother failed to accomplish the desired purpose . Peter's father Peter was found guilty of murder in the 16th century .
 Peter took over the conduct of state affairs and began to reform Muscovy, he found few collaborators . Peter’s Assistants were Peter's assistants . Peter's Assistants are Peter's first assistants .
 His own family, the court circles, and the boyar duma overwhelmingly opposed change . He was forced to step down from his post .
 The sovereign discovered little support at the top of the state structure, and also because he never attached much importance to origin or rank, the sovereign proceeded to obtain assistants wherever possible .
 Prince Menshikov, who, the story went, had once sold pies in the streets of Moscow, met in Peter’s society with the remnants of the Russian boyar nobility . The story went that Prince Menskikov had met with remnants of Russia's boyar
 The tsar had the valuable aid of some of his old friends, such as Patrick Gordon and the Swiss, Francis Lefort, who played a prominent role until his early death .
 Later such able newcomers as the diplomat, Andrew Ostermann, and the military expert, Burkhard Miinnich, joined the sovereign’s entourage .
 Some of his numerous foreign assistants, for example, had been born in Russia and belonged to the second generation of foreign settlers in Muscovy .
 A large group belonged to the service gentry, of whom only two examples are the chief admiral of the reign, Fedor Apraksin, and Chancellor Gavril Golovkin . Only two examples of the gentry are from the service .
 Even old aristocratic families contributed a number of important figures . Field Marshal Count Boris Sheremetev and Senator Prince Iakov Dolgoruky were important figures in Russia .
 The Church too, although generally opposed to reform, supplied some able clerics who furthered the work of Peter the Great . The Church also supplied some .
 Archbishop Theophanes, or Feofan, Prokopovich, came from Ukraine . He was one of many promoters of change in Russia, who, like many other promoters of . change in . Russia .
 Of all the ‘fledglings of Peter’s nest’, Menhikov acquired the greatest prominence and power, he says . Of all of the “fledgings of the nest”, he adds .
 This son of a corporal or groom came closest to being the sovereign’s alter ego and participating in the entire range of his activity . This is the son of the corporal who came closest .
 Menshikov rose as the boy tsar’s orderly in the Preobrazhenskii regiment . He rose to be Generalissimo, Prince in Russia, Prince of the Holy Roman Empire, and Prince of Russia .
 Vain and thoroughly corrupt, as well as able and energetic, he constituted a permanent target for investigations and court proceedings and repeatedly suffered summary punishment from Peter the Great’s cudgel, but somehow managed to maintain his position .
 Peter may have never entirely freed himself from the traditional elite, says Paul Bushkovitch . At the same time, he has argued, Peter may never entirely free himself .
 He benefitted from the contributions of both old and new men and was limited, like his predecessors, by the need to maintain a balance in court politics .
 War against Turkey was Peter I's first major action after he took the government of Russia into his own hands in 1694, following the death of his mother . Peter I was the Grand Embassy to Europe, and the first major war against Turkey .
 In fighting Turkey, the protector of the Crimean Tatars and the power controlling the Black Sea and its southern Russian shore, the new monarch followed in the steps of his predecessors .
 Before long it became apparent that he managed his affairs differently . However, before long he managed to manage his own affairs differently.
 In one winter, the tsar built a fleet in Voronezh on the Don River . The tsar's fleet was built in one winter . The fleet was based on a fleet on the Russian River .
 He worked indefatigably himself, as well as ordering and urging others, and utilized to the best advantage the knowledge of all available foreign specialists along with his own previously acquired knowledge .
 Peter the Great brought thirty sea-going vessels and about a thousand transport barges to Azov in May 1696 . The Great also brought about 1,000 barges and about 30 ships to the region .
 Azov was besieged by sea as well as by land, the Turks surrendered Azov in July . Azov is the first time Azov has been besieged by land and sea .
 The tsar next sent fifty young men to study in Holland, Italy, and England . With a view toward a further struggle against Turkey and a continuing augmentation and modernization of the Russian armed forces .
 Peter dispatched groups of Russians to study abroad several more times in his reign . Peter sent groups of Russian students abroad several of his reigns .
 In addition to experts, the tsar needed allies to prosecute war against Turkey . The tsar was able to get allies in order to win the war .
 The desire to form a mighty coalition against the Ottoman Empire, prompted Peter to organize a large embassy to visit a number of European countries . Peter traveled with the embassy, a most unusual act for a Muscovite ruler .
 His identity remained no secret to the rulers and officials of the countries he visited or to the crowds which frequently gathered around him . His identity, however, remained a secret to officials and crowds .
 The tsar engaged in a number of important talks on diplomatic and other state matters . The Russian tsar was involved in a series of important diplomatic and political talks .
 He seemed most concerned with navigation, but he also tried to absorb other technical skills and crafts . He was also interested in the ways and manners of Europe as he saw it .
 Peter Mikhailov traveled to the British Isles to learn about the Baltic provinces of Sweden, Prussia, and certain other German states . Mikhailov also traveled to Holland, England, and the Habsburg Empire .
 From Vienna the tsar intended to go to Italy, but instead he rushed back to Moscow at news of a rebellion of the streltsy . The tsar was returning from Vienna to Moscow .
 The tsar invited Europeans of every nationality to come to his realm . He promised to subsidize passage, provide advantageous employment, and assure religious tolerance and separate law courts .
 The streltsy had already caused trouble for Peter and suffered punishment on the eve of the tsar’s journey to the West—in fact delaying the journey . Peter's journey was delayed by punishment .
 The tsar acted with exceptional violence and severity . The new conspiracy that was aimed at deposing Peter and putting Sophia in power had been effectively dealt with before the sovereign's return .
 After investigation and torture more than a thousand streltsy were executed . Their mangled bodies were exposed to the public as a salutary lesson . After investigation, torture and torture they were executed, the bodies were revealed .
 Sophia was forced to become a nun, and the same fate befell Peter’s wife, Eudoxia, who had sympathized with the rebels . Sophia had been a supporter of the rebels, but was later forced to be a nun .
 If the gruesome death of the streltsy symbolized the destruction of the old order, many signs indicated the coming of the new . The strelsttsy's gruesome death symbolizes the end of old order .
 After returning from the West, the tsar began to demand that beards be cut and foreign dress be worn by courtiers, officials, and the military .
 Those who refused to cut their beards could pay a tax . Even peasants visiting the city had to pay a small fee to keep their own beards .
 The Grand Embassy failed to further Peter the Great's designs against Turkey . The Great Northern War was the result of the Grand Embassy's failure to stop Turkey .
 European powers proved unresponsive to the proposal of a major war with the Ottomans . But other political opportunities emerged in the 1930s .
 Peter joined the military alliance against Sweden organized by Augustus I, ruler of Saxony and Poland . Augustus I ruled Saxony, Poland and Saxony . Peter joined forces against Sweden in the war .
 The interests of Denmark, Russia, and Poland-Saxony clashed with those of Sweden . Sweden had acquired a dominant position on the Baltic and in the Baltic area . Denmark and Russia were allies in the Thirty Years' War .
 Charles XII, a mere youth of fifteen, ascended the Swedish throne in 1697 . The time to strike appeared ripe, for Charles XII to strike . Charles XII was a mere 15-year-old when he became king .
 Augustus II declared war on Sweden in January 1700, and several months later Denmark followed him . Peter I concentrated on concluding the long-drawn-out peace negotiations with Turkey .
 Peter the Great declared war on Sweden ten days after he learned of the conclusion of the treaty with the Porte . The day after he officially announced it, he declared war against Sweden .
 The Russians found themselves in a much more difficult situation than they had expected, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 With utmost daring Charles XII crossed the straits and carried the fight to the heart of Denmark, quickly forcing the Danes to surrender . The Danes were forced to surrender by Charles XII .
 Swedish king promptly attacked Denmark in Denmark . Swedish king attacked Denmark .
 On November 30, 1700, he suddenly attacked the main Russian army that was besieging the fortress of Narva . Transporting his troops across the Baltic to Livonia, he attacked the Russian army .
 The Swedes routed the Russian forces, killing or capturing some 10,000 troops and forcing the remaining 30,000 to abandon their artillery and retreat in haste . In spite of the very heavy numerical odds against them, the Swedes killed or captured some of the Russian troops and forced the
 The new infantry levies proved ‘nothing more than undisciplined militia,’ the foreign officers incompetent and unreliable. The foreign officers were incompetent, unreliable and unreliable, the British army said .
 It was believed by some at the time that Narva Charles XII should have concentrated on knocking Russia out of the war and that by acting in a prompt and determined manner he could have accomplished this purpose . It has been argued by others since that after . that after Narva . Charles XII
 Swedish king for years underestimated and neglected his Muscovite opponent . Instead, the Swedish king ignored and neglected the Muscivite opponent.
 After lifting the Saxon siege of Riga in the summer of 1701, he transferred the main hostilities to Poland, considering Augustus II his most dangerous enemy . Augustus II was considered the most powerful enemy in Europe .
 The tsar had a new army and artillery ready within a year after the debacle of Narva . Acting with his characteristic energy, the tsar was able to rebuild his army .
 Conscription, administration, finance, and everything else had to be strained to the limit and adapted to the demands of war . But the sovereign did not swerve from his set purpose .
 The melting of church bells to make cannons has remained an abiding symbol of that enormous war effort . The melted church bells have remained a symbol of the enormous effort to create cannons .
 Sheremetev at the head of a large army devastated these provinces, twice defeating weak Swedish forces, in 1701 and 1702 . The Russians began to establish themselves firmly on the Gulf of Finland .
 The original spelling of the name was Sankt Pieter Burkh, gradually modernized into SankT Peterburg . Peterburg was named in honor of Peter's patron saint and to signal Peter's love of all things Dutch .
 Peter the Great built the island fortress of Kronstadt to protect his future capital . The following year he built the city of Dorpat, or luriev, in Estonia and the stronghold of Narva itself .
 The tsar rapidly constructed a navy on the Baltic, his southern fleet being useless in the northern war . The new ships participated effectively in amphibious and naval operations . They were able to defeat the Russian army .
 Peter the Great was left alone to face one of the most feared armies of Europe . The battle was fought in the Great's first battle of the Crimean War . Peter was the most successful general in Europe .
 The Swedish king began his decisive campaign against Russia in January 1708 . He crossed the Vistula with a force of almost 50,000 men and advancing in the direction of Moscow .
 Peter I's position was further endangered by the need to suppress rebellions provoked by the exactions of the Russian government and by opposition to the tsar’s reforms . Peter I’m. Peter I. was further .
 In the summer of 1705 a monk and one of the streltsy started a successful uprising in Astrakhan . The uprising was aimed against the upper classes and the foreign influence of the upper class .
 It was rumored in Astrakhan that all Russian girls would be forced to wed Germans, a threat which led to the hasty conclusion of many marriages .
 The town was recaptured by Sheremetev only in March 1706, after bitter fighting . The town recaptured only in 1706 after a long battle .
 In 1707 Konrad Bulavin, a leader of the Don cossacks, led a major rebellion in the Don area . Bulavin led a revolt in 1707 against the Russian Empire .
 Bulavin’s movement followed the pattern of the great social uprisings of the past . Bulavin was inspired by the government's determination to hunt down fugitives .
 At its height, the rebellion spread over a large area of southern Russia, including dozens of towns, and the rebel army numbered perhaps as many as 100,000 men . At the height of the rebellion, the rebels had perhaps 100,00 men . The rebellion was centered in southern Russia
 As usual in such uprisings, however, this huge force lacked organization and discipline . As usual, as usual, this is not a revolution, but a huge force lacks organization, discipline, discipline .
 Turkic Bashkirs opposed the Russian disruption of their way of life as well as the heavy exactions of the state . Still another rebellion erupted in the middle Volga area in 1705 and was not put down until 1711 .
 Some historians believe that Charles XII would have won the war had he pressed his offensive in 1708 against Moscow . Charles XII's failure to press his offensive against Moscow would have helped him win the war, historians say .
 Swedish king wanted to rest and strengthen his army in a rich land untouched by the fighting before resuming the offensive . He counted heavily on Hetman Ivan Mazepa, who had secretly turned against Russia, to survive .
 Mazepa could bring only some 2,000 cossacks to the Swedish side . A lack of sympathy for the Swedes together with Menshikov’s energetic and rapid countermeasures assured the loyalty of Ukraine to Peter the Great .
 Charles XII'’s move south made it easier for a Russian force led by the tsar to intercept and smash Swedish reinforcements of 15,000 men and a huge supply train at Lesnaia . Also, Charles XII’’�s . move south . made it
 Swedish army spent dismal, cold winter in 1708-9 in Ukraine . Largely isolated from the people, far from home bases, short of supplies, and unable to advance their cause .
 The main Russian army finally came to the rescue of the small fortress of Poltava besieged by the Swedes, and the enemies met in the open field . The hour of decision struck in the middle of the following summer .
 Swedish army was destroyed on July 8, 1709, in the battle of Poltava . Swedish army destroyed in Poltavlava in 1709 .
 The Swedes, numbering only 22,000 to 28,000 as against over 40,000 Russians, put up a tremendous fight before their lines broke . They were vastly inferior in artillery, and vastly inferior to the Russians .
 Most of the generals eventually surrendered either on the field or several days later near the Dnieper, which they could not cross . Most of them, including the generals, eventually surrendered on the battlefield or on the river .
 In retrospect, the outcome of Poltava occasions no surprise, it bears remembering that a few years earlier the Swedes had won at Narva against much greater odds . Charles XII had acquired a reputation as an invincible commander .
 Russian generalship, discipline, fighting spirit, and efficiency had dramatically improved . But, in contrast to the debacle at Narva, Russia's generalship and discipline has dramatically improved, he says .
 Peter the Great had himself led his men in the thick of battle . He appreciated to the full the importance of the outcome of the battle .
 The fortunes of Peter I and his state reached perhaps their lowest point in his reign . Peter I's reign was perhaps the lowest point of his reigns in Russia .
 Turkey declared war on Russia in 1710 . Turkey had so far abstained from participation in the hostilities . France, as well as by Charles XII, intervened in the war .
 Peter acted badly underestimating the enemy and relying heavily on the support of the vassal Ottoman principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia and of Christian subjects of the sultan elsewhere in Serbia and Montenegro .
 In July 1711, the tsar found himself at the head of an inadequate army in need of ammunition and supplies . The tsar was surrounded by vastly superior Turkish forces near the Pruth River .
 Suggestions have ranged from weariness and losses of the Turkish troops to skillful Russian diplomacy and even bribery . Suggested answers range from the weariness of Turkish troops or the losses of Turkish forces . Suggestions include weariness, losses and skillful diplomacy and bribery .
 Peter the Great signed a peace treaty with the Turks, promised not to intervene in Poland, and guaranteed to Charles XII safe passage to Sweden . In any case, the peace treaty was signed in 1700 .
 At the price of renouncing acquisitions to the south, he was enabled to extricate himself from a catastrophic situation and retain a dominant hand in the Great Northern War . But, at the price, he renounced acquisitions to south .
 After Poltava, the tsar transferred his main effort to the Baltic, seizing Viborg, Riga, and Reval in 1710 .
 The debacle of Charles XII in Ukraine led to a revival of the coalition against him . Charles XII's defeat in Ukraine in 1918 led to the collapse of his coalition .
 Saxony, Poland, Denmark, Prussia, and Prussia joined Russia against Sweden . Saxony and Poland joined Russia at the start of the game .
 Russian troops helped the allies in their campaigns on the southern shore of the Baltic, while other forces continued the advance in the eastern Baltic area .
 Peter’s direct command over the Swedish fleet off Hang6 in 1714 . The new Russian navy became ever more active, scoring a victory against Sweden .
 The sudden rise of Russia came as something of a shock to other European countries . It strains relations, for example, between Great Britain and Russia .
 Peter the Great's purported testament expressed his, and Russia’s, aim to conquer the world . It also led to considerable fear and worried speculations about the intentions and future steps of the northern giant . This was reflected later in such forgeries as the purported testament .
 In 1717 the tsar traveled to Paris, and failed to obtain any diplomatic results beyond the French promise not to help Sweden . The tsar saw and learned much of what he learned from the French .
 Charles XII was killed in a minor military engagement Norway in December 1718 . Charles XII died in a major military engagement in Norway .
 His sister Ulrika Eleonora and later her husband Frederick I succeeded to the Swedish throne . Frederick I was born in Sweden . He was married to Frederick I, who died in 1901 .
 The Swedes finally admitted defeat and made peace in 1719-21 . Peter the Great proceeded to send expeditions into Sweden proper in 1718-19 .
 On August 30, 1721, Sweden concluded the Treaty of Nystadt with Russia . The treaty was signed by Sweden and Russia in 1721 .
 Russia acquired Livonia, Estonia, Ingermanland, part of Karelia, and certain islands . It returned the bulk of Finland and paid 2 million rix-dollars to Finland .
 In effect it obtained the so-called Baltic provinces which were to become, after the Treaty of Versailles, the independent states of Estonia and Latvia . Also obtained southeastern Finnish borderlands located strategically next to St. Louis .
 The capture and retention of the fortress of Viborg in particular gave Russia virtual control of the Gulf . Russia captured the fortress and held it for nearly three decades .
 Poltava was one of the decisive battles in the Great Northern War . The battle took place in the early 1900s in the Russian city of Poltavlia .
 Historians have argued that these victories marked the true founding of Russia as an empire . Historians argue that this victory marked the beginning of Russia's empire .
 Russia humiliated Sweden but also won a preponderant position vis-a-vis its ancient rival Poland . Russia also became directly involved in German affairs, including marital alliances arranged by the tsar .
 Russia’s interest in Central Asia, though mainly nonmilitary, reflected interest in expanding relations and trade with India and China . Russia's interest in the region reflected interest to expand relations with India, China .
 Celebrations of these victories symbolically elevated Russia and the ruler to new heights . Celebrations were part of the celebrations of Russia and its ruler .
 Peter was compared to classical and biblical heroes and gods, including Mars, Hercules, Samson, and David . In words and imagery, as Richard Wortman has shown, he has compared Peter to Mars and Hercules . Peter was often compared to Samson, Samson and David, as well as
 Peter I accepted the titles “Great,” “Father of the Fatherland” and “Emperor” in the older sense of imperator as a great military leader . The Senate of the Roman Empire called Peter I to accept the titles "Great" and
 Archbishop Prokopovich expressed certainty that the battle of Poltava took place on the feast day of St. St. Peter the Apostle . The battle took place in the same place as St. Vladimir's birth of the year .
 Scholars have taken extreme and opposite approaches to internal affairs during the reign of Peter the Great . We find that scholars have taken two extreme approaches to the internal affairs of the reign .
 On the one hand, the tsar’s reforming of Russia has been presented as a series of disconnected ad hoc measures necessitated by the exigencies of the moment, especially by the pressure of the Great Northern War . The tsar's reforms of Russia have been a series
 The same activity has been depicted as the execution of a comprehensive, radically new, and well-integrated program . Contrariwise, the same activity was depicted as a comprehensive and radically new program .
 Only a single year in Peter the Great’s whole reign, 1724, passed entirely without war . No more than another 13 peaceful months could be added for the entire period .
 The Muscovite financial system was overburdened and in a state of virtual collapse even before Peter the Great made vastly increased demands upon it .
 The problem for the state became simply to survive, and survival exacted a heavy price . "Survival exacts a heavy cost. The state's problem is to survive," the governor said .
 Peter the Great was not a theoretician or planner, but an intensely energetic and practical man of affairs . It has been argued, on the whole convincingly, that in any case he was not theoretician .
 A balanced judgment has to allow something to the opposite point of view as well . Yet a balanced judgment must be balanced, as well as allowing the opposite view .
 Peter the Great was preoccupied during most of his reign with the Great Northern War . His reforming of Russia was by no means limited to hectic measures to bolster the war effort . However, he had to sacrifice much else to its successful prosecution .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin wanted to modernize and modernize all of the Russian government, society, life, and culture, he said . Putin said he wanted to Westernize and Modernize Russia's government .
 Even if his efforts fell short of this stupendous goal and left huge gaps, the basic pattern is clear . Even if he failed to score, it's clear that his efforts were far less than his own .
 Countries of the West served as models in the work of the emperor and his associates . They chose among a rich variety of European states and societies . They tried to adapt Western institutions to Russian needs and possibilities .
 Although the reformer was no theoretician, he had the makings of a visionary . He was no theoretical or political theorist, he was a visionist .
 Both the needs of the moment and longer range aims must be considered in evaluating the reforms . Clearly, then, both the needs and longer-range aims must also be considered .
 Peter became more interested in general issues and larger patterns, as well as general issues, he says . Peter became increasingly interested in larger patterns and general issues .
 There is much we can argue about in interpreting Peter the Great’s vision, however . There are many ways to argue about Peter's vision, but there is much to debate .
 Military reforms stemmed most directly from the war . The Army and the Navy were heavily involved in the fight .
 Peter the Great’s measures must be regarded as radical, successful, and lasting, as well as imitative of the West . He has rightly been considered the founder of the modern Russian army .
 The emperor's predecessors had large armies, but these were poorly organized, technically deficient, and generally of low quality . Emperor's predecessor armies were poor organized and technically deficient . The emperor had a large army, but his armies were generally poor .
 Only gradually did “regular’s regiments, with Western officers and technicians, begin to appear . Only gradually they began to appear.
 The streltsy, or musketeers, were founded by Ivan the Terrible and expanded to contain twenty-two regiments of about a thousand men each . They were a doubtful asset in the Russian Empire .
 Stationed mainly in Moscow, they engaged in various trades and crafts . They constituted at best a semi-professional force .
 The streltsy became a factor in Muscovite politics, staged uprisings, and were severely punished and then disbanded by Peter the Great . They were punished and disbanded by the Great, but became a major factor in politics .
 Reformer instituted general conscription and reorganized and modernized the army . The reformer instituted conscription .
 The gentry, of course, had been subject to personal military service ever since the formation of the Muscovite state . Gentry had to serve in the military during the early years of the Soviet era .
 Under Peter the Great this obligation came to be much more effectively and, above all, continuously enforced . The obligation came under the Great, under Peter's rule .
 Members of the gentry were to remain with their regiments for life . Except for the unfit and those given civil assignments, the members of the . gentry remained with their . regiments .
 Other classes, with the exception of the clergy and members of the merchant guilds, fell under the draft . The draft was necessary for other classes, such as clergy and merchant guild members .
 Large numbers were conscripted, especially in the early years of the Great Northern War . Large numbers of conscripts were recruited during the war .
 In 1715 the Senate established the norm of one draftee from every seventy-five serf households . The Senate established a norm for every seventy or more serf family to have a drafter .
 Additional recruits were obtained from the townspeople, according to the state peasants . The state peasants were recruited by the peasants, while additional recruits were obtain from the townsfolk .
 All were to be separated from their families and occupations and to serve for life . The term was reduced to twenty-five years only in the last decade of the eighteenth century .
 He personally introduced a new and up-to-date military manual . He became proficient with every weapon, and learned to command units the smallest to the largest . He introduced the new military manual and became proficient .
 He insisted that each draftee, aristocrat and serf alike, similarly work his way from the bottom up, advancing exactly as fast as fast and as far as his merit would warrant . The king insisted that he would not be satisfied with the progress made by aristocrats or
 Important changes in the military establishment included the creation of the elite regiments of the guards, and the adoption of the flintlock and the bayonet . The adoption of flintlocks and bayonet was also a major improvement in artillery .
 By the time of Poltava, Russia was producing most of its own flintlocks . Russia was also producing its own own flints .
 The Russian army was the first to use the bayonet in attack . The weapon was originally designed for defense against the charging enemy . The bayonet was first used in attack by the Russian army .
 Peter the Great developed heavy siege artillery, which proved very effective in 1704 in the Russian capture of Narva . By about 1707, light artillery participated in battles alongside the infantry and the cavalry .
 The contrast between the bearded, xenophobic, and archaically trained streltsy who rebelled in 1698 and the clean-shaven, modern trained, and Western clad guards, often commanded by foreigners, symbolized how much had changed in the past .
 The guards were more than the elite of Peter’s army; they had grown up with the emperor, and contained many of his most devoted and enthusiastic supporters . Peter's guards were the most loyal and loyal to the emperor .
 Peter the Great frequently used officers and noncommissioned officers of the guards for special assignments, bypassing the usual administrative channels . In the second half of his reign, he often bypassed the usual administration channels . The use of officers bypassed administrative channels was common .
 They were sent to speed up the collection of taxes or the gathering of recruits, improve the functioning of the judiciary or investigate alleged administrative corruption and abuses . Often endowed with summary powers, they might include the right to bring a transgressing governor or other high official back in chains .
 These emissaries could be considered extensions of the ruler’s own person . Operating outside the regular bureaucratic structure, they could be seen as extensions to the ruler's own person.
 Later emperors, such as Alexander I and Nicholas I, continued Peter the Great’s novel practice on a large scale, relying on special agents to obtain immediate results in various matters .
 The modern Russian navy was the creation of Peter the Great's navy . To an even greater extent than the army, the modern navy was created by the Great .
 He also bequeathed to those who followed him the first Russian shipbuilding industry and, of course, the Baltic ports and coastline .
 The Swedish navy, built on the British model, had already won high regard by defeating the Swedish fleet .
 The British considered the Russian vessels comparable to the best British ships in the same class . The British government became so worried by the rise of the Russian navy that in 1719 it recalled its men from Russian service .
 Peter reformed the central and local government in Russia as well as Church administration and finance . He also effected important changes in Russian society, economy, and culture . Peter was mainly occupied with military matters .
 Peter I ascended the throne as Muscovite tsar and autocrat . He proved to be one of the most powerful and impressive absolute rulers of his age or any age .
 Ivan the Terrible or other Muscovite predecessors can be misleading . Yet comparisons with Ivan's predecessors are misleading . Ivan's reputation has been tarnished in Russia since his death .
 Peter the Great believed in enlightened despotism as preached and to an extent practiced in Europe during the so-called Age of Reason . Peter the . Great believed that enlightened despots were practiced during the . Age of . Reason .
 He borrowed his definition of autocracy and of the relationship between the ruler and his subjects from Sweden, not from the Muscovite tradition . He borrowed the definition from Sweden .
 Peter the Great considered himself the first servant of the state . In contrast to Ivan the Terrible, he had the highest regard for law, and considered himself a servant of state .
 He had no use for the boyar duma, or the zemskii sobor, and treated the Church in a much more high-handed manner than his predecessors had . Yet, again in accord with his general outlook, he had no . use for boyar . d
 The reformer largely escaped the vague, but nevertheless real, traditional hindrances to absolute power in Muscovy .
 In their place, he built a completely new structure of governing institutions . In the place of those institutions, he has built a new structure .
 Peter the Great published two orders which created the Governing Senate in 1711 . Peter's orders were published before he left on his campaign against Turkey . The Senate was created by Peter's order to govern the senate .
 The Senate was founded as the highest state institution to supervise all judicial, financial, and administrative affairs . It was founded in 1903 . The Senate is now the highest-ranking institution in the state .
 Originally established only for the time of the monarch’s absence, it became a permanent body after his return . The body was established after the monarch returned from his absence .
 The number of senators was first set at nine and in 1712 increased to ten . In 1712, the number was increased to 10 .
 Any disagreements between the OberProcurator and the Senate were to be settled by the monarch . Without his signature no Senate decision could go into effect . The monarch was to sign the bill .
 Certain officials and a chancellery were attached to the Senate . Certain other officials, including the Chancellery, were also attached to it .
 The Senate became one of the most important institutions of imperial Russia, especially in administration and law . While it underwent many subsequent changes, the Senate became an important institution .
 Peter the Great established collegia, or colleges, in 1717 and the years immediately following, in place of the old, numerous, overlapping, and unwieldy prikazy . In 1717, Peter the . Great established colleges, or college colleges, as a replacement for the
 Three colleges were added to deal with mining, estates, and town organization . Later three colleges dealt with mining and estates .
 Each college consisted of a president, a vice-president, four councilors, four assessors, a procurator, a secretary, and a chancellery . Each college was made up of six colleges, each with a president and vice-presidents .
 At first a qualified foreigner was included in every college, but as a rule not as president . At first, a qualified foreign student was allowed to attend every college .
 At that time collegiate administration had found considerable favor in Europe . At the time, collegiate administration was found to be in favor of Europe .
 Peter the Great was especially influenced by the example of Sweden and also, possibly, by Leibniz’s advice . The king was inspired by Sweden's example and was influenced by its example of the example .
 Emperor said he did not have enough trustworthy assistants to put in full charge of the different branches of the executive . He had to rely on groups of men, who would keep check on one another .
 The colleges lasted for almost a century before they were replaced by ministries in the reign of Alexander I . Local government also underwent reform in the same period .
 In 1699 towns were reorganized to facilitate taxation and obtain more revenue for the state . Towns were organized to facilitate tax revenue . Town was reorganized in 1699 to facilitate more revenue .
 The system was run for the government by merchants, run by the merchants . It took little into account except finance and stemmed from Muscovite practices rather than Western influences .
 Peter the Great introduced a thorough municipal reform along advanced European lines in 1720-21 . In 1721-21, he introduced a comprehensive municipal reform in the city .
 Based on the elective principle and intended to stimulate the initiative and activity of the townspeople, the ambitious scheme failed to be translated into practice because of local inertia .
 Provincial reform provided probably the outstanding example of a major reforming effort of Peter’s come to naught. Provincial reform . Peter's efforts to reform in the 1970s and 1980s have come to nothing .
 Changes began in a somewhat haphazard manner, largely under the pressure of war and a desperate search for money . Again, changes began in the 1990s under the pressures of war .
 After the reform of 1708 the country was divided into huge gubernii, or governments, eight, ten, and finally eleven in number . The country was then divided into large governments, such as eight or ten .
 With the legislation of 1719 a fully developed and extremely far-reaching scheme appeared . The legislation was passed in 1719, but with the legislation it was never fully developed .
 Fifty provinces, each headed by a voevoda, became the main administrative units . Fifty provinces were each head by a vododa .
 The commissars, as well as a council of from two to four members attached to the voevoda, were to be elected by the local gentry from their midst . Local gentry were elected by their own gentry to elect commissaries .
 The old Muscovite practice of kormlenita—“feedings” went out of existence . All officials received salaries and the old practice was abolished .
 Peter the Great went beyond his Swedish model in charging provincial bodies with responsibility for local health, education, and economic development . He charged local governments with responsibility in charge of local health and education .
 The reform of 1719 introduced into Russia a separation of administrative and judicial power . And it deserves special notice that it did .
 The separation of administration and justice disappeared by about 1727, while some other ambitious aspects of the reform never came into more than paper existence .
 The reign witnessed a strengthening of government control in certain borderlands . The reign saw the rise in government control of certain borderslands .
 After suppression of Bulavin’s great revolt, the emperor tightened his grip on the Don area . That territory came to be more closely linked to the rest of Russia .
 The cossacks, however, did retain a distinct administration, military organization, and way of life until the very end of the Russian Empire and even into the Soviet period . Cossacks are still living in Russia .
 Mazepa’s defection to Charles XII led to tightening of Russian control of Ukraine . Similarly, the defection led to a tightening of Russia control of the country . Mazepas defected to Charles XI led to tighter control of Russia .
 When the conservative patriarch died in 1700, the seat was kept vacant for over two decades by a mere locum tenens . Metropolitan Stephen Iavorsky was a moderate supporter of reform .
 In 1721, the so-called Spiritual Reglament established a new organization of the Church . Archbishop Theophanes Prokopovich established the new organization .
 The Holy Synod, consisting of ten, later twelve, replaced the patriarch . It replaced him with a group of ten clerics .
 A lay official, the Ober-Procurator of the Holy Synod, was appointed to see that that body carried on its work in a perfectly legal and correct manner . The Ober-procurator was appointed by the Vatican to see the body carry on its job in a '
 Peter the Great's reforms belonged to the Western, not Muscovite or Byzantine, tradition . The new arrangement fell under the conciliar principle widespread in the Orthodox Church .
 In particular, it tried to reproduce the relationship between Church and state in the Lutheran countries of northern Europe .
 The emperor did not acquire any authority in questions of faith, but it did enable the government to exercise effective control over Church organization, possessions, and policies . Although it did not make Russia Byzantine as some writers assert, some writers say it did .
 If Muscovy had two supreme leaders, the tsar and patriarch, only one remained in the St. St. Louis region . The tsar is believed to be the only person to remain in the region .
 The Holy Synod and the domination of the Church by the government lasted until 1917 . The domination lasted until the 1917 .
 Peter's policies toward the Church and religion reflected Peter’s general outlook . Peter's views on the Church reflected his general outlook on religion .
 He expected the Church to serve the public good and the interests of the state and empire as a whole .
 He tried to strengthen and broaden Church schools . He charged the Church with organizing welfare institutions such as almshouses .
 While he sought to improve the lot of the impoverished secular clergy, he considered monks to be shirkers and wastrels . He also took steps to limit ecclesiastical possessions and control ecclesiastical wealth .
 The government ordered priests to report any talk of sedition heard during confession . The government also ordered priests also to report reports of any talk about sedition in confession .
 The reformer exhibited more tolerance toward those of other denominations than his Muscovite predecessors . On the whole, he preferred Protestants to Catholics .
 The Holy Synod permitted intermarriage between the Orthodox and Western Christians in 1721 . In 1721, Orthodox Christians were allowed to marry Western Christians .
 The emperor apparently felt no religious animosity toward the Old Believers and favored tolerance toward them . The emperor's tolerance was evident in the emperor's favoritism toward them, according to reports .
 The relaxation in the treatment of the Old Believers early in the reign gave way to new restrictions and penalties, such as special taxation . Special taxation was introduced in the early reign of King Alexander II III .
 Anevaluation of the total impact of Peter the Great's administrative reforms presents certain difficulties . Peter's administration reforms presented certain difficulties, says historian .
 Reforms copied and adapted Western models, trying to import into Russia the best institutions and practices to be found anywhere in Europe . Russia's reforms copied Western models and adapted them into Russia, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin's government has been accused of corruption in Russia in the past .
 Efforts to delimit clearly the authority of every agency could well be considered revolutionary from the old Muscovite point of view .
 The very names of the new institutions and offices and technical terms associated with them testified to a flood of Western influences and a break with the Muscovite past . The new institutions were created by the Communist Party of Russia .
 Even where reforms survived, they were not nearly as profound as the emperor had intended . Even in the case of the local government, they did not, the change turned out to be less profound .
 Everything depended as of old on the initiative, ability, and behavior of officials . Statutes, prescriptions, and precise rules looked good on paper, but in actuality in Russia, everything depended on officials' ability .
 The kormleniia could be abolished, but not the all-pervasive bribery and corruption . The corruption is endemic in the country, but it is also pervasive in corruption, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Personal and largely arbitrary rule remained, in sum, the foundation of Russian administration . Personal and mostly arbitrary rule was the basis of Russian rule .
 Peter's reforms were closely associated with his own vision and drive to transform Russia . The reforms perpetuated the Russian tradition of personal rule, he says .
 Reformer's frantic efforts to craft a new system produced an order that was new but lacked integration, coordination, and cohesion . Also, the reformer’s frantic efforts were too complicated and involved to discuss fully .
 Peter the Great's administrative order proved to be more disjointed and disorganized than that of Muscovite Russia . A few scholars, such as Platonov, have argued that the administrative order established by the Great proved to have been more disorganized .
 The difficulty of transforming Russian reality into something new and Western becomes evident when we consider Peter the Great’s social legislation and his overall influence on Russian society . The difficulty becomes even more evident when . Peter the . Great's social legislation was based on his influence on Russia .
 The emperor’s financial policies played an important and continuous part in his plans and actions . Before turning to this topic, however, we must mention briefly the emperor's financial policies, for they played a significant part .
 Peter the Great found himself constantly in dire need of money, and at times the need was utterly desperate . The King of England was constantly in desperate need for money . The story goes back to the original version of this article .
 The only recourse was to squeeze still more out of the Russian masses, who were already overburdened and strained almost to the breaking point . Russia is already over-burdled and strained, and the only recourse is to squeeze more from the masses, writes CNN.com's
 The revenue the government managed to exact in 1702 was twice, and in 1724 five and a half times, the revenue obtained in 1680 . According to one calculation, one calculation says the revenue was twice and five times more than 1680 revenue obtained .
 In the process it taxed almost everything, including beehives, mills, fisheries, beards, and bathhouses . The state also extended the state monopoly to new items .
 For example, stamped paper, necessary for legal transactions, became an additional source of revenue for the state . So did oak coffins, and so did coffins .
 In fact, finding or concocting new ways to augment government funds developed into a peculiar kind of occupation in the course of the reign . Find or concocted new ways of augmenting government funds became an occupation .
 Peter the Great introduced the poll, or poll, tax in place of the household tax and the tax on cultivated land . The head tax was introduced in 1718 . Peter also introduced the head tax in the same place as the household and cultivated land tax .
 One purpose of the head tax was to catch shirkers who combined households or failed to till their land . Head tax was intended to catch those who combined their households or didn't till their lands .
 From 1718 to 1722 a census, a so-called revision, of the population subject to the head tax took place . The census took place between 1718 and 1722 . The population was subject to a head tax .
 Initially the census included only serfs and slaves who tilled the soil on private estates . The census was originally intended to include serfs, slaves and slaves . It was first published in 1881 .
 House slaves, household slaves and all dependent people not on the land, were added to the list . Then came orders to add household slaves, and finally vagrants . The list was expanded to include vagrants and household slaves .
 Each person registered during the census had to pay the same set head tax . The head tax was set at the same rate for each person registered in the country .
 On estates, landlords were held responsible for the prompt flow of money to the treasury . Landlords were also responsible for bringing in the money .
 Scholars have stressed that the head tax finally erased all differences between serfs and slaves, merging all peasants into one bonded mass . The head tax was first introduced in France in 17th century .
 The arbitrary power of the landlord and the weakness of the peasant made Russian serfdom differ little from slavery . Of course, we have already seen that the arbitrary power . of the landlords and the weakness of the peasants made Russian Serfdom little like slavery .
 After the revision serfs were allowed to leave the estate only with their master’s written permission, a measure which marked the beginning of a passport system .
 The head tax, it might be added, proved to be one of the emperor's lasting innovations . Head tax was the first of its kind in the Roman Empire .
 Peter the Great had to accept and did accept Russian society as it was, with serfdom and the economic and social dominance of the gentry . On the whole, he did accept the social and economic dominance of Russian society .
 The head tax presents an excellent example of an important social measure passed for financial reasons . Head tax is an example of a social measure that has been passed in the UK for years . It is not the first time the head tax has been introduced in Britain .
 Other social groups also found themselves subject to the insatiable demands of the emperor and his growing state . The head tax affected the lower classes, but it also affected other social groups, including the poor .
 For example, the merchants, the few professional people, and other middle-class elements, who were all exempt from the head tax, had to work harder than ever before to discharge their obligations to the state .
 As we know, state service constituted an ancient obligation of that class. As well as state service, state . As well . state service . constituted an . ancient obligation, as well .
 Under Peter the Great it became a more regular and continuous as well as much heavier obligation . But, as we have already seen with the army, under . Peter the . Great, under Peter . the . army, became a . more regular, continuous and . heavier obligation.
 Every member of the gentry was required to serve from about the age of 16 to the end of his days . The sovereign himself gave an examination to boys as young as 14 or even ten and assigned them to schools and careers .
 The gentry youths were divided roughly two-thirds to one-third between the military and the civilian branches of service . After an inspection, held usually in Moscow, the gentry youth were divided between military and civilian service .
 Peter the Great insisted that in the civilian offices as in the regiments or aboard ships all novices must start at the bottom and advance only according to their merit . Peter the . Great insisted in the . civilian offices that in . civilian . offices as well as in . regiments
 The impressive names of the ranks were generally borrowed or adapted from foreign ranks . The impressive ranks are generally borrowed from abroad or borrowed .
 Those who reached rank eight for civil service and rank twelve in the military were given hereditary nobility . Those who reach a still higher level of nobility could be passed on to their descendents . Their descendents could also have hereditary nobility, which they could pass on .
 Peter Peter also began to grant titles of nobility, including “prince,” for extraordinary achievements . Later emperors continued this practice, and later emperors also gave titles .
 Peter the Great's handling of the gentry represented something of a tour de force, and it proved successful to the extent that the emperor did obtain a great deal of service from that class .
 In the course of the eighteenth century, the gentry gradually escaped from its service obligations . In fact, we shall see how in the 17th century they escaped from their service .
 Peter the Great's effort to open the road to all talents was diminished . At the same time entry into that class became more difficult, so that entry into the class became harder .
 Some of the emperor's social legislation failed virtually from the start . It might be added that some of his social legislation .
 In 1714, in opposition to the established Russian practice of dividing land among sons, the reformer issued a law of inheritance according to which the entire estate had to go to one son only . The others were forced to exist, as in the case of the British nobility, solely by
 The law turned out to be extremely difficult to enforce even during Peter the Great's reign . It was repealed as early as 1731, and was repealed in 1731 .
 The emperor, characteristically, thought first of war and its immediate demands in his determination to develop the Russian economy . The emperor thought first . of war .
 From about 1710 he strove to develop industries not related to military needs, to increase Russian exports, and in general to endow the country with a more varied and active economy .
 Peter the Great made every effort to stimulate private enterprise, but he also acted on a large scale directly through the state . Peter the . Great made an effort to . stimulate private . enterprise .
 Ideologically the emperor adhered to mercantilism, popular in Europe at the time, with its emphasis on the role of the government, and the protection of home industries as reflected in the Russian tariff of 1724 .
 Emperor created the Russian textile industry, while he developed mining and metallurgy impressively from modest beginnings . In effect, the emperor created the . textile industry .
 He promoted many other industries, including the production of china and glass, as well .
 Peter the Great built canals and began the construction of a merchant marine . Peter began construction of canals in order to facilitate trade .
 For instance, a canal was built between 1703 and 1709 to connect the Neva with the Volga . It was built to connect Neva and Volga, and was built in the 17th century .
 In the course of Peter the Great's reign Russian foreign trade increased fourfold . Foreign trade continued to be handled in the main by foreign rather than Russian merchants .
 To be sure, this rapid development exacted a heavy social price, especially in the burdened and bonded lives of the lower classes .
 Peter the Great exercised a major and creative influence on the development of the Russian economy . Peter's influence would be built upon by later generations of Russian leaders .
 Education and Culture: There could be no turning back in culture either . Culture is changing in the way it has been in the past . Culture has been changing for decades .
 In a sense Peter the Great's educational and cultural reforms proved to be the most lasting of all . They pushed Russia firmly and irrevocably in the direction of the West, he says .
 The measures fitted well into the general pattern of the emperor's activity . They are discussed in more detail in the chapter dealing with Russian culture in the eighteenth century .
 The sovereign stressed the necessity of at least a minimum education for service . The School of Mathematics and Navigation was established in 1701 .
 His broader plans included compulsory education for the gentry, and the creation of the Academy of Sciences to develop, guide, and crown learning in Russia .
 This academy did come into existence a few months after the reformer’s death .
 Peter the Great showed a burning interest in science and technology throughout his life . Throughout his life he showed an interest in technology as well as other areas of knowledge .
 Emperor tried to introduce Western dress, manners, and usages, often by fiat and against strong opposition . In bringing the civilization of the West to his native land, he tried to bring it to China .
 Traditionalists objected on the ground that shaving impaired the image of God in men and made the Russians look like such objectionable beings as Lutherans, Poles, Kalmyks, Tatars, cats, dogs, and monkeys . The government demanded it “for the glory and comeliness
 It was argued that the already-mentioned calendar reform stole time from God and that the new simplified civil script should not be allowed to replace Church Slavonic . It was also argued that it should not replace the simplified script .
 The assemblées or society parties that women attended also aroused a storm . The assembles of women at society parties also aroused the storm .
 These elegant gatherings of women and men in Western dress demonstratively ended the Muscovite tradition of secluding women of the elite . These gatherings ended the tradition of Seclusion of women in the public sphere .
 By the end of Peter's reign members of the civil service, army, and navy, of the upper classes, and . some extent even of the middle classes, were shaven and wore foreign dress . Yet by the end . of the . end of . Peter's . reign members
 Western innovations generally succeed in winning more adherents with time . Other Western innovations also generally succeeded in winning acceptance with time.
 Even if he had wanted to , the cultural transformation of the majority would have been unrealistic . Of course, even if he . wanted to . change of the . majority would not have been impossible .
 It was left to his successors to try to bridge this growing gap, if they tried to do so .
 The conflict between old Muscovy and new imperial Russia was played out in the sovereign’s own family . The problem of Succession was solved by the sovereign's own family.
 Peter the Great’s mother and Eudoxia, the wife chosen for him by his mother, belonged to the unreformed . Peter forced his mother to become a nun in 1698, whom Peter forced her to be a nun . Peter the .
 The boy lived with his mother until her seclusion and later with aunts, in the old Muscovite palace . He lived with her until she seclusion, later with her aunts . The boy's mother died in the 1920s .
 The emperor had little time for his son and never established a rapport with him . The emperor never had a good time with his son . He was the only son to have a relationship with the emperor .
 Alexis became the hope of the opponents of the new order and their rallying point . Alexis became a hope for the opposition to the order and its rise in power .
 In 1712 the emperor married an illiterate Livonian peasant woman named Martha . She took the name Catherine when converting to Orthodoxy . The emperor himself married for the second time .
 Peter had found Catherine in his friend Menshikov’s household, where she had been living with him happily for a few years and bore him children . Catherine was found by Peter in Menskikov's household . Peter had been married to Menskkov for a
 Understanding and energetic, she also accompanied him on military campaigns . Understanding, energetic and energetic she was often accompanied by him .
 At about this time, Peter the Great warned Alexis that he would rather appoint a “worthy stranger” than an unworthy legal heir . Alexis either endorsed his reforms or renounced his rights to the throne .
 Alexis agreed to give up his rights with characteristically passive resistance . Alexis has been known for his passive resistance in the past .
 Alexis used the opportunity to escape to Austria and ask the protection of Emperor Charles VI, who had married a sister of Alexis’s late wife . In 1716, when Peter the Great, then in Denmark, called for his son, Alexis escaped to Austria .
 Reports suggested a conspiracy was hatched to depose and assassinate Peter the Great . Reports suggested that the plot was hatched there . Peter was the first monarch to be deposed .
 Lured back to Moscow in 1718 with a pardon, on the condition that he renounce his rights to the throne and name those who urged him to escape . Alexis was brought before an investigatory commission, which brought to light a great deal of opposition to and hatred of the new
 Alexis was condemned to death for treason and attempted regicide . Over a hundred high dignitaries of the state acted as the special court that condemned Alexis to death . Alexis was sentenced to death by a special court of over a hundred .
 Alexis expired in the fortress of Peter and Paul in the summer of 1718, probably from shock and torture used during the questioning . Alexis died before the execution could be carried out .
 Nine of his associates were executed, nine sentenced to hard labor, while many others received milder punishments . Many others were sentenced to milder sentences .
 Catherine bore Peter ten children, but only two girls survived beyond early childhood . Catherine bore 10 children, and Peter bore Peter 10 children . Only two of his children survived beyond childhood .
 Peter the Great passed a law of succession in 1722 which disregarded the principle of hereditary seniority and proclaimed instead that the sovereign could appoint his successor . In 1722 the sovereign was able to appoint a successor .
 His powerful organism worn out by disease, strain, and an irregular life, he died on February 8, 1725, without designating a successor to his empire .
 Peter the Great was compared to Jupiter, Mars, Neptune, and Hercules at the time of his death . He was also compared to David, Moses, and Samson and David .
 He was said to have brought Russia victory over its enemies and the rule of law and reason . Like them, he also brought Russians victory over their enemies .
 Putin had enemies who hated what he had done to Russia . But he also had enemies, as we have seen, who hated his actions .
 Rumors spread that the reformer was not a son of Tsar Alexis, but a foreigner who had substituted himself for the true tsar during the latter’s journey abroad . Rumors grew that he was an imposter, a usurper, indeed the Antichrist .
 He too saw things in black and white, hating old Muscovy and believing himself to be the creator of a new Russia . He also hated Musocovy .
 In the name of civilization he was intolerant of his critics and did not hesitate to use compulsion and violence to achieve his ends . He was tolerant of critics and used compulsion to use violence against critics .
 Peter was either revered as a bold champion of light against darkness, as an enlightened ruler who had replaced savagery with civilization, or as a crude tyrant who undermined and perverted Russia’s distinct national spirit and imported the alien spirit of Western rationalism . Peter was a crude
 It took a sensitive poet like Alexander Pushkin to draw a balance, emphasizing the necessity and the greatness of Peter’s reforms, while at the same time lamenting their human cost . Pushkin was a poet who emphasized the necessity of the reforms, but lamented the human cost of
 Peter was determined to convert borderland marshes, won in war, into a brilliant Western imperial capital . It was an act of as much symbolic as practical significance .
 Thousands of serfs, convicts, and war prisoners used to drain marshes, drive oak piles into the ground, and construct a great city . St. Petersburg .
 Russian historians of the late nineteenth century like Sergei Soloviev and Vasily Kliuchevsky already did much to demythologize Peter . Both admired Peter’s achievements and understood the necessity of modernization .
 Later historians would continue the effort to historicize Peter's rule . Peter's reign would be the first of its kind .
 Since Soloviev, scholars have deemphasized Peter’s originality, recognizing the many close connections between Peter the Great and the Muscovite past .
 In foreign policy and social policy, relatively little changed . In social policy and foreign policy, there was little change in policy .
 The process of Westernization had begun long before the reformer and had gathered momentum rapidly in the seventeenth century . And, of course, the central issue, had been long before .
 Historians have recognized the often chaotic, piecemeal, and ineffective side of Peter's reforming drive, as well as the brutality, violence, and suffering brought by change . However necessary change might have been .
 Studies have shown the emperor's use of religion to legitimize his rule, the complex meanings of court ritual and ceremony, and his dependence on networks of both established and new elites . Studies have also shown, for example, the importance of religion and rituals in China .
 Peter the Great cannot be denied the role of the chief executor of this fate . Quite possibly Russia was destined to be Westernized, but he was likely to be the main executor . Peter's role was to ensure Russia was Westernized as well as Russia .
 Peter the Great marked Russia’s transition from an unconscious to a conscious following of its historical path . Or, as one modern scholar has written, Peter the . Great marked . Russia's transition from . unconscious to . conscious following . of its history .
 At the very least the emperor's reign brought a tremendous speeding up of the process of Westernization . The Emperor's reign put this path in the hands of state policy and control, where formerly individual choice and chance had prevailed .
 Peter the Great was practical, and a utilitarian, as a practical person . Peter's impact may be more mundane than a discussion of historical destiny . Peter was practical and utilitarian .
 "One looks and one does not believe it, one keeps adding and one cannot reach the sum. One keeps adding," one says . "One keeps adding" and one can't believe it."
 Peter the Great ordered us to count years from the birth of Christ . January 1, 1841, was January 1 . Peter's birthday was the first anniversary of Christ's birth .
 Our clothing is made according to the fashion established by Peter the First, our uniform according to his model . It is time to dress, says the president of the United States .
 The cloth is woven in a factory which he created; the wool is shorn from the sheep which he started to raise . The cloths are woven in the factory he created .
 Peter the Great introduced this script and himself cut out the letters . A book strikes our eyes—Peter the Great introduces this script, and himself cuts out letters . The book strikes us eyes, and we see it as a book .
 Peter the First superseded the earlier church language . The language became a written language, a literary language, at the time of Peter The First .
 At dinner, all the courses, from salted herring through potatoes, to wine made from grapes, will speak to you of Peter the Great . At dinner he ordered potatoes which he ordered grown, and grapes which he began to cultivate .
 After dinner you drive out for a visit—this is an assemblée of Peter the Great . After dinner, you drive to see Peter's collection of paintings .
 You meet the ladies there -- they were admitted into masculine company by order of Peter the Great . You meet ladies there—they were . admitted into . masculine company . Peter the . Great .
 The first secular school was founded by Peter the Great . Peter's first secular university was founded in 17th century . The university is now the largest in Europe .
 Peter the Great placed Russia among the European states and began to instill respect for her . You decide to travel abroad—following the example of the Great; you will be received well—Peter the Great . Peter the . Great placed . Russia among . European states . and so on
 Catherine I, 1725-27, Peter II, 1727-30, Anne, 1730-40, Ivan VI, 1740-41, Elizabeth, 1741-62, and Peter III, 1762 . She came, the God-chosen autocrat, who
 And all wish, with one voice, one heart, that She rule Her fatherland for innumerable years in endless joy and eternal prosperity .
 The period between the death of Peter the Great and the accession of Catherine the Great, 1725 to 1762, has been considered by some historians as an era of shallowness, confusion, and decay . Others attribute to it much of Russia's spiritual growth and political advancement .
 Rapid and violent changes, as under Peter, were discontinued, but slowly the process of Westernization went on, gaining in depth and leading to a better proportion between the ambitions and the actual potentialities of the country .
 Russian history from the death of Peter the Great to the accession of Catherine the Great has been undeservedly neglected . Russian history has been unfairly neglected, says historian Walter Kirchner .
 This period, when lovers ruled Russia, offers little to impress, dazzle, or inspire . Sandwiched between two celebrated reigns, this period offers little to dazzle or inspire.
 Elizabeth’s absorption in French fashions and Peter III's imbecility, says the writer . "The struggle of unfit candidates for the crown, with the constant rise and fall of their equally deplorable favorites," he says .
 Westernization continues to spread into broader areas of Russian life . Westernization continued to grow in Russia, but it is still a problem .
 Foreign relations brought Russia into an ever-closer relationship with other European powers . Foreign relations have brought Russia closer to Europe than ever .
 The gentry were able to increase their advantages and free themselves from the mandate of state service . And the gentry was able to . increase their . advantages and . free themselves .
 Some recent historians have argued that the role of women as rulers in the eighteenth century brought a new spirit to Russian political life . After Peter the Great’s death in 1725, women ruled for all but seven of the remaining years of the century .
 Peter the Great’s notion that a monarch should be able to choose a successor based on merit and reason . The power and influence of court nobles and aristocratic guards’ regiments, who likely thought that women would be more pliable; and, not least, a shortage
 When the first emperor died without naming his successor several candidates for the throne emerged . Catherine I Peter I was one of the first Empress of Russia's first monarchs to be crowned .
 Peter, Alexis’s son and Peter the Greats grandson, was the dominant two . Peter and Catherine were the two dominant figures in the world's history .
 The deceased sovereign’s daughters, Anne and Elizabeth, and his nieces, daughters of his half-brother Tsar Ivan V, Catherine and Anne, appeared as more remote possibilities at the time . Before very long two of them were to rule Russia, while descendants of the
 Peter was the only direct male heir and thus the logical successor to his grandfather . Peter was Peter's only direct son .
 He had the support of the old nobility, including several of their number prominent in the first emperor's reign . He was supported by several prominent members of the nobility .
 Catherine had been crowned empress in a special ceremony in 1724 . Catherine had the backing of ‘the new men,” such as Menshikov, who had risen with the reforms . Peter the Great’s son Alexis and old Muscovy .
 The Preobrazhenskii and Semenovskii guard regiments decided the issue by demonstrating in favor of the empress . The pre-revolutionary Russian empress was the last Empress to be crowned .
 The guards, as we shall see, were subsequently to play a decisive role in determining who ruled Russia on more than one occasion . The guards played a crucial role in deciding the outcome of Russia's first war .
 Menshikov and five others became constant advisers and in a sense associates of the monarch . The council was a departure from Peter the Great's administrative organization and practice . The six members of the council were in effect constant advisers .
 Catherine I died in 1727, having appointed young Peter to succeed her and nominated as regent . Anne and Elizabeth, her daughters and the new ruler’s aunts, were added to the Supreme Privy Council .
 Menshikov transferred the monarch from the palace to his residence and betrothed him to his daughter . Peter II, not yet twelve when he became emperor, fell into the hands of Menskikov .
 Peter II did not like Menshikov; he placed his confidence in young Prince Ivan Dolgoruky . Peter II placed his trust in Prince Ivan Derguky, who was a young prince .
 The once all-powerful favorite and the closest assistant of Peter the Great died some two years later in exile in northern Siberia . The Dolgorukys replaced him at the court and in the government .
 The engagement of Peter II to a princess Dolgorukaia was officially announced in 1729 . Two members of that family sat in the Supreme Privy Council . Peter II was engaged to a daughter of the same family .
 Peter II died of smallpox early in 1730, before the marriage could take place . Peter II was not quite fifteen years old when he died of the disease .
 Advice of Prince Dmitrii Golitsyn to offer the throne to Anne prevailed in the Supreme Privy Council and with other state dignitaries . Anne was the childless widow of the Duke of Courland .
 Anne appeared to be weak and innocuous, and thus likely to leave power in the hands of the aristocratic clique . Anne was likely to be weakened and innocuous to leave the government in power .
 The Supreme Privy Council invited Anne to reign only under certain rigid and highly restrictive conditions . Anne will be allowed to reign under such conditions, the Privy council said .
 The would-be empress had to promise not to marry and not to appoint a successor . She also had to agree not to be married .
 The guards as well as all other armed forces were to be under the jurisdiction of the Supreme Privy Council, not of the empress . The guards were under the control of the supreme Privy council, not the Empress, it was announced .
 Peter the Great's view of the position and function of the monarch and his translation of this view into practice . These drastic conditions, which had no precedent in Russian history, stood poles apart from Peter's view .
 Anne accepted the limitations, thus establishing constitutional rule in Russia . Anne, who had very little to lose, accepted limitations .
 Russian constitutionalism, however, proved to be extremely short-lived . The country's constitutionalism was a Soviet state of the 1990s .
 Some critics spoke and wrote of extending political advantages to the entire gentry . Others simply denounced the proceedings .
 Anne used a demonstration by the guards and other members of the gentry, shortly after her arrival, to tear up the conditions she had accepted . She had thought them to represent the desires of her subjects, whereas they turned out to be a selfish cabal .
 Traditionally, it has been presented as a period of cruel and stupid rule by individual Germans and even “the German party” in Russia . The German party in Russia is considered to be the most powerful in the world .
 Anne brought with her from Courland a band of favorites, and that in general she patronized Germans as well as other foreigners . Anne distrusted the Russian high nobility, whose influence she did all she could to restrict .
 Anne was disinclined to take an active role in government and so relied on a close circle of officials and advisors . Anne's husband was the prime minister of the 1970s and 1980s .
 Certain departments, such as the foreign office with Ostermann at the head and the army with Miinnich, profited from able German leadership of the Petrine vintage . But many new favorites had no qualifications for their positions .
 ErnstJohann Biron, the empress’s lover from Courland, acquired the highest honors and emoluments and became the most hated figure and symbol of the reign . Biron was the most famous figure in the history of the French monarchy .
 Bironovshchina refers to police persecution and political terror during the reign . Several thousand people were executed and some 20,000 exiled to Siberia .
 Many of the victims were Old Believers and even criminals rather than political opponents . The cruelty of Biron and his associates perhaps should not be considered exceptional for the age . The persecutions excited the popular imagination and made the reign compare unfavorably with the rule of Elizabeth that was
 The Supreme Privy Council Anne did not restore the Senate to its former importance as the superior governing institution but relied on a cabinet of two or three members to take charge of state affairs .
 Shortly before her death she had nominated a two-month-old infant, Ivan, to be her successor on the throne . Shortly before she died, she nominated Ivan to be the heir to her throne .
 Ivan was a great-grandson of Ivan V and a grandson of Anne’s elder sister, Catherine . Catherine had married the Duke of Mecklenburg, Charles Leopold, in 1716 . Ivan was born in 1717 and died in 1918 .
 Anna Leopoldovna became the wife of Duke Anthony Ulric of Brunswick-Bevern-Liineburg . A daughter from this marriage, Anna became a wife of the Duke of Brunswick Ulric . She was married to the Duke and Duchess of Brunswick .
 Empress Anne appointed Biron as regent after her parents died at the Russian court . Biron's parents lived in Russia, but both parents were at the court at the time of his birth .
 Ivan VI, Anna Leopoldovna, and the entire “German party” were tumbled from authority and power . Then, in another year, late in 1741, Ivan . Ivan VI . Ivan . Leopoldsovna and the . ‘German party
 This last coup was executed by the guards led by Peter the Great’s daughter Elizabeth, who then ascended the throne as Empress Elizabeth of Russia . The guards led her to the throne and she ascended as Empress of Russia in 2011 .
 Anne and her reign have been excessively blamed in Russian historiography . Elizabeth has received more than her fair share of praise, though this has echoed in part the adulation she received in her own day .
 The new monarch symbolized to many contemporaries and later commentators the end of the brutal and scandalous ‘foreign’ domination associated with Biron . The empress herself stressed as much as she could that she wanted to promote Peter the Great .
 Elizabeth seemed to promise respect for Russians and the Russian elite and a new gentleness in Russian politics . Elizabeth seems to have promised respect for Russia and its elite .
 Elizabeth, or at least her administration, did much to continue Peter the Great’s legacy . Elizabeth's administration continued Peter's legacy .
 The Senate was restored to its former authority and her reign saw further rationalization of government institutions . Her reign also saw the Senate restored to former authority .
 Her government sought to stimulate the economy by abolishing most domestic custom barriers and encouraging private entrepreneurship . Her government also sought to encourage private entrepreneurship in the country .
 Russia helped defeat Prussia as part of the Seven Years’ War and briefly occupied Berlin . Her armies demonstrated Russia’s status as a European great power .
 In social life, the abolition of capital punishment was a striking development in light of the practices of Anne’s government but also much Russian tradition . It pales beside the enormous, persistent, and, in fact, growing evil of serfdom, the author writes .
 The rise in public discourse of imagery of the ruler as a kind and loving monarch was indeed something new and significant, though more a sign of changing political ideology than changing political practice . For all the adulation of Peter the Great, no one in his time would have called him kind,
 In part, this new standard grew out of comparison with the Bironovshchina that Elizabeth’s coup ended . The new standard was set by the coup that ended in the end of Elizabeth‘s coup .
 It was also an echo of evolving European notions of enlightened authority . But it was also a reference to evolving European views of enlightened authorities .
 As the historians Stephen Baehr and Richard Wortman have shown, a new ‘iconography of happiness” became widespread in political rituals, texts, and sermons . The historians have shown that the new “iconography” of happiness became widespread .
 Elizabeth was portrayed as bringing happiness and pleasure to her subjects, who were said to love her for her commitment to this national good . Elizabeth was continually portrayed as . bringing happiness .
 Portraits invariably emphasized Elizabeth's femininity and gentleness, a key part of her public image . Portraits always emphasized her femininity, gentleness .
 This cult of pleasure and love was echoed, in a different but not irrelevant way, in Elizabeth’s private life . This cult was echoed in the private life of the Queen, Elizabeth II, who died in 2011 .
 Without a husband, she went through a succession of lovers, all very visible and public . She had a string of lovers all over the world, including the most public .
 'This was treated as a matter of right and of the value she placed on pleasure' ' Indeed, this was treated . Indeed, she treated this as a . matter of . right and . of pleasure,' she said .
 Elizabeth relied extensively on favorites and their relatives in her administration, as Empress Anne had . Elizabeth's group proved more competent and attractive than the one sponsored by Empress Anne .
 Alexei Razumovsky, who may have been morganatically married to Elizabeth, was closest to the monarch . He may have had an affair with the monarch, but he was never married to her .
 Cossack was a simple cossack who had tended the village flock in his native Ukraine . He was the first person to be killed in Ukraine .
 The future favorite was brought to the court as a singer . Because of his magnificent voice, he was brought into the court .
 Elizabeth fell in love with him, and her attachment lasted until her death . Elizabeth fell to love him and died of her injuries .
 The Shuvalovs, the brothers Petr and Alexander and their cousin Ivan, were energetic and influential . By contrast, they were energetic, influential and influential in Russia .
 Ivan Shuvalov left behind an almost unique reputation for integrity and kindness . He refused honors and rewards, and for selfless service in several capacities, especially in promoting enlightenment in Russia .
 Petr Shuvalov was made Count by the empress . He used his position at the court to have a hand in every kind of state business, including financial and economic matters and the military .
 Petr Shuvalov is credited with saying debased coinage would be less of a load to carry . The tax on vodka suited a time of distress because people would then want to get drunk, he said .
 Elizabeth’s own extravagant love of beauty contributed to the state’�s financial crisis . Elizabeth was a model of beauty for the state . Her extravagant beauty style contributed to state's financial crisis, she said .
 The financial chaos, together with the overwhelming burden of serfdom, led to the flight and uprisings of peasants that became characteristic of the age . Of much more importance is the fact that the financial chaos and the . . . also . the . fundamental and overwhelming . overwhelming burden
 The German orientation that had been overthrown by Elizabeth came back with a vengeance when Peter III ascended the throne . Elizabeth's circle was more attracted to French culture and to France, and Peter III was more interested in France .
 The new ruler was a son of Elizabeth’s older sister, Anne, and a grandson of Peter the Great . Charles Frederick, Duke of Holstein-Gottorp, was the son of Anne and Charles Frederick .
 Peter was brought up with the view of succeeding to the Swedish throne . His father was a son of Charles XII's sister . Peter lost his mother in infancy and his father when a boy .
 After Elizabeth's decision, he was educated to succeed to the throne of the Romanovs . He was educated in order to succeed his mother and father .
 Peter III lived in Russia from the age of 14 . He never adjusted to his new country . Peter III was born in Russia and died in 1903 .
 He continued to fear and despise Russia and the Russians while he held up Prussia, and in particular Frederick II, as his ideal . Extremely limited mentally, as well as crude and violent in his behavior, he was extremely limited mentally and violent .
 His reign of several months was best remembered in the long run for the law abolishing the compulsory state service of the gentry . Many of his contemporaries thought him a violent attack on everything Russian and a deliberate sacrifice of Russian interests to those of Prussia .
 The new emperor threatened to disband the security police, and even demanded that icons be withdrawn from churches and that Russian priests dress like Lutheran pastors . The Holy Synod did not dare execute the orders .
 Even official portraits seem to hint at Peter’s notorious arrogance and boorishness . Peter's official portraits hint at his notorious arrogance .
 Frederick the Great led to the withdrawal of Russia from the Seven Years’ War . The act saved Prussia from a crushing defeat and deprived Russia of great potential gains .
 The Russian emperor refused to accept even what Frederick the Great was willing to give him for withdrawing and proceeded to make an alliance with the Prussian king . The Russians refused to withdraw and agreed to a treaty with Frederick .
 Peter III's wife Catherine was originally a princess of the small German principality of Anhalt-Zerbst . Peter III married Catherine in 1745 and made enemies, but she behaved with far greater intelligence .
 She adapted herself to her difficult environment, learned much about the government and the country, and found supporters . Isolated and threatened by her boorish husband, who had a series of love affairs .
 The emperor was easily deposed and shortly after killed, possibly by one of the leaders of the insurrection, Alexei Orlov, in a drunken argument . Orlov was the leader of the revolt and the emperor was killed by Orlov .
 Catherine bypassed her son Paul, born in 1754 during her marriage with Peter III, who was proclaimed merely heir to the throne . Catherine became empress, bypassing her son, Paul . Catherine was crowned empress in 1776 .
 Catherine's initial success marked the beginning of a long and celebrated reign . The coup of 1762 appeared to be simply another in a protracted sequence of overturns characteristic of Russian history . Catherine's chances of securing her power seemed, if anything, less promising than those of her immediate predecessors .
 The Gains of the Gentry and the Growth of Serfdom in Russia between 1725 and 1762 . While rulers changed rapidly and favorites constantly rose and fell in Russia .
 Most important was the growth of the power and standing of the gentry together with its complementary process, a further deterioration in the position of the serfs . Serfs suffered further deterioration from serfs in the 17th century .
 Peter the Great's insistence that only one son inherit his father’s estate could hardly be enforced even in his reign and was formally repealed in 1731 . As we know, the idea was hardly enforced even during the reformer's reign .
 Empress Anne began giving away state lands to her gentry supporters on a large scale . The peasants on the lands became serfs, and Elizabeth enthusiastically continued the practice .
 Peter the Great's school could become officers without serving in the lower ranks, a privilege directly opposed to Peter's intentions and practice . Graduates of this school could be officers without having to serve in lower ranks .
 As the century progressed the gentry came to rely increasingly on such cadet schools for both education and advancement in service . The gentry relied on such schools to develop their skills for advancement .
 The Gentry Bank was established by Empress Elizabeth in St. Edward VII . Also to their advantage was the Gentry bank established by the Empress .
 St. Petersburg branch in Moscow to supply landlords with credit at a moderate rate of interest .
 In 1758 the members of other classes who owned serfs were required to sell them . Members of the other classes were required by selling serfs to the serfs .
 A Senate decision of 1756 affirmed that only those who proved their gentry origin could be entered into gentry registers . The decision in 1758-60 in effect eliminated the opportunity to obtain hereditary gentry status through state service .
 At the same time ‘personal, or nonhereditary, members of the class came to be rigidly restricted in their gentry rights . Members of the gentry class were rigidly limited in their rights .
 Most significant evolution took place in regard to the service obligations of the gentry to the state . The most significant evolution was the creation of the state of France in 1881 .
 In 1736 this service, hitherto termless, was limited to twenty-five years . The gentry themselves had asked for twenty years . A further provision exempting one son from service so he could manage the estates .
 Some landlords managed to be entered in regimental service early in their lives . Some landlords were entered into regimental . service .
 On February 18, 1762, in the reign of Peter III, compulsory gentry service was abolished . In 1762 in Peter III's reign, compulsory service was also abolished .
 Members of the gentry could serve the state, or not serve it, at will . They could even serve foreign governments abroad instead, if they so desired .
 The edict impressed upon the gentry the importance of education and proper care of their estates . It also impressed upon them that they were of use even when not serving the government directly .
 In equity the repeal of compulsory gentry service should have been followed by the emancipation of the serfs . In equity, the repeal should have followed promptly by emancipation of serfs, says the historian .
 The abolition of serfdom did take place on the following day, the nineteenth of February, that day came ninetynine years later . Yet—again to cite Kliuchevsky—although the abolition took place on that day, it did not .
 The serfs themselves, it would seem, shared the feeling that an injustice had been committed, for the demand for freedom of the peasants, to follow the free of the gentry, became a recurrent motif of their uprisings .
 In the reign of Peter II they were already prohibited from volunteering for military service and thus escaping their condition . They were not allowed to volunteer in order to serve in the military .
 By a series of laws under Empress Anne peasants were forbidden to buy real estate or mills, establish factories, or become parties to government leases and contracts .
 Serfs were ordered to obtain their master’s permission before assuming financial obligations . Later, in the time of Elizabeth, serfs had to obtain permission from their master's permission before taking financial action .
 Landlords acquired increasing financial control over their serfs, for whose taxes they were held responsible . Especially following the law of 1731, landlords acquired increasing control over serfs .
 After 1736 serfs had to receive permission of their masters before they could leave for temporary employment elsewhere . Serfs must also have permission from their masters to leave their serfs for temporary work .
 Landlords obtained the right to transfer serfs from one estate to another and even to exile delinquent serfs to Siberia . The government included these exiles in the number of recruits required from a given estate .
 The criminal code of 1754 listed serfs only under the heading of property of the gentry . Serfs were only serfs under the head of the property of gentry, according to the code .
 Russian serfdom, although never quite the same as slavery, came to approximate it closely . Serfdom was not concerned with race or ethnicity, but came to resemble slavery closely .
 The Foreign Policy of Russia from Peter to Catherine followed certain clearly established lines . Peter's foreign policy from Peter the Great to Catherine the Great followed certain clear established lines.
 From the time of Peter the Great, representatives were exchanged between Russia and other leading European states . Russia and Europe have been at odds with each other since the early 1800s .
 Russia was to a considerable degree an enemy of its neighbors and a friend of its neighbor’s neighbors . Russia's relations with its neighbors were affected by this basic pattern .
 France relied on Turkey, Poland, and Sweden to envelop and weaken its arch-enemy, the Habsburgs . France, for example, consistently remained an antagonist of Russia, because in its struggle for the mastery of the continent .
 Russia, of course, had repeatedly fought against the three eastern European allies of France . Russia, Russia and France fought against each other for decades .
 Austria stood out, by contrast, as the most reliable Russian ally . Austria, ruled by the Habsburgs, stood out as a reliable ally of Russia . Austria's relationship with Russia has been strained in recent years .
 The two states shared hostility toward France, Turkey and Sweden . Sweden acted repeatedly in Germany against the interests of the Habsburgs . Russia and Sweden also acted against France and Turkey .
 In Poland also both Russia and Austria found themselves opposed to the French party . In Poland, both parties found themselves opposing each other in the polls .
 The first alliance between the two eastern European monarchies was signed in 1726 . It remained a cornerstone of Russian foreign policy until the Crimean War in the mid-nineteenth century .
 In Poland, Russia and Austria also sought to displace French influence . In Poland and Austria, the French influence has also been weakened .
 As the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth deteriorated, Russia steadily increased its influence there . Russia's influence in the region has been steadily increasing in recent years .
 Some historians have described the power of Russia in Poland by the middle of the eighteenth century as equivalent to that of a protectorate . Russia's power in Poland in the 17th century was similar to that in Russia's protectorate of Poland .
 Prussia represented a threat to Russia rather than a potential ally . Prussia, the other leading German power, represented a potential alliance with Russia . Russia is considered a major ally in the region .
 Prussia’‘’s rise to great power rank under Frederick the Great after 1740, together with Russia‘s rise under Peter the Great, which had just preceded it, upset the political equilibrium in Europe . The rise of Prussia in 1740 upset the
 Count Alexei Bestuzhev-Riumin was one of the first continental statesmen to point to the Prussian menace . Count Alexiev Riumin died in the Crimean War in 1881 .
 He worried especially about the Russian position on the Baltic, called Frederick the Great ‘the sudden prince,” and spoke in a typically eighteenth-century doctrinaire manner of Russia’s ‘natural friends,’ Austria and Great Britain .
 The hostile Russian attitude toward Prussia lasted, with some interruptions, until the time of Catherine the Great and the partitions of Poland, brought them together .
 In the period under consideration, Great Britain could well be called a “natural friend” of Russia . Great Britain would be a ‘natural friend of’ of Russia.
 After the scare occasioned by the achievements of Peter the Great and his navy, no serious conflicts arose between the two until the last part of the century . The two nations were at odds for centuries .
 Great Britain valued Russia as a counterweight to France and as a trading partner from which it obtained raw materials, including naval stores, in exchange for manufactured goods . On the contrary, Great Britain regarded Russia as an ally of France .
 Russia participated in five wars between 1725 and 1762 . In line with its interests and alliances, Russia fought in Russia's first war in 1725 .
 In 1733-35 Russia and Austria fought against France in the War of the Polish Succession, which resulted in the defeat of French candidate Stanislaw Leszczynski and the coronation of Augustus II's son as Augustus III of Poland .
 In 1736-39 Russia, again allied to Austria, waged a war against Turkey who was supported by France . Russia was again allied with Austria, and fought against Turkey .
 Miinnich and other Russian commanders scored remarkable victories over the Ottoman forces in the Ottoman Empire . Miinnch and other commanders scored notable victories over Ottoman forces .
 In 1741-43, Russia, supported by Austria, fought Sweden, who was supported by France . Russia and Austria fought Sweden in the Swedish-Austria war . Sweden was defeated by Russia in the Battle of the Winter War .
 Sweden started the war to seek revenge, but was defeated, and by the Treaty of Abo ceded some additional Finnish territory to Russia . Sweden was defeated in the war .
 In its new role as a great power Russia also became involved in wars fought away from its borders . Russia also got involved in conflicts over issues not immediately related to its interests .
 The most important was Russian intervention in the Seven Years’ War, 1756-63, fought again largely over Silesia . The war was fought largely over the territory of the region .
 Russia and allies managed to drive Prussia to the brink of collapse . Russia and its allies drove the country to the verge of collapse. Prussia was driven by Russia, its allies .
 Only the death of Empress Elizabeth early in 1762, and the accession to the throne of Peter III, who admired Frederick the Great, saved the Prussian king . Peter III was the son of Frederick's son, who died in 1763 .
 Russian foreign policy between 1725 and 1762 has been severely criticized for its cost in men and money and meddling in European affairs that had no immediate bearing on Russia . However, these criticisms on the whole are not convincing, writes Andrew Hammond .
 In its new role Russia could hardly disengage itself from major European affairs and conflicts . Russia has been involved in some of the world's most recent conflicts in recent years .
 Peter III wrote off in a fantastic manner the opportunities produced by the Seven Years’ War . Peter III did write off the opportunities created by the War . In general Russian diplomats successfully pursued the interests of their country, writes Peter .
 Catherine the Great would continue the basic policies of her predecessors . Catherine would continue to carry out the same policies she had in her reign .
 Russian army scored its first major victories against Turkey in 1736-39 . Russian army played first major part in the heart of Europe in the course of the Seven Years' War .
 Such famous commanders as Rumiantsev and Suvorov began their careers in this interim period between two celebrated reigns . The Russian monarchy was ruled by the late King of Russia .
 "Not to deprive people of their natural liberty but to correct their actions in order to attain the supreme good," says President Obama . Obama: "I'm not afraid to say I'm sorry. I'm glad to say 'I'm sorry'
 Russia will be "the most happy of any nation on earth," says President Vladimir Putin . "No nation will be more just and consequently flourish more"
 Catherine the Great was thirty-three years old when she ascended the Russian throne . She ascended the throne at the age of 33 .
 The future empress of Russia was born in the small German principality of Anhalt-Zerbst . She grew up in modest but cultured surroundings . The future Russian empress is born in Germany .
 The court in AnhaltZerbst, like many other European courts, was strongly influenced by French culture . Catherine started reading French books in childhood .
 In 1744, at the age of 15, she came to Russia to marry Peter of Holstein-Gottorp and prepare herself to be the wife of a Russian sovereign . She arrived in Russia in 1744 to prepare herself for her Russian wife .
 The German princess’s position at the imperial court could be fairly described as isolated and even precarious . Peter proved to be a miserable husband, while the German princess was isolated and .
 The future empress accomplished much more than merely surviving at court . The future queen was a model for the Queen of England . She became the first woman to become a British monarch .
 In addition to becoming Orthodox in order to marry Peter, she learned Russian language and literature well and to obtain some knowledge of her new country .
 She turned to the writings of the philosophes, Voltaire, Montesquieu, and others, for which she had prepared by her earlier grounding in French literature .
 Catherine the Great's interest in the Enlightenment was to constitute an important aspect of her reign . As we shall see, she was fascinated by the Enlightenment, and her interest in it was important .
 The young princess adapted herself skillfully to the new environment, made friends, and won a measure of affection and popularity in court circles .
 Catherine the Great’s personality and character impressed many of her contemporaries as well as later commentators . Catherine's character and personality impressed many historians and commentators .
 The empress possessed high intelligence, a natural ability to administer and govern, a remarkable practical sense, energy to spare, and an iron will, she said . She said .
 Catherine believed that she could prevail over all obstacles, and more often than not events proved her right . Catherine believed she could overcome all obstacles and often did .
 Self-control, skill in discussion and propaganda, and a clever handling of men and circumstances to serve her ends were additional assets of that unusual monarch . Self control and skill in . discussion and . propaganda, she said, and clever handling .
 The historian can agree, provided that ambition is understood not merely as a desire to snatch the crown, or attain glory by success in war, or gain the admiration of the philosophes, but as a constant, urgent drive to excel in everything .
 For the first time since Peter the Great, Russia acquired a sovereign who worked day and night, paying personal attention to all kinds of matters, great and small . Russia has a new sovereign who works every day to ensure his country is well-connected .
 Catherine the Great had certain weaknesses, such as her weaknesses . Catherine's weaknesses were her weaknesses, but she had many of them, including weaknesses .
 Determination easily became ruthlessness, ambition fed vanity just as vanity fed ambition . skill in propaganda would not stop short of asserting lies . skill would stop short short of assertion lies .
 Foreign observers often noted her insatiable desire to impress others, both with her physical presence and intellect . Foreign observers noted her .
 Ultimately, it has been argued, she was a supreme egoist, with few beliefs or standards of value outside her own overpowering wishes .
 Catherine II’s admirers sometimes noticed that she lacked something, call it charity, mercy, or human sympathy . Catherine II's admirers often noticed she lacked charity or mercy . Even her admirers thought she lacked compassion or sympathy .
 Some thought that she looked her best in masculine attire, which she occasionally chose to wear .
 She was also said to have a feminine “propensity to voluptuousness,” in the words of the British ambassador . She also had a ‘feminine’ quality, the ambassador said .
 Catherine the Great's notorious love affairs have become one of the lasting memories of her rule in popular imagination . Catherine's love affair is one of her most famous love affairs in the world .
 This too, it would seem, reflected her driven, passionate, and vain personality . Her personality reflected her passion for life, her passion and ambition .
 It has been suggested that her first lover was forced on Catherine, so that she would have a son and Russia an heir, and that Paul resulted from that liaison rather than the marriage to Peter .
 The empress allegedly had twenty-one known lovers, the last after she had turned sixty . The last of her known lovers was after she turned sixty, she allegedly had turned 60 .
 Some specialists believe he married her . He certainly continued to be influential after the rise of other favorites .
 Catherine II had to behave carefully during her first years on the throne . Catherine II's first year in charge of the British monarchy was her first year of rule .
 Brought to power by a palace revolution and without a legal title to the crown, the empress had the enthusiastic support of guardsmen such as the Orlov brothers, but otherwise little backing .
 There persisted the possibility that another turn of fortune would make her son Paul sovereign and demote her to the position of regent or even eliminate her altogether .
 She distributed honors and rewards on a large scale, in particular state lands with peasants, who thus became serfs . She distributed state lands and rewards with peasants .
 She traveled widely all over Russia reviving Peter the Great's practice, reviving the practice . She traveled to Russia to learn more about the country and win popularity .
 Catherine felt ready to introduce into Russia important changes based on the precepts of the Enlightenment . For that purpose she called the Legislative Commission . The Commission was created in 1766 .
 The aim of the Commission was to codify laws, a task last accomplished in 1649, before the Westernization of the country . The Commission was last accomplished by the 1649-1649 .
 Catherine the Great believed that the work of the Commission would go a long way toward rationalizing and modernizing Russian law and life . The Commission will help modernize and rationalize Russian law, life and life, she said .
 In preparation for the Commission, Catherine drafted a remarkable document to guide the discussions of the delegates, her lengthy Instruction, or Nakaz, in which she laid out her vision of how Russia should be governed .
 The text, composed by Catherine personally over a period of eighteen months, drew heavily on Montesquieu’s Spirit of the Laws . The empress referred to the text as her prayer book and used it for general political principles .
 Critics have argued that she abandoned much that was essential in Montesquieu, such as the division of powers . Catherine's version was reduced to an administrative arrangement meant to improve the functioning of autocracy .
 She strongly believed autocracy was the only feasible form of government for holding together and ensuring the progress of an enormous country like Russia . Central power must be grounded in fundamental laws and the advancement of the “supreme good” if it were not to become tyranny .
 Of course, this view of government was shared by many Enlightenment thinkers . The Enlightenment thinkers were concerned about the state of government .
 She hesitated to recommend ending serfdom, though she claimed to find it morally offensive . Likewise, she said she didn't want it to be abolished, even though she said it was moral offensive .
 In fact, she had written strong words on the matter for an early draft, but was advised to remove these from the draft . She was advised by the government to remove the strong words .
 The final version of the Instruction merely contains a pious wish that masters would not abuse their serfs . The final . version of this article was published in the May 18th edition of this year's edition of The Daily Mail .
 Catherine the Great rejected Beccaria's ideas of government based on social contract . Catherine found his criticisms of arbitrariness and cruelty in penal law useful . Catherine rejected his ideas of social contract but found them useful .
 The Instruction denounced capital punishment as well as torture and argued for crime prevention . Thus, the instruction was denounced as a crime prevention.
 On the whole, the Instruction is a strikingly liberal document, so much so that it was banned in France . The Instruction is so liberal that it has been banned from France .
 The Holy Synod was represented by a single appointed deputy . Yet this numerous gathering was an ‘all-Russian ethnographic exhibition,” to quote Kliuchevsky .
 Delegates received written instructions or mandates from their electorates, including the state peasants, who, together with the cossacks and national minorities, supplied over a thousand such sets of instructions .
 Russian society of the second half of the eighteenth century comparable to that obtainable for France in the famous cahiers of 1789 .
 The commission proved unwieldy, not enough preliminary work had been done, often there seemed to be little connection between the French philosophy of the empress’s instruction and Russian reality .
 Gentry delegates argued with merchant representatives over serf ownership and rights to engage in trade and industry . For example, gentry delegates debated over serfs' rights to trade, industry .
 More ominously, gentry deputies clashed with those of the peasant class on the crucial issue of serfdom . Gentry deputies and peasants clashed with each other on the issue of Serfdom in France .
 Catherine the Great quickly realized the potential danger of such confrontations . Catherine the Queen realized the danger of confronting the world's first monarch .
 The outbreak of war against Turkey in 1768 provided a good occasion for disbanding the Legislative Commission . The Commission was disbanded after the outbreak of the war in Turkey .
 Some committees continued to meet for several more years until the Pugachev rebellion, but again without producing any practical results . Some committees met again in the 1980s and 1990s, but failed to produce any progress .
 Social antagonisms that simmered in the Legislative Commission exploded in the Pugachev rebellion . Pugachev's Rebellion was the result of a rebellion against the government . The rebellion was the culmination of a series of events that began in the 1930s .
 Emelian Pugachev was a Don cossack, though alienated from the cossacks establishment because of their growing acceptance of Moscow’s authority . Pugachev died at the age of 80 in the early 1900s in Moscow .
 In November 1772, he arrived among Ural cossacks and peasants claiming to be tsar Peter ITI come to deliver them from oppression . Many peasants believed Peter had been murdered because he intended to free the serfs .
 The revolt quickly spread up and down the Ural River and westward to the Volga basin . The revolt spread across the entire country .
 At its height the rebellion encompassed a huge territory in eastern European Russia, including such important cities as Kazan . The rebellion was centered around Kazan, Kazan and other cities in eastern Europe .
 By January 1774, his forces were said by observers to have numbered around 30,000 followers .
 The uprising was built upon social discontents that were widespread in imperial Russia . The uprising in Russia was built on social discontent that was widespread in Russia .
 What began as a cossack movement quickly attracted serfs, state peasants, serfs ‘ascribed’ to mines and factories, poorer town dwellers, Old Believers, and non-Russians, including Bashkirs, Tatars, Kalmyks, and
 "All these groups felt, one way or another, that they had lost traditional freedoms," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The violent ferocity of the rebellion suggests the intensity of discontent . It is not the first time the rebels have taken to the streets of the country .
 Looting, pillaging, beatings, and murders of the rich were common when towns were attacked . Looting and pillaging of towns were common during the attacks .
 Assaults on rural estates resulted in the death of a great many landlords . Assaults in rural estates led to the deaths of many landlords, many of whom they were landlords .
 Once well-trained army troops arrived, the rebel army was soon defeated . Well-trained troops were soon defeated.
 Pugachev’s own men handed him over to government forces in 1774 . Pugachev escaped after the defeat of his troops and his escape back to the Ural area .
 A government commission has been convened to look into the causes of the rebellion .
 As a rationalist, she could not see the power such dreams of revenge, deliverance, and perfect freedom can have to mobilize people, she says . She says .
 The revolt, combined with the experience of the Legislative Commission, may have helped disillusion Catherine, revealing the chasm between French philosophy and Russian reality . Catherine’s reign divided into early liberal years and a later period of conservatism .
 The rebel and pretender Pugachev, shown after his capture, was captured by Russian forces . Pugachev was captured in the early 1980s in Moscow .
 Catherine the Great was too intelligent to become simply a reactionary. Yet she was too smart to be simply reactionary. She was too clever to be a reactionary to become a monarchist. Catherine was not a reactionary, but an intelligent woman .
 She intended to combine oppression and coercion with a measure of reform and a great deal of propaganda . She intended instead of combining oppression with reform and propaganda, she said .
 New system of local government introduced by Catherine the Great in 1775 was closely related to the collapse of local authority during the Pugachev rebellion . It was also an attempt to fix the perennial problem that localities were poorly governed .
 Scholars debate whether the purpose of these reforms was to create a more rational, efficient, and effective structure of local administration . Or to promote a radically different model of local political life based on principles of participation and autonomy, they say .
 Statute on Provincial Administration of 1775 distributed administrative powers and functions more clearly but also decentralized control and mandated local gentry participation . Both aspects can be seen in the Statute . Statute distributed administrative power and functions but also decentralized control, mandated local participation .
 Catherine's statements about the need for both ‘orderly’ administration and active involvement by her subjects can also be seen in her statements . Both aspects of Catherine's policies can be found in her statement .
 She reorganized the administrative geography of the country . She established fifty gubernii—“governments” or “provinces” -- each subdivided into some ten uezdy, or districts .
 Historical and regional considerations were completely disregarded in the drawing of these ‘orderly’ boundaries . Every province contained between 300,000 and 400,000 inhabitants and every district between 20,000 to 30,000 .
 Each province was to be run by an appointed governor and a network of institutions and officials . The network was divided, in principle, by executive, legislative, and judicial functions . Each province would be governed by a governor .
 Catherine expected active participation by the local gentry, who were urged to display initiative and energy . Most important, Catherine expects active participation from the gentry .
 In the towns, the reform similarly stipulated elected mayors and town officials . The reform would also stipulate elected mayors, town officials and officials .
 Catherine also reorganized the provincial court system, explicitly on a class basis, with different courts and procedures for different estates . Catherine reorganized a class-based court system in the province .
 Provincial administrations told to organize new Bureaus of Public Welfare to establish schools, hospitals, almshouses, madhouses, and other institutions for the poor . Provincial administrations were told to . organize schools, . hospitals, . alms houses, and madhouses .
 The process of recognizing the corporate identity of the nobility and strengthening the status and role of landlords in Russian life reached its full development in the Charter to the Nobility of 1785 .
 The incorporated gentry of a province could petition the monarch directly “regarding its corporate needs and interests,” a right denied the rest of the population . The Assemblies of the Nobility will also have a right to petition the king directly .
 Members of the gentry remained free from obligations of personal service and taxation . They became exempt from corporal punishment . Members of gentry were exempt from personal service or taxation .
 They could lose their gentry standing, estates, or life only by court decision . Court decision could affect them only if they lose their standing or estates .
 The property rights of the landlords reached a new high . Members of the gentry were recognized as full owners of their estates . In case of forfeiture for crime, an estate remained within the family .
 Catherine the Great's reign was characterized by an extension and strengthening of serfdom . As earlier, a rise in the position of the gentry meant an extension of the role of gentry . The rise in gentry's position was an extension to the extension of Serfdom,
 Catherine’s government in essence confirmed an already existing system in Ukraine . Catherine's government is responsible for helping to legalize serfdom in Ukraine and for, so to speak, standardizing that evil throughout the empire .
 Catherine the Great personally extended serfdom on a large scale by her frequent and huge grants of state lands and peasants to her favorites, beginning with the leaders of the coup of 1762 . Catherine also gave her favorites large grants of land and peasants .
 The total number of peasants who thus became serfs has been variously estimated . It was on the order of several hundred thousand working males . Well over a million persons were serfs .
 The census of 1794-96 indicated this growth of serfdom, with the serfs constituting 53. percent of all peasants and 49 percent of the population . Serfs constituted 53. per cent of the entire population .
 A huge survey of boundaries and titles was an important step in legalizing and confirming landholdings . The final secularization of vast Church estates with some 2 million peasants with 2 million peasant peasants became subject to the College of Economy .
 Colonists were sought abroad, often on generous conditions and at great cost, to populate territories newly won from Turkey and other areas . Serfdom and government regulations drastically restricted the mobility of the Russian people .
 Catherine II's efforts to promote the economy, education, and culture in Russia will be discussed in more detail in later chapters . Catherine II is one of the world's most powerful monarchs .
 In economic life the empress turned in certain respects from rigid mercantilism to the newly popular ideas of free enterprise and trade . She tried to stimulate economic activity with loans and incentives to noble farmers .
 She promoted free public primary and secondary schools . She authorized private publishing and printing for the first time in Russian history . She also authorized private printing and publishing for first time .
 She founded hospitals, led in the struggle against infectious diseases, and decreed that Russia begin to produce its own medicines and surgical instruments .
 She also pioneered, if modestly, in social welfare, introducing some measures to help the underprivileged, for example, widows and orphans .
 Catherine the Great sought success and glory, for herself and her country, in expanding the empire and advancing Russia's place as a great power in the European system .
 The empress scored triumph after triumph on the international stage . Assisted by statesmen as Nikita Panin and Potemkin and such generals as Rumiantsev and Suvorov .
 Catherine the Great's foreign policy was by no means a novel departure . Catherine's policy was not an entirely novel departure from her time in the reign .
 Russia's ideas proved ephemeral, and Russia continued on her old course . But, in fact, these ideas proved . Russia continued its old course. Russia continued to be Russia .
 Russia's foreign policy under Catherine Catherine concentrated in two segments of time . Catherine's role as a Russian diplomat was a key figure in the world's most powerful state of power . Catherine became the first female leader of Russia's anti-Westernist movement .
 The years 1768-74 witnessed the First Turkish War, together with the first partition of Poland in 1772 . The years also saw the First Polish and First Turkish Wars .
 Between 1787 and 1795 Russia participated in the Second Turkish War, 1787-92, an inconclusive war with Sweden after they attacked Russia in 1788, and the second and third partitions of Poland, 1793-1795 .
 Catherine's success in promoting the doctrine of free commerce at sea for noncombatants led to the formation of the League of Armed Neutrality in 1780 . Catherine’s success during the war with its rebellious American colonies, in promoting free commerce . Catherine also promoted the doctrine .
 As the Revolution became more radical, the empress reacted with bitterness and hostility . But as the revolution grew more radical she reacted with hostility . The empress is said to have been bitter and bitter .
 At home she turned against critical intellectuals and indeed against much of the cultural climate she herself had striven so hard to create, she said . At home, she turned her back on critical intellectuals .
 After the execution of Louis XVI in 1793, she broke off relations with France entirely . She was considering a military coalition against France . She also considered a possible coalition against the French .
 Great Britain was immersed in a conflict with its North American colonies during the latter part of the First Turkish War . During the second crucial sequence of years all powers had to shift their attention to revolutionary France .
 Russians aimed to reach the Black Sea and thus attain what could be considered their natural southern boundary as well as recover fertile lands that had been part of the Kievan state but were lost to invaders .
 Crimean Tatars had recognized the suzerainty of the Sultan of Turkey . The Crimean Tatar, successors to the Golden Horde in that area, had recognized that of Turkey's sultry .
 Catherine the Great followed the time-honored example of Muscovite tsars and such imperial predecessors as Peter the Great and Anne . In pushing south, she followed the Muscovaite example of muscovites .
 The First Turkish War, 1768-74, was fought both on land and, more unusual for Russia, on sea . It was fought on both land and sea, and was unusual for the Russians to do so .
 A Russian army commanded by Rumiantsev advanced into Bessarabia and the Balkans, scoring impressive victories over large Turkish forces . Another Russian army invaded and eventually captured the Crimea .
 A Russian fleet under Alexei Orlov sailed from the Baltic to Turkish waters and sank the Ottoman navy in the Bay of Chesme on July 6, 1770; however, it did not dare to try to force the Straits .
 Turkey was ready in the summer of 1774 to make peace with Russia . In spite of the fact that the Russian drive into the Balkans had bogged down, Turkey made peace in 1774 .
 Treaty of Kuchuk Kainarji was humiliating blow to the once-powerful Ottomans . Russia gained access to the Black Sea and other strategic points, including the Crimean ports of Yenikale and Kerch, the fortress at Kinburn .
 Crimean Tatars were proclaimed independent, although they recognized the sultan as caliph, that is the religious leader of Islam . The Crimean Tatar was proclaimed independent of the Crimean sultan .
 Russia obtained right of free commercial navigation in Turkish waters, including permission to send merchantmen through the Straits . Russia obtained the right to send ships through Turkish waters .
 Moldavia and Wallachia were returned to Turkey, but they were to be leniently ruled . Russia reserved the prerogative to intervene on their behalf . Russia returned Moldavia to Turkey but returned Wallachian and Moldavia .
 Russia acquired the right to build an Orthodox church in Constantinople . The Turks promised to protect Christian churches and to accept Russian representations on behalf of the new church to be built in the capital .
 The provisions of the treaty relating to Christians and Christian worship became the basis of many subsequent Russian claims in regard to Turkey . The treaty was the basis for many of Russia's claims against Turkey .
 Some of the northern littoral of the Black Sea remained Turkish, while the Crimea became independent . Crimea remained Turkish while some of the region remained independent .
 From the Ottoman point of view, the war was a disaster that could only be remedied by exaction of revenge and by restoration of Turkey's former position by force of arms . The war was only remedied only by exactions of revenge, says historian .
 In 1783 Russia moved to annex the Crimea, causing many Crimean Tatars to flee to the sultan’s domain . Russia annexed the Crimea in 1783, causing the Crimean Tatar to flee .
 By 1785 Russia had built a sizable fleet in the Black Sea, with its main base in Sevastopol, Crimea . Russia's main fleet was based in the Crimean Peninsula .
 Catherine toured the region by boat, accompanied by French, English, and Austrian ambassadors . In 1787, Catherine toured by boat accompanied by ambassadors .
 Gossip at court exaggerated the stage managing, suggesting that villages along the shore were only painted facades . The singing peasants were moved as the visitors moved .
 Historians have shown the progress in developing this southern region of the empire was very real . But as historians have shown, without ignoring Potemkin’s showmanship, the progress on developing the region was real .
 The project involved conquering the Ottomans, or at least their European possessions, and establishing a great Christian empire centered at Constantinople .
 Catherine the Great had her second grandson named Constantine, entrusted him to a Greek nurse, and ordered medals struck with a reproduction of St. Catherine's reproduction of the St. Louis Cathedral . Catherine also entrusted him with her Greek nurse .
 Austria finally agreed to allow the project after receiving assurance that the new empire would be entirely separate from Russia . Austria also offered compensations in the Balkans and other advantages to the project .
 Like many other overly ambitious schemes, the Greek project proved to be ephemeral . Yet, like many others, it was an over-ambitious scheme .
 Neither it nor its chief promoter Potemkin survived the Second Turkish War . Neither it or its chief patron Potemkins survived the war .
 Turkey declared war on Russia in 1787 after the Russians rejected an ultimatum demanding that they evacuate Crimea and the northern Black Sea littoral . Turkey declared the war after Russia refused to evacuate Crimea or the Black Sea .
 The Porte enjoyed the sympathy of several major European powers, especially Great Britain . Great Britain almost entered the war in 1791 . Sweden gave active support by attacking Russia .
 Russian troops led by Suvorov scored a series of victories over Turkish forces . In 1790 he stormed and won the supposedly impregnable fortress of Ismail, Ismail . The Russian troops won the fortress in 1790 .
 Mikhail Kutuzov, the hero of 1812, first broke into Ismail in 1812 . Incidentally, it was Mikhail Kutzov, a hero of the day .
 By the Treaty of Jassy, signed on January 9, 1792, Russia gained the fortress of Ochakov and the Black Sea shore up to the Dniester River . Turkey recognized Russian annexation of Crimea .
 Poland's settlement with Turkey proved definitive and, as many scholars have insisted, logical and natural . But the same could not be asserted by any stretch of the imagination in the case of Poland . Poland was ruled out of Turkey by the end of the war .
 The partitioning of that country left Russia and Europe with a constant source of pain and conflict . Indeed, the partitioning left Europe and Russia with constant conflict, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Weakness and disorder in the political system in Poland from about the middle of the seventeenth century was a factor leading to this catastrophe . The collapse of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth was also a factor in the disaster .
 Poland-Lithuania was dominated by a very strong aristocracy, expressing its authority through the Sejm . A weak, elected king was a weak king . As we have seen, this was not the first time the king had been elected king .
 To be sure, like monarchs elsewhere, rulers tried to expand their power, but unsuccessfully . King tried to do so, but failed, in the eyes of many .
 Sejm is composed of instructed delegates from provincial parliaments . It resembles in its procedure a diplomatic congress more than a national legislature . For its part, the Sejmu resembled in its procedures a diplomatic .
 The right of any member of parliament to veto any law and even dissolve the Sejm has created frequent political chaos . Growing corruption and foreign interference (including by Russia) has also led to political chaos in recent years .
 The main recourse to the Sejm being dissolved was to proclaim a confederation, a gathering of the adherents of a given position . The main traditional recourse to a dissolution was to declare a confederation .
 A confederation could not be obstructed by a liberum veto, and it might try to impose its views by force . A liberum veto would not stop a confederation from being obstructed .
 Most historians have noted that given the growing political stability and centralization of neighboring states, this was a fatal path . Most historians, however, have noted this was not the best path .
 Poland might have survived its problems absent outside interference . This deserves emphasis, for Poland might not have survived without outside interference. This is not the case .
 Polish society, in the eighteenth century, experienced an intellectual and cultural revival that began to spread to politics . Polish society in the 17th century experienced a cultural revival . Poland's political revival began in the 18th century .
 Given time, Poland might well have successfully reformed its political system . Poland's political system may well have created more order and effectiveness . Poland has a long history of political reform .
 Historians have argued, they encouraged Poland’s internal problems in order to take advantage of them . Historians argue that the Polish government encouraged Poland's internal problems to exploit them .
 Stanislaw Poniatowski tried to introduce certain reforms but failed to obtain firm support from Russia and Prussia . Catherine the Great’s former lover was the last king of Poland, who reigned from 1764 to 1795 . Russia, Prussia had agreed in 1764
 Critics argue that this was a deliberate effort to weaken Polish unity rather than a defense of religious tolerance as a principle .
 The concession led to violent protests against the reform, Poniatowski, and Russian interference in Poland . In any case, the concession was not enough .
 First partition of Poland came in 1772 . Eventually Russian troops subdued the Confederates .
 Great power politics played a large role in this unusual attempt to solve the Polish problem . Poland has been plagued by a series of problems since the fall of communism .
 Frederick the Great of Prussia proposed the partition of a part of Poland as a way to satisfy Catherine the Great’s expansionist ambitions . Austria had taken the initiative in 1769 by seizing and “re-incorporating” certain Polish border areas . Austria in effect
 Although the Prussian acquisition was smallest in size and population, it represented the most valuable gain of the three from the political, military, and economic points of view .
 Poland lost about one-third of its territory and more than a third of its population . In all, Poland lost more than one-thirds of its land and population .
 The disaster spurred the Poles to enact long-needed reforms, though these would be halted by neighbors who worried about a revitalized Commonwealth . Poland's reforms would be stopped by neighbors worried about the nation's future .
 Changes were begun in 1773 and culminated in the work of the celebrated Four Years’ Sejm of 1788-92 and in the constitution of May 3, 1791 .
 The monarchy was to become hereditary, and the king to have effective executive power . The dysfunctional liberum veto was abolished in favor of majority rule . A cabinet of ministers, organized along modern lines, was created and made responsible to the Sejm .
 Polish reform party profited from the benevolent attitude of Prussia . Prussia apparently hoped to obtain further concessions from a new Poland .
 Russia instigated the organization of the Confederation of Targowica in defense of the old order in May 1792 . Russia sent armies into Poland in support of this Confederation .
 At this point, the Prussians reversed themselves and joined the invaders . The Prussian army was defeated by the Romans .
 Russia seized Lithuania and most of western Ukraine . Prussia seized Danzig, Thorn, and Great Poland, with a combined population of 1 million . Austria did not participate in the invasion .
 Russia obtained right to move its troops into what remained of Poland and control its foreign policy . In addition, Russia obtained the right to control Poland's foreign policy and move troops into its territory . Russia also won right to take control of what remained Polish territory and control foreign policy.
 The Poles were crushed by the Russians, commanded by Suvorov, and the Prussians . The Russians were led by the Prussian and the Poles .
 Austria rejoined her allies to participate in the third partition of Poland in October 1795 . Austria joined forces with her allies in the 1795 partition .
 Russia acquired the remainder of Lithuania and Ukraine, with more than 1 million inhabitants, as well as the Duchy of Courland . Prussia took Mazovia, including Warsaw, with 1 million people . Austria appropriated the rest of Little Poland, with Cracow, and another
 On the one hand, Prussia, Russia, and Austria scored a remarkable, indeed virtually unprecedented, diplomatic and military coup . On the other hand, the three countries involved in the coup were Russia, Austria and Prussia . The coup was a remarkable and unprecedented diplomatic coup .
 They dismembered and totally destroyed a large European state, eliminating an old enemy, rival, and source of conflicts . While adding greatly to their own lands, resources, and populations, they added greatly to the region .
 Eastern Europe fell under their complete control, with France deprived of her old ally . Eastern Europe was under the control of the French state .
 For a long time after the division of Poland, the three east European monarchies cooperated closely on the international scene, if you will . Significantly, for a very long time, they were partners in crime, perhaps in crime .
 The partitions left a legacy of trouble with lasting consequences . On the other hand, the partitions left behind a history of trouble . The partitions were left behind lasting consequences.
 We might date the beginning of the ‘national problem’ in the Russian Empire from the partitions . In particular, we might date it from the partitioned partitions . We might also date the start of the "national problem" in the Empire from partitions .
 Most Russian scholars like to emphasize that, in the three partitions of Poland, Russia took only old Russian lands, once part of the Kievan state . The two German powers grabbed ethnically and historically Polish territory .
 The brutal Russian policy toward Poland had to allow for the interests of other aggressors . Warsaw and the very heart of Poland attached to Russia in 1815 .
 While the peasantry in the annexed lands of Poland-Lithuania were mainly Lithuanians, Belorussians, and Ukrainians, the nobility was generally Polish by language and culture .
 Catherine the Great showed she was not mainly concerned about the faith or the ethnic origins of her new subjects . In any case, she showed she wasn't mainly concerned with the faith .
 Russian troops suppressed uprising of Ukrainian peasants against their Polish and Polonized landlords . Russian troops also suppressed uprising against Polish and Polish landlords .
 Some Ukrainian historians have argued that oppression by Polish landlords only increased under Russian occupation . The strong Russian government maintained law and order more successfully than had the weak Polish authorities .
 The partitions, for all their benefits to Russia, also brought to the growing empire several potential sources of national conflict and antiRussian nationalism . In other words, the partitions brought to Russia also brought national conflict, anti-Russia nationalism .
 For the short term, the most worrisome for the Russian state were Catholic Poles and Jews . Catholics and Jews were the most worried for the state, according to Russian officials .
 Most Poles refused to accept the dismemberment of their nation and foreign rule . Most Poles, of course, refused to . accept their nation .
 In some respects, then, the ‘Polish problem’ was made worse by partition . The partitioning of Poland has made it worse for the country .
 The Russian Empire absorbed a great part of one of the largest and oldest Jewish communities in Europe .
 Catherine the Great has received a great deal of both praise and criticism . The queen of Russia is the subject of many of the world's most famous works of art .
 Her admirers focus mainly on her achievements in advancing Russia's Westernization and international position . Her admirer: Her achievements are mainly to advance Russia's position in the West .
 Her detractors dwell on her failures to achieve many of her stated goals and especially on the continued growth of serfdom . Her detractors focus on her failure to achieve some of her goals .
 Critics have been repelled by the contrast between her professedly enlightened views and the ease and thoroughness of her accommodation to this great social evil .
 Historians debate how real and deep were her commitments to the principles of the Enlightenment . More generally, historians debate how deep her commitment to the Enlightenment was to her .
 A more balanced assessment needs to be done on the actual working and effects of her policies before a final judgment is possible . A balanced assessment is possible, but more research is needed before a verdict can be made .
 Catherine believed in her reforms but also recognized harsh realities . As such, it can be argued, she believed in reforms but recognized harsh reality .
 She believed that human beings are “rational creatures” with natural dignity and liberty but also that they need to be educated . She believed, as she wrote in her Instruction, that human being is ‘rational creatures .
 In a word, as de Madariaga and other recent historians have argued, she was not a liberal or a democrat but neither was an enlightened despot . Neither was a hypocritical despot, much less a hypocritical one, they argue .
 Her ideal was a regulated and orderly polity in which everyone performed their functions well and in the interests of the common good . Her ideal is drawn from both the French Enlightenment and German cameralism .
 There were many inadequacies, inconsistencies, and brutalities in her long reign . Her long reign was brutalized by her reigns .
 Most historians would agree that her achievements were considerable . But most historians would say that she had a long list of achievements .
 By encouraging greater social initiative and local engagement, some scholars have even seen here the idea of a modern civil society . She fostered the promise of a new relationship between rulers and ruled .
 Emperor Paul ascended the throne in 1796, making undoing his mother's work a salient feature of his brief reign . His reign ended in 1801 in a palace coup .
 He, in turn, came to hate his mother, her favorites, her advisers, and everything she stood for . "He came to love his mother. He, turned to hate her," he says .
 Paul had his murdered father, Peter II, dug up from his modest resting place and reburied with pomp . Symbolically, he had his father's body dug up and buried in lavish ceremony .
 He freed from prison and exile those punished by his mother, including liberal and radical intellectuals and leaders of the Polish rebellion such as Kosciuszko . He would replace them in time with his own perceived enemies .
 In ideology and policy, he was suspicious of all independent social activity, especially by the nobles . He was suspicious in the eyes of the nobles, especially in his own country .
 He revoked the Charter to the Nobility and the charter to the Towns . He promoted a military model for both state and society .
 The emperor promoted and demoted his assistants with dazzling rapidity and often for no apparent reason . Highly suspicious, irritable, and given to frequent outbreaks of rage, the emperor was often irritable .
 He personally changed the drill and redesigned the uniforms of the Russian army . The imperial military reviews inspired terror in the participants . He personally redesigned the . uniforms .
 The emperor insisted on his autocratic power and majesty even in small things like dancing at a palace festival and saluting . Most important, he insisted that he was autocratic .
 As Paul reportedly informed the French ambassador, the only important person in Russia was the one speaking to the emperor, and only while he was so speaking . Paul reportedly said that the emperor was speaking to him only when he spoke to him .
 Russia finally acquired a strictly legal and stable system of succession to the throne . But it was also explicitly excluded women . Russia's new throne system was explicitly excluded from women .
 The emperor's views and attitudes found reflection in his treatment of the crucial problem of serfdom and the gentry . His treatment of Serfdom was reflected in his attitude to the English .
 Paul continued Catherine the Great’s support and promotion of serfdom by spreading it to extreme southern Russia, so-called New Russia, in 1797 . He distributed state lands and peasants to his favorites at an even faster rate than had his mother .
 Paul tried for the first time to regulate and limit the obligations of the serfs to their masters by proclaiming in 1797 that they should work three days a week for their landlords and three days for themselves, with Sunday sanctified as a day of rest . Paul did not share his mother
 Paul’s new law was not, and possibly could not be, enforced, but it did represent a turning point in the attitude of the Russian government toward serfdom .
 From that time on, limitation and, eventually, abolition of serfdom became real issues of state policy . "Serfdom" was abolished by the French Revolution in 1881 .
 The emperor gave further expression to his displeasure with the gentry through such measures as the restoration of corporal punishment for members of that class as well as the townspeople . The emperor also increased reliance on the bureaucracy in preference to the bureaucracy .
 It was in the field of foreign policy and especially of war that Paul's reign left its most lasting memory . Paul's legacy will be remembered for his role in Afghanistan, Afghanistan .
 Just before her death, Catherine the Great had come close to joining an anti-French coalition . Just before she died, she had considered joining a pro-French anti-France coalition . She died in 1777 .
 Paul began with a declaration of the Russian desire for peace, but before long he too, provoked by French victories and certain mistakes of tact, turned to the enemies .
 Russia entered the war against France as a member of the so-called Second Coalition . The coalition was organized in large measure by Paul and composed of Russia, Great Britain, Austria, Naples, Portugal, and Turkey . The Second Coalition was formed by Russia and Great Britain .
 In the campaigns that followed, a Russian fleet under the command of Fedor Ushakov seized the Ionian Islands from the French, and established there a Russian-controlled republic under the protectorate of Turkey .
 Paul accepted his election as the grand master of the Knights of Malta and thus ruler of that strategic island . Russian influence extended even further west in the Mediterranean, for Paul .
 Russian troops joined allied armies in the Low Countries and in Switzerland, but their most effective intervention took place in northern Italy .
 A force of 18,000 Russians and 44,000 Austrians led by Suvorov drove out the French in the course of five months in 1798-99 .
 He had to retreat in 1799-1800 to southern Germany through the Swiss Alps held by a French force . Instead, because of defeats on other fronts and the change of plans in the allied high command, he had to return .
 His successful management of the retreat has been considered one of the great feats of military history . The retreat was one of Britain's most successful retreats in history .
 Suvorov is regarded as the ablest military commander Russia ever produced . He died shortly after the Swiss campaign at the age of seventy, aged 70 .
 The qualities of this eccentric and unpredictable general included heavy reliance on speed and thrust . His remarkable psychological rapport with his soldiers .
 Britain failed to support Russian troops adequately in the Netherlands, says Paul Paul . Disgusted with Austria and also with Great Britain, Paul abandoned the coalition . Paul said he was disappointed with Britain and Austria for failing to support Russia adequately .
 In 1800 he switched sides and joined France, considering the rise of Napoleon to be a guarantee of stability and the end of the revolution . In 1800, he decided to join France, believing Napoleon would end the revolution and stability .
 Alexander I promptly recalled the cossacks after the emperor's death . Alexander I's death interfered at this point, and Alexander I quickly recalled them .
 His rudeness, violent temperament, and unpredictable behavior helped the conspiracy to grow even among the emperor's most trusted associates and indeed within his family . The emperor's rudeness and violent temperament helped to help the conspiracy grow, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 His preference for the troops trained at his own estate of Gatchina antagonized, and seemed to threaten, the guards . He preferred to use his own troops at his home estate . His preference to use the troops was that of his own .
 Grand Duke Alexander, Paul’s son and heir, apparently assented to the plot . The plot was hatched in St. Petersburg, Russia, and the plot was likely to have been carried out .
 It remains uncertain whether murder was part of the original plans of the conspirators . Alexander, it seems, had not expected it, or whether it occurred by accident .
 It is significant that none of the contemporary western European authors who have written on Russian economics in the late eighteenth century and early nineteenth speaks of Russia as economically backward .
 Russian industry, at least in some branches, was ahead of all the other Continental countries but of England as well . In fact, during some part of the eighteenth century, Russian industry was ahead not only of all of the others .
 The notion of Russian “backwardness’ has long been a seductive metaphor for telling the history of Russia, not least in discussing the economy . Michael Karpovich: Russia's economy has suffered from a lack of stability in recent years .
 The reforms of Peter the Great and Catherine the Great played no small part in facilitating this development . The reforms were part of Peter's reforms in order to make the country stronger .
 On the other hand, as will be seen, this progress was often contradictory . On the one hand, it was often the most successful period of history .
 While agriculture thrived and landlords made greater and greater profits, serfdom became stronger than ever . The tax burden on the poor grew, and towns and urban manufacture languished .
 Within the Russian boundaries of 1725 there lived some 13 million people in that year, 19 million in 1762, and 29 million in the year of 1796 . In 1796 there were 29 million people living in Russia .
 Russia had by the end of the eighteenth century over 36 million inhabitants . Counting approximately 7 million new subjects acquired as a result of expanding the empire's boundaries, Russia had at the time 36 million people .
 The expansion of the Russian Empire in the eighteenth century produced a number of other results important for the economic life of the country . In addition to the immediate increase in population, the growth of the population was also important to the economy .
 Peter the Great's victory in the Great Northern War gave his state access to the Baltic . Citizens of such ports as Riga were more proficient in navigation and commerce than the Russians .
 Catherine the Great's huge gains from the partitions of Poland also brought Russia closer to other European countries . Catherine's gains included towns and areas with a relatively more developed economy . Russia's gains also included towns with more developed economies .
 Both the German landlords of the Baltic region and the Polish or Polonized gentry of what came to be known as the western provinces were in certain respects more advanced than their Russian counterparts .
 Catherine the Great's success in the two Turkish wars opened vast fertile lands of southern Russia to the Black Sea . Catherine's success established the empire firmly on the coast of Russia and established it firmly .
 Although serfdom restricted mobility, population in the south grew rapidly by means of voluntary migration and the transfer of serfs and peasants . Serfs and state peasants were transferred to the south .
 Agriculture and Other Occupations Differentiation accompanied expansion . Agriculture and other Occupations Differentiated accompanied expansion.
 The fertile, mostly “black-earth,” agricultural areas of the south became more and more distinct from the more barren regions of the center and north . The fertile and mostly "black earth" agricultural areas became more distinct .
 The system of work for one’s master prevailed in the south, that of obrok, or payments to the landlord in kind or money, in the north . In the north, the system of barshchina prevailed .
 On the rich black earth of the south the serfs tilled their masters’ fields as well as their own plots . Serfs also performed other tasks for the master such as cutting firewood or mowing hay .
 The landlords generally sold the products of their economy on the domestic market . But toward the end of the century export increased .
 In the provinces of the center and north, where the earth was not so fertile, the obrok, or quitrent, practice grew . In the province of the north and center, the practice grew.
 Only modest harvests of rye and other grains suitable to the rigorous climate could be obtained from the soil, so that the peasant population had to find different means to support itself .
 In some places peasants produced iron implements, such as locks, knives, and forks . In others they made wooden utensils, spoons, cups, plates, toys, and the like, or leather goods .
 Many peasants left their homes periodically, especially for the winter, to find work elsewhere . Where no such subsidiary local occupations emerged, many peasants left home to find jobs elsewhere .
 Groups of peasants sought employment together in associations known as arteli, singular artel . Often groups of peasants became carpenters, housepainters, or construction workers .
 Others earned money in industrial production, transportation, or petty trade . Some earned money through industrial production and transportation . Others made money through petty trade.
 A large number of peasants were able to pay their quitrent to the landlord, meet their obligations, and support themselves and their families . These varied earnings, together with their meager agriculture, made it possible for a large number to pay the landlord .
 About one-quarter of the peasant population of the less fertile provinces left their villages for winter employment elsewhere . It has been estimated that about one a quarter of the peasants left their village to find work elsewhere .
 The great extent and the continuing expansion of agriculture in Russia did not mean that it was modern in technique or very productive . Russia's agriculture was very productive, but it was not always modern or productive .
 Russian agriculture remained rather primitive, and, because of the backward technique of cultivation, even excellent land gave relatively low yields .
 Serfdom contributed heavily to the inefficient use of labor and to rural overpopulation, according to the author of the book, "Serfdom" and "Rural Overpopulation" The author argues that serfdom was inefficient in rural areas and that it contributed to overpopulation .
 By the end of the century, in spite of the efforts of the Free Economic Society established in 1765 and a few other groups, no substantial modernization had occurred .
 As Soviet historians repeatedly emphasized, serfdom with its abundant unskilled labor still could effectively satisfy the needs of the rather sluggish and parochial Russian rural economy in the 17th century .
 In a sense, the Russians during that period made greater advances in industry . The Russians made more advances in their industry, the historian says .
 The total number of workers rose to a considerable figure variously estimated between 100,000 and 225,000 . The total figure is estimated to be between 100 and 200,000 people .
 Many factories employed hundreds of hands, with the highest known number in the neighborhood of 3,500 . The highest known known number of hands employed in the factory was in the vicinity of 3.500 .
 Russia's mining and metal industries developed so spectacularly as to give Russia a leading position in Europe in this type of production . The country has a long history of heavy metal production .
 Lesser centers of metal industry existed in Olonets, near the Finnish border, and in Tula, south of Moscow .
 The textile industry flourished in and around Moscow and some neighboring provinces and, a lesser extent, in the St. Petersburg region .
 A number of other industries also developed in eighteenth-century Russia . The Russian industry was developed in the 17th century .
 Russian manufacturing establishments reflected and in turn affected the social structure of the empire . However, in the context of Russian society, the acquisition of a suitable labor force created special problems .
 They were, in fact, industrial serfs, but they belonged to a factory, not to an individual . They belonged to an industrial serf, not an individual, says historian John Sutter .
 These possessional factories acquired special prominence in heavy industry . The factories were built in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Some landlords set up manorial factories, especially for light industry, where they utilized the bonded labor of their serfs . Some landlords, in turn, set up factories where they used their serfees to work .
 Free labor also played an increasingly important role in the industrial development of Russia in the eighteenth century . Nevertheless, free labor played a significant role in Russia's industrial development .
 Even when it represented the labor of someone else’s serfs out to earn their quitrent, it led to new, more “capitalistic,” relationships in the factories .
 In the middle of the century merchants owned some 70 percent of textile factories in Russia as well as virtually the entire industry of the Moscow and St. Petersburg industry .
 In addition to government managers, merchants, and gentry entrepreneurs, businessmen of a different background, including peasants and even serfs, made their appearance .
 In a number of instances, peasant crafts were gradually industrialized and some former serfs became factory owners . In some instances, the former serfers became the owners of some factories .
 The state engaged directly in industrial development but also encouraged private enterprise . State engaged directly with industrial development .
 The gentry were encouraged to take part in every phase of economic life . This encouragement was evident in the abolition of restrictions on entering business . The protective tariffs of 1782 and 1793 were introduced in 1793 .
 Domestic commerce was stimulated by the repeal of internal tariffs that culminated in Empress Elizabeth’s legislation in 1753 . The building of new canals following the example of Peter the Great, by territorial acquisitions, and especially by the quickened tempo .
 In particular, the fertile south sent its cultural surplus to the center and the north in exchange for products of industries and crafts . The countryside as a whole supplied the cities and towns with grain and other foods and materials .
 Moscow was the most important center of internal commerce as well as the main distribution and transit point for foreign trade . Moscow was also the most significant distribution point in the country's economic history .
 St. Petersburg, Riga, Archangel, Archangel and towns in the heart of the grain-producing area such as Penza, Tambov, and Kaluga . Volga ports like Iaroslavl, Nizhnii Novgorod, Kazan, and Sarat
 Tobolsk, Tomsk, and Irkutsk developed as significant commercial as well as administrative centers . In distant Siberia, Tobolk, Tomk and Irksk became significant commercial and administrative centers.
 The best known among them included the celebrated fair next to the Monastery of St. St. Mary's Monastery .
 Macarius on the Volga in the province of Nizhnii Novgorod, the fair near the southern steppe town of Kursk, and Irbit fair in the Ural area .
 Foreign trade developed rapidly, especially in the second half of the century . Foreign trade has developed rapidly in the past century .
 The annual ruble value of both exports and imports more than tripled in the course of Catherine the Great's reign, an impressive achievement .
 After the Russian victory in the Great Northern War, the Baltic ports such as St. Petersburg became important after the war . After the war, Baltic ports became important for the Russian Empire .
 St. Petersburg, Riga, and Libau “Liepaja” became the main avenue of trade with Russia . They maintained this dominant position into the nineteenth century .
 Russia exported to other European countries timber, hemp, flax, tallow and some other raw materials . Iron products and certain textiles, notably canvas for sails, were also exported to Europe .
 The 100th century saw the beginning of the grain trade that was later to acquire great prominence . Also, the century also saw the start of the Grain trade that later acquired great prominence.
 Catherine the Great’s acquisition of southern Russia and the development of Russian agriculture there as well as the construction of the Black Sea ports, notably Odessa . Odessa was won from the Turks in 1792 and transformed into a port in 1794 . The trade became possible on a
 Russian imports consisted of wine, fruits, coffee, sugar, and fine cloth, as well as manufactured goods . Russian imports were mainly wine, fruit, fruit and coffee .
 Throughout the eighteenth century exports greatly exceeded imports in value in value . Throughout the 17th century exports exceeded imports .
 Great Britain remains the best Russian customer, accounting for something like half of Russia’s total European trade . Great Britain is the best European customer, according to the latest figures .
 St. Petersburg and other centers in the empire handled the transactions and carried Russian products away in foreign ships, especially British and Dutch .
 Russia also engaged in commerce with Central Asia, the Middle East, and even India and China, channeling goods through the St. Nevsky St. Peter's Bridge .
 A considerable colony of merchants from India lived in Astrakhan in the eighteenth century . The colony was a colony of Indian merchants from the city .
 They fell into two categories, roughly equal size, serfs and state peasants . Serfs and peasants were roughly equal in size, and were state peasants and serfs .
 Serfs constituted 53. percent of the total peasant population in Russia . Toward the end of the century the serfs were 53.% of the peasant population .
 As outlined in earlier chapters, the position of the serfs deteriorated from the reign of Peter the Great to those of Paul and Alexander I and reached its nadir around 1800 . The position of Serfs deteriorated between the reigns of the Great and those of Alexander I .
 It has been estimated that the obrok increased two and a half times in money value between 1760 and 1800 . The barshchina grew from three to four days a week and in some cases even five or more days of a week .
 Emperor Paul tried to stem the expansion of the barshchina in 1797 with his ineffectual law of 1797 . Emperor Paul's law was an attempt to stop the expansion .
 Household serfs were serfs who had no land to till, but acted instead as domestic servants or in some other capacity within the manorial household . Perhaps the most unfortunate were the numerous household serfs with no land .
 This segment of the population expanded as landlords acquired new tastes and developed a more elaborate style of life . Landlords are expanding as landlords acquire new tastes, developed more elaborate lifestyles .
 Some household serfs became painters, poets, or musicians, and a few even received education abroad . Some serfs were educated abroad .
 Household serfs were kept under the constant control of their masters . Their condition could barely be distinguished from slavery . But, as can can be readily imagined, it was especially the household serfs .
 State peasants fared better than serfs, although their obligations increased in the course of the century . Their obligations, too, increased in course of century, increased .
 At best, they maintained a reasonable degree of autonomy and prosperity . At best they were in charge of their own businesses .
 At worst, as exemplified by possessional workers, their lot could not be envied even by the serfs . But at worst, they were not envied by even the Serfs .
 Even apart from major rebellions such as those associated with Bulavin in Peter the Great's reign and Pugachev under Catherine the Great, peasants expressed their discontent in everyday ways, such as slow and sloppy work during barshchina .
 peasants gathered together to petition their landlord or even the tsar, though this was forbidden by law . When particularly riled, often by some new demand on their labor, peasants sometimes gathered together .
 The eighteenth century, especially the second half during the reign of Catherine the Great, has been considered the golden age of Russian gentry . By contrast, the first half of the 18th century was considered a golden age for the gentry in Russia .
 This class dominated the life of the country and enjoyed growing wealth in this favorable economy . Constituting a little over 1 percent of the population, this class dominated life . The class is now a little more than 1 percent .
 Their style of life became increasingly elaborate and costly, requiring servants, servants, imported furniture, imported books and art, costly balls, and travel abroad . The style of their life was becoming increasingly elaborate, with servants, expensive furniture and art .
 Many noblemen, with the lessening and finally abolition of their service obligations, focused on enjoying this life . Many landlords took a greater interest in their estates . Some of them also pursued other lines of economic activity, such as manufacturing .
 The State Lending Bank was established by Catherine the Great in 1786 . Its main task was the support of gentry landholding .
 The nobility can also be credited with facilitating Russian Westernization and developing modern Russian culture .
 The gentry continued to surround the throne, to supply officers for the army, and to fill administrative posts . And, of course, the gentry also continued to fill posts .
 While the gentry prospered, the position of the clergy and their dependents declined . The clergy's position in England declined as a result .
 Russian priests became poorer and more insecure financially after 1764 . Never rich, Russian priests were never rich .
 They had to depend almost entirely on fees and donations from their usually impoverished parishioners, often producing resentment . Parishioners often produce resentment at the expense of their poor, often poor families .
 The style of life of priests and their families, especially in the countryside, often differed little from that of peasants, often inspiring contempt . In the 1930s, the style of priests' life was similar to that of the peasants .
 The eighteenth century saw the disintegration of the parish community . In addition, as Gregory Freeze has shown, the eighteenth century also saw the breakdown of the community .
 Where the boundaries of religious and secular activities had once overlapped, the local church forming a unifying center, these were split apart . These were now split apart, leaving the church as only a religious institution . The boundaries of the church and the secular world had once been overlapped .
 None of these classes were numerous or prominent in eighteenth-century Russia . Nevertheless, none of these classes were prominent or prominent .
 The government tried to stimulate initiative, public spirit, and participation in local affairs among townsmen . The charter of 1785 granting urban self-government was granted to townsmen in 1785 .
 Women, outside the charmed circle of privilege enjoyed by the Westernized and often educated wives of the elite, tended to share in the experience and burdens of their menfolk . The added burden of domestic responsibilities and patriarchical family hierarchies was added to the burden of the men .
 Women labored in the fields, worked as servants, occasionally engaged in commerce, ran households, ran their households, cared for children, and worried about having enough food and paying increasing taxes . Women were also concerned about paying more taxes .
 The government made a special effort to control women’s sexuality, confining “debauched” women in special institutions and sometimes punishing them . Echoing Muscovite concerns, the government tried to control ‘debauching’ women . The government tried
 Catherine the Great hoped to spread elementary education to girls . On the other hand, Catherine the . Great hoped the education was for girls .
 The number of non-Russians living under the rule of the Russian crown was one of the defining social changes in the eighteenth century .
 Historians have spoken of an “urge to the sea,” of natural boundaries not yet reached, of unstable borderlands, of instability . The effect was the forced entry into Russian life of people representing many different ethnicities and religions .
 Polish nobles, Cossack leaders, Baltic Germans, Jews, and Muslims, had already developed institutions and a strong sense of separate identity . While some groups had little in the way of autonomous organization, other groups had developed institutions .
 Policies toward different groups varied widely, usually depending on how much the state valued their potential service to crown and country . This was also influenced by existing prejudices .
 In general, the tendency was to incorporate and assimilate elites and disregard local peculiarities . The tendency to incorporate elites was to disregard local eccentricities .
 The imperial government in the eighteenth century generally tolerated local differences in language, religion, and communal organization . Following Muscovite tradition, and also influenced by study of the Ottoman experience, the imperial government generally tolerated differences in religion and language .
 Tolerance did not include Uniate Ukrainians and Belorussians, for they were viewed as heretics from the true faith . Jews and Muslims were viewed with suspicion .
 Catherine the Great also made some effort to absorb new subjects into the Russian social hierarchy . Catherine tried to replace communal institutions with a uniform system of local administration . Catherine also made an effort to introduce new subjects to the Russian society .
 Russian policy toward non-Russian ethnic and religious groups remained remarkably pragmatic, flexible, and tolerant . Still, compared to the age of nationalism in the nineteenth century, Russian policy remained remarkably tolerant .
 There were many reasons for this, including the great distances of the empire and the weakness of local government, and native resistance to interference in their ways .
 Russian ethnicity and Orthodox religion were not yet treated by the state as the unifying and stabilizing foundation of Russian politics and society . But we cannot neglect the fact that they were not treated as a state as unifying .
 Clearly, we can never ignore the state in discussing Russia’s economy and society, says CNN.com's Anna Urry.com . The Russian state is a key part of Russia's economy, she says .
 The state’s ambitions in the eighteenth century required squeezing people and resources . The state of the seventeenth century had ambitions to squeeze resources and people . But the state's ambitions required squeezing resources and squeezing people .
 Russia had a large and glorious army, a complex bureaucracy, and one of the most splendid courts in Europe . Although a poor, underdeveloped, and illiterate country, Russia had large army and complex bureaucracy .
 With the coming of Westernization, the tragic gulf between the small enlightened and privileged segment at the top and the vast majority living near to the bottom became wider than ever . The tragic, and as it turned out fatal, gulf of wealth became wider .
 We shall consider this again when we deal with Russian culture in the eighteenth century and indeed throughout imperial Russian history .
 A mixture of tongues, The language of France with that of Nizhnii Novgorod. French and Russian . French . Russian .
 On the one hand, the eighteenth century marked a decisive break with the Muscovite past . On the other hand, it was the beginning of the modern Russian revolution .
 Peter the Great's violent activity was perhaps most revolutionary in the domain of culture . Peter the 'Great' was perhaps the most violent person in the world . Peter's violent activities were perhaps the greatest in culture .
 Russia moved from a parochial, ecclesiastical, quasi-medieval civilization to the Age of Reason . All of a sudden, skipping entire epochs of scholasticism, Renaissance, and Reformation, Russia moved to Reason .
 Russian culture of the eighteenth century differed significantly from those of the following periods . On the other hand, the culture of Russian culture also differed significantly .
 From the beginning of Peter the Great's reforms to the death of Catherine the Great, the Russians applied themselves to the huge task of learning from the West . The Russians apply themselves to a huge and fundamental task, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The eighteenth century in Russia was an age of apprenticeship and imitation par excellence . It was the age of imitation par excellence for the Russian aristocracy .
 Peter the Great borrowed Western technology during the first decades of the century . Catherine the Great brought Western ideas into Russia in the course of the last third .
 By 1800, the process had spread to everything from artillery to philosophy . It gives an indication of the stages in the Russian absorption of Western culture .
 The culture of the Enlightenment, which Russia borrowed, had a number of salient characteristics . Russia borrowed the culture of Enlightenment from the Enlightenment in France .
 It represented notably the triumph of secularism and thus stood in sharp contrast to the Church-centered civilization of Muscovy . The secularism of the Roman Empire was a triumph for secularism .
 In Peter's time, visual allegories, often appearing in books, were common expressions of ideas . Peter's work was published in the early 1900s, and Peter's first published book series .
 This image suggests the high value placed on scientific and technical knowledge . The image suggests that scientific knowledge is valued highly .
 The name of God, in Hebrew, hovers above this temple to mathematics, with its feminine personification holding the key to many sciences, ranging from astronomy to fortifications . God's personification is key to astronomy, astronomy, fortifications and fortification .
 Instead of being central to Russian life and culture, it became, at least as far as the government and the educated public were concerned, it was a separate and rather neglected compartment .
 To follow George Florovsky and other specialists, one could detect little originality or growth . Moreover, within this compartment, the author of the book, "Little Originality"
 The secular philosophy that dominated the stage in eighteenth-century Europe emphasized reason, education, and the ability of enlightened men to advance the interests of society .
 The last point applied especially to rulers, who had the greatest means at their disposal to direct the life of a country . It was especially true for rulers, as they had the most means to direct their country .
 Enlightenment came to Russia through the educated gentry, says historian . Enlightenment came in through the gentry and government sponsorship .
 After the pioneer years of Peter the Great, with his motley group of foreign and Russian assistants, the gentry, as we know, increasingly asserted itself to control most phases of the development of the country .
 It became the civilization of an educated, aristocratic elite, with its salons and its knowledge of French . The civilization showed more preoccupation with an elegant literary style and proper manners than with philosophy or politics .
 This culture constituted the first phase of modern Russian intellectual and cultural history and the foundation for its subsequent development . Nonetheless, this culture was the first stage of Russian culture .
 Peter the Great began his work of educating the Russians . The glitter of the age of Catherine the Great was still far away when he began his education .
 Of necessity, his efforts were aimed in many directions and dealt with a variety of fundamental matters . Of necessity he aimed at many directions .
 As early as 1700 he arranged for publication of Russian books by a Dutch press . Several years later the publishing was transferred to Russia .
 Six hundred books published in the reign of the reformer have come down to our time . Six hundred different books have been published .
 In 1702 the first Russian newspaper, Vedomosti or News, began to be published, the monarch himself editing its first issue .
 Next Peter the Great took part in reforming the alphabet to produce what came to be known as the civil Russian alphabet . The civil alphabet is now known as 'civil Russian'
 The new alphabet represented a considerable simplification of the old Slavonic . Composed of Slavonic, Greek, and Latin letters, the new alphabet was created in 1903 . The alphabet was composed of letters from Slavonic and Greek .
 The old alphabet was allowed for Church books, but, following a decree in early 1710, all other works had to use the new system . All other works must now be written using the new alphabet .
 Peter the Great introduced Arabic numerals to replace the cumbersome Slavonic ones . Peter also introduced Arabic numbers to replace Slavs .
 Peter the Great sent, altogether, hundreds of young Russians to study abroad, and he opened schools of new types in Russia . Peter the . Great sent . altogether, . hundreds of . young Russians abroad, . he opened . schools of . new types .
 As early as 1701 he established in Moscow a School of Mathematical and Navigational Sciences . For example, he established a school of mathematical and navigational sciences .
 The school stressed the teaching of arithmetic, geometry, trigonometry, astronomy, astronomy and geography .
 Moscow received an artillery and an engineering academy of the same general pattern . Moscow, in turn, received artillery and engineering academies from Russia . Moscow received the same pattern as Moscow .
 Some other special schools, such as the so-called “admiralty’s and “mathematical” ones, also appeared in the course of the reign . Some of the special schools also appeared during the reign of the king .
 In 1716, the government opened twelve elementary “cypher’s schools in provincial towns . The government opened the schools in an attempt to develop a broader educational system .
 In 1706 a medical school with a student body of 50 began instruction in Moscow . In 1709 another medical school, this time with 30 students, started functioning in St. Petersburg . In St. Louis, the first medical school opened in 1709 .
 Peter I organized small classes to study languages of some non-Russian peoples within the empire . Peter I also organized classes on Chinese and Japanese and languages of non-Russians .
 Reformer tried to improve and modernize those of the Church . Reformer established state schools and tried to modernize the church .
 Education in Russia began to expand by means of private schools . Private schools began to appear in the course of his reign .
 Peter the Great's measures to promote enlightenment in Russia also included the founding of a museum of natural science and a large general library in St. Petersburg . Peter also founded a large library in the city of St. Vladimir .
 The Academy only came into being some months after Peter the Great’s death . It represented the realization of a major project of the reformer's last years . The Academy was the culmination of Peter's last year's work .
 The Academy had three departments, the mathematical, physical, and historical, as well as a section for the arts . The Academy was founded in 1903 and was named after its founder .
 The academicians gave instruction, and a high school was attached to the Academy to prepare students for this advanced education . The Academy was set up in the 1950s .
 Russia obtained Academy of Sciences before it acquired elementary schools . Peter the Great's reforms and role of the state in eighteenthcentury Russian culture are a significant comment .
 After the death of Peter the Great, there followed a certain decline in education in Russia . The death of the Great led to a decline in Russian education .
 Once the government relaxed its pressure, state schools tended to empty and educational schemes to collapse . State schools tend to empty after the government relaxes pressure on education .
 Church schools, which were much less dependent on the reformer, survived better . Church schools survived better than those of the reformers .
 The Russians were to produce many trained Russians, some of whom became prominent in a variety of activities in the eighteenth and subsequent centuries . Some of them were prominent in the 17th century and later generations .
 Church schools stood apart from the main course of education in Russia . On the whole, Church schools served Church needs, that is, the training of the clergy, and stood apart .
 With the rise of the gentry in the 17th century, exclusive gentry schools became increasingly important . Exhibitions of gentry school graduates were given certain privileges by the aristocracy .
 Peter the Great's artillery and engineering academies were restricted to members of the nobility . New kadet schools were opened under Empress Anne and her successors to prepare sons of the aristocracy for army officers .
 Home education, often by foreign tutors, also developed among the gentry . Home education was also developed in the early 1900s .
 In the education of the gentry much time was devoted to such subjects as proper bearing in society, fencing, and dancing, as well as to French and other foreign languages .
 As noted in the scheme mentioned earlier, Western manners and fashions came to occupy much of the attention of educated Russians . The scheme was part of a scheme to encourage Russians to adopt Western manners .
 The first Russian institution of higher learning was to be, all in all, the most important one in the history of the country, as well as a model for other universities . Promoted by Ivan Shuvalov and Mikhail Lomonosov .
 In a decade the number of professors about doubled, with Russians constituting approximately half of the total . Russians constitute approximately half the total of professors .
 Originally instruction took place in Latin; but in 1767 Russian began to be used in the university . In 1767, Russian was first used in instruction; now Russian is used .
 In 1756 the university started to publish a newspaper, the Moskovuskie Vedomosti or Moscow News . The university started publishing a newspaper in 1756 .
 The eighteenth century bequeathed to its successor the indispensable foundations for further development . Still, this field, as in so many others, is still being developed, as well as others .
 Catherine the Great's reign, or roughly the last third of the century, witnessed a remarkable growth and intensification of Russian cultural life . Catherine's reign was the most intense period of her reign and reigns .
 Catherine the Great's edict of 1783, licensing private publishing houses, contributed to the trend . Catherine the . Great's Edict of . 1783 . contributed to . the trend of publishing .
 It was the empress’s personal interest in the propagation of her views, together with the interests and needs of the growing layer of educated Russians, that led to the sudden first flowering of Russian journalism .
 By 1770 some eight periodicals entered the field to comment on the Russian and European scene, criticize the foibles of Russian society, and engage in lively debate with one another . Catherine the Great herself took an active part in the debate .
 Catherine II's reign saw the rise of the Free Economic Society in Russia . Catherine II ruled the country for more than 30 years . The Free Economic Societies were established in Catherine II II .
 Catherine’s sweeping ambition to transform society can be seen in education . Peter the Great's emphasis shifted from technical and professional orientation to a broadly liberal and humanist approach .
 Catherine shared the Enlightenment view that human beings, hence society, could be improved through education . Catherine believed that education could be beneficial to society .
 Her main collaborator, who shared her philosophical interests, was Ivan Betskoy . Her main work was to create a group of Russian philosophers and philosophers . Her work was published in 1989 and 1990 .
 This meant developing individuals both intellectually and morally, giving them knowledge and skills . It also meant fostering a sense of civic responsibility and a love of virtue . This is not only for children, but also for adults, it also meant developing moral and intellectual .
 Following Rousseau, they believed this required isolating students from their corrupting environments . They believed this needed isolation from students from corrupt environments .
 Catherine and Betskoy relied on select boarding schools, including Smolny school for noble girls, the first and the most famous state school for girls in the history of the Russian Empire . Catherine's mother and daughter were educated in the new state school . Catherine was educated at Smol
 Catherine and her collaborators could see the weakness and limitations of these efforts . Catherine's efforts are still needed to find a solution to the problems of climate change .
 The walls of boarding schools evidently could not keep out the cultural environment . Students often failed to become paragons of virtue and enlightenment . Also for the select few, even for the few, boarding schools could not .
 Other approaches, broader in scope but more limited in purpose, had to be tried . Therefore, other approaches to the problem were needed to be considered .
 The empress became especially interested in the system of popular education instituted in the Austrian Empire in 1774 . The system was explained to her by Emperor Joseph II himself .
 In 1782, following the Austrian monarch’s advice, she invited the Serbian educator Theodore Iankovich de Mirievo from Austria and formed a Commission for the Establishment of Popular Schools . The commission was formed following the advice of Austria's monarch .
 The Commission approved Iankovich de Mirievo's plan of a network of schools on three levels and of the programs for the schools . The Commission also approved the plans for the programs .
 Serbian educator then concentrated on translating and adapting Austrian textbooks for Russian schools . He then supervised the training of Russian teachers .
 Its first hundred students came from Church schools and graduated in 1786 . The school was founded in 1783 .
 The government opened twenty-six more advanced popular schools in the autumn of 1786 and 14 more in 1788 . Relying on its new teachers, the government opened .
 Catherine the Great deserves substantial credit in the field of education . Catherine's education was a major success in the education field .
 Her valuable measures ranged from pioneering in providing education for girls to the institution of the first significant teacher training program in Russia and the spreading of schools to many provinces .
 The government's limited efforts did not represent all of Russian education . Of course, the government did not succeed .
 Church schools continued, and education of the gentry advanced in the last third of the eighteenth century . The gentry continued their education in the 17th century .
 When not attending exclusive military schools, sons of the nobility received instruction at home by private teachers, augmented, with increasing frequency, by travel abroad .
 The French Revolution led to the exclusion of France from Russia from Russian itineraries . A large number of French émigrés served as tutors in Russia during the Revolution .
 The long-term effects of educating and Westernizing the elite were considerable . The long term effects of education and Westernization are still visible .
 A growing number of young educated Russians were a class of people imbued with advanced notions about society and the person, often burning to apply their ideas to Russia’s realities . First, they were people with advanced ideas about society, the person .
 We will see the consequences of this, neither intended nor desired by the state, in the early nineteenth century, especially. especially. The consequences of the state's actions will be seen in the future .
 Education and cultural reform were producing the first signs of a ‘public sphere’ in Russia, it has been argued . The public sphere is a social space between the state and private life, where individuals can come together to discuss matters of general concern .
 The history of education also reminds us of the glaring division of Russian society . The Russian education system is deeply divided by Russian society.
 The eighteenth-century cultural revolution left the majority of the population largely untouched . The 17th century cultural revolution was left largely untouched by the population .
 If the dominant cultural trend among the elite was increasing secularization, the culture of the peasantry was thoroughly imbued with the religious, the spiritual, and the mystical . The culture of peasants was deeply embedded with religious, spiritual and spiritual traditions .
 Although the evidence is scattered, important signs of connection and change can be seen . The evidence was scattered, but the evidence of change and change is scattered .
 Educated Russians in the late eighteenth century began collecting folklore as evidence of a timeless culture . The collection of folklore was collected by Russians in Russia in the 1800s .
 Historians like Marina Gromyko have shown peasants were not entirely isolated . But the research of historians has shown they were not isolated .
 Folklore included stories about contemporary wars and other events . Folklore, for example, included stories of contemporary wars, and others .
 Rumors about the monarchy circulated orally among peasants . The peasants were aware of the larger world and the power of a just monarch who would bring freedom to the people .
 Cheap, often garishly colored lubki, or popular prints, circulated in both cities and villages . Popular prints often illustrating folkloric themes, exotic events, or bawdy situations . These might be sold alongside printed religious images and texts .
 The adaptation of the Russian language to new needs in the eighteenth century constituted a major problem for Russian education, literature, and culture in general . In the 17th century, Russian education and culture was a major issue .
 It will be remembered that on the eve of Peter the Great's reforms Russian linguistic usage was in a state of transition as everyday Russian began to assert itself in literature at the expense of archaic, bookish, Slavonicized forms .
 This basic process continued in the eighteenth century, but it was complicated further by the mass intrusion of foreign words and expressions that came with Westernization and had to be dealt with somehow . This was the case in the 17th century .
 In the course of the century, the basic linguistic issues were resolved, and modern literary Russian emerged . Modern literary Russian was born in Russia .
 The battle of styles, although not entirely over by 1800, resulted in a definitive victory for the contemporary Russian over the Slavonicized . For the fluent over the formal, for the practical and the natural over the stilted and the artificial, the battle was over .
 Nikolai Karamzin, who wrote in the last decades of the eighteenth and the first of the nineteenth century, contributed heavily to the decision by effectively using the new style in his own works .
 As to foreign words and expressions, they were either rejected or absorbed into the Russian language . This led to a great increase in its vocabulary, leading to an increase in the vocabulary .
 The Russian linguistic evolution of the eighteenth century was remarkably successful can best be seen from the fact that the golden age of Russian literature, still the standard of linguistic and literary excellence, followed shortly after .
 The linguistic evolution was linked to a conscious preoccupation with language, to the first Russian grammars, dictionaries, and philological and literary treatises .
 These efforts, which were an aspect of Westernization, contributed to the establishment of modern Russian literary culture .
 Mikhail Lomonosov deserves special praise for the first effective Russian grammar, published in 1755, which proved highly influential . The first effective grammar was published in Russia in the year of 1755 .
 A rich dictionary composed by some fifty authors including almost every writer of note appeared in six volumes in 1789-94 . The dictionary was composed of almost fifty authors . It was published in 18th century .
 Theoretical discussion and experimentation by Vasilii-Trediakovsky, Lomonosov and others led to the creation of the now established system of modern Russian versification .
 Modern Russian literature must be dated from Peter the Great’s reforms, says Russian writer . Modern Russian Literature must have been written in Peter's first century, he says .
 The reign of the first emperor marked a sharp division in Russia's literary tradition . Russian literary tradition goes back to the Kievan age in the Lay of the Host of Igor and other works .
 Once Russia turned to the West, it joined the intellectual and literary world of Europe, which had little in common with that of Muscovy . Once Russia joined Europe, it had little to common with the intellectual world of the West . Russia's relationship with Europe has little to do with
 In fact, it became the pressing task of educated eighteenth-century Russians to introduce and develop in their homeland such major forms of Western literary expression as poetry, drama and the novel .
 The emergence of an original and highly creative Russian literature took time, and the slowness of this development was emphasized by the linguistic evolution of the language . Naturally, the emergence of a novel in Russia took time and took time .
 The century had to be primarily imitative and in a sense experimental . Only the last decades have been richer in creative talent than the last few decades .
 The pioneer work of eighteenth-century Russian writers made an important contribution to the establishment and development of modern Russian literature .
 Kantemir produced original works as well as translations, poetry and prose, satires, songs, songs and lyrical pieces, fables, and essays . He also produced satires and fables .
 In literature he is remembered especially for his odes, some of which are still considered classics of their kind . In particular they touch upon the vastness and glory of the universe .
 Alexander Sumarokov, 1718-77, has been honored as the father of Russian drama . He was a prolific and influential writer, and was honored for his work in Russia .
 Sumarokov was the first director of a permanent Russian theater . In addition to writing tragedies and comedies, he also wrote satires and poetry .
 Sumarokov wrote his plays in the pseudo-classical manner characteristic of the age . He often treated historical subjects, often treating historical subjects . The plays were published in the early 1900s .
 Nikolai Karamzin, who belongs to the nineteenth century as well as the eighteenth, won reputations in Russian letters . Two writers of the period, not to mention Nikolai .
 At his best Derzhavin produced superb poetry, both in his resounding odes and in some less-known lyrical pieces . Like most court poets, he wrote too much; yet at his best he produced superb odes .
 The poet was the first major Russian dramatist, a writer of comedies . He was minister of justice in the government of Alexander I Fonvizin, 1745-92 .
 The play achieves a great richness and realism in its depiction of provincial Russian gentry . Pseudo-classical in form and containing a number of artificial characters and contrived situations .
 The hero of the comedy is the lazy and unresponsive son who, despite his reluctance, in the changing conditions of Russian life has to submit to an elementary education . The doting, domineering, and obscurantist mother are apparently destined for immortality .
 In addition to The Minor, Fonvizin translated, adapted, or wrote other plays . The Brigadier, in which he ridiculed the excessive admiration of France in Russia . Also produced a series of satirical articles and critical letters .
 Classicism or neo-classicism represented the dominant trend in European literature of the eighteenth century . Other currents also came to the fore toward the end of that period .
 Russians eagerly translated, adapted, and assimilated Western originals . The Russians eagerly adapted and adapted Western originals into their own versions .
 Nikolai Karamzin, 1766-1826, can be called the founder of sentimentalism in Russian literature . He was born in Russia and died in 1826 .
 Letters of a Russian Traveler and Poor Liza marked the triumph of the new sensibility in Russia . Both appeared in the last decade of the century .
 Karamzin, it might be added, succeeded also as a publisher, and generally helped to raise the stature of the professional writer in Russia .
 Hans Rogger’s study of ‘national consciousness’ in eighteenth-century Russia shows a new interest in folklore, a concern with the history of the country, and an emphasis on things Russian as opposed to Western .
 History of ideas cannot be separated from literary history, least of all in the Russian setting . The history of ideas and literary history is inseparable from ideas, especially in Russia .
 This didactic tendency, highly characteristic of the Age of Reason, found special application in Russia, where so much had to be learned so fast . The didactic tendencies were characteristic of Russia, especially in the early 1900s .
 Kantemir, “the originator of modern Russian literature,” wrote satires by preference . His translations included Montesquieu’s Persian Letters .
 Satire remained a favorite genre among Russian writers of the eighteenth century . Satire was a popular genre among many Russian writers, including Fonvizin .
 The same satire, the same social criticism inspired journalism, is no clear line between the two fields . The same satirists and social critics have been writing for years, but no clear lines were clear .
 Russian writers and publicists inveighed against backwardness, boorishness, and corruption of their countrymen . They neglected no opportunity to turn them toward civilization and light, they said .
 At the same time they noticed that on occasion ‘the ungainly beasts” began to admire the West, in particular France, too much and to despise their own country . That in turn was satirized and denounced throughout the century, satirized .
 The spirit of criticism developed especially in the reign of Catherine the Great . It was aided by the sponsorship and example of the empress herself . Catherine's reign was particularly successful .
 "She gave, so to speak, official endorsement to the far-reaching critiques and views of the philosophes," she said .
 The Free Economic Society even awarded its first prize to a work advocating the abolition of serfdom . The society's first prize was awarded to an article advocating the abolishment of serfsdom .
 A certain kind of Russian Voltairianism emerged, combining admiration for the sage of Ferney with a skeptical attitude toward many aspects of Russian life . Ferney was a pioneer in Russia .
 Some historians dismiss Voltairianism as a superficial fashion, but it no doubt served for some Russians as a school of criticism . Although some historians dismiss it as superficial, some historians do not dismiss it .
 Freemasonry became another school of criticism and thought for the Russians, and a more complicated one, for it combined disparate doctrines and trends . Freemasonry was a model for the Russian Freemasonry .
 Russia came to Russia from the West, from Great Britain, Germany, Sweden, and France . It came from Russia, again from the west .
 The first fraternal lodges appeared at the time of Empress Elizabeth . The movement became prominent only in the reign of Catherine the Great .
 2,500 members of the Russian gentry, almost entirely from the gentry . Most of the members were from St. Petersburg, Moscow, and some provincial towns .
 Specialists distinguish two main trends within that movement in eighteenth-century Russia . Growing out of the double obligation all Freemasons were expected to assume .
 They engaged in education and publishing, establishing a private school and the first largescale program of publication in Russia outside of the government . They established the first large-scale program of publishing in Russia .
 They contributed to periodical literature and social criticism . They contributed heavily to the periodical .
 An etching based on the famous painting of 1797 by Levitsky, who also painted Catherine the Great . The etching is based on a copy of the painting of the same painting .
 The Great expressed contempt for the mysticism of the Freemasons, but, until the 1790s, she encouraged their social activism . Note the hand extended and mouth slightly parted as if in reasoned argument .
 Novikov established a private printing and publishing firm, edited and contributed essays to many journals, promoted the Russian book trade, and established the first series of children’s books in Russia .
 His early writings, which Catherine the Great admired, were mainly gentle, humorous satires . They were mainly against landlords who felt vain pride in their noble rank but contributed little to the common good .
 His later writings were weighty and biting essays on moral and ethical problems . He later wrote a book of essays that dealt with moral, ethical issues .
 He chastised “weakness, imperfection, and vice” in Russian life . He appealed to society to recognize that man is not a “a rotten and putrid vessel of original sin” (in the language of the traditional Church) but the majesty of God
 Few in the eighteenth century dared challenge the institution in Russia . The institution was both so well accepted and so fundamental to Russian life .
 Numerous writers criticized individual excesses of serfdom, such as cruelty of one master or wastefulness of another . But they did not assail the system itself .
 Radishchev’s attack on serfdom broke through the veneer of cultural progressivism and well-being typical of the reign of Catherine the Great . It was the occasion for a sharp break between the government and critical intellectuals .
 In particular, he experienced the impact of Rousseau, Mably and Mably, and the entire egalitarian, and generally more radical, tendency of the later Enlightenment .
 Radishchev left his mark on Russian history with the publication in 1790 of his stunning Journey from Petersburg to Moscow . A member of the gentry, an official, and a writer of some distinction, he was a Russian aristocrat .
 Following the first section called “the departure,” twenty-odd chapters of that work, named after wayside stations, depicted specific and varied horrors of serfdom .
 The panorama included such scenes as serfs working on a Sunday, because they could till their own land only on that day . The rest of the week was devoted to the barshchina, and the forced arrangement of marriages by an overly zealous master .
 Radishchev combined his explicit denunciation of serfdom with a comprehensive philosophical, social, political, and economic outlook, reflected in the Journey and in other writings .
 He assailed Russian despotism and administrative corruption . He suggested instead of a republic with full liberties for the individual .
 And he actually drew up a plan for serf emancipation and an accompanying land settlement . The plan was based on a plan to emancipate serfers and set up a land settlement for the poor .
 Radishchev’s philippic resulted in his being sentenced to death, changed fortunately to ten-year imprisonment in Siberia . The death sentence was changed to ten years in Siberia, but was not life imprisonment .
 Catherine the Great finally turned against the ideas of the Enlightenment, which she had done so much to promote . Frightened by the French Revolution, she turned against ideas of Enlightenment . The French Revolution was the first time she had turned against Enlightenment ideas .
 Novikov and his fellow Masons in Moscow also suffered . In 1792, she had him arrested as a “subversive” and sentenced without trial to fifteen years’ imprisonment in the Schlisselberg fortress .
 Their educational and publishing work came to an abrupt end after they moved to St. Petersburg, Russia .
 Edicts against travel and other contacts with the revolutionary West reached absurd proportions in Paul’s reign . Travel bans also reached absurd levels in Paul's reign .
 The import of the issue proved even more profound than a reaction to the French Revolution, it has been revealed .
 Radishchev’s Journey meant the appearance of a radical intellectual protest in Russia . It was a foretaste of the radical intelligentsia, a precursor to the radical left .
 secular philosophy, literary debates, and social criticism stood in the center of the Enlightenment . Other aspects of culture also developed at that time, including culture .
 The one great Russian scientist of the eighteenth century appeared quite early on the scene . His achievements were rarely if ever to be matched in the entire annals of science in Russia . But—to underline the danger of generalizations and schemes—the danger of . generalizations .
 Lomonosov, 1711-65, was a pioneer grammarian, an important literary scholar and a gifted poet . He was also a chemist, a physicist, an astronomer, a meteorologist, a geologist, and a mineralogist, a metallurgist
 Pushkin was to refer to him, appropriately, as the first Russian university . Pushkin referred to him as the "first Russian university" Pushkin later referred to Pushkin as a poet .
 In considering the work of Lomonosov, we should remember that he lived before the time of extreme scientific specialization, when a single mind still could master many disciplines, and indeed advance them . In considering his work, we must remember that we should also remember that .
 Lomonosov represented, in other words, the Russian counterpart of the great encyclopedic scholars of the West . He represented Russia's Russian counterpart to the West's great encyclopaedaedic scholars .
 Lomonosov probably did his best work in chemistry, physics, and the border area between these two sciences . He did the best work between chemistry and physics in his life .
 In 1751, he developed and in 1751 taught the first course of physical chemistry in the world . In 1752, he published a textbook in that field .
 Russian scientist's most outstanding achievements included the discovery of the law of the preservation of matter and of energy long before Lavoisier . He also discovered atmosphere on Venus and established the nature and composition of crystals, charcoal, and black earth .
 Lomonosov’s scientific work proved far ahead of his time, especially in Russia, where it found no followers and was fully rediscovered only by Vasilii Menshutkin and other twentieth-century scholars . The work was rediscovered in Russia only by Mensh
 Lomonosov remained essentially an isolated individual . The eighteenth century was also noteworthy in Russian history for large-scale, organized scientific effort .
 Expeditionary expeditions were made to explore, explore, or study distant areas of the empire and sometimes neighboring seas and territories .
 Geography, geology, mineralogy, botany, zoology, ethnography, and ethnography profited from these well-thought-out and daring undertakings . Geography and geology were among the subjects profiting from these projects .
 Peter the Great's expeditions led to important results in the first half of the century . The expeditions were started by the Great in 17th century .
 Numerous expeditions, often of great scholarly value, followed later in the century . Many of these expeditions were made in the early 1900s .
 The Russians applied themselves to what can be called the social sciences and the humanities . The Russians also applied to the humanities and social sciences, including the humanities, in their work .
 Russia profited throughout the century from the presence of foreign scholars, such as the outstanding German historian August-Ludwig von Schlézer . The study of history too developed quickly in Russia, with the Russians profiting from foreign scholars .
 Eighteenthcentury Russian historians included Vasilii Tatishchev, Mikhail Shcherbatov and Ivan Boltin . Prince Mikhail Shchebatov argued the case for the rights of the gentry .
 Russian historians have tended to emphasize the role of the monarch and the state . From the time of Tatishchev, Russian historians tend to emphasize monarchs and state .
 Architecture flourished in eighteenth-century Russia because of the interest and liberality of Peter the Great and his successors . Architecture flourished because of Peter's interest, liberality and interest in the art .
 Catherine the Great proved a passionate builder, and the same was true of Paul, as well as of Alexander I and Nicholas I in the nineteenth century . Catherine the . Great proved to be a passionate .
 St. Petersburg rose from the swamps to become one of the truly beautiful and impressive cities of the world . The best monument of this imperial devotion to architecture remains the best monument .
 Baroque at the beginning of the century and neo-classical style . The Winter Palace in St. Louis was built in the 1920s and 1930s .
 Commissioned by Elizabeth, although only completed after her death, and designed by Rastrelli, the palace was a residence of the Russian emperors and empresses until 1917 revolution .
 The Hermitage museum was established by Catherine the Great as a wing of the palace . It was then opened to the public as part of the museum, originally established by the Great .
 Count Bartolomeo Rastrelli came as a boy from Italy to Russia, when his sculptor father was invited by Peter the Great . He designed the Winter Palace and the Smolny Institute in St. Petersburg . The Romanovs included a number of gifted foreigners,
 St. Petersburg and the great palace in Tsarskoe Selo, together with many other buildings, are among the most famous buildings in Russia .
 Some excellent Russian architects, such as Vasilii Bazhenov and Matvei Kazakov, emerged in the second half of the century . Some of the best architects of the 20th century emerged in Russia .
 In the 1750s, the art section of the Academy of Sciences became an independent Academy of Arts . The Academy of Art was founded in 1770s .
 Dmitrii Levitsky, 1735-1822, was a Ukrainian whose father was a priest and religious artist . In the field of painting, portrait painting fared best, as exemplified by the work of Levitski, a Ukrainian .
 Fedot Shubin, 1740-1805, like Lomonosov a peasant from the extreme north, was the first important Russian sculptor .
 He was trained in his family of bone carvers . He went on to obtain the best artistic education available in St. Louis .
 The world's best soccer stars have won high recognition abroad as well as at home . They have won titles in Russia, St. Petersburg, Italy and France .
 The eighteenth century also witnessed the appearance in Russia of modern music, notably the opera, as well as ballet and the theater . Modern music was also seen in Russia as a popular form of music .
 "Imitation and apprenticeship developed into mastery and, with time, originality," he says . But, as in so much, imitation and apprentice development became more and more .
 Peter the Great invited German actors and later sovereigns sponsored French and Italian troupes . A native Russian theater became established only in the 1750s .
 Its creator was a merchant's son, Fedor Volkov, who organized a successful theater in Iaroslavl on the Volga . He was then requested to do the same in the capital .
 Russia possessed several public theaters, a theatrical school, and a periodical, The Russian Theater, which began to appear in 1786 . By the end of the century Russia had several theaters and a theater school .
 Theater had won popularity among the great landlords, who maintained some fifteen private theaters in Moscow alone . Theater had become popular with the landlords of the city .
 Recent scholars have argued that theater played a key part in the civilizing mission of the Russian Enlightenment . Theater audiences were one of the key new sites of nongovernmental civic activity and sociability in Russia .
 There were, of course, continuities, not least the continuing influence of religious belief . There were also a continuing influence on religious belief.
 The cultural world of the common people had changed little, a bourgeoisie was still missing, and the few dissenting voices could be easily silenced, says the author of the book .
 Many Russians worried about the wholesale borrowing from the West . Like Karamzin, many Russians worried that this wholesale borrowing is from the west .
 Wounded national pride, although common, is an unfortunate and usually unjustified sentiment . National pride is a common sentiment, but it is unfortunate and often unjustified .
 No eighteenth-century writers or artists are much known outside Russia, and not primarily because of unfair neglect . Russia’s famous contributions to world culture in the nineteenth century in the 19th century .
 Russians borrowed from the West, but they also assimilated, adapted, and developed Western culture . More to the point, Russians borrowed, adapted and developed West culture . Russians borrowed and adapted, but also adapted, to the West .
 Sources of a heritage should be important to the historian, but how it was used may well be considered still more significant . The sources of a historical source should be considered important to historians .
 We have seen something of that use in this chapter and shall see much more of it in our subsequent discussions of Russian culture . We have also seen some use of this use of Russian language .
 We must show them that we are not bears, says Nikolas KARAMZin . We must also show ourselves that we're not bears. We must be strong enough to live in Russia, he says . We are not bear bears, he adds .
 Peter the Great's reign of Alexander I is one of the two centuries which divide Russia from the Bolshevik revolution . Alexander I reigns during the period when the Russian state was liberalized .
 The accession of Alexander I to the throne was met with jubilation and high hopes . Alexander I was the son of Alexander III, who was assassinated by his father . He was the youngest son to be king of the Roman Empire .
 His youth, enlightened education, and first statements as ruler seemed to justify these expectations . But his youth and enlightened education have not justified these expectations, he said .
 He was hailed as a liberal by many writers, Thomas Jefferson among them, and denounced as a reactionary by numerous others . Lord Byron, Lord Byron and Lord Byron denounced him as reactionary .
 Alexander I was also a drill sergeant and a parade ground enthusiast . He was often called an ‘angel’, an epithet frequently applied to Alexander I . Alexander I, who died in 1877, was also an enthusiast of the parade ground .
 Some accounts see continual vacillation; others a shift from liberalism to reaction between the beginning and end of his reign . Others see a shift between liberalism and reaction . Some accounts say he was a liberal monarch .
 Alexander may have belonged with those exceedingly sensitive, charming, and restless individuals whose lives display a constant irritation, search, and disappointment . Though psychology is a hazardous terrain for the historian, it can be observed that Alexander may belong to those who live with constant irritation .
 Alexander I’s inability to come to terms with himself and to pursue a steady course, it has been argued, explains his actions better than do allegations of cynicism or Machiavellianism . Alexander I's inability to deal with himself, it is argued, is better than allegations
 Alexander's difficult childhood and boyhood included his ambiguous relations with his father, Paul, and his grandmother, Catherine the Great, who hated each other . There was, of course, a difficult childhood .
 Alexander spent more time with Catherine than with his parents . He learned early the arts of flattery, dissimulation, and hypocrisy, or so so .
 The empress took a great liking to Alexander from the very beginning and apparently wanted to make him her successor, bypassing Paul . Alexander was the son of Alexander Alexander, who was born in Russia .
 Education also influenced the future emperor's character, views, and activities . Emperor's education also influenced his character and views .
 Catherine the Great took a personal interest in Alexander the Great's upbringing . Alexander was guided by the ideas of the Enlightenment . Alexander's upbringing was inspired by ideas of Enlightenment .
 Catherine personally instructed him in the principles that should define an ideal monarch, including Stoic self-control to enable the higher voice of reason to be heard, compassion and accessibility .
 Catherine chose a tutor for the grand duke, a professed republican named Frédéric-César de La Harpe . He showed Alexander classical examples of the virtuous ruler, guided by reason, working for the good of his people . The lessons were elaborated by the
 La Harpe had Alexander read all of the great books of the Enlightenment, both classical and modern, and histories of every European nation and of the new republic of the U.S.
 Catherine also arranged for a religion tutor who advocated a personal faith that focused on the search for God's truth and the belief that God’s main desire was for the happiness of all humanity .
 The problem, historians have argued, is that La Harpe’s teaching had little in common with Russian reality .
 Alexander I's one-sided education is thought to have led him to a one-side education . Alexander I was one of the most successful monarchs of his time . Some scholars believe the contrast between theory and practice stemmed from this one-handed education .
 Alexander found himself in a precarious position during Paul's reign, especially because Paul thought of divorcing his wife and disinheriting Alexander and his other sons by her . Alexander found his position in jeopardy during his reign .
 The young grand duke almost certainly knew of the conspiracy against his father, but the murder of Emperor Paul was apparently a surprise and a shock . Emperor Paul's death was a shock and a surprise to his son .
 Certain critics attribute Alexander I's strong feeling of guilt and his later mysticism and lack of balance to the tragedy of his accession . Alexander I was one of the most powerful monarchs in Europe .
 Alexander's reign can also be explained in terms of history and political culture . Alexander's relationship with the Roman Empire is also explained by history and culture .
 We have already often seen the tension between the ideal of a tsar as loving, benevolent, and devoted to the good of Russia . The ideal of the tsar is awesome and almighty in his power, and that of the Russian tsar .
 In practice, as we have often seen and will see again, these principles can be at odds . In practice it can be difficult to say whether or not it's a good idea to say yes .
 Some specialists insist that Alexander I escaped from the throne to live in Siberia as a saintly hermit Theodore, or Fedor, Kuzmich .
 Based on circumstantial evidence as the emperor's constant longing to shed burdens of his office, and a court physician's refusal to sign the death warrant, this supposition needs further proof, although it cannot be entirely dismissed .
 Suicide might offer another explanation for a certain strangeness and confusion associated with the sovereign’s death .
 Alexander I himself, on coming the throne, gave good cause for the hope among educated Russians that he would rule in the spirit of the Enlightenment . Alexander I was the first Russian monarch to rule in a spirit of Enlightenment .
 An amnesty restored to their former positions up to 12,000 men dismissed by Paul . Restrictions on travel abroad and on the entry into Russia of foreigners were abrogated . The censorship was relaxed and private publishing houses were again allowed to open .
 These welcome measures marked at best only the beginning of a liberal program . But, of course, these welcome measures are not the end of the liberal program, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The key issues to be faced included serfdom and autocracy, together with the general backwardness of the country and the inadequacy and corruption of its administrative apparatus . The key issue is to face is the general backwardness and corruption in the country .
 Alexander's reign was a period of reform, but little was actually accomplished . Alexander was the first king of the Roman Empire . Alexander died in 1877, but his reign was the last of his reign .
 On the crowned column is the word “Law.” was willing to consider limiting autocracy and abolishing serfdom . The word ‘law.’ is written in the crown of the crown .
 Alexander I reigns from 1801 to 1805 and from 1807 to 1812, each, incidentally, followed by war with France . It is generally said that there were two ‘liberal’ periods in the reign of Alexander I, from 1803 to 1806 .
 The first period of reform, following immediately upon Alexander I's acquisition of the crown, was the most far-ranging in purpose and the most hopeful . Alexander I was the first king to take over the throne .
 The new emperor decided to transform Russia with the help of four young, cultivated, intelligent, and liberal friends, the so-called Unofficial Committee . The committee is a group of young people, cultivated and intelligent, intelligent .
 The members of the committee, Nikolai Novosiltsev, Count Pavel Stroganov, Count Viktor Kochubey, and Polish patriot Prince Adam Czartoryski, reflected the enlightened opinion of the period .
 Emperor spoke of them jokingly as his “Committee of Public Safety,” a reference to the French Revolution that would have made his predecessors shudder . The emperor spoke of the committee jokingly, as his "Committee"
 He met with the committee informally and frequently, often daily over coffee, over coffee .
 At first Alexander I intended to abolish autocracy and serfdom, says Stroganov . The Unofficial Committee's notes on meetings suggest that at first, Alexander I wanted autocracy . Strogenov’s notes on the meetings are included in his notes .
 "The dangers and difficulties associated with these issues, as well as the unpreparedness for reform of the administration and the mass of people," quickly became apparent . However, the dangers of these issues were quickly becoming apparent .
 Serfdom represented, so to speak, the greatest single interest in the empire . Its repeal was bound to affect the entire Russian society, in particular the extremely important gentry class . The repeal of serfdom in Russia would have affected the entire society .
 As to autocracy, the emperor himself, although he had spoken of a republic, hesitated in practice to accept any diminution of his authority . The emperor was reluctant to accept a diminution .
 Characteristically, he became disillusioned and impatient with the proceedings and called the Unofficial Committee together less and less frequently . Characteristically he became impatient and disillusioned .
 The proclamation of a Russian charter of rights failed to be translated into practice . Even more limited projects such as the proclamation of the Russian Charter of Rights .
 Recent scholars have argued that Alexander I may never have seriously contemplated abolishing autocracy . In fact, recent scholars argue, Alexander I never considered abolishing an autocratic state .
 Yes, he spoke often of a “constitution,” but the question is how he understood this . The question is whether he understood it, he says .
 Alexander I probably did not mean limiting the power of the executive through a democratic balance of power . As Marc Raeff and other historians have argued, Alexander I, and at least most of his advisors, probably didn't mean limiting executive power .
 He thought of a constitution as primarily bringing an orderly system of administration and law, free of arbitrariness and willful caprice . Rather, as elsewhere in Europe at the time, he thought of the constitution as a system of admin and law . The constitution was enhanced perhaps by representation from
 The ideal was a Rechtsstaat, a state based on “law,” which meant a strong central government based on rationalized written procedures and clear and rational division of functions . In a word, the ideal state of Germany was based on "law," which meant
 Alexander believed in the necessity of a strong and rational central state that could guarantee order and happiness and be a dynamic force for change . In other words, like Peter the Great and Catherine the Great, he said .
 In this view, his jealous protection of his prerogatives as an autocrat can be seen as neither hypocrisy nor vacillation but as the reflection of a certain philosophy of politics .
 Alexander's first years of Alexander’s reign witnessed the enactment of some important specific measures . No great reforms ever materialized from all these discussions . Alexander's reign was the first year of his reign in which he ruled the Persian Empire .
 Peter the Great's colleges were gradually replaced in 1802 and subsequent years by ministries, with a single minister in charge of each . The colleges had a checkered and generally unhappy history .
 The ministry of commerce was abolished, and the ministry of police appeared . Later the ministry was abolished and police were created .
 Right to own estates was extended from the gentry to other free Russians in 1801 . In 1801, the right to own a Russian estate was extended to all free Russians .
 In 1803 the so-called “law concerning the free agriculturists” went into effect . The law was passed in 1803 in France .
 It provided for voluntary emancipation of the serfs by their masters, assuring that the emancipated serfs would be given land . It also established regulations and courts to secure the observance of all provisions, including land .
 The newly emancipated serfs were to receive in many respects the status of state peasants, but, by contrast with the latter, they were to enjoy stronger property rights and exemption from certain obligations . The newly freed serfs would be exempt from certain duties .
 The monarch and his Unofficial Committee examined the condition of the country . Russian backwardness and ignorance became strikingly apparent to the monarch .
 Education, therefore, received a high priority in the official plans and activities of the first years of the reign . Education was therefore a priority .
 "Serfdom and autocracy" did not present quite the dangers and obstacles associated with serfdom, autocracy . Fortunately too this effort didn't present quite as many obstacles that were associated with the issues .
 Alexander I's establishment of institutions of learning and his entire school policy were distinctly liberal for his time . Education in Russia during the first half of the nineteenth century will be discussed in a later chapter, but it should be noted .
 They have been called the best fruits of the monarch’s usually hesitant and brittle liberalism . Indeed, they have been compared to the best fruit of his usually hesitant, brittle liberalism. The monarch's usually hesitant liberalism.
 The second period of reform in Alexander I's reign, 1807-12, corresponded to the French alliance and was dominated by the emperor's most remarkable assistant, Mikhail Speransky . The emperor's second period in his reign, the second period, was the reign of Mikhail S
 In contrast to the members of the Unofficial Committee as well as to most other associates of the sovereign, he came from poor village clergy .
 It was Speransky’s intelligence, ability to work, and outstanding administrative capacity that made him for a time Alexander I's prime minister in fact, if not in name .
 Speransky sought to establish in Russia a strong monarchy firmly based on law and legal procedure, experts say . As most specialists believe, that unusual statesman sought in Russia to establish strong monarchy .
 Speransky found his inspiration in the vision of a Rechtsstaat, not in advanced liberal or radical schemes . In other words, Speranks was inspired by the vision he found in Germany . Sperkins: "Speransky's inspiration was to find a Re
 In Russian conditions Speransky’s views were certainly liberal, as his contemporaries fully realized . In Russia, he wrote: “In Russian conditions, as well as in his contemporaries, he was certainly liberal .
 They could have been developed more liberally, if the opportunities had presented themselves . Furthermore, they could have developed more freely, if they had been developed .
 In 1809, at the emperor's request, Speransky submitted to him a thorough proposal for a constitution . The proposal was rejected by the emperor at the request of him .
 Those belonging to the middle group received general civil rights and political rights when they could meet the property requirement . Those who did not meet property requirement received civil rights, political rights .
 The working people too obtained general civil rights, but they clearly did not own enough to participate in politics . "The working people ... didn't own enough of a place in politics," she says .
 The state duma, the most intriguing part of the system, showed the statesman’s caution, for in addition to the property restriction imposed on its electorate, it depended on a sequence of indirect elections . Speransky's system showed the state's caution .
 The assemblies of the volosti elected the district assemblymen, provincial assemblymen and the state duma, or national assembly . The assemblymen elected the members of the national assembly, who are elected by the state legislature .
 The activities of the state duma were apparently to be rather narrowly restricted . Also the activities were to be limited to just a small number of people .
 The state duma did provide for popular participation in the legislative process . But, on the other hand, it did provide a chance to change the law, says Duma .
 Speransky’s insistence on the division of functions, strict legality, and certain other provisions such as the popular election of judges, if successfully applied, would have in time transformed Russia . That, together with Speranks’ insistence on . the division . of functions and
 Speransky’s fourfold proposal of local self-government and a national legislative assembly represented a farsighted outline of the Russian future .
 Many specialists say this is a classic example of too little and too late . That future, however, took extremely long to materialize, offering little and little hope .
 Russia received district and provincial self-government by the so-called zemstvo reform of 1864 . The Duma, a national legislature, in 1905-6; and volost self-governorship in 1917 .
 In 1809 and the years following, Alexander I failed to implement Speransky’s proposal . Alexander I did not implement the proposal in 1809 or 1809 .
 The statesman’s fall from power in 1812 resulted from the opposition of officialdom and the gentry evoked by his measures and projects in administration and finance . Also from the break with Napoleon, Speransky having been branded a Francophile .
 The second liberal period of Alexander I's reign, then, like the first, produced no basic changes in Russia . Alexander I was the first Russian monarch to have a liberal regime .
 Like the first, the second liberal period led to some significant legislation of a more limited nature . Yet, again like the first period, it led to more limited legislation . The second period was the first liberal period in Britain .
 Alexander I created the Council of State modeled after Napoleon’s Conseil d’Etat, with Speransky attached to it as the Secretary of State . Alexander I was the only part of the statesman's plan that the monarch translated into practice .
 This body of experts appointed by the sovereign to help him with the legislative work in no way limited the principle of autocracy . The Council tended to be extremely conservative, and was extremely conservative .
 Speransky: "It clearly reflected the emphasis on legality, competence, and correct procedure" Still, it clearly reflects the emphasis of legality and competence so dear to Speranks .
 Speransky also reorganized the ministries and added two special agencies to the executive . One for supervision of government finance, the other for the development of transport .
 A system of annual budgets was instituted, and other financial measures were proposed and in part adopted . A system was instituted in the 1930s .
 Speransky did yeoman’s service in strengthening Russian bureaucracy . He introduced something in the nature of a civil service examination to emphasize merit and efficient organization .
 Speransky’s constitutional reform project represented the most outstanding but not the only such plan to come out of government circles in the reign of Alexander I . One other should be noted here, that of Novosiltsev. The constitutional reform plan was also noted .
 Novosiltsev’s Constitutional Charter of the Russian Empire emphasized very heavily the position and authority of the sovereign . The Charter bore strong resemblance to Speransky's scheme in its stress on legality and rights .
 The monarch accepted the plan, but proceeded to implement it in small part . Furthermore, the monarch not only graciously accepted it, but also implemented it .
 Novosiltsev created as a model one of the twelve units proposed by Novosiltssev . Namely, by combining several provinces, he created a model of the 12 .
 Only after Alexander I's death in 1825 was Novosiltsev’s scheme completely abandoned . The old system of administration was re-established in the experimental provinces .
 Alexander I's preoccupation with diplomacy and war, especially the difficult, even cataclysmic, wars against Napoleon . One explanation for the failure of reform is that he was preoccupying himself with war .
 Alexander's reign began with declarations of peaceful intentions and a certain isolationism . Alexander was the first king of Alexander III, who ruled the kingdom of Alexander II . Alexander died at the age of 50 in 1881 . Alexander III was the last king of the Roman Empire .
 Around 1805, an isolationist policy gave way to an activist policy, based on the assumption that Russia’s strategic advantages gave it the responsibility to lead the continent to peace, which was threatened by French expansionism . Alexander confessed some regret over the partition of Poland and hope it
 After succeeding Paul, who had both fought France and later joined it against Great Britain, the new emperor proclaimed a policy of neutrality . The new emperor declared himself to be neutral .
 Economic ties with Great Britain and traditional friendship with Austria and Great Britain, together with the equally traditional hostility to France, contributed to the decision . Russia's economic ties with Britain and Austria also contributed to Russia's decision .
 Alexander I came early to consider Napoleon as a menace to Europe, all the more so because the Russian sovereign had his own vision of a new European order .
 An outline of the subsequent Holy Alliance and concert of Europe, without religious coloration, can be found in the instructions issued in 1804 to the Russian envoy in Great Britain .
 The War of the Third Coalition broke out in 1805 when Austria, Russia, and Sweden joined Great Britain against France and its ally, Spain . Great Britain won the war against Spain, France and Spain .
 The combined Austrian and Russian armies suffered a crushing defeat at the hands of Napoleon on December 2, 1805, at Austerlitz . Napoleon defeated the combined Austrian, Russian armies in the battle .
 Austria was knocked out of the war, but the Russians continued to fight . In 1806 even obtained a new ally, Prussia . The Russians continued their fight against Austria .
 The French armies destroyed Prussian forces in the battles of Jena and Auerstadt . But the Russians could not destroy the Russians, and finally succeeded in inflicting a major defeat on them at Friedland .
 The treaties of Tilsit between France and Russia and France and Prussia followed early in July 1807 . The treaties were signed by France, Russia, Prussia and France .
 The Franco-Prussian settlement reduced Prussia to a second-rate power . Prussia was saved from complete destruction by the insistence of the Russian sovereign .
 Alexander I had to accept Napoleon’s redrawing of the map of Europe . Russia emerged as the hegemon of much of eastern Europe and the only major power on the continent other than France .
 The temporary settlement with France allowed the Russians to fight several other opponents and expand the boundaries of the empire in the first half of Alexander’s reign . It was the temporary settlement that allowed them to fight other opponents .
 The Georgians were hard-pressed by their Muslim neighbors, the Persians and the Turks . They had repeatedly asked and occasionally received Russian aid from Russia .
 Russian expansion represented the logical culmination of a process, especially as Iran and the Ottoman Empire weakened . Russia's expansion was the result of the collapse of the Ottoman empire and the loss of Iran .
 Russian view at the time that this was a voluntary entry into the empire is consistent with the facts . Georgian disillusionment with Russian rule would later develop, but the official Russian view was consistent .
 This also marked the first step in the extension of Russian imperial authority across the great Caucasian mountain range . The first step was to extend the Russian imperial control of the Caucasus .
 In response, Britain and France began to view Russia as a colonial rival . In response to this, Russia began to be viewed as an imperial rival .
 As expected, the annexation of Georgia by Russia led to the Russo-Persian war, fought from 1804 to 1813 . The war was fought between Russia and the Persian Empire .
 The Russians proved victorious, and by the Treaty of Gulistan Persia had to recognize Russian rule in Georgia and cede to its northern neighbor the areas of Daghestan and Shemakha in the Caucasus .
 The annexation of Georgia also served as one of the causes of the RussoTurkish war that lasted from 1806 to 1812 . Georgia's annexation of the Crimean Peninsula was also the cause of the war .
 Russian troops, this time led by Kutuzov, scored a number of successes . The Russian troops were able to defeat the Soviet Union forces in the Second World War .
 The Treaty of Bucharest was hastily concluded by Kutuzov on the eve of Napoleon’s invasion of Russia . It added Bessarabia and a strip on the eastern coast of the Black Sea to the empire of the Romanovs . It also granted Russia extensive rights
 In 1808-9 Alexander I fought and defeated Sweden, with the result that the Peace of Frederikshamn gave Finland to Russia .
 Finland became an autonomous grand duchy with the Russian emperor as its grand duke . Finland became a Russian-controlled state of Finland in 1881 .
 Alexander’s reign also witnessed a continuation of Russian expansion in North America, which had started in Alaska in the late eighteenth century . Alexander's first half of Alexander's reign also saw the continuation of his expansion in the region .
 New forts were built not only in Alaska but also in northern California, where Fort Ross was erected in 1812 . Fort Ross is one of the most famous forts in the world .
 The agreement that the two emperors reached in Tilsit in 1807, and which was renewed at their meeting in Erfurt in 1808, failed in the long run to satisfy either side .
 The Russians resented Napoleon’s domination of the continent, his disregard of Russian interests, and, in particular, the obligation to participate in the so-called continental blockade . The Russians were forced to accept it because of their military defeat, and resented it .
 The blockade was meant to eliminate all commerce between Great Britain and other European countries and to strangle the British economy . It actually helped Russian manufactures, especially in the textile industry, by excluding British competition .
 Russian exporters and thus the powerful landlord class were hurt by the crash . But it did hurt Russia's exporters, and thus its landlord class . It did hurt the Russian exporter but did not hurt the landlord class.
 Russian military reverses at the hands of the French cried for revenge, especially because they came after a century of almost uninterrupted Russian victories . The French came to terms with the Russians in the early 1800s .
 Napoleon and his lieutenants came to regard Russia as an unreliable partner . Napoleon regarded Russia as the last major obstacle to their complete domination of the continent .
 Tensions and crises multiplied, involving a mix of traditional competition between state powers and newer elements of imperial and colonial rivalry . Tensions were high in the early 1930s and 1930s, when tensions were high .
 The French protested the Russian participation in Napoleon's war against Austria in 1809 . Alexander I's failure, from 1810 on, to observe the continental blockade was a major problem .
 Napoleon's political rearrangement of central and eastern Europe also provoked Russian hostility . Napoleon’s political reorganisation of central . and . eastern Europe provoked . Russian hostility.
 Duchy of Oldenburg was part of the rearrangement of Germany . The Russian sovereign was a close relative of the duke, who was close to him .
 In 1809, West Galicia was added to the Duchy of Warsaw, a state created by Napoleon from Prussian Poland . Russia added the region in 1809 after the Treaty of Schénbrunn .
 This change appeared to threaten in turn Russia's hold on the vast lands that it had acquired in the partitions of Poland . Russia had acquired vast lands in the partitioned Poland in order to gain control of the region .
 Napoleon invaded Russia in June 1812, having made the necessary diplomatic and military preparations, he invaded Russia . Napoleon made the decision to invade Russia in 1812 .
 Russia had just succeeded in making peace with Turkey, and it had acquired active allies in Sweden and Great Britain . Russia had already made peace with the Turks .
 Scholars continue to debate the exact size of the opposing armies, but none doubt the overwhelming size . The French invasion force was overwhelming, and the French invasion was overwhelming .
 Napoleon crossed the Nieman River into Russia with from 450,000 to 600,000 troops to face perhaps 200,000 Russian soldiers and cossacks . Napoleon's army grew with reinforcements to no more than 400,000 in Russia .
 The Russian force was divided into two separate armies, one commanded by Prince Michael Barclay de Tolly and the other by Prince Peter Bagration . The Russian forces were divided into separate armies and commanded by two princes .
 Napoleon’s army had the reputation of invincibility and what was considered to be an incomparably able leadership . Napoleon's army was considered the most powerful in the world .
 Napoleon's Grande Armée contained a surprisingly small proportion of veterans . Napoleon’s Grand Armée was a surprisingly large proportion of his troops . Napoleon was Napoleon's first president .
 Only the Poles, who fought for a great independent Poland, acquitted themselves with distinction . Frenchmen constituted less than half of it, while of the allied troops only the Poles fought for Poland .
 With the return of the Russian forces from the Turkish front, the arrival of other Russian reinforcements, and the extension of French lines of communication which had to be protected, the French advantage of greater numbers was much reduced .
 Napoleon's expectations that their early defeats would force the Russians to sue for peace proved groundless . Napoleon's hopes that the Russians would sue him for peace were false . Napoleon hoped that the defeat would force him to make peace with Russia .
 An early and exceptionally cold winter contributed its share to the Russian cause . An early early winter contributed to the cold winter .
 Problems of logistics involved in the French campaign turned out to be much more difficult to resolve than Napoleon and his assistants had foreseen . The French army was defeated in 18 months .
 Napoleon advanced into the heart of Russia along the Vilna-VitebskSmolensk line, just as Charles XII had done a century earlier . Napoleon's advance into Russia was similar to Charles XII's advance in Russia .
 The Russians could not stop the invaders and lost several engagements to them, including the bloody battle of Smolensk . The Russians were unable to stop the invasion and were defeated .
 Two separate Russian armies managed to effect a junction and thus present a united front to the invaders . However, Russian troops inflicted considerable losses on the enemy, and the enemy suffered .
 Alexander I put Prince Mikhail Kutuzov in supreme command of the Russian forces . Under the pressure of public opinion, public opinion incensed by the continuous French advance, Alexander I .
 A disciple of Suvorov and a veteran of many campaigns, the sixty-seven-year-old Kutuzov did agree in fact with Barclay de Tolly’s policy of retreat .
 Napoleon felt it incumbent upon him and his army to fight before surrendering Moscow . Napoleon gave Napoleon a major battle on the seventh of September near the village of Borodino, seventy-five miles from the city .
 The battle of Borodino had few equals in history for the severity of the fighting . The battle was the most intense battle of all time in the world .
 Although it lasted but a single day, the extent of the bloodshed was staggering . The bloodshed was so much that it lasted only one day, but it was only a day .
 The number of dead and wounded in the Russian army (and many would later die of their wounds) likely numbered around 40,000 men out of 100,000 who went into battle .
 The casualties included scores of generals and thousands of officers . Prince Bagration and other prominent commanders were among the dead or fatally wounded . Scores of generals were killed or wounded .
 By nightfall the Russians in the center and on the left flank had been forced to retreat slightly, while they held fast on the right . The Russians had retreated slightly, but held on to the right, while the Russians held on the center .
 Kutuzov, however, decided to disengage and to withdraw southeast of Moscow . Kutuzova decided to withdraw from the area, but it was not immediately clear whether he would withdraw .
 Alexander I refused even to consider peace as long as a single French soldier remained on Russian soil . Alexander I. refused to even consider peace with the French until the French troops were removed from Russia .
 Moscow, still constructed largely of wood, burned down during the first days of the French occupation . Moscow burned down in the early days of French occupation.
 Count Fedor Rostopchin, the Russian governor and military commander of the city, may have deliberately started the conflagration, but this remains a disputed issue . It is possible he deliberately started it, as most French and some Russian specialists assert .
 Napoleon had to retreat before the onset of winter in Russia . Napoleon was unable to obtain peace from Alexander and largely isolated in the Russian wasteland .
 The return march of the Grande Armée, which started on October 19, gradually became a rout . The Grande Armédée's return march was a rout, ending in defeat .
 The action of the Russian army at Maloiaroslavets prevented the French from taking a new road through fertile areas untouched by war and forced them to leave .
 French and allies perished in droves, and their discipline began to break down . The French and their allies perished, and the French and allied forces began to die .
 Late in November, as the remnants of the Grande Armée crossed the Berezina River, they were lucky to escape capture through the mistake of a Russian commander . The French army was forced to abandon the French in November .
 Out of the total force, perhaps, from 30,000 to 50,000 men finally struggled out of Russia . The total force of perhaps 30,00-50,000 was perhaps the largest in the world .
 The breakdown of the transportation and supply of the Grand Armée should rank high among the reasons for its collapse . But the breakdown of transport and supply is not the only reason for the collapse of the French army .
 Napoleon’s soldiers died from hunger and epidemics than from cold, for the supply services, handicapped by enormous distances, insecure lines of communication, and bad planning, failed on the whole to sustain the military effort .
 Historians have established that the Russian high command had no “Scythian policy” of retreat with the intention of enticing Napoleon’s army deep into a devastated country . Napoleon's army had no intention of retreating, contrary to legend, historians say .
 The French advance resulted rather from Russian inability to stop the invader and from Napoleon's obsession with seizing Moscow . Napoleon was obsessed with capturing Moscow and wanted to take over Moscow .
 In many respects, the war of 1812 deserves its reputation in Russian history as a popular, patriotic war . The war of the 1812 was a popular and patriotic war in Russia . It was fought in Russia in 1812 .
 No defeatism appeared in the midst of the Russian government, educated public, or people . Except for certain small court circles, no defeatism was apparent in Russia .
 The Russian peasants fought heroically in the ranks of the regular army but also banded into guerrilla detachments to attack the enemy on their own . This was an activity unparalleled at the time except in Spain . The peasants were able to attack their enemies without assistance .
 Not included in the numbers of causalities were large numbers of civilians, both partisans and ordinary villagers along the path of war .
 Russian Foreign Policy, 1812-25 Alexander I carried the war beyond the boundaries of Russia . Alexander I took part in the Crimean War, which ended in 1812 .
 Prussia and, several months later, Austria switched sides to join Russia, Sweden, and Great Britain . Prussia, Austria, and Prussia joined Great Britain in 1914 . Austria joined Russia and Sweden in 1918 .
 After more desperate fighting, the allies entered Paris triumphantly on March 31, 1814 . The French emperor's military genius led the allies to victory .
 Napoleon abdicated unconditionally and retired to the island of Elba . Napoleon had to abdicate unconditionally . Napoleon's abdication was the result of the Treaty of Peace .
 He returned on March 1, 1815, rapidly won back the French throne, and threatened the allies until his final defeat at Waterloo on June 18 . He returned to France in March 1815 .
 The French emperor's abortive comeback failed to undo the new settlement for Europe drawn by the victors at the Congress of Vienna . The new settlement was drawn up by the victorious victors in Vienna .
 Alexander I himself represented Russia at the Congress . Metternich of Austria, Castlereagh of Great Britain, Hardenberg of Prussia, and, eventually, Talleyrand of France .
 The great powers, assembled in Vienna, redrew the political map of Europe and resolved certain conflicts over colonial territories in Africa and Asia, all with the goal of promoting greater stability and advancing their gains .
 Russia’s geopolitical ambitions were focused especially on Poland, one of the most contentious issues at the conference . Poland is one of Russia's most important countries in the world .
 Alexander I wanted to establish a large kingdom of Poland in personal union with Russia, that is, with himself as king . Alexander I was king of Poland, Poland, from 1881 to 1883 . He wanted to set up a larger kingdom with Russia with himself .
 His reasons likely included further geopolitical expansion and undoing the unjust partition of Poland . Poland is now a testing ground for liberal reform, he says .
 As compensation he offered to support the Prussian claim to all of Saxony . The Prussian claimed to have taken Saxony from Saxony in 17th century .
 The Prussians agreed, but Great Britain and Austria strongly opposed it . Great Britain, Austria and Great Britain strongly opposed the plan . The Prussianians agreed to the Prussussians' plan .
 Talleyrand used this opportunity to bring France back into the diplomatic picture, on the side of Great Britain and Austria . He used it to bring the French to the diplomatic table .
 He obtained his Kingdom of Poland, but reduced in size, while Prussia acquired about three-fifths of Saxony . The Kingdom of Prussia was reduced to Poland in 1881 .
 Kingdom of Poland contained most of former Grand Duchy of Warsaw, with Warsaw itself as its capital . Prussia regained northwestern Poland, Austria retained most of its earlier share of the country . Cracow became a free city-state under the joint protection of Russia, Austria, and
 New Poland received a liberal constitution from Alexander I . Alexander I combined the offices of autocratic Russian emperor, constitutional Finnish grand duke, and constitutional Polish king . New Poland was the first country to have a constitution .
 It might be added that he also favored constitutionalism in France, where the Bourbons returned to the throne as constitutional, not absolute monarchs .
 Alexander I's elated, mystical, and even messianic mood at the time of the Congress of Vienna expressed itself best in the document known as the Holy Alliance . Alexander I shared the complex sentiment with many other Europeans in the months and years following the shattering fall of Napoleon .
 Signed on September 26, 1815, by Russia, Austria, and Prussia, and subsequently by the great majority of European powers . The alliance appealed to Christian rulers to live as brothers and preserve peace .
 While the Holy Alliance had deep roots in at least two major Western traditions, Christianity and international law, it had little relevance to the international problems of the moment and provided no machinery for the application or enforcement of Christian brotherhood .
 The pope remarked drily that from time immemorial the papacy had been in possession of Christian truth and needed no new interpretation of it . Castlereagh could well describe it as a piece of sublime mysticism and nonsense .
 Quadruple Alliance represented a continuation of the wartime association of the allies and dated from November 20, 1815 . The Quadrple Alliance was formed from the end of the war .
 Great Britain, Austria, Russia, and Prussia agreed to maintain the settlement with France and to prevent the return of Napoleon or his dynasty to the French throne . At that time Great Britain and Austria, Germany, and Russia, agreed to keep the settlement .
 The sixth article provided for periodic consultations among the signatory powers . It resulted in the “government by conference,” also known as the Congress System or Confederation of Europe .
 Conferences took place at Aix-la-Chapelle in 1818, Troppau and Laibach in 1820-21, and Verona in 1822 . Conferences were held in France and Italy .
 At Aix-laChapelle, France shed its status as a defeated nation and joined the other four great European powers in the Quintuple Alliance . The payment of the indemnity and the withdrawal of allied occupation troops were part of the agreement .
 Great Britain opposed intervention in the internal affairs of sovereign states . Austria, Prussia, and Russia were determined to suppress revolution, no matter where it raised its head .
 Britain increasingly viewed Russia as a menacing rival to its interests in Europe and in overseas colonies, and the British public viewed the repressive tendencies of the Russian autocracy with distaste .
 France occupied something of an intermediate position, although it did invade Spain to crush the liberal regime there . France occupied a position in Spain, but did invade it to crush its liberal regime .
 Metternich tended to dominate the joint policies of the eastern European monarchies . Alexander I, frightened by a mutiny in the elite Semenovskii guard regiment and other events, followed the Austrian chancellor in his eagerness to combat revolution everywhere .
 Metternich convinced Alexander that preserving monarchical legitimacy, even of a despised Muslim ruler, overrode the rights of national minorities, even Christian ones . The Orthodox Greeks rose against their Ottoman rulers in 1821, when the Ottoman rulers were overthrown .
 The conservative European powers succeeded in defeating a series of liberal revolutions on the continent of Europe . These victories proved to be short-lived, as the subsequent history of Europe in the nineteenth century was to demonstrate .
 The Congress System has been roundly condemned by many historians as a tool of reaction, both noxious and ineffective in maintaining order and stability in Europe . The Congress system has been widely condemned by historians .
 Alexander I's role in Alexander II's rise to power was unusual, but not unusual . Alexander I was one of the most powerful men in the world . Alexander II was the first monarch to become king of the Roman Empire .
 The architects of the Congress System may have created, at its best, more than a mere diplomatic alliance of the great powers . The architects may have made, at their best, a more than just a diplomatic alliance .
 "The Confederation of Europe" seems too grand a designation for the alliance following the Congress of Vienna . This European harmony did not last, of course, and “The Confederation’s of Europe” seemed too grand .
 Congress System can be seen as an early, in a sense prophetic, predecessor to the still evolving European Union of our time . Yet, it can be argued, the Congress System was an early precursor to the European Union .
 Alexander I, more than any other European leader, emphasized the construction of the Quadruple and the Quintuple alliances . Alexander I tried to develop cooperation and unity in Europe, he says. Alexander I .
 He proposed forming a permanent international army to guarantee the European settlement . But the suggestion was speedily rejected by Castlereagh and Metternich .
 The Second Half of Alexander’s Reign was the second half of his reign . While “the emperor of Europe” attended international meetings and occupied himself with the affairs of foreign countries, events in Russia took a turn .
 The second half of Alexander's reign after 1812 saw virtually no progressive legislation and few plans in that direction . Novosiltsev’s constitutional project formed a notable exception .
 Alexander I proved to be a poor constitutional monarch because he quickly became irritated by criticism or opposition and repeatedly disregarded the law . In Poland the constitutional regime, impressive on paper, did not function well, largely because of Alexander I .
 Serfs were emancipated in the Baltic provinces, but, because they were freed without land, the change turned out to be a doubtful blessing for them . Serfs have been freed from land, but the change was not a good thing for them, as they had no land .
 Serfdom remained undiminished and unchallenged in Russia proper . To the last the sovereign considered emancipating the serfs .
 Speransky was Alexander I's outstanding assistant in the first half of the reign . General Alexei Arakcheev came to occupy that position in the second half . The difference between the two men tells us much about the course of Russian history .
 Arakcheev, once a faithful servant of Emperor Paul, was brutal, rude, and a martinet of the worst sort . He was once a distinguished specialist in artillery and military matters in general, .
 He became Alexander’s minister of war and eventually prime minister, without the title . He reported to the sovereign on almost everything of importance in the internal affairs .
 The common image of the evil genius Arakcheev imposing his will on the emperor badly distorts the relationship . Yet the rather common image is of him imposing his . will on his will, but it is not the only one to blame for the relationship.
 The general’s unquestioning and prompt execution of Alexander's orders that made him indispensable to the monarch . Alexander's unquestioning execution of his orders was precisely the reason for his loyalty to him .
 Alexander became increasingly attached to the ideal of discipline and order in the years following the Napoleonic wars . Alexander became attached to his growing regard for his own sacred authority .
 The project, however, was evidently Alexander’s idea, though it was executed by Arakcheev . The project was evidently the idea of Alexander's idea, but it wasn't his idea .
 The plan was largely inspired by the precision and order on Arakcheev’s own estate, which Alexander had visited in 1810 . Alexander visited the estate in Russia in the summer of 1810, and the plan was inspired by it .
 Alexander admired “the symmetry and elegance” and “cleanliness” of it all . Alexander admired the symmetry and . elegance of the design . Alexander said he admired ‘the symmetry’ and ‘cleanliness of it’
 The idea was to combine military service with farming, both to reduce the cost of the army and to enable soldiers to lead a normal family life . Applied to the military, the idea was also a humanitarian endeavor .
 The reform began in 1810, was interrupted by war, and attained its greatest impetus and scope between 1816 and 1821 . At least one-third, possibly as much as a half, of the peacetime Russian army established in military settlements .
 Scholars have described the settlements as an experimental ‘utopia’ of ordered, rationalized, and supervised men and space . Scholars have called the settlements an experimental "utopia" of ordered and rationalized men .
 Troubles and uprisings in the settlements, however, checked their growth . The settlements are still growing in spite of the troubles .
 After the rebellion of 1831, Nicholas I turned definitely against the reform . The last settlements were abolished only much later much later .
 Alexander I's and Arakcheev’s scheme failed principally because of the extreme regimentation and minute despotism that it entailed, which became unbearable . Alexander I. and Alexander I .’S.’The scheme failed because it became unbearable. Alexander I
 Richard Pipes has argued that Russian soldiers proved particularly poor material for this venture in state direction and paternalism, resenting even useful sanitary regulations .
 In the final years of Alexander’s reign, there are signs that he was losing confidence in this faith in rational order as the best path to happiness . Alexander was losing his faith in this belief in rationality .
 He began to voice doubts that mortals could actually end the sufferings and evils of the world .
 He became more and more pious and mystical and came to see religious faith rather than secular change as the best means of ensuring the people’s happiness . He supported the Russian Bible Society's massive campaign to distribute bibles .
 The tsar was warmly received and praised as a tender and loving tsar, a humble man willing to walk among his people .
 The backwardness and suffering he saw on his travels only seem to have reinforced his anxieties and doubts . But the backwardness of his travels reinforced his anxiety and doubts, he said .
 It is said that at one point he got out of his carriage, stood, and wept . It was said to have happened at the end of the day .
 The Decembrist Movement and Rebellion was the first Russian revolutionary group . It was known after its unsuccessful uprising in December 1825 as the Decembrists .
 Most of the Decembrists were army officers, often from aristocratic families and elite regiments . They had received a good education, learned French and sometimes other foreign languages, and obtained a firsthand knowledge of the West .
 Initially, these young men sympathized with Alexander I's enlightened purposes, but they grew disenchanted, first with the lack of positive results and then with the growing conservatism, they say .
 The Decembrists were essentially liberals in the tradition of the Enlightenment and the French Revolution . They wanted to establish constitutionalism and basic freedoms in Russia and abolish serfdom .
 The Russians produced a variety of statements and programs, indicating the range of liberal opinion among educated Russians in the early 19th century .
 The most moderate, Nikita Muraviev, envisioned a Russia ruled by a hereditary monarch who shared power with an elected legislature . Heirarchs would share power with the elected legislature, the most moderate .
 The most radical document favored a Jacobin-style dictatorship for the first ten years after the revolution . Colonel Pavel Pestel’s Russian Justice favored a strongly centralized republic .
 As can be seen, all agreed on the necessity of a strong state to ensure progress . As can't all agree on the need to be strong statesmen .
 At the very minimum, it was the responsibility of this revolutionary state to defend the rights of individuals, abolish serfdom, advance education and social welfare, and ensure basic civil rights, especially freedom of speech, press, religion, and assembly .
 Decembrists included some of the most gifted and prominent Russian youth and enjoyed the sympathy of many educated Russians, including such literary luminaries as Pushkin and Griboedov .
 Russian liberalism was still far from the broad social movements seen in England or France . Russian liberals were still far away from the broader social movements of England and France .
 The feebleness and backwardness of the Russian middle class was one of many key differences . Russia's middle class is one of the key differences between Russia and Russia's poor .
 The first societies formed by the future Decembrists, such as the Union of Salvation, were formed in St. Louis, Missouri . The Union was founded in the early 1900s .
 Alexander I still wished to cooperate with Alexander I and were concerned with the development of philanthropy, education, and the civic spirit in Russia rather than with military rebellion . The Union of Welfare that replaced it the following year was concerned with philanthropy and education .
 The Southern Society, led by Pestel, was located in Tulchin, the headquarters of the Second Army, in western Ukraine . The Union of Salvation had become in 1821 the more political and conspiratorial Northern Society, and the radical Southern Society .
 Organizationally, the Southern Society was especially effective and increasingly large . It was particularly effective organizationally, organizationally .
 The Society of the United Slavs was formed by the Decembrists and established contacts with a Polish revolutionary group . It soon incorporated a less aristocratic alliance of lower-ranking army officers who shared the general aims .
 When the hour of rebellion suddenly arrived, however, the Southern Society proved to be little better prepared than the Northern Society .
 Alexander I died unexpectedly in December 1825 . It was not entirely clear who should ascend to the throne . Alexander I was not quite clear who would take over from him .
 The late emperor had no sons or grandsons, according to Paul’s law of succession . The next in line was Alexander's eldest brother Constantine . Constantine was the late emperor's eldest son, Alexander's brother .
 He renounced his rights to the throne five years earlier when he married a Polish aristocrat who was not of royal blood . However, he had renounced the throne when he had married an aristocrat .
 A manifesto by Alexander recognized this in 1822 and named Nicholas, the third brother, heir to the throne . Nicholas was named Nicholas by Alexander in a manifesto . Alexander named Nicholas as heir to Britain's throne .
 But the manifesto had remained unpublished, and only a few people had received exact information about it .
 In much of educated society, Nicholas was viewed as a reactionary, whereas Constantine was thought to have more liberal views . Constantine thought to be more liberal than Nicholas .
 The capital and the army swore allegiance to the new emperor Constantine I, Constantine reaffirmed his position renouncing that claim . Nicholas published Alexander’s 1822 manifesto, and then guard's regiments in St. Peter the Apostle .
 The Northern Society of the Decembrists staged its rebellion . They were told to swear allegiance to the new ruler for a second time, this time to Nicholas I .
 Officers used their influence with the soldiers to start a mutiny in several units . They entreated them to defend Constantine's rightful interests against his usurping brother . Realizing that they had a unique chance to act, the conspiring officers used their power .
 Altogether about 3,000 misled rebels came in military formation to Senate Square in the heart of the capital . Altogether they came in a military formation .
 Mutineers were soon faced by troops several times their number and strength . Although the government was caught unprepared, the mutineers soon faced a larger force .
 The Decembrists failed to act because of their lack of leadership . The new emperor hesitated to start his reign with a massacre of his subjects .
 As dusk began to gather on the afternoon of that northern winter day, artillery was brought into action . But, as verbal inducements failed, dusk was gathering, artillery began to be used .
 Several canister shots dispersed the rebels, killing sixty or seventy of them . The rebels were killed by gunfire, killing 60 or seventy .
 Nicholas I became famous for tightening authoritarian power in his reign . Nicholas I would become famous for his authoritarian style of rule .
 Russia's revolutionary movement may be linked to the rise and fall of the Decembrist rebellion . So, too, might we date the beginnings of Russia's revolution with the rise of its revolutionary movement .
 'I shall always hold in honor the calling of a soldier. That is why I feel so well among these people, and why I shall always be in honor of the calling'
 "I consider the entire human life to be merely service, because everybody serves," he says . "Everybody serves, so everybody serves. I consider it to be simply service"
 Nicholas I had little in common with his brother Alexander I . He displayed determination, singleness of purpose, and an iron will .
 He also possessed ah overwhelming sense of duty and a great capacity for work, he said . He said: "He also possessed an overwhelming sense . of duty"
 In character, Nicholas I seemed to be the perfect absolute monarch . Nicholas I was a striking and powerful monarch .
 He was always a soldier at heart, finding pleasure and strength amidst the disciplined order of the army . Appropriately, he was always found pleasure in the discipline of the Army .
 As emperor he ordered alterations of the uniforms, even changing the number of buttons . He was devoted to military drills, the parade ground, and uniforms down to the last button .
 The autocrat insisted on arranging and ordering minutely and precisely everything around him . In the same spirit, he insisted on ordering and ordering .
 Nicholas' parade ground was a model for society and politics, he says . The parade ground is now a model of society, politics, says Nicholas .
 Engineering, especially the construction of defenses, was Nicholas’s other enduring passion .
 Later, specializing in fortresses, he became head of the army corps of engineers and thus the chief military engineer of his country . Still later, as emperor, he staked all on making the entire land an impregnable fortress .
 Nicholas was also a religious, moral, and domestic man . He cultivated this public image alongside his public persona as fierce autocrat .
 His moral sense was also mainly a commitment to values like discipline, order, and loyalty . He was also committed to the values of discipline and order .
 Nicholas I was often admired for his physical beauty and majesty . Shown here in the uniform of the Polish army, he was often seen as beautiful .
 In a country and at a time when powerful men were of more consequence than laws and institutions, these questions of the tsar’s personality and taste are of more than trivial significance . The questions of tsar's personality and tastes were more important than laws .
 "His character fit very well with his ideology of power and rule," he said . " Moreover, his character fit well with [his] ideology of rule and power," he added .
 Born in 1796, the new ruler was brought up not in the atmosphere of the late Enlightenment like his older brother . He faced wars against Napoleon and of growing conservatism in France .
 Nicholas was increasingly inclined to view his great personal power as rooted in Russian traditions of patriarchal authoritarianism rather than Western notions of enlightened despotism . His was also an age of nationalism, and his was also a time of Russian nationalism .
 This basic set of principles, with variations, would long remain influential in Russian politics, including today . The basic principles would be influential in Russia's politics, even today .
 Orthodoxy highlighted both the role of the official Church and the ultimate source of ethics and ideals . Orthodoxy was the focus of Orthodoxy in the 1950s and 1960s .
 In many ways, this was a repudiation of the Age of Reason, a rejection of the prime place given to human reason and human capacities . In many . way, this . was a . repudiated of the . Age of . Reason, he said .
 In its place rose an insistence on ‘the mystery and unfathomableness” of life and thus the vanity of reason, reason . In place of reason was insistence on the mystery of life, the author says .
 As a political principle, this meant rejecting human efforts to perfect society but also sanctifying existing authority as coming from God . This was rejected as an attempt to perfection society but sanctify existing authority .
 In addition to assuming that human beings were inherently weak and sinful, the strong hand of government was needed to keep order . In addition, assuming that humans were a “despicable and ungrateful tribe” in the words of a leading publicist of the day .
 Advocates of Official Nationality also viewed the history of Russia as reinforcing this lesson . The history of Russian Russia has also been viewed as a lesson .
 Russia considered autocracy the best means of ensuring Russia’s progress and happiness, following tradition . At the same time, and also following tradition, they considered the autocracy . Russia's autocracy was considered the best way to ensure Russia's progress, happiness .
 Autocracy was said to be not despotism but a paternal power united in love with the people . Autocracy is said to have been the paternal power of the people. Autocratic power was united in the people's love, love and love .
 The Russian polity was described as a ‘family’ in which the tsar was the stern but benevolent father . The people were obedient and loving children, though often in need of discipline and help .
 Russian nationality referred to the special nature of the Russian people . nationality referred to Russia's special nature .
 As can be seen, this ideal of nationality had its roots both in Russian traditions and in European thought of the day, especially the Romantic nationalist idea that each nation has its own unique genius, institutions, language, temperament, and virtues .
 Russia's genius, it was felt, was the unique bond of love and devotion between the people and the tsar . Russia’s genius was the bond of the people, it felt . The tsar was the only man in Russia to be able to hold the country’
 The Decembrist rebellion at the beginning of Nicholas I's reign only hardened the new emperor's basic views as well as his determination to fight revolution to the end . Nicholas’s “System” was created by Nicholas I .
 No doubt it contributed to the emperor's mistrust of the gentry, and indeed of independence and initiative .
 Nicholas I showed minute personal interest in the arrest, investigation, trial, and punishment of the Decembrists . This preoccupation with the dangers of subversion remained with him throughout his reign .
 Emperor surrounded himself with military men to the extent that in the later part of his reign there were almost no civilians among his immediate assistants . The emperor surrounded himself in a large circle of military men .
 He relied heavily on special emissaries, most of them generals of his suite, who were sent all over Russia on particular assignments, to execute immediately the will of the sovereign . Also, he relied heavily .
 The monarch’s own person was an extension of the monarch's own person . The monarch was not involved in the regular administrative system, but his personal life .
 In fact, the entire machinery of government came to be permeated by the military spirit of direct orders, absolute obedience, and precision, at least as far as official reports and appearances .
 Corruption and confusion, however, lay immediately behind this fagade of discipline and smooth functioning . Corruption and . confusion, but . corruption and confusion lay behind this . corruption, however .
 In his conduct of state affairs Nicholas I often bypassed regular channels, and he generally resented formal deliberation, consultation, or other procedural delay . He generally resents formal deliberating, consultation and other procedural delays .
 The importance of the Committee of Ministers, the State Council, and the Senate decreased in the course of his reign . The important roles of the committee of ministers, the state council, the Senate and the state Council decreased .
 The emperor depended more and more on special bureaucratic devices meant to carry out his intentions promptly while remaining under his immediate and complete control . Instead of making full use of them, the emperor depended on them, he relied on them to carry his intentions .
 Nicholas I made extensive use of ad hoc committees standing outside the usual state machinery . As one favorite method, Nicholas I used to make use of the usual machinery, he said .
 The committees were usually composed of a handful of the emperor's most trusted assistants . The same men in different combinations formed these committees throughout Nicholas’s reign .
 As a rule, the committees carried on their work in secret, adding further complication and confusion to the already cumbersome administration of the empire .
 The laborious futility of this first ad hoc committee became the characteristic pattern of most of the subsequent committees during the reign of Nicholas I, in spite of the fact that the emperor himself often took an active part in their proceedings .
 The failure of one committee to perform its task merely led to the formation of another . The failure to do so led to another committee to form another .
 Some nine committees tried to deal with the issue of serfdom . For example, some nine committees were on the issue .
 His Majesty’s Own Chancery was much more useful than the special committees . As an effective means to exercise personal authority outside the regular structures of bureaucracy and law, it was more useful to the royal family .
 In 1828 the Fourth Department was created for the purpose of managing the charitable and educational institutions under the jurisdiction of the Empress Dowager Mary . The department was created in 1828 .
 Fifth Department was created and charged with reforming the condition of the state peasants . After two years of activity it was replaced by the new Ministry of State Domains . Eight years later the Fifth Department became the new ministry .
 In 1843, the Sixth Department of His Majesty’s Own Chancery came into being, a temporary agency assigned the task of drawing up an administrative plan for Transcaucasia . The plan was drawn up in 1843 .
 The departments of the Chancery served Nicholas I as a major means of conducting a personal policy that bypassed the regular state channels . The departments were used as a way to conduct personal policy .
 For many Russians, the political police came to symbolize the reign of Nicholas I . The political police were the autocrat’s main weapon against subversion and revolution . They were his principal agency for controlling the behavior of his subjects .
 "In their effort to embrace the entire life of the people, they intervened actually in every matter in which it was possible to intervene," he said .
 Family life, commercial transactions, personal quarrels, projects of inventions, escapes of novices from monasteries—everything interested the secret police . The secret police were interested in everything, including family life and commercial transactions .
 At the same time the Third Department received a tremendous number of petitions, complaints, denunciations, and each one resulted in an investigation, each one became a separate case . "Each one of these investigations became a different case," she said .
 Count Alexander Benckendorff and Prince Alexsi Orlov probably spent more time with Nicholas I than any of his other assistants . They accompanied him, for instance, on his repeated trips of inspection throughout Russia .
 Most of the feverish activity of the gendarmes seemed to be to no purpose . Yet most of the activity seemed to have no purpose. The gendarrames were in the middle of the night .
 Endless investigations of subversion, stimulated by the monarch’s own suspiciousness, revealed very little . Endless investigations . revealed little. of subverted subversion .
 Even the most important radical group uncovered during the reign, the Petrashevtsy, fell victim not to the gendarmerie but to its great rival, the ordinary police . The police continued to be part of the Ministry of the Interior .
 The desire to control in detail the lives and thoughts of the people and above all to prevent subversion, which constituted the main aims of the Third Department, also guided the policies of the Ministry of Education . We shall discuss in a later chapter of this chapter .
 He paid the most painstaking attention to the huge and difficult business of government . He did his own inspecting of the country, rushed to meet all kinds of emergencies, from cholera .
 The emperor wanted to embody the ideal of the tsar as father to his people . He wanted to be physically present everywhere so that the people could be reassured and inspired .
 Alexander I's uncertain and tragic reaction to the St. Catherine's death is the contrast between Alexander I and Alexander II . Illustrative of the changed political style and mood at the top, Alexander I was the king of the Roman Empire . Alexander I is the son of Alexander I, who
 In fact throughout his reign the emperor feared, at the same time, two different revolutions . "Throughout his reign he feared, as well as the . same time as the. same time," he said .
 An elemental, popular uprising might also be unleashed by such a major shock to the established order as the coveted emancipation . On the other hand, an elemental uprising might be unleashed in the same way .
 In the end, although the government was almost constantly concerned with serfdom, it achieved very little . The government was constantly worried about the future of the British monarchy .
 New laws either left the change in the serfs’ status to the discretion of their landlords, thus merely continuing Alexander's well-meaning but ineffectual efforts . New laws prohibited only certain extreme abuses connected with serfdom .
 Even the minor concessions granted to the peasants were sometimes nullified . The peasants' rights were often nullified by the peasants .
 Following European revolutions of 1848, the meager and hesitant government solicitude for the serfs came to an end . Following the European revolutions, the European governments came to a halt .
 Only the bonded peasants of western Russian provinces obtained substantial advantages in the reign of Nicholas I . The government wanted to use them in its struggle against Polish influence that was prevalent among the landlords of that area .
 The emperor and his government could not introduce in their country the much-needed fundamental reforms . Determined to preserve autocracy, afraid to abolish serfdom, and suspicious of all independent initiative and popular participation, they could not .
 Important developments did nevertheless take place in certain areas where . change would not threaten the fundamental political, social, and economic structure of the Russian Empire .
 The state peasants' condition was far-reaching reform in the condition of the state peasants . Especially significant proved to be the codification of law and the reform of the peasants .
 The new code was produced in the late 1820s and early 1830s by the immense labor of Speransky and his associates . Despite defects, despite defects, it was a tremendous achievement and a milestone in Russian jurisprudence .
 In 1835 it replaced the ancient Ulozhenie of Tsar Alexis, dating from 1649, and it was destined to last until 1917 . In January 1835, it was replaced by the original Ulozhie, dating back to 1649 .
 Count Pavel Kiselev became head of the new Ministry of State Domains in 1837 . The reorganization of the state peasants followed several years later . Count Pavel was the first official official to reorganize the peasants .
 Kiselev’s reform included the shift of taxation from persons to land, additional allotments for poor peasants, some peasant self-government, and the development of financial assistance, schools, and medical care in villages .
 The leading Soviet specialist on the subject, Druzhinin, however, claimed, on the basis of impressive evidence, that the positive aspects of Kiselev’s reform had a narrow scope and application, while fundamentally it placed an extremely heavy burden on the state peasants . Dru
 Nicholas I became a reactionary monarch . Nicholas I was afraid of European revolutions . He became reactionary .
 Russians were forbidden to travel abroad, hit teachers and students especially hard . Teachers and students were hit hard .
 New restrictions further curtailed university autonomy and academic freedom . New restrictions also curtailed academic freedom in the U.S.
 Constitutional law and philosophy were eliminated from the curricula . logic and psychology were retained, but were to be taught by professors of theology .
 Historians say the universities themselves came close to being eliminated . Only the timely intervention of certain high officials prevented this disaster .
 The censors deleted ‘forces of nature’ from a textbook in physics . They probed the hidden meaning of an ellipsis in an arithmetic book . Censors demanded that the author of a fortune-telling book explain why in his opinion stars influence the fate of men
 It was in this atmosphere of suffocation that Russia experienced its shattering defeat in the Crimean War . The Crimean War was a crushing defeat for Russia .
 If the Crimean debacle represented the logical termination of Nicholas I's foreign policy and reign, it was a case of historical logic unique for the occasion and difficult to follow . The Crimean debacle was not the end of Nicholas's reign, as many scholars insist .
 The Russian emperor intended least of all to fight other European powers . For, the Russian emperor wanted to avoid fighting other European nations .
 Vladimir Putin is a dedicated supporter of autocracy at home and abroad . He became a dauntless champion of legitimism abroad .
 Nicholas I was determined to maintain and defend the existing order in Europe, just as he considered it his sacred duty to preserve the archaic system in his own country . Nicholas I considered his duty to maintain the existing system in Europe .
 It rose again and again, in 1830, in 1848, and on other occasions, attempting to reverse and undo the settlement of 1815 . The settlement of the 1815 was overturned in 1815, but the settlement continued to rise .
 The emperor’s assistants in the field of foreign policy, led by Count Karl Nesselrode, on the whole shared the views of their monarch and bent to his will . Count Karl served as foreign minister throughout the reign .
 Shortly after Nicholas I's accession to the throne, Russia fought a war against Persia . The war lasted from June 1826 to February 1828 . Russia fought the Persian Empire .
 The Treaty of Turkmanchai gave Russia part of Armenia with the city of Yerevan, exclusive rights to have a navy on the Caspian Sea, commercial concessions, and a large indemnity . Nicholas I characteristically refused to press his victory .
 In particular, he would not support a native movement to overthrow the shah and destroy his rule, he said .
 A few weeks after making peace with Persia, Russia declared war on Turkey . The Russian Empire declared war against Turkey .
 This conflict marked the culmination of an international crisis that had begun with the rebellion of the Greeks against their Turkish masters in 1821, the so-called Greek War of Independence . The war of independence began with the revolt of the Greek people against the Turkish government in the early 1800s .
 The Russian government vacillated in its attitude toward the Greek revolution . On one hand, the Russians sympathized with the Orthodox Greeks and were traditionally hostile to the Turks . On the other hand, Russia was committed to the support of the status quo in Europe .
 The Greek crisis had unusually complicated diplomatic ramifications and possibilities . Moreover, the Greek crisis has unusually complicated implications and possibilities.
 Other European powers also found it difficult to maintain a consistent policy toward the struggle of the Greeks against the Turks .
 Nicholas I tried, first with Great Britain and France, and then on his own, to restrain Turkey and settle the Balkan conflict . Nicholas I was acting more firmly than his brother, and tried to restrain his brother . He tried to settle the conflict between Turkey and Turkey .
 On October 20, 1827, in the battle of Navarino, the joint British, French, and Russian squadrons destroyed the Egyptian fleet that had been summoned to help its Turkish overlord . The Egyptian fleet was destroyed by the British and French squadrons .
 Russo-Turkish hostilities officially began in April 1828 . Russo-Russoya hostilities began in 1828, but it was not until 1828 that it officially began . Russia and Turkey were involved in the Crimean War .
 The Porte proved to be more difficult to defeat than the Russian emperor had expected . The second major campaign of the war brought decisive, if costly, victory to the Russian army and forced the Ottoman state to agree to the Treaty of Adrianople .
 The settlement gave Russia the mouth of the Danube as well as considerable territory in the Caucasus . It also promised autonomous existence under a Russian protectorate to the Danubian principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia .
 The treaty has often been considered an example of moderation in international affairs . But in spite of these and other Russian gains embodied in the treaty, it has often and justly been considered moderation .
 The Russian emperor did not try to destroy his former opponent, regarding Turkey as an important and desirable element in the European balance of power . He did not want to destroy Turkey, but wanted it to be an important element in Europe's balance-power .
 The decision to preserve the Ottoman state represented the considered judgment of a special committee appointed by Nicholas I in 1829 to deal with the problems raised by the defeat of Turkey and the changing situation in the Balkans .
 The committee's report to the effect that “the preservation of the Ottoman Empire in Europe . exceeded the inconveniences which it presents,” received the Russian sovereign’s full endorsement .
 The revolution in Paris in July 1830 came as a great shock to the tsar . Its impact was heightened by the Belgian uprising in September and by unrest in Italy and Germany .
 I sent a special emissary to Berlin to coordinate action with Prussia and tried to assemble an army in Poland to march west . He sent an army to assemble in Poland . He also tried to organize a special army in Berlin to march .
 When Louis-Philippe was accepted by other European governments, the Russian emperor still withheld official recognition for four months . The Russian emperor then treated the new French ruler in a discourteous manner .
 The revolution of the Belgians against the Dutch provoked the anger of the Russian autocrat who regarded it as another assault on the sacred principle of legitimacy . The revolution was also seen as a clear violation of the territorial provisions of the Treaty of Vienna .
 Nicholas I had to subscribe to the international settlement of the issue, which favored the rebels . Nicholas I delayed the ratification of the Treaty of London for several months and did not establish regular diplomatic relations with the new state .
 It should be added that the early plans for a Russian military intervention in western Europe might well have been realized, except for the Polish revolution, which broke out late in November 1830 and which took the Russian government approximately a year to suppress .
 Russian rule in Poland continually grew after the partitions . Resentment of Russian rule continued to grow after partitions .
 The settlement of 1815 had created a Kingdom of Poland (also known as Congress Poland) ruled by the Russian emperor . The settlement was created in 1815, and the settlement of the same year created a kingdom of Poland .
 Many Poles resented what they saw as a ‘fourth partition’ rather than the reestablishment of their historic state . Many Poles see what they see as a 'fourth partition' rather than reestablishing the historic state of Poland .
 This was a constitutional monarchy, however, with its own legislature, army, currency, school system, and administration . This was the country's own legislature and army .
 Alexander I and his brother Grand Duke Constantine ruled Poland on behalf of the emperor . These rights and autonomy were sometimes violated by Alexander I . Alexander I ruled Poland for the duration of his reign .
 Nicholas I's intense anti-constitutionalism seemed a greater threat, though the new emperor took no steps to abrogate the constitution . Nicholas I was an intense opponent of the constitution, but he took no action to abogate the Constitution .
 Rumors that the tsar was planning to use his Polish army to suppress these uprisings likely precipitated the Polish revolt . The Polish revolt began among the officer corps in Warsaw in November 1830 . The revolt was the first Polish uprising since the Russian Revolution in Russia .
 Nicholas I's rejection of any compromise magnified into a national uprising for Polish independence and freedom . Quickly, perhaps due to Nicholas I, the movement magnified . The uprising was the first Polish uprising in Poland since the 18th century .
 Russia soon lost control of both the government and the army in Poland . It had to reconquer Poland in a full-fledged war . Russia had to take over Poland in order to regain control .
 Russian troops, led by General Ivan Paskevich, vastly outnumbered Polish forces . It took many months to eradicate patriotic detachments and bands in Polish forests .
 Some Polish historians have argued that there was a real chance for success . Some historians have said that there were a real chances of success in Poland .
 The leadership was far from well organized or even sufficiently determined . But the leadership was not well organized, or sufficiently determined, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The Polish revolt remained an upper-class affair without support from Polish peasants, much less Ukrainian and Belorussian peasants . In St. Petersburg, the Polish revolt was an upper class affair .
 The constitution of 1815 was replaced by the Organic Statute of 1832 that made Poland ‘an indivisible part” of the Russian Empire . Poland was made ‘indivisible’ of the Empire in 1832 .
 The estates of the insurgents were confiscated . Polish institutions of higher learning were closed . The lands of the Catholic Church were secularized and the clergy given fixed salaries .
 Poland was forced more and more into the Russian mold in legal, administrative, educational, and economic matters . At the same time, Poland was . forced more . and more . into the . Russian mold .
 The Russian language reigned in the secondary schools as well as in the administration, while a stringent censorship banned the works of most of the leading Polish authors as subversive .
 In turn, rebellion and suppression stimulated a more radical Polish nationalism, including a mass emigration of educated Poles who would establish an important émigré community in the West .
 A Russification more thorough than in Poland developed in the western and southwestern provinces, with their Belorussian and Ukrainian peasant population and Polonized landlord class . Polonization developed in Poland's western and southwest provinces .
 Even prior to the insurrection of 1830-31, the government of Nicholas I had moved toward bringing that territory into closer association with Russia proper . Nicholas I's general penchant for centralization and standardization was connected with the emperor's general tendency to centralization .
 After the revolution was suppressed, assimilation proceeded swiftly under the direction of a special committee . Assimilation proceeded quickly under the supervision of the committee .
 Rebels from Lithuanian, Belorussian, and Ukrainian provinces were denied amnesty offered to those from Poland . Rebels from Lithuania, Belarus, and Ukraine provinces denied amnesty .
 In 1839, the Uniates severed their connection with Rome and came into its fold . It was in this territory that the Orthodox Church scored its greatest gain when it severed its connection to Rome .
 Because the landlords represented the Polish element, Nicholas I and his assistants changed the usual policy to legislate against their interests . The landlords represented their interests, and the law was passed against them, he says .
 They went so far as to introduce in some provinces ‘inventories’ that defined and regularized the obligations of the serfs to their masters . In 1851, they established compulsory state service for the gentry of the western region .
 Thousands of poor or destitute families of the petty gentry were reclassified as peasants or townspeople . Some of them were transferred to the Caucasus, some of them being transferred .
 Nicholas I was determined that these ideas not be allowed to challenge Russian national unity and rule . As ideas of national identity grew in the western borderlands of the Russian Empire during the 1830s and 1840s, he was determined not to challenge these ideas .
 This can be seen especially in Ukraine, where the imperial government crushed the secret Brotherhood of Cyril and Methodius . The Brotherhood was described as the first attempt by Ukrainian intellectuals to move from cultural to political activism .
 Relative stabilization in Europe was followed by new troubles in the Near East and more Russian intervention . Relative stability in Europe followed by more troubles in Europe and Russia intervention .
 No European capital answered the sultan’s desperate appeals for help with the exception of St. Louis . The sultan's desperate appeal for help was met with no response .
 Nicholas I's eagerness to aid the Porte in its hour of need found justification in the political advantages that Russia could derive from this important intervention . Nicholas I. Nicholas I found ample justification in his eagerness for aid, writes Alexander Vatanka .
 Mohammed Ali was seen as yet another major rebel in Russia . But such action also corresponded perfectly to the legitimist convictions of the Russian autocrat, who regarded him as a major rebel .
 On February 20, 1833, a Russian naval squadron arrived at Constantinople and, several weeks later, some 10,000 Russian troops landed on the Asian side of the Bosporus . This is the only appearance of Russian armed forces at the Straits in history .
 Great powers acted in concert to bring Turkey and Egypt together, arranging the Convention of Kutahia between the two combatants and inducing the sultan to agree to its provisions . The great powers arranged the convention and induced Egypt to agree with it .
 Orlov signed a pact with Turkey, the Treaty of Unkiar Skelessi, on July 8, 1833 . The Russians withdrew immediately after Orlov had signed the treaty . Orlov's treaty with Turkey was signed in 1833, and he died in 1831 .
 The agreement, concluded for eight years, contained broad provisions for mutual consultation and aid in case of attack by any third party . Secret article exempted Turkey from helping Russia in exchange for keeping the Dardanelles closed to all foreign warships .
 The events of 1830-31 in Europe, and a lesser extent recurrent conflicts in the Near East, impressed on Nicholas I . Nicholas I the necessity for close cooperation and joint action of the conservative powers, he says .
 The three eastern European monarchies drew together by the end of 1833 . Austria and Prussia felt the same need, with the result that the three monarchies draw together .
 Russia came to a thorough understanding with the Habsburg Empire, especially regarding their common struggle against nationalism and their desire to maintain Turkish rule in the Near East . Russia and the Empire came to an understanding regarding the common struggles against nationalism .
 The Russian agreement with Prussia stressed joint policies in relation to partitioned Poland . Similarly, the agreement with Russia stressed joint policy in Poland . Russia and Prussia agreed a joint policy on partitioning Poland .
 The agreements of 1833 were meant to protect, not only the immediate interests of the signatory powers, but also the entire conservative order in Europe . The agreements were intended to protect the interests of both the signatories and Europe's conservative order, the author says .
 The revolution of February 1848 in France opened a new chapter in the struggle between the old order and the rising forces of modern liberalism, nationalism, and socialism in nineteenth-century Europe . The revolution was the result of rapid economic, social, and intellectual changes in Europe .
 Nicholas I told his guests at a ball to saddle their horses because a republic had just been proclaimed in France . The Russian autocrat did react immediately and violently to the news from Paris .
 The tsar assembled 300,000—400,000 troops in western Russia in preparation for a march to the Rhine . Although delighted by the fall of Louis-Philippe, he hated as a usurper and traitor to legitimism .
 Nicholas I rose to his full stature as the defender of legitimism in Europe . In the trying months that followed, Nicholas I became a major figure in legitimism .
 The ultimate failures of the initially successful revolutions of 1848 and 1849 can best be explained in terms of the specific political, social, and economic conditions of the different countries involved . The remarkable ultimate failures can be explained by the specific conditions of each country involved .
 The Russian monarch certainly did what he could to tip the balance in favor of reaction . Still, the Russian monarch did not do enough for reaction to the reaction .
 On March 14, he issued a thunderous manifesto against revolution . He appealed to “every Russian to respond joyfully to the call of their Sovereign,” appealing to ‘every Russian’
 He tried to use every resource at his disposal to oppose the numerous uprisings that had gripped the continent . He was the first African African leader to take office in the 1970s .
 Russian government supplied Austria with a loan of 6 million rubles . Russia would join Austria as a full-fledged combatant if an outside power were to support an Italian state against the Habsburgs .
 The first Russian military intervention to suppress revolution occurred in July 1848 in the Danubian principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia, where Russia acted for itself and for Turkey to defeat the Romanian national movement . Russia acted in the same way as Turkey did in 1848 .
 Nicholas I heeded the Austrian appeal, on the basis of the agreements of 1833, to help combat the revolt in Hungary . Paskevich and almost 200,000 troops were assigned to the campaign in 1849 .
 The successful Russian intervention in Hungary earned the undying hatred of the Hungarians . It was directed in part against the Polish danger, as Polish revolutionaries were fighting on the Hungarian side .
 The Austrian Empire was one of the main supports of that order in Europe . But its chief rationale lay in the Russian autocrat’s determination to preserve the existing order . The Russian leader was determined to protect the existing European order .
 The impressive and in certain ways dominant position that Russia gained with the collapse of the revolutions of 1848-49 on the continent failed to last . Russia gained a dominant position in Europe after the revolution in 1848, but it was never fully realized .
 Nicholas I became more blunt, uncompromising, doctrinaire, and domineering than ever before, experts say . Nicholas I himself became more uncompromising and uncompromising in his reign .
 The Crimean War was a major event in the Near East . It was the first time the Crimean War saw the conflict in Russia .
 The resumption of hostilities between Turkey and Egypt in 1839-40 undid the Treaty of Unkiar Skelessi . The treaty was the result of a war between Egypt and Turkey in Egypt .
 European powers acted together to impose a settlement upon the combatants, under terms of the Treaty of London of July 15, 1840 . They also signed the Straits Convention of July 13, 1841 . European powers also agreed to a strait convention of 1841, which was signed by the
 The Convention reaffirmed the closure of the Bosporus and the Dardanelles to all foreign warships in time of peace . The Convention, in which Great Britain, Austria, Prussia, Russia, and France participated, reaffirmed .
 Nicholas I proved willing to cooperate with the other states, and, in the same spirit, made an effort during the years following to come to a thorough understanding with Great Britain .
 In the summer of 1844, he personally traveled to England and discussed the Near Eastern situation with Lord Aberdeen, the foreign secretary .
 The results of these conversations were summarized in an official Russian memorandum, prepared by Nesselrode, which the British government accepted as accurate . The results were summarized into a Russian memorandum .
 Russia and Great Britain were to maintain the Turkish state as long as possible . In case of its impending dissolution, the two parties were to come in advance to an understanding concerning the repartitioning of territories involved .
 Russo-British relations in the decades before the Crimean War have been variously explicated and assessed by different scholars . Several elements in the situation stand out clearly, according to the historian .
 Nicholas I's apparently successful agreement with Great Britain had an illusory and indeed a dangerous character . Nicholas I had apparently agreed an agreement with Britain had a dangerous and dangerous character. Nicholas I was not happy with the agreement .
 The two main points of the understanding—the preservation and the partitioning of Turkey—were, in a sense, contradictory . The entire agreement was, therefore, especially dependent on identical, or at least very similar, interpretation by both partners of developments in the Near East, a degree of
 Public Russophobia in England, often shared by high officials, grew especially as Russia’s influence in Turkey grew . Also, we should not underestimate the influence of public Russophobia, especially in England .
 Russia’s seeming invincibility after 1848 blinded Nicholas to growing distrust and hostility to Russia in Europe, even among allies . Nicholas was a leader of the Crimean War of Russia in Russia .
 Nicholas I's mistaken belief that his Near Eastern policy had strong backing in Europe, he says . The relationship with Great Britain helped Nicholas I believe he had strong support in Europe . Nicholas I had a complex and unfortunate entanglement with Britain .
 The precipitating event was a dispute in the Holy Land between Catholics and Orthodox in regard to certain rights connected with some of the most sacred shrines of Christendom . The dispute was over certain rights .
 Menshikov terminated the discussion and left Constantinople . Turkey accepted the first series of demands, but would not endorse Russian interference on behalf of Orthodox subjects of the Porte .
 Russian occupation of the Danubian principalities as “material guarantees” added fuel to the fire . Russian occupation was ‘material guarantee’ to the Danube principalities, according to the historian .
 Nicholas I's rash actions precipitated war, although it is probable he wanted to avoid a conflict . Nicholas I was likely to want to avoid conflict, but his rash actions were likely to precipitate war .
 The Russian government acted in a conciliatory manner, accepting the so-called Vienna Note as a compromise settlement, evacuating the principalities, and repeatedly seeking peace . After the outbreak of hostilities, the Russian government repeatedly sought peace .
 Turkey, France, Great Britain, and even Austria pressed increasingly exacting demands on Russia . The war guilt should be divided among Turkey, Britain, France and Austria, who pressed Russia's demands, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Fighting between Russia and Turkey started in October 1853 . Great Britain and France joined the Porte in March 1854 . Sardinia intervened next year .
 Austria stopped just short of hostilities against Russia, exercising strong diplomatic pressure on the side of the allies . Austria's diplomatic pressure was strong enough to make the decision .
 Nicholas I found his country fighting alone against a European coalition . Nicholas I. I found himself in a situation like that of a French president in the 1930s . He found himself fighting alone in France .
 The Russian emperor’s Near Eastern policy, which culminated in the Crimean War, has received various interpretations .
 Historians have emphasized Russian aggressiveness toward Turkey, explaining it by the economic requirements of Russia, such as the need to protect grain trade through the Black Sea or to obtain markets in the Near East . Many historians have emphasized the strategic imperative to control the Straits, or simply by the
 The tsar's attitude toward the Ottomans long retained the earmarks of his basic belief in legitimism . Yet, as we had occasion to observe, the tsar’s attitude to the Ottomsans .
 Nicholas’s approach to Great Britain can be considered sincere, and the ensuing misunderstanding thus all the more tragic . In other words, Nicholas's approach to the UK can be seen as sincere and sincere .
 Crimean War was provoked partially by religious conflicts . The Crimean War saw the Crimean War become a major factor in the conflict .
 The tsar himself retained throughout his reign a certain ambivalence toward the sultan . And the tsar was himself ambivalent towards him .
 He repeatedly granted the legitimacy of the sultan’s rule in the Ottoman Empire . But he remained uneasy about the sprawling Muslim state with numerous Orthodox subjects .
 Once the conflict began, Nicholas I readily proclaimed himself the champion of the Cross against the infidels . Nicholas I declared himself himself the "champion of the cross"
 Crimean War involved several major states, but its front was narrowly restricted . The Crimean War was fought between Russia and Russia in the Crimean War .
 Austrian troops occupied Moldavia and Wallachia separating the Russians from the Turks in the Balkans . The area with its extremely difficult terrain was unsuited for major operations .
 The allies controlled the sea from the Black, the Baltic, and the White seas to the Bering Sea . The allies staged a number of naval demonstrations and minor attacks on the Russian coasts .
 The Crimean War began in September 1854 in Crimea, Russia's first invasion of the Crimea . The Crimean peninsula was the site of the Crimean War, which ended in defeat .
 The war became centered on the allied effort to capture the Crimean naval base of Sevastopol . The allied effort was centered on capturing the naval base .
 Sevastopol held out for eleven and a half months against repeated bombardments and assaults of French, British, Turkish, and Sardinian forces with their superior weapons . Sevastopopo was held out by the Russians for 11 months . The city was occupied by the Crimean Warlord
 Russian supply service broke down and the high command showed little initiative . The Black Sea fleet led by admirals Pavel Nakhimov and Vladimir Kornilov fought desperately for their city .
 Count Eduard Totleben, the chief Russian military engineer at Sevastopol, proved to be a great improviser of defenses . He did more than any other man to delay the allied advance . Count Totleb was one of the greatest improvisers of the Crimean War .
 The hell and heroism of the Crimean War were best related by Lev Tolstoy, himself an artillery officer in the besieged city, in Sevastopol Tales .
 It might be added that this conflict, which many scholars consider the unnecessary result of misunderstandings, was the more tragic since typhus and other epidemics caused even more deaths than did the actual fighting .
 The Russian forces finally abandoned Sevastopol on September 11, 1855, sinking their remaining ships and blowing up fortifications . The Russians finally abandoned the city in 1855 .
 Nicholas I had died in March 1856 . Alexander II and the allies were ready early in 1856 to make peace . The allies were effectively supported by Austrian diplomacy .
 An impressive international congress met in Paris for a month, from late February until late March . The international congress was held in Paris from February until March .
 Russia ceded to Turkey the mouth of the Danube and a part of Bessarabia . Russia accepted the neutralization of the Black Sea, agreed not to maintain a navy or coastal fortifications there .
 Russia gave up claims to a protectorate over the Orthodox in the Ottoman Empire . Further, Russia also gave up its claims to an Ottoman protectorate in the Empire .
 The Danubian principalities, the basis for the future state of Romania, were placed under the joint guarantee of the signatory powers . An international commission was established to assure safe navigation of the Danube . The Danube was the source of the future Romania .
 The Treaty of Paris marked a striking decline of the Russian position in southeastern Europe and the Near East, and indeed in the world at large .
 Nicholas I died on February 18, 1855, evidently after a brief but severe illness . Nicholas I watched his beloved military colossus fail against the modern armies of the West .
 One version of the death of Nicholas I, though likely only a legend, is that the shocked and disillusioned emperor poisoned himself . Nicholas I's death is believed to have been the result of a poisoning .
 Historians agree that Nicholas I and his firm beliefs strongly influenced Russian history, but he did not give it new direction . Nicholas I's firm beliefs influenced Russia's history but did not change it .
 "On the contrary, he clung with a desperate determination to the old system and the old ways," he said . "He clung" to the system, he said. "on the contrary."
 The catastrophe of the Crimean War underlined the pressing need for fundamental reforms in Russia as well as the fact that the hour was late . The Crimean War was underlined by the need to reform in Russia, writes Alexander Vatanka .
 Alexander II's ‘great reforms’ reflected a new recognition of necessary change . Alexander II’s “Great reforms” reflected a . new recognition . of necessary . change, Alexander II. Alexander II .
 Russia's reforms also reflected changes within Russia's economy, society, and culture, to which we now turn . But these reforms also reflect changes in Russia's society, society and culture .
 Nicholas’s politics, by contrast, movement prevailed over stagnation, he says . Nicholas' politics, he writes, is a result of his success in many fields, including politics .
 For many foreign observers at the time and most early historians, Russian economic and social life in the first half of the nineteenth century was defined by overwhelming backwardness, stagnation, and oppression . For many Russian social and economic life, Russian life was defined as 'backwardness'
 The old structure of society was breaking down, advancing social groups that poorly fit into the established structure of traditional social groups, namely nobles, clergy, merchants, townspeople, and peasants . Indeed, the old structure was breaking .
 Russian economy and society failed to keep pace with other European countries, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We cannot ignore the fact that the Russian economy . And yet, we cannot ignore that," says Putin .
 The forces of capitalism that were affecting Russia were revolutionizing Great Britain, Belgium, and France . Russia was revolutionizing Belgium, Belgium and France in the 1930s .
 Serfdom and state control of society undoubtedly held back Russia’s economic development . Russia's economic development has been hampered by state control and serfdomism .
 Although the Russian urban classes rose rapidly, they remained small and weak compared to the bourgeoisie in much of western Europe . The Russian urban class rose rapidly but remained small .
 The country obtained some steamships and railroads, but its transportation system failed to serve adequately either the peacetime needs or the needs of the Crimean War . The Crimean War was the first Crimean War and second Crimean War.
 Russian weapons and military equipment proved inferior to those of their European opponents . Black Sea fleet, composed of wooden sailing vessels, could not compete with steam-propelled warships of the allies .
 In the nineteenth century, Russia could afford such relative backwardness even less than at the time of Peter the Great . In the mid-nineties, Russia was less backward than in the late 1800s .
 Postcolonial historians argue that Europe should not be the only measure of modernity . To be sure, as postcolonial historians today argue, Europe is not only a measure of the modern .
 The European model and standard could be ignored only at its peril . But for countries like Russia in the nineteenth century, such a model is not only ignored only .
 The second half of the eighteenth century marked the zenith of manorial agriculture in Russia . The first decades of the nineteenth century witnessed significant changes in the economic picture .
 Russian estates sent more and more produce to the market, at home and abroad, as southern Russia began to export grain via the Black Sea . Russian estates began to send more than 100,000 tonnes of grain each year .
 New opportunities for marketing, together with a continuing growth of population, led to a strong and steady rise in land prices . Land prices have increased in recent years .
 Most landlords failed to adjust effectively to competition and to establish efficient production on their estates . Yet, most landlords, entirely unprepared for the task by their education and outlook, failed .
 In the first half of the nineteenth century, the proportion of nongentry landownership grew, despite the fact that only members of the gentry could own serfs . In the 19th century, only gentry members could own their serfs, but only the members of gentry
 In addition, the indebtedness of the gentry to the state increased rapidly, acquiring tremendous proportions by the middle of the century . In addition to the debt, the debt of the state was also growing rapidly .
 On eve of the emancipation of the serfs in 1861, the state held in mortgage two-thirds of all serfs . It has been estimated that on the eve of emancipation in 1861 the state had mortgageed 2-thirds .
 While substantial landlords adjusted more or less effectively to the new conditions, their poorer brethren, lacking capital or other sufficient assets, lost out in the competition .
 The first half of the century saw a concentration of gentry landholding, and a decline, often pauperization, of small gentry landowners . First half of century saw the decline of small landowners .
 The increasing differentiation of the gentry has been seen as an unmistakable sign, not so long after the ‘golden age’ of the late eighteenth century, of looming decline among the nobility as a class . Indeed, the increasing differentiation is seen as a sign of decline among
 Landlords first responded to the new market opportunities and the generally rising tempo of economic life by trying to obtain a greater yield from their own fields . Considerable evidence indicates that the landlords first responded .
 Barshchina, therefore, increased in scope and became more demanding, a process culminating in the 1840s . The process was carried out in the late 1800s .
 More intensive exploitation of serf labor offered no solution to the problem of achieving efficient, improved production . But more intensive exploitation would not solve the problem, he says, but it could .
 The best option seemed to be to let peasants farm and market as they wished and demand higher payments . Since few landlords were interested in taking a direct role in agricultural management .
 In the 1840s and especially in the 1850s obrok increased at the expense of barshchina . Obrok was a popular form of tea .
 Peasants had to pay their masters perhaps ten times as much obrok in 1860 as in 1800 . In 1860, the cost of the obronk was ten times more than in 1800, in 1860 .
 Serfs received additional land in return for obrok, but also, to make escalating payments . Serfs earned additional income by working in factories, transportation, and other occupations, including as hired agricultural labor away from home .
 Free labor came to be hired in agriculture, especially in the Volga region and the Black Sea provinces . Significantly, more and more free labor was brought in in agriculture .
 Some estates became successful ‘capitalist’ producers, making use of machinery, fertilizers, and more modern methods of farming . Some estates were successful “capitalist” producers .
 Overall, productivity increased somewhat as Russian agriculture became more intensive . The increase in productivity was partly due to increased intensive farming .
 Old staple crops, notably rye and wheat, continued to be grown on a large scale . Old staple crop crops, such as rye, were grown on large scale in the 1930s .
 Certain new items rose to positions of some importance in the agriculture of the country, including potatoes and sugar beets, and, in the south, wine . Successful production of wine required considerable knowledge and skill .
 Fine wool began to be produced with the introduction into Russia of a new and superior breed of sheep in 1803 . The culture of silk and certain vegetable dyes developed in Transcaucasia, which produced fine wool .
 With government aid, the number of sheep sheep increased from 150,000 in 1812 to some 9 million in 1853 . The sheep population rose to 9 million by the end of the 1853 season .
 As in the past, peasants found many ways of coping with the material hardships and uncertainties of their lives, from their deeply religious view of the world to minor and major acts of resistance, as we have seen . The peasants have found ways to cope with their material hardships .
 It is important to emphasize here—for it would be increasingly challenged by reformers— how much autonomy Russian peasants enjoyed . It would be important to highlight how much freedom peasants enjoyed in Russia .
 Although legally little distinguished from slaves, socially their lives were very different from the slaves in the southern United States in the early 1800s . Social differences between slaves and slaves was very different socially and legally .
 The commune was responsible for peasant relations with landlords and the state . It was also responsible for establishing rules for community welfare .
 The commune collected taxes owed to the state and obrok owed to landlords, maintained order in the village (punishing individuals who violated communal rules and norms), decided who should serve in the army, and organized fieldwork .
 Industry and Labor Industry, no less than agriculture, was affected by the growth of the market economy . Agriculture, industry and labor were affected by growth of a market economy. Industry and labor industry was affected . Agriculture is a key industry in the United States.
 Russian manufacturing establishments, counting only those that employed more than 15 workers, increased in number from some 1,200 at the beginning of the century to some 2,818 by 1860 .
 The pervasiveness of contractually forced industrial labor in Russia was in striking difference to industrial development in western Europe . Contractually forced labor was a key factor in Russia's industrial development .
 Serf owners could contract serfs out to non-noble manufacturers until 1820s . Serfs were also allowed to contract their serfs to manufacturers . This practice was banned in the early 1820's .
 Beginning in the 1830s, the number of freely hired factory workers was on the rise, especially in the cotton textile industry . The number of free-hiring factory workers began in the 1800s .
 The output of this relatively new industry increased 16 times over the course of the half-century . It's not the first time the industry has seen a rise in output .
 A major stimulus was a decision by the British government in 1842 to end the ban on exporting cotton-spinning machinery . The British government also ended a ban on the export of cotton spinning machinery.
 Russian manufacture of industrial machinery was still little developed, so most industrial labor was still handwork, and often outwork . Most of the Russian factories were still hand-work .
 On the whole, free labor gained steadily over bonded labor, and “capitalist” factories over both possessional and manorial ones . Free labor has steadily gained steadily in the last century .
 By 1825 “capitalist” factories constituted 54 percent of all industrial establishments . According to one count, by 1825 "capitalist" factories were at 54 percent .
 As mentioned, the use of machinery was fueled by a massive increase in imported equipment . The use of imported equipment is fueled by the increase in machinery .
 Russian industry, however, remained largely restricted to the Urals, the Moscow area and the rapidly growing St. Petersburg area .
 St. Petersburg-Baltic region, and several other well-established centers, are well-known in Russia . The region is also known for its cultural traditions .
 Trade and Transportation reflected the quickening tempo of economic life in Russia in the first half of the nineteenth century . Trade and transportation trade reflected the changing tempo of Russian economic life .
 The differentiation of the country into the grain-producing south and the grain consuming center and north became more pronounced . The differentiation provided a stronger basis for fundamental, large-scale exchange .
 The north and the center sent the products of their industries and crafts south in return for grain, meat, and butter . North and center sent each other's products and crafts to the south .
 The northwestern region produced flax for virtually all of Russia . For example, the northwestern region produces flax .
 A district in the distant Archangel province raised a special breed of northern cows . The district raised the special breed in a special way to raise cows .
 Several Ukrainian provinces became famous for their horses . The best sheep were bred in southern Russia, between the Volga and the Don . Ukraine is also famous for its horses and its sheep .
 Even such items as woolen stockings became objects of regional specialization . The woolen coat of clothing became an object of interest in the region .
 Purchased clothing began to displace the homespun variety among the peasants in the first half of the nineteenth century . A number of scholars have noted how purchasing clothing began gradually displace homespun .
 Macarius in Nizhnii Novgorod province was transferred in 1817 to the town of the city itself . Macarius was transferred to the city of Nizni Novgoro and became famous in the city .
 In 1825 goods worth 12. milllion rubles were sold at that fair; in 1852 the sum rose to 57. million . In 1852 goods worth 57 million were sold in the same amount .
 Rivers and lakes continued to play an extremely important role in trade and travel . Rivers, lakes and rivers continued to be an important part of trade .
 A number of canals, especially those constructed between 1804 and 1810, added to the usefulness of the water network, by linking, for instance, the western Dvina to the Dnieper and St. St. Oderder .
 St. Petersburg to the Volga means it is possible to send goods from the upper Volga to the Baltic Sea . The Volga is one of the most important rivers in Russia .
 In 1820 regular steam navigation commenced on the Volga to be extended later to other important rivers and lakes . The Volga is one of the most important rivers in the world .
 The first public Russian railroad, joining St. Petersburg, was built in 1903 . Following by several years the construction of a small private railroad to serve the needs of a factory .
 The suburban imperial residence of Tsarskoe Selo was opened to traffic in 1837 . St. Petersburg was the site of the Russian capital of St. Catherine II II .
 In 1851 the first major Russian railroad went into operation, linking St. Petersburg to St. Charles in 1851 . The first major rail link in Russia was the first to link the city from St. Louis to Paris .
 The systems of transportation remained inadequate, considering the size of the country, the systems of transport remained inadequate .
 Russia possessed only a little over 3,000 miles of first-class roads in 1850 . In 1850 Russia had 3,500 miles of roads, but only 3,200 of them were first class .
 The Russian army in the Crimea proved to be more isolated from its home bases than the allied forces, which were supplied by sea, from theirs . The allied forces were also isolated from their home bases .
 Foreign trade grew rapidly in the first half of the nineteenth century . Foreign trade is about which we have more precise data than we have concerning domestic commerce .
 Russia continued to export raw materials, such as timber and timber products, hemp, flax, tallow and grain . Russia also exported increasing quantities of grain and hemp .
 The grain trade resulted from the development of agriculture, notably the raising of wheat, in southern Russia; from the organization of grain export, largely in Greek ships, via the Black Sea; and from the pressing demand for grain in industrializing Europe .
 The grain trade rose to 35 percent of the total value of Russian exports in 1855 . From bare beginnings at the turn of the century, the grain trade became a major source of trade .
 It led to the rapid rise of such ports as Odessa and Taganrog and made the Black Sea rival the Baltic as an avenue for commerce with Russia . Odessa was the first port port to open in 1881 .
 Russian manufactures found no demand in the West, but attracted some customers in Turkey, Central Asia, Mongolia, and China . Russian manufactures, by contrast, found .
 The Russian imports consisted of tropical produce, such as fruits and coffee, and factory goods, including machinery .
 The population continued to increase rapidly throughout this period, from 36 million people in 1796 to 45 million in 1815 . The population in 1851 rose to 67 million, with a population of 67 million .
 Serfs grew to constitute 49 percent of the total population of Russia in 1796 and as much as 58 percent in 1811 . By 1858, they composed only 44. percent of Russia's population .
 Recent historians have questioned older arguments about the extent of peasant impoverishment . Crushing conditions of existence were certainly a factor, though .
 Townspeople constituted about 4. percent of the inhabitants of the empire at the turn of the century and 7. percent in 1851 . Townspeoples constituted about . percent of . the inhabitants . of the Empire at the time of the . century .
 Of particular importance was the growth of people ‘in between’ the traditional social groups, often designated, by a state determined to define and contain everyone, as raznochintsy .
 Growing middle class was built by energy, talent, and initiative of commoners . Commoners advanced themselves through education and effort .
 As a result of continued imperial expansion, the Russian population continued to become more diverse in ethnicity, language, and religion . The Russian population became more diverse as a result .
 The conquest of Transcaucasia began with the annexation of Georgia in 1801 . It soon extended to Armenia and Azerbaijan, bringing one of the most ethnically and religiously diverse places on earth .
 A sign of growing official awareness of what would later be called the national problem was the new designation, starting with Nicholas I's reign, of the non-Christian peoples of Siberia as inorodtsy, or "aliens" A term that would continually expand in its application would continually
 Government efforts to weaken Jewish communal institutions and the beginning of Russification in the western borderlands, especially in Poland after the insurrection .
 Russian rule faced growing resistance by some of its subject peoples, in Poland most spectacularly . Other groups, such as educated Ukrainians, fought against Russian rule by mountain peoples of the Caucasus .
 In different ways, these patterns of differentiation and difference point toward trends that would increasingly define Russian society in the nineteenth century and beyond . Rural economic pressures, the rise of new industries and free labor (and restrictions on this development) growing possibilities for geographic and social mobility .
 There are gloomy names of emperors, military commanders, inventors of weapons of murder, torturers, and martyrs . There are also gloomy names for emperors and military commanders .
 "We do not belong to any of the great families of the human race," says Alexandor Blok . "We are not part of the family," he says .
 We are neither of the West nor of the East, and we have the traditions of neither . We are not of the west nor the east, we have neither traditions of either. We have no tradition of either, we are neither West nor East .
 We move so oddly in time that, as we advance, the immediate past is irretrievably lost to us . As we advance we move so slowly, we advance so quickly that the past is lost to ourselves . We are lost to our immediate past, and we are lost
 Fresh forces are seething and struggling for expression, but weighted down by onerous oppression and, finding no outlet, these forces merely induce dejection, weariness, and apathy . Fresh forces struggle for expression but find no outlet .
 Literature alone, despite the Tatar censorship, still lives and moves forward . Literature alone . Despite censorship, it still lives .
 With us, the title of poet and writer has long since eclipsed the tinsel of epaulettes and gaudy uniforms . With us we have long since lost our title to the title 'poisoner and writer'
 The Russian people reserved for themselves life—their moral and communal freedom, the high purpose of which is to achieve a Christian society . Vissarion BelinSKY, 1847, was the author of a novel about the Russian Revolution .
 No less, philosophical, social, and political thought grew and developed in spite of autocracy and strict censorship . "No less, political thought grows and developed despite autocracy," says the author .
 The eighteenth century had mainly been a period of learning from the West . The 17th century was mainly a period that had been learning from Europe . It was the first time the English language had been spoken to the west .
 "Simple borrowing also gave way to creative adaptation and originality," the author says . The film series is set to be released in September .
 This term, though coined only later in the 1860s, denoted educated and intellectually engaged individuals who, in the name of absolute principles, stood against what they saw as a repressive political and social order .
 Tolstoy’s War and Peace, Turgenev's A Gentry Nest, Sergei Aksakov's family chronicle, and Alexander Herzen's memoir . The spirit and tone have been preserved in such brilliant works of memory and literature .
 This culture grew in a rich and rarified world—one supported by the labor of serfs . It was supported by a rich world supported by serfs, one of the world's richest and most powerful .
 The educated gentry enjoyed a cosmopolitan upbringing at home, with emphasis on French, and a lesser extent German, language and literature . A small army of foreign and Russian tutors were used to teach the gentry .
 The sons of the gentry often attended select military schools before entering the army as officers . French language and proper social manners were emphasized in the French language .
 More and more of them attended universities, both home and in western Europe . More than a quarter of them went to university, both in the UK and Europe .
 Gentry women too, though unable to attend university, often received extensive cosmopolitan educations, spoke foreign languages, and played music . Gentry . women also often received cosmopolitan . educations .
 The empire was divided into six educational regions, each headed by a curator . With the creation of the Ministry of Education in 1802, the empire was split into six regions . Each curator was head of the educational regions .
 The plan called for a university in every region, secondary school in every provincial center, and improved primary schools in every district . The plan also called for an improved primary school in each district .
 Russian secondary school students rose only to about 5,500 by 1825 . While university enrollments usually numbered a few hundred or less each .
 Private initiative emerged to supplement government efforts . Private initiative emerges to supplement the government efforts.
 Pushkin attended the Imperial Lyceum in Tsarskoe Selo . During the last years of Alexander's rule, education officials undertook a series of obscurantist purges of several universities . Pushkin was also a student at the Imperial lyceum .
 During the thirty years of Official Nationality, with Uvarov himself serving as minister of education from 1833 to 1849, the government tried to centralize and standardize education; to limit the individual's schooling according to his social background .
 Nicholas I and his associates did everything in their power to introduce absolute order and regularity into the educational system of Russia . Nicholas I introduced absolute order into the Russian educational system .
 The state even extended its minute control to private schools and indeed to education in the home . The state also extended its control to the home and private schools .
 Private institutions were not to increase in number in the future except except where public schooling was not available . Inspectors were appointed to assure their compliance .
 Russian private tutors began to be considered state employees, subject to appropriate examinations and enjoying the same pensions and awards as other comparable officials . At the same time the government strictly prohibited the hiring of foreign instructors who did not possess the requisite certificates testifying to academic competence and exemplary “moral�
 Nicholas I himself led the way in supervising and inspecting schools in Russia . The emperor's assistants followed his example .
 The restrictive policies of the Ministry of Education resulted logically from its social views and aims . The Ministry's restrictive policies were logically from social views, the author says .
 Members of the upper class, by contrast, received inducements to continue their education . Many boarding schools for the gentry were created for that purpose .
 Children of peasants and lower classes in general were to attend only parish schools or other schools of similar educational level . Secondary schools and universities catered primarily, although not exclusively, to the gentry .
 Special efforts were made throughout the reign to restrict the education of the serfs to elementary and “useful” subjects . The education of serfs was restricted to elementary subjects .
 Schools for girls were under the patronage of the empress dowager and the jurisdiction of the Fourth Department of His Majesty's Own Chancery . They served the same aims as those for boys .
 The inculcation of the true doctrine, that of Official Nationality, and a relentless struggle against all pernicious ideas constituted, as we know, essential activities of the Ministry of Education .
 Only officially approved views received endorsement, and they had to be accepted without question rather than discussed . Only official approved views were allowed to be discussed in the public .
 Teachers and students, lectures and books were generally suspect and required a watchful eye . Students and teachers were generally considered suspicious by the authorities .
 In 1834 full-time inspectors were introduced into universities to keep vigil over the behavior of students outside the classroom . Full-time inspections were introduced in 1834 to keep an eye on student behaviour .
 As already mentioned, with the revolutionary year of 1848 unrelieved repression set in . Unrelieved repression was set in during the year of the revolution .
 Nicholas I made some significant contributions to the development of education in Russia . Still, the government of Nicholas I still made significant contributions .
 Uvarov in particular did much to raise educational and scholarly standards in Russia in the 16 years he was in charge of the ministry .
 Many new chairs and the opening up of numerous new fields of learning in the universities of the empire . The practice of sending promising young Russian scholars abroad for extended training .
 The Russian educational system, with all its flaws, came to emphasize academic thoroughness and high standards . The Russian education system is known for its high standards and thoroughness .
 The government has used the standards to make education more exclusive at all levels of schooling .
 The “Copernicus of geometry” left his mark in the history of thought by formulating a non-Euclidian geometry, within which the Euclidian scheme represented but a single instance . The Copernicus was known as the ‘Copernic’ of
 Lobachevsky’s revolutionary views received scant recognition from his contemporaries either in Russia or in other countries . They nevertheless represented a major breakthrough in the direction of the modern development of mathematics and the physical sciences .
 Several other gifted Russian mathematicians of the first half of the nineteenth century contributed to the growth of their subject .
 Astronomy too fared exceptionally well in Russia in the first half of the nineteenth century . Astronomy also fared well in Russian in the early 19th century .
 Struve investigated over 3,000 double stars and developed methods to calculate the weight of stars . Struve dealt with such problems as the distribution of stars and the shape of our galaxy .
 Struve's associates and students expanded the study of astronomy in Russia . Struve’s associates, students, family members helped expand the study in Russia.
 As in the eighteenth century, and in other imperial powers, the natural sciences were enriched by expeditions and discoveries . The natural sciences was enriched by discoveries and expeditions . The discovery of new discoveries was made in the early 1900s .
 Russians continued to explore Siberia and the northern seas but also organized expeditions to circumnavigate the globe . Russians continued their exploration of Siberia and northern seas .
 Russian explorers were the first Europeans to encounter numerous islands in the Pacifc Ocean, though the Russian government did not choose to claim them . The islands were discovered by Russian explorers .
 Faddei Bellingshausen led an expedition to the south polar region from 1819 to 1821 . He was one of the first Europeans to see the continent of Antarctica . And, from 1821, he was the first European to see Antarctica .
 The institute was established in St. Petersburg in 1818 . Similar institutes were established at many universities in Russia .
 Father Iakinf Bichurin’s extensive research on China . Contributions in this field ranged from early ethnographic descriptions of Central Asian peoples . Father Bichirin was an early ethnographer .
 In this age of nationalism, it was natural that history writing should have developed strongly and gained a new public, says historian .
 Nikolai Karamzin was the first widely popular historian . He also became the first Russian writer to be widely popular .
 The History of the Russian State began in 1816 but was left unfinished in the account of the Time of Troubles when the author died in 1826 . Karamzin’s extremely readable reconstruction of the colorful Russian past is highly acclaimed .
 In 1811 Karamzin had expressed similar views succinctly in his secret Memoir on Ancient and Modern Russia given to Alexander I .
 The Russian language evolved further, and so did linguistic and literary studies . Language and Literature has evolved further in the Russian language .
 Pushkin represented the apogee of modern Russian language and literature and became their classic model . The writings of Karamzin marked the victory of the new style over the old, those of Pushkin . Pushkin's writings of the 19th century marked the triumph of the old style
 The simplicity, precision, grace, and flow of Pushkin’s language testify to the enormous development of the Russian literary language since the time of Peter the Great . Pushkin's language is one of the most beautiful examples of Russian literature .
 Admiral Alexander Shishkov, who served from 1824 to 1828 as minister of education, fought a losing battle . Such opponents of this process as the reactionary Admiral Alexander . Alexander .
 The first decades of the nineteenth century witnessed the work of the remarkable philologist Alexander Vostokov and the early studies of several other outstanding linguistic scholars . The first generations of the 19th century witnessed work of Alexander Vstokov .
 Belinsky literary criticism in Russia acquired sweeping social, political, and generally ideological significance . We shall see that with Belinsky, literary criticism has broadened social and political significance .
 Literature constituted the glory of Russian culture in the first half of the 19th century . Literature was a major part of the Russian culture during that period .
 New literary trends included what prerevolutionary and Soviet scholars described as Romanticism and realism . The definitions and usefulness of these categories are debated, though the definitions are debated .
 Romanticism attracted a number of gifted poets and writers . Pushkin, Lermontov, and Gogol also contributed to artistic growth of such luminaries as Pushkin .
 The poet represented the humane, elegiac, and contemplative, rather than the ‘demonic” and active, aspects of Romanticism . On the whole the poet represented . the humane and elegiac .
 In their view, with realism Russian literature achieved true independence and originality and established a firm foundation for lasting greatness . With realism, they say, Russian literature finally achieved true independent and originali .
 The term realism has been applied to a variety of literary developments in Russia in the first half of the nineteenth century . A difficult concept to use, the term realism is difficult to describe .
 Ivan Krylov, the writer of fables, has been described as an exemplary realist . Krylov was described as a 'exemplary realist' and a 'realist' in his work .
 Krylov lived from 1768 to 1844, but began writing fables only in his late thirties . Krylov achieved something like perfection in his new genre, rivaling such world masters of the fable as Aesop and La Fontaine .
 While animals often act as protagonists, their foibles and predicaments serve as apt illustrations of Krylov’s Russia and of the human condition in general .
 This masterpiece was finished in 1824, but because of its strong criticism of Russian high society, it was put on the stage only in 1831 and then with numerous cuts .
 Gore ot uma is neo-classical in form and contains very little action, but it overflows with wit . It contains little action but contains a lot of wit, but overflows .
 It consists almost entirely of sparkling, grotesque, or caustic statements and observations by its many characters, from a saucy maid to the embittered hero Chatsky .
 Griboedov’s play possesses an eternal freshness and effervescence, while many of its characters’ observations have become part of the everyday Russian language . Many lines from Krylov's fables, like many lines from the fables .
 Pushkin was born near the end of the eighteenth century and became famous in the last years of Alexander I's reign . Griboedov and Pushkin were the greatest Russian writers of the age .
 Pushkin had but a short life to live before meeting violent death . Like Griboedov, Pushkin met violent death at the hands of the Tsar .
 Pushkin's first major poem, the whimsical and ironic Ruslan and Liudmila, was completed in 1820 . Pushkin is considered to be the greatest Russian poet and one of the greatest prose writers .
 Pushkin’s early works, such as The Fountain of Bakhchisarai and The Prisoner of the Caucasus, reflected a certain interest in the unusual and the exotic that was characteristic of the colonial age . Pushkin's early works reflected interest in unusual and exotic that
 Pushkin turned to a penetrating and remarkably realistic treatment of Russian educated society and its problems . Eugene Onegin, written in 1822-31, was written by Pushkin in Russia . Pushkin's first novel, published in Russia, was published in 1818-31 .
 Onegin became one of the most effective and compelling figures in modern Russian literature . Both he and the heroine of the poem, Tatiana Larina, as well as their simple story, were to appear and reappear in different variations and guises in the works of Lermontov
 Pushkin contributed greatly to the development of Russian prose, especially by such tales as A Captain's Daughter . Eugene Onegin was written in most elegant verse . Pushkin also contributed to the Russian prose .
 Pushkin is considered a founder of realism in Russia . In his prose even more than in his poetry Pushkin has been considered a pioneer of realism .
 Alexander Pushkin’s deeply sensitive and versatile genius ranged from unsurpassed personal lyrics to unsurpassing personal lyrics . Pushkin was a deeply sensitive, versatile genius .
 He was busily engaged in publishing a leading periodical, The Contemporary, and in historical studies when he was killed .
 Its outstanding characteristic consisted in an astounding sense of form, harmony, and measure, which resulted in perfect works of art . It was the work of an artist who had a sense for form and harmony of form .
 Pushkin's poem, The Bronze Horseman, perhaps best expressed Pushkin’s recognition of tragedy in the world . Pushkin was a Russian poet who lived in Russia .
 It depicted a disastrous conflict between an average little man, Eugene, and the bronze statue of the great founder of St. Paul's . Eugene was depicted as Eugene, Eugene and a bronze statue .
 The Bronze Horseman, too, affirms Peter the Great’s work, modern Russia, and life itself . A minority of specialists reject this reading of the poem .
 Pushkin was most Russian precisely in being a “universal man,” able to express the spirit of any nation . For Fedor Dostoevsky, in his speech at the unveiling of a monument to Pushkin in Moscow in 1880, a speech met with “
 Pushkin myth developed very strongly in the late 1800s and in Stalin’s Soviet Union . Such arguments would become a full-blown Pushkin legend, which developed very strong in the 1800s .
 Pushkin himself, though, some scholars have demonstrated, was less certain about how well he fit into Russian life . Pushkin was born in Russia and died in 1903 at the age of 25 .
 Pushkin's African origins and swarthy looks were one reason he sometimes felt himself to be an outsider . His greatgrandfather was Ibrahim Hannibal, who, according to family legend, was the son of an Abyssinian prince, given as a gift to Peter the Great .
 His discontent with Russian authoritarianism led him to openly sympathize with the Decembrists . Nicholas I's undying suspicion earned him Nicholas II's undied suspicion . So was his discontent with authoritarianism, which led him openly sympathizing with Decembists .
 Pushkin was part of the very elite of privileged society in Russia . On the other hand, he clearly reveled in society life . Pushkin's poems show him reveling in life life .
 His works reveal the darker sides of society life, especially for the sensitive individual . But his works also reveal the dark sides of life life .
 Poems like The Bronze Horseman show some understanding of the suffering of commoners as well as commoners, as well . Poems such as The Bronze horseman show how commoners suffer .
 There is scattered evidence that Pushkin expressed a desire to emigrate to th~ West . Pushkin is believed to have expressed an interest in emigrating to the West .
 Born in 1814 and killed in a duel in 1841, Lermontov began writing at a very early age and left behind a literary legacy of considerable size .
 His life was a constant protest against his environment, a protest that found expression in public gestures, such as his stunning poem condemning Russian high society for the death of Pushkin, and in private troubles .
 Lermontov often chose fantastic, exotic, and highly subjective themes set in the grandeur of the Caucasus, where he spent some time in the army . The works were often set in Russia's Caucasus .
 A Demon is a long poem that explores his troubled self through the figure of a demon, who embodies the spirit of difference and alienation .
 Iam he, whose gaze withers hope At the moment hope blossoms . Accursed by every living soul. I am he, whom no one loves, Accursed .
 "I am the scourge of my earthly slaves, I am tsar of knowledge and freedom," he writes . "I'm the scourge, I'm the enemy of the heavens and the evil of nature"
 To describe Lermontov as a Romantic poet does not do him full justice. Yet to describe him as a romantic poet does he do not do it full justice .
 Through his prose writings, particularly his short novel A Hero of Our Times, he became one of the founders of the Russian realistic novel, in subject matter as well as in form .
 Dmitrii Mirsky considered Lermontov's superbly powerful, succinct, and transparent prose superior even to Pushkin’s. Such a discerning critic as Dmitriian Mirsky . Mirsky thought Lermonsonov’“superpower’
 Lermontov, no doubt, could have done much more had he not been shot dead at the age of twenty-six . He was shot in the face of a mob of Russian soldiers .
 Nikolai Gogol’s early venture into poetry proved an unmitigated disaster . The poet's first attempt at poetry was a disastrous failure .
 Gogol, who lived from 1809 to 1852, came from provincial Ukrainian gentry . The characteristic society of his stories and plays stood several rungs lower on the social ladder than the world of Chatsky and Onegin .
 Gogol's first collection of tales, Evenings on a Farm near Dikanka, came out in 1831 . The collection sparkled with a generally gay humor and the bright colors of Ukrainian folklore .
 The gaiety and folklore, as well as a certain majestic tone and grand manner, were to appear in Gogol’s later works, for example, the famous cossack prose epic, Taras Bulba, which dealt with the struggle of the Ukrainians against the Poles
 More frequently, as in the celebrated play The Inspector General and in Gogol's masterpiece, the novel Dead Souls, the subject matter contained nothing out of the ordinary and the plot showed little development . More often, as well as in The Inspector .
 Dead Souls, published in 1842, demonstrates the scope and might of Gogol’s genius . It serves as the touchstone for different interpretations of the novel .
 A simple story of a scoundrel, Chichikov, who visited provincial landlords and bought up their dead serfs, has been hailed as a devastating, realistic, satirical picture of rural Russia under Nicholas I . But there seems to be much more to Gogol’
 Russian formalist critics and such writers as Dmitrii Merezhkovsky and Vladimir Nabokov deserve credit for emphasizing these other ‘non-realistic’” aspects and powers of Gogol .
 The great novelist himself, it might be added, probably did not know what he was doing .
 His withering satire, applauded by opponents of the existing system in Russia, stemmed directly from his strange and troubled genius, not from any ideology of the Left . He was a withering satirist, not a Leftist, but a troubled genius .
 In the second volume of Dead Souls Gogol tried to reform his characters and save Russia . In fact, in fact, he tried to do so .
 Gogol published in 1847 his naive and reactionary Selected Passages from Correspondence with Friends . He suggested, for example, that serfs should remain illiterate and shocked educated Russia . Still trying to resurrect Russian society, he suggested serfs stay illiterate .
 Gogol also attempted to find salvation for himself, and for Russia, in religious experience, but no avail . The Russian national tried to find a way of salvation, but ultimately failed .
 He died in 1852 after a shattering nervous breakdown when he burned much of the sequel to the first volume of Dead Souls . He died of a nervous breakdown after burning the sequel .
 Pushkin was the outstanding member of a brilliant generation of poets . Karamzin, Zhukovsky, Krylov, Griboedov, Pushkin, Lermontov, and Gogol were by no means the only Russian authors in the reigns of Alexander I
 Sergei Aksakov was the narrator of provincial gentry life, a master of Russian life . He was also a great prose writer . His work was published in Russia in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Turgenev, Dostoevsky, and Tolstoy were the first Russian giants of Russian and world literature . Russia saw the first publications of such giants of world literature as Turgenevsky and Dosteevsky .
 Alexander Herzen described the first half of the nineteenth century as a remarkable age of outward political slavery and inward intellectual emancipation . Herzen describes the period as an 'insulting age' for the world's first generation .
 Russia profited from its association with the West and from the great development of cosmopolitan and secular education and culture in Russia over the previous century . The country's education, culture and education has been developed over the last century .
 Intellectual orientation among educated Russians shifted toward German idealistic philosophy and Romanticism . But on the whole the intellectual orientation shifted toward idealism and romanticism .
 The Zeitgeist affirmed deep, comprehensive knowledge, often with mystical or religious elements, in opposition to mere rationalism . The new intellectual Zeitgeist affirms deep knowledge, an organic view of the world as against a mechanistic view .
 It also emphasized such diverse doctrines as struggle and the essential separateness of the component parts of the universe in place of the Enlightenment ideals of harmony, unity and cosmopolitanism .
 Questions of the meaning and mission of the individual, the nation, and the world were present among eighteenth-century thinkers such as Novikov and Novakov . Questions of meaning and purpose of individual, nation, the world have been present among the thinkers of this era . Dece
 Romanticism and idealistic philosophy penetrated Russia in a variety of ways . Romanticism, idealism, and idealism were prevalent in Russia in the 1930s .
 Educated Russians continued to read voraciously and were influenced by Schiller, Schiller and other brilliant Western Romanticists . Educated Russian women continued to be influenced by the West .
 Of course, the subjects of the tsar were also Europeans and thus could not help but be part of European intellectual movements . The subject of the Russian tsar's subjects was also Europeans .
 There is no convincing reason for dissociating Russian intellectual history from that of the first half of the nineteenth century . Some Russians showed originality in developing different currents of Western thought, and while in general the Russian response to Romantic ideas can be considered creative rather than merely imitative .
 In particular, two German philosophers, Schelling first and then Hegel, exercised strong influence on Russians .
 The best expression of some Schellingian views can be found in Fedor Tiutchev’s unsurpassed poetry of nature . Schelling affected certain professors and a number of poets, such as the Slavophile .
 It was largely an interest in Schelling that led to the establishment of the first philosophic “circle” and the first philosophical review in Russia . Schelling was the inspiration for the first "philosophical circle"
 In 1823 several young men who had been discussing Schelling in a literary group formed a separate society . Study of German idealistic philosophy was the main object of the society .
 The circle chose the name of “The Lovers of Wisdom” and came to contain a dozen members and associates . Many of them were to achieve prominence in Russian intellectual life . The circle was formed in the early 1900s .
 The Lovers of Wisdom reflected the Romantic temper of their generation in a certain kind of poetic spiritualism that pervaded their entire outlook, in their worship of art, and their pantheistic adoration of nature .
 The group disbanded after the Decembrist rebellion in order not to attract police attention . It disbanded in order to avoid attracting attention from police .
 A decade later, Petr Chaadaev presented the question of the nature and destiny of Russia . The question of Russia's future was powerfully and shockingly presented by the Russian politician .
 In his Philosophical Letter, Chaadaev argued that Russia had no past, no present, and no future . The letter was written in French in 1829 and circulated by hand until its first publication in the Telescope in 1836 .
 It had never really belonged to either the West or the East, and it had contributed nothing to culture. It had contributed to culture, he said . It was not a place in either the East or the West, it had never belonged to .
 Russia lacked the dynamic social principle of Catholicism, which constituted the basis of the entire Western civilization . In particular, Russia lacked social principle, which led to the decline in Catholicism . Russia lacked dynamic social principles of Catholicism .
 Chaadaev was officially proclaimed deranged by the authorities after the publication of the letter . He later modified his thesis in his Apology of a Madman Apology . The letter was published by the Russian authorities .
 Russia, he now argued did enter history through the work of Peter the Great and could obtain a glorious future by throwing all of its fresh strength into the construction of the common culture of Christendom . Russia could now be thrown into the future, he said .
 Several ideologies emerged to compete for the favor of the educated public . The ideologies were inspired by Schelling, by an increasing Hegelian influence, and by German Romantic thought .
 Karamzin’s 1811 Memoir on Ancient and Modern Russia, already mentioned, used an argumentative survey of Russian history to show the dangers of social division (especially the “many headed hydra of aristocracy”)
 Among ideological justifications of autocracy, the most influential was ‘Official Nationality’ The previous chapter discussed the idea of official nationality in the previous chapter .
 It found influential spokesmen among a number of professors and writers . It also found censors and officials, notably in education and in the Church .
 These terms were coined by each side as a slightly ironic and mocking definition of the other, and thus are caricatures rather than accurate definitions of their main views . It should be mentioned that each side coined them as slightly ironic .
 The informal group flourished in the 1840s and 1850s until the death of the Kireevsky brothers in 1856 and of Khomiakov and Konstantin Aksakov in 1860 .
 Slavophilism expressed a vision of integration, peace, and harmony among people . Slavophillism was an expression of a fundamental vision of unity among people, peace and unity .
 Khomiakov’s concept of sobornost, an association of believers joined in love, freedom, and truth, was the essence of Orthodoxy, he said . The concept was created on the religious plane .
 Slavophiles assert that a harmonious integration of individuals could be found in the social life of the Slavs . Historically, this was found in ancient Russian institutions such as the zemskii sobor and peasant commune .
 The family represented the principle of integration in love, and the same spirit could pervade other associations of human beings . Again, the family represented a family .
 As against love, freedom, and cooperation stood the world of rationalism, necessity, and compulsion . The world stood against rationalism and necessity, the author says .
 It too existed on many planes, from the religious and metaphysical to that of everyday life . It also existed on a spiritual and metaphysical plane, from religious to everyday life.
 The Roman Catholic Church chose rationalism and authority in preference to love and harmony . The Catholic Church seceded from Orthodox Christendom . Protestantism and the entire civilization of the West, he says, manifested itself .
 Peter the Great introduced the principles of rationalism, legalism, and compulsion into Russia, where they proceeded to destroy or stunt the harmonious native development and to seduce the educated public . The Great introduced rationalism and legalism into Russia .
 The Russian future lay in a return to native principles, in overcoming the Western disease, says Alexander Nekrassov . The future was in Russia, he says, "in overcoming Western disease"
 After being cured, Russia would take its message of harmony and salvation to the discordant and dying West . Russia would be cured of the disease and take it to the dying West, he says .
 It is important to realize that the all-embracing Slavophile dichotomy represented the basic Romantic contrast between the Romantic ideal and the Age of Reason . Fedor Stepun and others have pointed out that this was the Romantic contrast .
 Slavophilism fits into the framework of European Romanticism, although the Slavophiles showed considerable originality in adapting Romantic doctrines to their own situation and needs . The Slavophilees also experienced the influence of Orthodox religious thought and tradition .
 Some scholars have described the complex Slavophile ideology as a paradoxical “retrospective utopianism’” The Slavophiles imagined a future based on a past that was itself largely imagined .
 Slavophiles condemned all legalism and compulsion in the name of their religious ideal . In a sense, they were religious anarchists, for they condemned all . legalism . In the sense, the Slavophile was religious anarchists .
 This justification of autocracy remained historical and functional, therefore relative, never religious and absolute . Yet this justification remained functional and functional . Autocratic autocracy was never religious or absolute . Autocracy was not absolute, but it was historical, functional, functional and not religious .
 Slavophiles insisted on the “freedom of the life of the spirit,” that is, freedom of conscience, speech, and publication . Slavophile wanted the emancipation of the serfs and other reforms, including emancipation of serfs .
 Knhomiakov and his friends opposed such aspects of the established order as the death penalty, government intrusion into private life, and bureaucracy in general . Also opposed such features of the order as death penalty and government intrusion in private life .
 Slavophile publications did not escape censorship and prohibition for long . Slavophiles were censors and censors in the early days of the 20th century .
 The Westernizers were much more diverse than the Slavophiles, and their views did not form a single, integrated whole . The Westernizer was much more eclectic than Slavophile . The Westizers were more diverse, but their views didn't form a one, integrated part .
 Mikhail Bakunin came from a gentry home like those of the Slavophiles . Vissarion Belinsky was an impoverished doctor and grandfather a priest . Even socially the Westernizers consisted of different elements .
 Some generally held opinions and doctrines gave a measure of unity to the movement . Yet certain generally held views and doctrines were common .
 Like the Slavophiles, Westernizers built their arguments on a foundation of German idealistic philosophy .
 Many were friends and met to discuss ideas, but they came to very different conclusions . Many of them came to conclusions, but many were very different .
 Khomiakov and his friends affirmed the superiority of true Russian principles over those of the West . Westernizers argued that Russia could accomplish its mission only in the context of Western civilization . The Westernizers argue that Russia's mission only can be achieved only in Western civilization.
 They viewed Russia’s Westernization as positive, but criticized the established order for its failures to follow this path fully . They viewed the Westernization of Russia as positive but criticized it for not following it fully .
 Westernizers could be quite critical of the West for failing to live up to its own high ideals . However, the differences ran more deeply than views of Russia and the West, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 Westernizers idealized the individual and were concerned above all with the rights and dignity of the person . The Westernizers, as we shall see, were concerned with the individual .
 Slavophiles anchored their entire ideology in an interpretation of Orthodoxy . Slavophilees anchored their ideology in a interpretation of the Orthodoxy, Slavophilia .
 Westernizers believed in a universal moral code and even spoke of this as exemplified by Christ’s teachings . Westernizers attached little importance to religion as such .
 Even those who did not turn toward atheism viewed existing religion as an insult to reason . Atheists say existing religion is an insult of reason .
 Most moderate Westernizers were essentially idealistic liberals, emphasizing gradualism and popular enlightenment . The most moderate Westernizer was essentially idealists and liberals .
 The radical Westernizers came to challenge religion, society, and the entire Russian and European system and to call for a revolution . The radical westernizers, however, largely through Hegelianism and Left Hegelianistism, challenged society and society .
 Vissarion Belinsky, 1811-48, Alexander Herzen, 1812-70, and Mikhail Bakunin, 1814-76 . Bakunin was a major figure in Russia's revolutionary revolution .
 Belinsky became widely known and very influential as a literary critic . Belinsky was known for his work as a leading critic .
 His literary criticism was famous for its passion, invective, and eulogy . More important, he saw works of literature as expressions of their time . He was also famous for his ability to see works of fiction as expressions for their time.
 Belinsky: Art should inspire and awaken people, regenerate and ennoble them . For Belinsky, art should inspire, awaken people and inspire them, he says .
 For Belinsky, for Belinsky one did not have to be a poet, but one must be a citizen . Nekrasov later put it, for Nekrasovsky, "For a poet you must be an American citizen"
 Literature and literary criticism in Russia would indeed become the freest place in Russia for examining social and political conditions and imagining change . Following Belinsky’s insight and example, literature and literary critics would indeed be freest in Russia .
 Belinsky lacked the education enjoyed by noblemen like Herzen and Bakunin . Belinsky made up for this in intellectual commitment and fervor .
 The notion of the human person,lichnost in Russian, was key to his thought . Above all, he said, was the notion of being a human person .
 He was convinced that the individual person possessed natural dignity and rights, he built on this foundation a sweeping critique of existing society . He built on a foundation of this critique, he argued that society needs to change .
 Herzen’s autobiography, My Past and Thoughts, is one of the most remarkable Russian texts written in the nineteenth century . Herzen is a blend of memoir, literature, philosophy, philosophy and political criticism .
 He was an incisive writer and a complex thinker, sensitive to how intractable were the problems of human existence . He was incisive and complex thinker and sensitive to the problems he faced .
 He stressed the dignity and freedom of the individual and the oppression of the personality in Russia . Like Belinsky, he continually stressed freedom and freedom .
 As such, he hated despotism but also feared the absolutism of the radical Left . As such he feared the death of the Soviet Union, he also hated the radical left .
 He was able to organize a major center of Russian dissident publishing and journalism . He left Russia in 1847, eventually settling in London, where he organized a major publishing center .
 He suggested that the dominant spirit in western Europe had become that of the “petite bourgeoisie,” whose guiding principle was not the human person but property . The dominant spirit of western Europe has become the "petite bourgeois," he said .
 He began to see the Russian peasant commune as a possible source for a new social order . Like the Slavophiles, he began to think of the Russian peasants .
 His socialism was tempered by his commitment to individual freedom and skepticism about simple solutions . But his socialism was always tempered by a good deal of skepticism about solutions .
 Bakunin has been described as a “founder of nihilism and anarchy” Bakunin said he was born not under a star but under a comet . He began peacefully enough as an enthusiast of German thought .
 Before long he turned to Left Hegelianism and moved beyond it to anarchistism . He turned to anarchism and a sweeping condemnation of state, society, economy, and culture in Russia .
 Bakunin emphasized destruction, proclaiming in an early article that the passion for destruction was itself a creative passion . Bakunin proclaimed in a signal article that he believed in the destruction of the world .
 Herzen bitterly witnessed the defeat of the revolution of 1848 in Paris . Bakunin attended the Pan-Slav Congress in Prague and participated in the revolution in Saxony . Herzen saw the defeat in Paris in 1848 .
 Austrian government handed him over to Russian authorities . He was to spend over a decade in fortresses and Siberian exile .
 Many small radical groups emerged in these years, inspired by a variety of ideologies . Many small groups emerged from the 1960s to 1990s .
 The Petrashevtsy were a circle of people associated with Dostoevsky's literary circle . The circle is famous for their traumatic experience in the life of the young Dosteevsky .
 Two score or more men gathered on Fridays at the home of Mikhail Butashevich-Petrashevsky in St. Petersburg, Russia, in 1849 .
 St. Petersburg, Russia, was the birthplace of Utopian socialist Charles Fourier . The city was inspired by the teachings of Fourier, the French socialist philosopher . The Russian city was founded in 1903 after the fall of Napoleon III .
 Fourier preached the peaceful transformation of society into small, well-integrated, and self-supporting communes . Fourier: Small communes would provide for the release and harmony of human passions .
 Many Petrashevtsy added to Fourierism political protest, demand for reform, and general opposition to the Russia of Nicholas I . The government condemned twenty-one men to death, although it changed their sentence at the place of execution in favor of less drastic punishments .
 The Petrashevtsy, it should be noted, generally came from lower social strata than did the Lovers of Wisdom, the Slavophiles, and the Westernizers . They included mostly minor officials, junior officers, and students .
 As educated Russians grew critical of the established order and more committed to radical change, the abstractions of German idealism and even the vague spirit of revolt born of Romanticism disintegrated . We can see that .
 The talk became more critical of current realities, and some turned to action . Herzen’s publication of free and defiant words at his press in London was published in London . Bakunin's armed defiance of the establishment on Europe's revolutionary barricades is seen as a model for the
 As the movement grew, its social reach expanded beyond the nobility . Also, as the movement grows, it became more mainstream .
 This was the beginning of a process that would have a profound impact on the rest of Russian history . As this often-heard phrase suggests, this was the start of the process .
 The Arts Architecture flourished in the early nineteenth century, much of it still sponsored by the government . Much of the Arts Architecture was still sponsored in the UK .
 Neo-classical and Empire style reached its height in Russia during the time of Alexander I . It strongly affected the appearance of St. Peter the Apostle .
 St. Petersburg, Moscow, and other towns, as well as countless manor houses all over the empire . The Russian Empire is home to countless mansions and mansions .
 Leading architects included Andreian Zakharov, who created the Admiralty building in St. George's Square .
 Andrei Voronikhin, of serf origin, built Kazan Cathedral and a number of imperial palaces . Carlo Rossi designed many important squares and buildings in the capital, including the Alexandrinsky theater and square. Carlo Rossi .
 Under Nicholas I, neo-classicism gave way to an eclectic mixture of styles . The style was neo-Classicism under Nicholas I .
 Isaac’s Cathedral is a major example; it has been described by specialists as both grand and majestic and fundamentally tasteless and inelegant . Isaac's Cathedral is one of the world's most famous landmarks .
 Russian music, largely owing to the brilliance of Mikhail Glinka, 1804-57, finally achieved originality and stature . Russian music was largely due to Glinka's brilliance, and his music was original .
 Glinka has been viewed as the ‘father of Russian national music’ with his extensive use of folkloric melodies and motifs .
 Ivan Susanin’s opera about the Time of Troubles premiered in 1836 . It was described as a perfect reflection of Uvarov's ideas of Official Nationality . Nicholas I certainly praised it .
 Glinka composed folk-songs not to create a new national music but simply to denote when folk characters were present . Critics of this view agree that Glinka was patriotic but argue that he composed fully in a European tradition .
 Theater flourished as well, due to the new availability of Russian plays, which included masterpieces such masterpieces as Woe from Wit and The Inspector General, and the emergence of some excellent actors . Theater flourished due to availability of new Russian plays .
 Landlords continued to establish private theaters on estates, with serfs as actors . Serfs continued to play in private theaters .
 As the skillfullness of dancers grew the training of French and Italian masters, a new sense of ballet as a Russian art began to emerge .
 Chaadaev’s claim that Russia was a blank in the cultural order of things and had contributed nothing to “the progress of the human spirit” was already extreme when these words appeared in print in 1836 . Chaadaeva”s claim would have found even
 The Tsar could not appear without being followed by demonstrative crowds running after his carriage . Crowds of peasants and educated men stood in front of the palace, shouting hurrahs .
 The redemption tax for the land was an indemnity to the nobles in lieu of the obligations of serfdom . They knew perfectly well how difficult it would be to pay the redemption tax, which was in reality .
 When I saw our Nikolskoe peasants, fifteen months after the liberation, I could not but admire them . "I admire them," he said of the Nikolsko peasants .
 Their inborn good nature and softness remained with them, but all traces of servility had disappeared . All traces of their servility were gone, but they were never servile .
 They talked to their masters as equals talk to equals, as if they never had stood in different relations . "They talked to each other as equals," they said, "as if they had stood different relations"
 Alexander It succeeded his father, Nicholas I, on the Russian throne at the age of thirty-seven . Alexander IT succeeded Nicholas I on the throne aged 27 . Alexander I succeeded Nicholas II at age 37 .
 He had received a rather good education as well as considerable practical training in the affairs of state . He had also received practical training .
 Alexander’s teachers included the famous poet Zhukovsky, who has often been credited with developing humane sentiments in his pupil .
 Grand Duke Alexander remained an obedient son of his strong-willed father . Alexander showed no liberal inclinations prior to becoming emperor .
 He retained an essentially conservative mentality and attitude throughout his life . Indeed he retained a conservative mentality throughout the life .
 Alexander II's manifesto announcing the end of the Crimean War promised reform . Alexander II promised reform, and this produced a strong impression on the public . The Emancipation of the Serfs was the first attempt to emancipate the serfs .
 The new emperor's first measures, enacted even before the termination of hostilities, included the repeal of some of the Draconian restrictions of Nicholas I's final years, such as those on travel abroad and on the number of students attending universities .
 Much had changed in regard to serfdom during the intervening fifty or fifty-five years . However, much had changed during that period .
 Human bondage satisfied less and less effectively the economic needs of the Russian Empire . Human bondage, as indicated in an earlier chapter, satisfied less .
 With the growth of the money economy and competition for markets, the deficiencies of low-grade serf labor became more obvious . The deficiencies of Serf labor have become more obvious in the modern world .
 Many landlords could barely feed their serfs; and the gentry accumulated an enormous debt . Many landlords, especially those with small holdings, could barely . feed their . serfs . And many landlords were unable to feed them .
 Free labor became more common throughout the Russian economy during the first half of the nineteenth century . As we know, free labor, whether really free or merely the contractual labor of someone else’s serfs, was more common in Russia .
 Interpretations of the Russian economic crisis in mid-nineteenth century range from Ivan Kovalchenko’s emphatic restatement, with the use of quantitative methods, to Pavel Ryndziunsky’�s stress on the general loosening of the social fabric .
 Economic liberals at the time, and generations of historians since, have agreed that serfdom was becoming increasingly anachronistic . Serfdom is now an increasingly important part of the world's history, but it's not the first time it's been so much .
 Some scholars have questioned the evidence behind arguments about the economic failure of serfdom or the decline in peasant living standards .
 In any case, perception and opinion is usually more determining than facts alone . "Perception and opinion" is more important than facts, according to the author .
 The majority of government officials and most of the landowning nobility did not share the view that serfdom must be abolished for economic reasons . Whatever the economic facts, it is clear that the majority of people did not believe in abolishing serfedom .
 The fear of peasant rebellion has often been identified as a key reason the state finally acted to end serfdom . The fear was often cited as a reason for the state's decision to act against serfedom .
 The serfs kept rising against their masters. Oppressed and exasperated beyond endurance, the serfs rose against their master . Oppressed serfs were exasperated by endurance .
 The Pugachev rebellion was the first Russian peasant uprising in Russia in the 19th century . The uprisings became more frequent and on the whole more serious .
 Ignatovich emphasized that the uprisings also increased in length, in bitterness, in the human and material losses involved, and in the military effort necessary to restore order . Ignatovic: Uprisings increase in length and in bitterness .
 Semen Okun and other Soviet scholars further expanded Ignatovich’s list of uprisings . The list was expanded by Soviet scholars .
 The gendarmerie stressed the danger of serfdom during the reign of Nicholas I . Besides rising in rebellion, serfs ran away from their masters, sometimes by the hundreds and even by the thousands .
 On occasion large military detachments had to be sent to intercept them . On occasion they were intercepted by soldiers .
 A growing sentiment for emancipation, based on moral grounds, also contributed to the abolition of serfdom . A growing trend for emancipation led to the emancipation of the serfans in France .
 The Decembrists, the Slavophiles, the Westernizers, the Petrashevtsy, some supporters of Official Nationality, together with other thinking Russians, all wanted the abolition of serfdom .
 As education developed in Russia, more humane feelings and attitudes became more widespread . As Russian literature came into its own, humane feelings were more widespread in Russia .
 Pushkin and particularly Turgenev, who in 1852 published in book form his magnificent collection of stories, Sportsman's Sketches, where serfs were depicted as full-blown human beings, no doubt exercised an influence .
 On the eve of the abolition of serfdom in Russia, virtually no one defended that institution . The arguments of its proponents were usually limited to pointing out the dangers implicit in such a radical change .
 Crimean War provided additional evidence of the dangers and dangers of serfdom . Crimean War found reflection in the poor physical condition and listlessness of recruits and in the general economic backwardness of the country .
 Russia had essentially to rely on a standing army without a reserve, Alfred Rieber says . The government was afraid to allow soldiers to return to villages, he says .
 Alexander II said it would be better to abolish serfdom from above than wait until it would begin to abolish itself from below . Alexander II asked the gentry of Moscow to consider the matter .
 Lithuanian gentry offered to discuss emancipation without land . Government had difficulty in eliciting any initiative from landlords on the subject of emancipation .
 The ensuing imperial rescript made it clear that emancipation was indeed official policy and, furthermore, that emancipation would have to be with land . The resulting rescript was made official policy . It was also decided that emancipation must have been with land.
 A remarkable aspect of the coming of emancipation was the publicity and public discussion that surrounded this process . A remarkable part of the emancipation process was the public discussion surrounding this process.
 The government announced its plans and invited discussion and suggestions—a process of openness and publicity known as glasnostost . The government has invited discussion, suggestions, and the process is known as 'glas nostost'
 Noble assemblies were asked to discuss how the reform should be implemented . Noble assemblies sometimes opened their sessions to non-nobles. Noble assemblies also opened their discussions to non .
 Restrictions on discussing the abolition of serfdom in the press were lifted . Restrictions were lifted on discussions of the abolition in the media .
 Alexander asked the police to submit weekly reports on the public's attitude and mood, and warnings and even arrests could result when overly critical opinion was voiced . At the same time, Alexander asked police to send weekly reports to the public .
 In any case, a wave of expectation and enthusiasm swept the country after the publication of the rescript .
 Eventually, in 1858, gentry committees were established in all provinces to consider emancipation . Main Committee of nine members was set up in St. Louis, Missouri and St. Antrim .
 Landlords accepted the abolition of serfdom once the government had made its will clear . Landlords wanted the reform to be carried out as advantageously for themselves .
 The gentry of southern and south-central Russia, with its valuable, fertile soil, wanted to retain as much land as possible and preferred land to a monetary recompense . Northern and central Russia, by contrast, considered serf labor and the resulting obrok as their main asset
 Gentry committees differed on such important issues as the desirable legal position of the liberated serfs and the administration to be provided for them . The committees also differed on the legal position and administration of freed serfs .
 The opinions of provincial committees went to the Editing Commission . The body was created at the beginning of 1859 and composed of public figures interested in the peasant question .
 The Editing Commission submitted its plan of reform to the Main Committee . After twenty months of work the plan was submitted to the State Council . The plan was eventually passed to the state council .
 Alexander II signed the emancipation manifesto on March 3, 1861—February 19 on the Russian calendar . After its quick consideration by the State Council, the manifesto was approved by Alexander II .
 The emancipation reform faced the hostility of conservatives in government and society . Throughout its protracted and cumbersome formulation and passage the emancipation reform was faced by conservatives . The reform faced a long and arduous gestation period .
 A far-reaching law was finally enacted can be credited to the determined efforts of so-called “enlightened bureaucrats” and “liberals” Officials such as Nikolai Miliutin, the immediate assistant to the minister of the interior and the leading figure
 The emperor in effect forced the speedy passage of the measure through an antagonistic State Council . The State Council managed to add only one noxious provision to the law, that permitting a “pauper’s allotment,” which will be mentioned later .
 The conservatives defended the interests and rights of the gentry, the ‘liberals’ were motivated by their belief that the interests of the state demanded a thoroughgoing reform . Whereas the conservatives defended . the interests . of the . gentry .
 In addition to landowners’ serfs, the new freedom extended to peasants on the lands of the imperial family and to the huge and complex category of state peasants . The new freedom was extended to the vast category of peasants .
 The detailed provisions of the land settlement were extremely complicated and different from area to area . The peasants were to obtain roughly half the land, that part which they had been tilling for themselves, the other half staying with the landlords .
 Serfs had to repay the landlords for the land they acquired and had to pay them back . Because few serfs could pay anything, the government compensated the gentry owners with treasury bonds .
 Former serfs in turn were to reimburse the state through redemption payments spread over a period of forty-nine years . The former serfs were to receive the state's redemption payments .
 As an alternative, serfs could take one-quarter of their normal parcel of land, the so-called “pauper’s allotment,” and pay nothing . Serfs could pay nothing for a quarter of their usual parcel, the ‘pau
 Except in Ukraine and a few other areas, land was given, not to individual peasants, but to a peasant commune . Land was given to peasants not individual peasants but to communes .
 The emancipation of the serfs can be called a great reform, although an American historian probably exaggerated when he proclaimed it to be the greatest legislative act in history . The emancipancy of serfs was the greatest reform in history, but it was probably exaggerated .
 Some 52 million peasants, over 20 million of them serfs of private land owners, were serfs . It directly affected the status of some 52 million people . The country's peasants are serfs or serfs, some of whom are peasants .
 The liberation of 4 million black slaves in the U.S. was obtained as a result of a huge Civil War, not by means of a peaceful legal process . That should be compared, for example, to the almost simultaneous liberation of almost 4 million slaves in America . That's not
 The moral value of the emancipation was no doubt tremendous, if incalculable, the emancipation of women in 18th century was tremendous . The emancipation of American women was a major factor in emancipation .
 The specific provisions of the new settlement have also been defended and praised, especially on the basis of the understanding that the arrangement had to be a compromise, not a confiscation of everything the gentry owned .
 The emancipation of serfs in Russia has been favorably compared to the largely landless emancipation in Prussia at the beginning of the nineteenth century, and the land allotments of Russian peasants, in several other countries .
 While in theory they were to retain the acreage that they had been tilling for themselves prior to 1861, in fact they received 18 percent less land .
 In some cases, 40 percent or more of the total was lost in some provinces . The loss exceeded the national average, amounting in some cases to 40 percent .
 Former serfs often failed to obtain forested areas or access to a river . They had to assume additional obligations toward their onetime landlords to satisfy their needs .
 Other scholars have stressed the overpopulation and underemployment among former serfs . Former serfs were no longer obliged to work for the landlord and had less land to cultivate for themselves .
 State peasants received, although by no means prosperous, received, on the whole, better terms than did the serfs of private owners . State peasants were not prosperous, but they received better terms, says historian .
 The financial arrangement proved unrealistic and impossible to execute . The financial arrangements proved impossible and difficult to execute.
 Free serfs kept meeting as best they could the heavy redemption payments, which were not related to their current income, kept mounting . The arrears kept mounting for the freed serfs in the 18th century .
 By the time the redemption payments were finally abolished in 1905, former serfs paid, counting the interest, 1. billion rubles for the land initially valued at less than a billion . The redemption payments for land were abolished in 1903 .
 It should be noted that while officially the serfs were to redeem only the land, not their persons, actually the payments included a concealed recompense for the loss of serf labor .
 More had to be paid for the first unit of land, the first desiatina, than for the following units . More was paid for more than the first units of land than the following ones .
 The suspect Polish and Polonized landlords of the western provinces constituted an exception, for they were given slightly less money than the just price of their land . The suspect .
 The transfer of land in most areas to peasant communes rather than to individual peasants has been judged another major error, although this is an extremely complex issue . Transfer of land to peasants communes is a 'major error' in the UK .
 Arguments in favor of the commune ranged from the Slavophile admiration of the moral aspects of that institution to the desire on the part of the government to have taxes and recruits guaranteed .
 As a practical matter the government could hardly have expected to break up the commune at the same time the serfs were being freed and peasants were deeply attached to the village . The economic disadvantages of the village may have outweighed its advantages, as a result of its advantages .
 Russian agriculture drastically needed improvement and modernization . Of most importance was the fact that the commune's community survival stands above all other values, which was important .
 The emancipation reform disappointed Russian radicals, who considered it inadequate . It was the first Russian emancipation reform to be implemented .
 It disappointed peasants who apparently believed they had a right to all the land they worked without payment . More important, it disappointed peasants, who thought they were entitled to all their land .
 A rash of agrarian disturbances followed the abolition of serfdom . The misery, despair, and anger in the countryside remained a powerful threat to imperial Russia until the very end of imperial rule .
 Alexander II and his assistants turned next to the reform of local government, to the establishment of the so-called zemstvo system . Alexander II was the first to reform local government in the early 1900s .
 For centuries local government had remained a particularly weak aspect of Russian life . Local government has remained a weak part of Russian administration .
 The arrangement that the “Tsar-Liberator” inherited dated from Catherine the Great's legislation and combined bureaucratic management with some participation by the local gentry . The considerable manorial jurisdiction of the landlords on their estates formed another prominent characteristic of the prereform countryside .
 The new law, enacted in January 1864, represented a strong modernization and democratization of local government . It was a far-reaching effort on the part of the state to meet the many pressing needs of rural Russia and to do this largely by stimulating local initiative .
 The word zemstvo itself connotes land, country, or people, as distinct from the central government . Institutions of self-government were created at both the district and provincial levels .
 Representation was proportional to landownership, with some allowance for the possession of real estate in towns . Representation in the 17th century was proportionate to landowners .
 Members of district assemblies elected from their own midst, regardless of class, delegates to their provincial assembly . Members of districts assemblies, in turn, elected members of their own assembly .
 The district and provincial zemstvo assemblies met only once a year to deal with such items as the annual budget and basic policies . They elected boards to serve continuously as the executive agencies of the system and to employ professional staffs .
 The zemstvo system has legitimately been criticized on a number of counts . The system has been criticized for being unfair on the basis of its constitution .
 For a long time it encompassed only the strictly Russian areas of the empire, some thirty-four provinces, not the borderlands . For example, for a long . time it was only Russian areas, not borderlands, not borders .
 It possessed a limited, many would say insufficient, right to tax . Also, it had a limited right to do so, many say insufficient .
 A governor could in various ways interfere with the work of a zemstvo, but not vice versa . In broader terms, it represented merely a junior partner to the central government, which retained police and much administrative control .
 The smallest zemstvo unit, the district, proved too large for effective and prompt response to many popular needs . The desirability of further subdivisions soon became apparent .
 Even such a system constituted a great step toward democracy for autocratic and bureaucratic Russia . Yet, even such a . democracy for . autocratic . Russia, Russia .
 The zemstvo institutions functioned effectively also in those areas where there were no landlords and where peasants managed the entire system of local self-government .
 The zemstvo system was established in Russia in 1864 and ended in 1917 . It was established to help rural Russia from 1864 to 1917, but was largely ineffective .
 It was important for public education and health in the United States . It was especially valuable for its contributions to public education .
 Russia obtained a kind of socialized medicine through the zemstvo long before other countries, with medical and surgical treatment available free of charge . In effect, Russia has socialized medical treatment long before others .
 The zemstvo system also served, contrary to the intentions of the government, as a school for radicalism and especially liberalism . liberalism found little opportunity for expression on the national, as distinct from local, scene until the events of 1905 and 1906 .
 In 1870 a municipal reform reorganized town government and applied to towns many of the principles and practices of the zemstvo administration . In 1870 the town government was reorganized and reorganized by town councils . The reform was a result of the reorganized municipal reform .
 The new town government was “to take care of and administer urban economy and welfare,” consisted of a town council and a town administrative board elected by the town council .
 The town council was elected by all property owners or taxpayers . The election was according to a three-class system, which gave the small group on top that paid a third of the total taxes . The mass at the bottom accounted for the last third of taxes .
 The Russian judiciary needed reform probably even more than the local government did . Russian judiciary needs reform probably more than local government does, says Alexander Nekrassov .
 The old system was thoroughly hated by informed and thinking Russians . It was based on the class system rather than on the principle of equality before the law, and relying entirely on a written procedure .
 The most significant single aspect of the reform was the separation of the courts from the administration . The separation of courts from administration was the most significant part of the reforms .
 Instead of constituting merely a part of the bureaucracy, the judiciary became an independent branch of government . The judiciary is no longer a mere part of government, it is a powerful and independent branch .
 Judges were not to be dismissed or transferred, except by court action . Judges would not be dismissed, transferred or dismissed, except for court action. Judges would have to be removed from their posts . Judges had to be transferred, not dismissed, unless they were transferred .
 Judicial procedure acquired a largely public and oral character instead of the former bureaucratic secrecy . Judicial procedure has become a much more public than bureaucratic secrecy.
 The contending parties were to present their cases in court and have adequate legal support . Contending parties will be presented in court on Thursday .
 Reform virtually created the class of lawyers in Russia, who began rapidly to acquire great public prominence . In fact, the reform virtually created a class of lawyer in Russia .
 Two legal procedures, the general and the abbreviated one, replaced the chaos of twenty-one alternate ways to conduct a case . The general and abbreviated ones replace the other twenty-21 alternate ways of conducting a case.
 Trial by jury was introduced for serious criminal offenses . Justice of the peace was established to deal with minor civil and criminal cases .
 All Russians were to be equal before the law and receive the same treatment . All Russians should be treated the same way, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: 'All Russians are equal before and under the law. All Russians must be equal'
 Exceptions to the general system were the military and ecclesiastical courts, together with special courts for peasants who lived for the most part by customary law .
 Almost overnight it transformed the Russian judiciary from one of the worst in the world . The Russian judiciary has transformed the country's judicial system into a modern world .
 The government withdrew whole categories of legal cases from the normal procedure of 1864 and to subject them to various forms of courts-martial . Later the government tried on occasion to influence judges for political reasons .
 Reform of the judiciary could be restricted in application, it could not be undone by the imperial government . Modern justice replaced arbitrariness and confusion with modern justice, he says .
 Russian legal reform followed Western, especially French, models, but, as Samuel Kucherov and others have demonstrated, these models were skillfully adapted to Russian needs . Russian legal reforms have been successfully adapted to the needs of the country .
 It might be added that the courts, as well as the zemstvo institutions, acquired political significance, for they served as centers of public interest and enjoyed greater freedom of expression than was generally allowed in Russia .
 The reform exercised an important general impact on Russian society and contributed to the modernization and democratization of the country . Inspired by military needs and technically complex, the reform exercised a general impact .
 Dmitrii Miliutin wanted to profit by the example of the victorious Prussian army . It was executed by the Minister of War Dmitriai Miliutsin's brother .
 He introduced a variety of significant innovations, including the change in military service . The most important was the change of military service, he said .
 The obligation to serve was extended from the lower classes alone to all Russians . The length of active service was drastically reduced from twenty-five years in the beginning of Alexander II's reign to six after the reform .
 Recruits were to be called up by lot; different exemptions provided for hardship cases . Terms of enlistment were shortened for those with education, a not unwarranted provision in Russian conditions .
 Miliutin abolished corporal punishment in the army, established specialized military schools, established elementary education for all draftees . Miliutsin also reformed military law and legal procedure, and introduced elementary education .
 Measures similar to Miliutin’s were carried out in the navy by Grand Duke Constantine . The measures are similar to those carried out by the Grand Duke of Constantine .
 Alexander II's reforms under Alexander II included the establishment of a single state treasury, publication of the annual budget, and the creation of the State Bank to centralize credit and finance . Alexander II also generally liberalized steps with regard to education and censorship .
 The government's reforms stimulated continued and sometimes dramatic changes in the economy and social relations, to be discussed in a later chapter . Vastly important in themselves in themselves, the reforms also stimulated continued economic and social changes .
 The development of capitalism, the decline of the gentry, the rise of a middle class, and the growth of a working class, were affected by the reforms . The decline of gentry and rise of middle class were also affected by reforms .
 Russia began to take long strides on the road to becoming a modern society . Indeed, Russia began taking long strides in the process of modernizing its society .
 Change was also making this authoritarian political order increasingly anachronistic and, in the eyes of many Russians, a brake on continued progress . But change is also making authoritarian political orders increasingly more difficult to deal with .
 The government could not restore the old social and legal order, it could stop advancing on the new road and try to restrict and limit the effectiveness of the changes . The government was unable to restore the social order, but could try to limit its effectiveness .
 Alexander II and Alexander III attempted to do so in the second half of Alexander II's reign, under Alexander III, and under Nicholas I until the Revolution of 1905 . Alexander III and Nicholas I were kings of Russia until 1905 .
 While the need for reforms had been apparent, the rationale of reaction proved less obvious and more complicated . The need for reform was apparent, but the rationale was less obvious, more complicated.
 The reforms had their determined opponents in official circles and among the Russian gentry, who did their best to reverse state policy . For one thing, the reforms, as we know, they had their opponents .
 Special circumstances played their part, such as peasant uprisings, student disturbances, the unexplained fires of 1862, the Polish rebellion of 1863, and Dmitrii Karakozov's attempt to assassinate the emperor in 1866 .
 The “great reforms,” together with the general development of Russia and the intellectual climate of the time, led to pressure for further reform . The ‘great reforms’ led to the introduction of ‘Great Reforms’ in Russia, the author says .
 The granting of a constitutional monarchy and certain other concessions would have satisfied most of the demand and provided stability for the empire . Possibly the granting of the constitutional monarchy would have provided stability .
 Alexander II and certainly his successors were willing to go that far . But neither Alexander II nor certainly his . successors . Neither Alexander or Alexander II . certainly . would be willing to . go further .
 They turned against the proponents of more change and fought to preserve the established order . Instead they turned against change and turned against it .
 Alexander II's "great reforms" came only after the Crimean War, and they owed little to any far-reaching liberalism or vision . The “great reforms” had come only after Crimean War had demonstrated the total bankruptcy of the old system .
 The sequel showed how difficult it was for the imperial government to learn new ways . The sequel to the original film was based on the novel's success in China .
 After the political stillness and immobility of Nicholas I's reign, the early 1860s in Russia were loud and active . After the “great reforms” of the ‘great reforms,” the early 18th century Russia was active . The Russian Revolution was a
 In 1861 and 1862 disturbances, provoked largely by the clumsy and authoritarian policies of the new minister of education, Count Admiral Evfimii Putiatin, swept Russia .
 In 1862 a series of mysterious fires broke out in St. Louis, Missouri, in the same year of 1862 .
 In 1861 and 1862 leaflets urging revolution began to appear in different Russian cities . Also, in 1862 and 1863 leaflets urging the revolution appeared in different cities .
 The challenge of anti-imperial nationalism to Russian policies, and the limits of government reformism, was again highlighted by the problem of Poland .
 His early policies, which partly restored Polish autonomy, pointed to the possibility of greater change . Still, his early policies still pointed to greater change, but his policies have not changed .
 Marquis Alexander Wielopolski was put in charge of the Polish administration . The Marquis was the first Polish official to take over the situation .
 His rule combined cultural autonomy for Poland with social reforms and repression of dissent . His rule was a mixture of reform and repression that would also often be seen in Russia .
 The imperial government took steps to draft into the army thousands of young Polish men, mostly students, into it . When, following a series of disorders, the imperial government tried to draft them .
 Poles possessed no regular army and had to fight for the most part as guerrilla bands . In contrast to the situation in 1831, the Poles had no regular armies and fought for most of the time as guerrillas .
 Insurgentism spread to Lithuanian and Belorussian lands, and lasted from January 1863 until it was finally suppressed in May 1864 . The insurrection grew quickly, spread to Lithuania, Belorussia and the rest of the world .
 Great Britain, France, and Austria tried to aid the Polish cause with diplomatic interventions but were rebuffed by Russia . Great Britain and France tried to help Polish cause but Russia rebuffed .
 Asa result of the rebellion, Poland lost the limited autonomy it had recently regained . Poland lost its limited autonomy .
 In general, the government increased centralization, police control, and Russification, with the Russian language made compulsory in Polish schools .
 A still more intense Russification developed in the western borderlands of Russia, where every effort was made to eradicate the Polish influence .
 The use of the Polish language was forbidden, and the property of the Catholic Church was confiscated . A 10 percent assessment was imposed on Polish estates, the use of Polish language forbidden .
 Uniates in Poland proper were forcibly reconverted to Orthodoxy in 1875 . In 1875 they were forcibly re-converted to the Orthodoxy . The Uniates were the Uniate of Poland .
 Scholars have remarked on the vacillations and inconsistencies of Alexander II's rule . Alexander II’s rule as a whole has been criticized for its inconsistencies and inconsistencies .
 One turning point were the troubles of the early 1860s, though we can also see movement in the opposite direction .
 A more decisive turning point, in the opinion of many historians, came in 1866, after an attempt by an emotionally unbalanced student, Dmitrii Karakozov, to assassinate the emperor . The emperor was assassinated by a student who was unbalanced .
 Count Dmitrii Tolstoy took charge as minister of education in Russia in 1818 . Government proceeded gradually to revamp schooling in Russia . Stricter controls and heavy emphasis on classical languages would discipline students .
 Over a period of years reaction expressed itself in the curbing of the press, restrictions on the collection of taxes by the zemstvo and on the uses to which these taxes could be put, in the exemption of political and press cases .
 The municipal reform took place in 1870 and the army reform as late as 1874 . On the other hand, despite the reactionary nature of the period, the municipal reform in 1870 took place .
 Another argument focuses less on change over time than on deeper sources of inconsistency . Another argument is that the government has been inconsistent with its policies .
 He often chose as his ministers and advisors men whose views were completely opposed to one another . Thus, he often chose ministers who were opposed to each other . His views were often diametrically opposed .
 A less personalized argument sees contradiction in the nature of ‘great reforms’ themselves, a certain structural ambivalence, as it were . A less personal argument is that the reforms themselves are contradictory .
 When we look at what reformers -- the tsar and his ministers -- were saying about reform, we see a certain dualism . The tsar was the prime minister of Russia in the 1920s and 1930s . The Russian Revolution was the first Russian revolution in Russia . The revolution
 Russian history dominated by a struggle between the government Right and the radical and revolutionary Left . Moderates and liberals in the middle powerless to influence the fundamental course of events .
 The Polish rebellion, hailed on the Left, stimulated conservative Russian nationalism and helped push conservatives closer to the government . The partnership between the Right and the government would never be fully amicable or trusting .
 In 1863, the onetime liberal Westernizer, Mikhail Katkov, came out emphatically in support of the government and Russian national interests . In 1863 he came out against the Russian government .
 In a sense Katkov and his fellow patriots acted much like the liberals in Prussia and Germany when they swung to the support of Bismarck . The Russian patriots who enthusiastically defended the Russian state acted like their counterparts .
 Leftist revolutionaries remained a small minority, but attracted the sympathy of broad layers of the educated public . In the long run, it proved more characteristic of the situation in Russia that, although leftist revolutionaries remained small minorities, they attracted broad support .
 The intellectual history of Russia in the second half of the nineteenth century will be summarized in a later chapter . Some aspects of Russian radicalism of the 1860s and 1870s must be mentioned .
 Following Turgenev, it has become customary to speak of the generation of the 1860s as “sons” and “nihilists” following . These "sons" with the ‘fathers” of the 1840s are often compared to
 The transformation in Russia formed part of a broader change in Europe that has been described as a transition from Romanticism to realism . The change in Russia is described as the transition between Romanticism and realism .
 In Russian conditions the shift acquired an exaggerated and violent character . In Russia, the shift became more violent and violent .
 The earnest young men and women of the 1860s wanted to cut through every polite veneer . They wanted to get rid of all conventional sham, to get to the bottom of things .
 Science came to be greatly admired in the Western world in the early 1900s . Science was considered real and worthwhile in the natural and physical sciences . Today's society is based on knowledge and reason rather than ignorance and reason .
 The casting down of idols in mid-nineteenth-century Russia constituted the moral strength of nihilism . Emancipation, and freedom constituted freedom, was a moral strength in Russian nihilism, the author says .
 The rebels of the 1860s stood poles apart from the Slavophiles and other idealists of the 1830s and 1840s . They could be considered disciples of Herzen, Bakunin, and to some extent Belinsky, in their later, radical phases .
 The radicals of the 1860s differed from the ‘fathers,” reflecting the progressive democratization of the educated public in Russia . Socially too the radicals differed socially too from the 'fathers'
 The participation of women in this movement was another very important social change. Women's participation was another social change, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The effects of education for women, combined with the iconoclastic rejection among educated youth in the 1860s and 1870s of traditional norms of gender, sex, and family, brought many women into the arena of radical thought and revolutionary politics .
 The word and concept “intelligentsia” came to be associated with a critical approach to the world and a protest against the existing Russian order . The word became associated with the concept during that portentous period .
 The Russian revolutionary movement can be traced to the revolutionary propaganda and circles of the 1860s . The Russian revolution was founded by the Russian revolutionary circles .
 By that time the essentially individualistic and anarchic creed of nihilism, with its stress on total personal emancipation, became combined with and in part replaced by a new faith, populism . The “critical realists” their political, social, and economic program .
 Populism was the main trend of the Russian radical and revolutionary movement in the last third of the nineteenth century . In the narrow sense it came to be associated with teachings of such intellectuals as Herzen, Bakunin, Chernyshevsky, Petr Lavrov, and Nikolai Mikhail
 If nihilists gloried in their emancipation, independence, and superiority to the rotten world around them, populists felt compelled to turn to the masses, which in Russia meant the peasants . In Russia, this was the peasants, and in Russia, the peasants.
 They wanted to repay their debt for acquiring education—which had brought the precious emancipation itself—at the expense of the sweat and even the blood of the muzhik, the peasant, and to lead the people .
 The intellectuals, it must be added, desired to learn as well as to teach . The intellectuals wanted to learn and to teach, the intellectuals, said the writer .
 Herzen and Bakunin believed in the unique worth and potential of the peasant commune . The commune could serve as an effective foundation for the just social order of the future, he says .
 In one way or another most populists hoped to find in the people that moral purity and probity, if you will, which their own environment had denied them . Most populists wanted to find moral purity, probity --truth -- which they own environment denied them, he says .
 Whether their search stemmed from reason and critical “realism,” irrational and utopian dreams, or a desire for a more just and happy world is a question of perspective and argument .
 2,500 went to the villages to become rural teachers, scribes, doctors, veterinarians, nurses, or storekeepers . They went to villages, some 2,000 of them, to become doctors, nurses and teachers .
 The only uprising that the populists produced resulted from an impressive but forged manifesto in which the tsar ordered his loyal peasants to attack his enemies, the landlords, the peasants .
 The muzhiks often handed over strange newcomers from the cities to the police . Indeed the muzhks on occasion handed over the strange newcomers to police .
 The police, in turn, were frantically active, arresting all the crusaders they could find . The police were also frantically active in arresting those crusaders .
 If the peasants would not act, the revolutionaries should themselves fight the government . Their successes would show the masses that the government was vulnerable and serve as an inspiration in deeds .
 Several years of revolutionary conspiracy, terrorism, and assassination ensued . Several years later, the country was overthrown by the Taliban .
 The first instances of violence occurred more or less spontaneously, sometimes as countermeasures against brutal police officials . Police brutality was a form of violence in the early 1900s .
 Vera Zasulich shot and wounded the military governor of St. Louis in 1878 . She shot him in the head and wounded him .
 Political cases have been withdrawn from regular judicial procedure . Political cases were withdrawn from judicial procedure in the wake of this humiliation for the government .
 "Before long an organization emerged that consciously put terrorism at the center of its activity. But before long, it emerged that . The organization emerged as an organization that consciously . put terrorism . at the heart of its activities .
 Alexander II was the emperor, Alexander II, who was condemned to death . Alexander II's death was the result of the assassination of Alexander III . Alexander III was the last emperor to be executed by the Romans .
 What followed has been described as an ‘emperor hunt’ and in some ways defies imagination . What followed was described as a ‘monarch of the jungle’
 The Executive Committee of the "People's Will" included only about thirty men and women . Andrei Zheliabov, who came from the serfs, and Sofia Perovskaia, came from Russia's highest administrative class, fought the Russian Empire .
 The emperor finally decided on a more moderate policy that could lead to a rapprochement with the public . After being faced by strikes, student disturbances, and a remarkable lack of sympathy on the part of the educated public, as well as by the dauntless terrorism of the �
 General Count Mikhail LorisMelikov appointed as head of a special administrative commission and several months later as minister of the interior . He was appointed as a member of a commission and later became head of an administrative commission .
 Several moderate or liberal ministers replaced a number of reactionaries . Several moderates or liberals have replaced reactionaries in the past .
 Loris-Melikov’s plan called for the participation of representatives of the public, both elected and appointed, in considering administrative and financial reforms . The plan was similar to the abolition of serfdom .
 Alexander II indicated his willingness to consider Loris-Melikov’s proposal on March 13, 1881 . Alexander II said in March 1881 that he was willing to consider the proposal .
 Alexander II's reign was perhaps not quite as dramatic as its internal history . The foreign policy of the reign of Alexander II also deserves careful attention . Alexander II was one of the most successful monarchs in history .
 It began with the termination of the Crimean War and the Treaty of Paris, possibly the nadir of the Russian position in Europe in the nineteenth century . It did much to restore Russian prestige .
 The Russians fought a successful war against Turkey and largely redrew the map of the Balkans . Notably, the Russians fought the Turkish war .
 The empire of the Romanovs made a sweeping expansion in the Caucasus, Central Asia, and the Far East . Also, in the course of the reign, the empire also expanded in Central Asia and the Caucasus .
 The changing pattern of power relations in Europe was in many ways less favorable to the state of the Romanovs in 1881 than it had been fifty years earlier . The unification of Germany in Germany, which the tsarist government helped more than hindered, was more favorable to Russia in 18
 The Crimean War meant the collapse of the world of Nicholas I, a world of legitimism with himself as its leader . Nicholas I was the leader of the Crimean War . He was the son of a Russian prince .
 Austria did everything to aid Russia’s enemies short of actually fighting . The Russian government and public bitterly disappointed with Austria, which did not actually fight .
 Prince Alexander Gorchakov turned to France as a possible ally, and Napoleon III indicated reciprocal interest . Napoleon III showed interest in Russia .
 The Franco-Russian rapprochement foundered on the Polish rebellion of 1863 . Yet at that time—in contrast to what happened thirty years later—the Franco-Russians foundered . The French and Russian governments were at odds for years .
 The imperial government could reject the argument of these powers and rebuff their intervention only because of the strong support that it obtained from the Russian public and also from Prussia . Russia could reject these arguments only because it obtained strong support from the public and Prussia.
 Bismarck realized the danger of Polish nationalism for Prussia and wanted to secure the goodwill of the tsar . Count Constantin von Alvensleben was sent to promise the Russians cooperation against the Polish rebels .
 Bismarck’s astute handling of the Russians contributed, no doubt, to the rather benevolent attitude on the part of the tsarist government toward the unification of Germany under Prussia, which involved the defeat of Austria in 1866 .
 Russia did nothing to prevent the emergence of Germany as the new continental giant, it has been called the worst mistake that tsarist diplomacy ever made . In retrospect, the fact that Russia did . nothing to . prevent the . emergence of . Germany as a continental giant has been described as the
 Russian statesmen were not the only ones in that crucial decade totally to misjudge the situation and prospects in Europe . To qualify that charge, it should at least be noted that . Russia's statesmen weren't the only .
 The British protested and an international conference was held in London in March 1871 . Russian action was allowed to stand, although the principle of general consent of the signatories was reaffirmed .
 When in the 1870s the tsarist government looked again for allies, it once more found Prussia, or rather Germany, and Austria, which had become Austria-Hungary . The tsar found the allies of Prussia and Austria in the early 1870s .
 For a century the Hohenzollerns had remained, on the whole, the best friends of the Romanovs . As to the Habsburgs, the Russian rancor against them, generated by their behavior at the time of the Crimean War, had somewhat subsided
 The new alliance, the so-called Three Emperors’ League, was formed in 1872 and 1873 . The alliance was formed by the three Emperors' League .
 Russia’s part in it involved a military convention with Germany, according to which each party was to assist with 200,000 troops if its partner were attacked by a European power . Austria-Hungary was also involved in a somewhat looser agreement with Russia .
 The League could be said to represent a restoration of the old association of conservative eastern European monarchies .
 The direction of the new alliance belonged to Bismarck . Alexander I and Nicholas I led the conservative coalition in the early 1930s . The new alliance was led by Alexander I, Nicholas I .
 The Russian government was grateful to be admitted as a partner in the project . Russia's government was "grateful" to be allowed to take part in the venture .
 Russian and German interests did not correspond in some important matters. Moreover, Russia and Germany's interests were not corresponding in some of the important matters .
 The lack of harmony became obvious in 1875 when Russia and Great Britain exercised strong pressure on Germany to assure that it would not try a preventive war against France . Great Britain and Russia exercised strong .
 The uprising against Turkish rule in Herzegovina and Bosnia began in July 1875 . It was the first uprising in the Balkans since the 18th century . In 1875, the uprising began with the uprising against the Turkish rule of Bosnia and Bosnia .
 The year 1876 witnessed a brutal Turkish suppression of a Bulgarian uprising, as well as fighting and massacres in other parts of the peninsula, and the declaration of war on the Porte by Serbia and Montenegro . The year of 1876 was a brutal suppression of the Bulgarian uprising .
 Pan-Slavism was hitherto no more than a vague sentiment, except for certain small circles of intellectuals . It became an active force in Russia for the first time .
 The last hope of Balkan nationalities in their uneven contest with the Ottomans rested on Russian intervention . But the Turks defeated the Serbs; hence the last hope was to Russia intervention .
 The imperial government considered intervention carefully and without enthusiasm . It was considered to be the first time in decades that it had considered intervention .
 Gorchakov and other responsible tsarist officials did not believe at all in Pan-Slavism . The exception was Count Nikolai Ignatiev .
 Russia declared war on Turkey on April 24, 1877 . The tsarist government had agreed an understanding with Austria-Hungary . However, international diplomacy failed to bring peace, and Russia became more deeply involved .
 The difficult, bitter, and costly war resulted in a decisive Russian victory . Russia won a decisive victory over the Soviet Union .
 The tsarist troops were approaching Constantinople when the fighting ceased . The fighting ceased when the tsarist forces were approaching the city .
 Russia obtained important border areas in the Caucasus and southern Bessarabia . Serbia and Montenegro gained territory and were to be recognized, along with Romania, as fully independent, while Bosnia and Herzegovina were to receive some autonomy and reform .
 The forces of international diplomacy turned Russia’s victory into a new humiliation . Russia's victory in the Crimea was a victory for Russia, but it was a humiliation .
 Austria-Hungary and Great Britain forced Russia to reconsider the settlement . Great Britain made the settlement with Russia in 1903 .
 Austria-Hungary was particularly incensed by the creation of a large Slavic state in the Balkans, Bulgaria, which Russia had promised not to do . Russia had specifically promised to not do this, and Austria was angry .
 The Congress of Berlin redrew the map of the Balkans in 1878 . The reconsideration took place in the summer of 1878 in Berlin, Germany .
 Serbia, Montenegro, and Romania retained their independence . Russia held on to southern Bessarabia and most of her Caucasian gains . Other provisions of the Treaty of San Stefano were changed beyond recognition .
 Bulgaria proper, north of the Balkan Mountains, to be autonomous; Eastern Rumelia, south of the mountains, to receive a special organization under Turkish rule; and Macedonia, granted merely certain reforms . Bulgaria proper was to be an autonomous, with the exception of an autonomous state .
 Austria-Hungary acquired the right to occupy Bosnia, Herzegovina, and the Sanjak of Novi Bazar, while Great Britain took Cyprus . Great Britain also took Cyprus, although not to annex, as well as Bosnia and Herzegova .
 The diplomatic defeat of Russia reflected in the Berlin decisions made Russian public opinion react bitterly against Great Britain, Austria-Hungary and Austria-Germany . Bismarck, the “honest broker” of the Congress, was less justifiably .
 Alexander II's reign of Alexander II brought mixed results . The empire of the tsars continued to expand in Asia, turning the already multinational Russian Empire into a truly colonial power . Alexander II ruled the Russian Empire in the early 1900s .
 Russia's colonial expansion made England and other colonial powers increasingly nervous . In turn, Russia’s colonial expansion in turn, it made other nations nervous .
 The third quarter of the nineteenth century witnessed enormous Russian gains in Asia, notably in the Caucasus, in Central Asia, and in the Far East .
 In 1867, the tsarist government withdrew from the Western hemisphere by selling Alaska to the United States for $7. million . Also, in 1867 the Russian government sold Alaska to America .
 Georgian recognition of Russian rule and successful wars against Persia and Turkey in the first decades of the nineteenth century had brought Transcaucasia and thus all of the Caucasus under the sway of the tsars .
 Imperial authority remained nominal or nonexistent as far as numerous mountain tribes were concerned . But imperial authority was nonexistent in many of the mountains .
 The determination to subdue the mountaineers produced a series of wars against Circassians, Abkhazians, Osetians, Chechens and others, beginning in the 1810s .
 The mountaineers, mostly Muslims, responded to attempts at attempts at Russian domination by uniting in a prolonged jihad, or holy war, in defense of their freedom and faith . The mountainese, mostly Muslim, responded .
 The complete “pacification” of the Caucasus, therefore, took decades, and military service in that majestic land seemed for a time almost tantamount to a death warrant . The complete "pacification" took decades .
 Russian troops commanded by Prince Alexander Bariatinsky staged another, this time decisive, offensive . Russian troops used a new and superior rifle against the nearly exhausted mountaineers .
 In 1859 Bariatinsky captured the legendary Shamil, who for twenty-five years had been the military, spiritual, and political leader of Caucasian resistance to Russia . Shamil was captured in 1859 . He was the leader of the Caucasian resistance against Russia .
 The Caucasus was once considered as the end of the fighting in the Caucasus . However, more time had to pass before order could be fully established there . The Caucasus is still a major source of conflict in Russia .
 The conquest of Central Asia began in earnest only during the reign of Alexander II, with a series of daring military expeditions in the period from 1865 to 1876 . Alexander II's reign was the first to conquer Central Asia in the area .
 Russians conquered the khanates of Kokand, Bokhara, and Khiva, and finally annexed the Transcaspian region in 1881 . In 1881, the Russians also annexed the region .
 Russian expansion into Central Asia bears a certain resemblance to colonial wars elsewhere and to the American westward movement . Russia's expansion of Central Asia is similar to that of the U.S. and the West .
 Central Asia was attractive for commercial reasons, as a source of raw materials, notably cotton, and as a market for Russian manufactured goods . Central Asia is attractive as a growing market for Russia's manufactured goods, especially in cotton .
 Ideologically as well, these years saw the development of thinking that much resembled Western imperialism, especially the view that Russia, as a civilized nation, had the duty to control backward peoples and bring them order .
 While natives of Central Asia were viewed as alien and inferior “others’—literally, inorodtsy—the establishment of Russian rule usually interfered little with the native economy, society, law, religion or customs .
 Russia’s imperial approach in Central Asia, as in the Caucasus, was still focused on control more than on assimilation . Russia's imperial approach to Central Asia was focused on controlling more than assimilation, says historian .
 Count Nikolai Muraviev became governor-general of Eastern Siberia in 1847 . He was later known as the Count of Amursky of the Amur . He became governor general of Siberia .
 The Pacific coast of the Russian Empire began gradually to be settled by Russian soldiers and colonists . The Pacific Coast was gradually settled by Russians and settlers .
 Russia’s renewed expansion into the Far East, as into the Caucasus and Central Asia, was inspired by economic and security interests but also by an imperial self-image as a modern empire, comparable to other colonial empires, particularly Britain .
 Writers spoke of Russia's ‘civilizing mission’ in Asia and of the prestige that this gave to the civilizers . Writers said Russia's mission in Asia gave them prestige . Russia's civilizing mission was a success in Asia .
 As Dostoevsky wrote in 1881, “In Europe we were hangers-on and slaves, while in Asia we are masters.” ‘In Asia we were masters,’ he wrote .
 Vladivostok, or “the rule of the east,” was established in 1860 . Vladimostok was the most important new city on the Pacific coast of Russia . The city was established by the Crimean War of 1860 .
 Its name signaled the commanding achievement of an empire that had now reached the very eastern edge of the Asian continent .
 The reign of Alexander III and the reign of Nicholas II until the Revolution of 1905 formed a period of deepening crisis and intensifying efforts to preserve the traditions of autocratic monarchical power . Politically and politically, Alexander III's reign was marked by an attempt to preserve autocratic power .
 At the same time, this increasingly conservative monarchy recognized the need to modernize the economy . The monarchy did all it could to stimulate industrial development, the king says .
 The 1880s and 1890s were a period in Russian history defined by rapid change in the economic and social spheres and strong reaction in the political arena . In fact, the 1880s, 1890s was a period of rapid change .
 One view of the 1905 revolution is that this was the moment when this impossible contradiction finally broke down . The 1905 revolution was a moment when the impossible contradiction broke down, says historian .
 Alexander II considered further reform as a possible path away from crisis . At the very end of his reign, as we saw, Alexander II looked at reform as possible path to crisis . Alexander II's reign ended at the end of Alexander II .
 Alexander III and Nicholas II rejected the path of political reform in the wake of his assassination and continuing social and political turmoil . Alexander II and Alexander III were assassinated by Alexander III .
 The tsar ruled out further reform in Russia in the early 1900s . The tsars were convinced of the sacredness and necessity of unlimited personal power remaining in their hands .
 The official estimate of Russian conditions and needs became increasingly unreal . The official estimates of Russia's needs and needs have become increasingly unreal.
 The government relied staunchly on the gentry, although that class was in decline . The gentry is in decline, but the government relied heavily on them .
 The last two Romanovs to rule Russia agreed on principles and policies, they differed in character . They differed on principles, policies, and they differed from each other .
 Alexander III was a strong man, Nicholas II was a weak one . Under Nicholas confusion and indecision complicated further the government's efforts . Alexander III and Nicholas II were a strong men, but Alexander II was weak .
 Alexander III, born 1845, was full of strength and vigor when he ascended the Russian throne after the assassination of his father . Alexander III was born in Russia in 1845 .
 The new ruler was determined to suppress revolution and to maintain autocracy . He made clear in a manifesto of May 11, 1881, which led to the resignation of Loris-Melikov and other leaders .
 It took a number of months and further changes at the top before the orientation represented by Loris-Melikov was entirely abandoned and the government embarked on a course away from all reform .
 The state, he believed, had as its high purpose the maintenance of law, order, stability, and unity among men . The state's high purpose was to maintain law and stability among men, he said .
 In Russia that aim could be accomplished only by means of autocracy and the Orthodox Church . In Russia, that aim is to be achieved only by . means of . autocratic and the . Orthodox Church.
 The “Temporary Regulations” were not rescinded, but instead applied to virtually anyone whom officials suspected or simply disliked . Most of the remaining members of the “People’s Will” soon fell into the hands of the police .
 For many years after the demise of the ‘People’s Will, terrorism died down in Russia, although occasional individual outbreaks occurred . For years, terrorism in Russia has died down .
 The tsarist government relied on them during the rest of its existence, with the result that Russians lived under something like a partial state of martial law .
 Alexander III’s government also enacted ‘counterreforms’ meant to curb the sweeping changes introduced by Alexander II . Alexander III's government also tried to buttress the centralized, bureaucratic, and class nature of the Russian system .
 New press regulations made the existence of radical journals impossible and the life of a mildly liberal press precarious . The life of liberal press was precarious in the 1930s, when it was banned .
 In fact most policies of the Ministry of Education—which will be summarized in a later chapter— concerned the emphasis on classical languages Alexander III in 1889 . Alexander III was the prime minister of the British Empire in the 19th century .
 The tsar and his associates used every opportunity to help the gentry and stress their leading position in Russia . The State Gentry Land Bank was set up in 1885 by the tsar .
 The peasants were considered essentially wards of the state rather than mature citizens . At the same time they imposed further restrictions on the peasants, they considered them to be children .
 The most outstanding “counterreform’” of the reign, the establishment in 1889 of the office of zemskii nachalnik, zemstvo chief, or land captain . The policies of bureaucratic control of the peasants and emphasizing the role of the
 An official who had nothing to do with the zemstvo self-government was appointed and dismissed by the minister of the interior . That official was appointed following the recommendation of the governor of the land captain’s province .
 His assigned task consisted in exercising direct bureaucratic supervision over the peasants . His task was to exercise direct . bureaucratic supervision of peasants .
 Land captain confirmed elected peasant officials as well as decisions of peasant meetings . He could prevent officials from exercising their office, or even fine, arrest, or imprison them . The fines imposed by the land captain could not exceed several rubles and the prison sentences, several days .
 Land captains received vast judicial powers, thus, contrary to the legislation of 1864, again combining administration and justice . Land captains were given vast judicial power by land captains in 1864 . This was contrary to legislation of that year's legislation, which was passed by the British Parliament .
 In fact, these appointed officials replaced for the peasants, that is, for the vast majority of the people, elected and independent justices of peace . "In fact, the peasants are replaced by the peasants," says the president .
 The law of 1889 stipulated that land captains had to be appointed from members of the local gentry who met a certain property qualification . Land captains were appointed by land captains who had to meet property qualifications .
 Each district received several land captains . Each land captain administered several volosti, that is, townships or cantons .
 Russia obtained a new administrative network, one of land captaincies . Russia obtained in this manner a new . administrative network . One of Russia's new administrative networks is a land captaincy network .
 The following year, 1890, the government made certain significant changes in the zemstvo system . The government made significant changes to the system .
 The previous classification of landholders, that of 1864, had been based on a form of property that did not distinguish members of the gentry from other Russians who happened to hold land .
 In 1890 the members of the gentry became a distinct group—and their representation was markedly increased . In 1890, members of this gentry were a distinct gentry .
 Peasants could thenceforth elect only candidates for zemstvo seats, as recommended by land captains . Peasant could then elect candidates for districts, as required by the governor . The governor made appointments to districts from these candidates, as necessary .
 Minister of the interior received the right to confirm chairmen of zemstvo boards in their office . Board members and employees were to be confirmed by their respective governors .
 In 1892 the town government underwent a similar “counterreform,” which, among other provisions, sharply raised the property requirement for the right to vote . The town went through a similar reform in 1892, raising property requirements .
 St. Petersburg decreased from 21,000 to 8,000, and that in Moscow from 20,000-to-7,000 . Moscow's population dropped to 7,000 in two years . Russia's population also dropped from 7,500 to 9,500 .
 Alexander III also witnessed increased pressure on nonOrthodox denominations . The reign of Alexander III was also seen as a growth of the policy of Russification . Alexander III's reign saw increased pressure for non-Russian denominations .
 The government also began to oppose non-Christian faiths such as Islam and Buddhism, which had devoted adherents among the peoples of the empire .
 Russification went hand in hand with militant Orthodoxy . For peoples who were not Great Russians such as the Ukrainians and the Georgians belonged to the Orthodox Church .
 Russification was practiced earlier against the Poles, especially in the western provinces following the rebellions of 1831 and 1863 and to a somewhat lesser extent in Poland proper . Russification became a general policy of the Russian government only late in the nineteenth century .
 It represented in part a reaction against the growing national sentiments of different peoples of the empire with their implicit threats to the unity of the state . In part a response to the rising nationalism among Russians themselves .
 Alexander III has often been considered the first nationalist on the Russian throne . The Official Nationality of Nicholas I was also a type of Russian nationalism . Alexander III was the first Russian monarch to be considered a nationalist .
 Measures of Russification began to be extended not only to the rebellious Poles, but, for example, to the Georgians and Armenians in Transcaucasia and even gradually to the loyal Finns .
 Jews, who were very numerous in western Russia as a result of the invitation policy of late medieval Polish kings, were bound to suffer in the new atmosphere of aggressive Orthodoxy and Russification . Jews were very many in western . Russia .
 New legislation was enacted to establish additional curbs on them and their activities . And indeed old limitations came to be applied to them with a new force, while old limitations were applied with new force . New legislation established to establish new curbs .
 Jews came to be rigorously restricted to residence in the “Pale of Jewish Settlement” that is, the area in western Russia where they had been living for a long time . Even within the Pale they could reside only in towns and smaller settlements inhabited by merchants and craftsmen
 The great bulk of the poor Jewish population was tied to its location . Educated or otherwise prominent Jews could usually surmount these restrictions, but the poor were often unable to .
 In 1881, violent pogroms occurred in southwestern Russian towns and settlements, destroying Jewish property and sometimes taking Jewish lives . The word entered the English language from the Russian word 'pogrom'
 Local authorities often did little to prevent pogroms and even encouraged them, it is claimed . Local authorities did not stop pograms and often encouraged them .
 The Russian government defined Jews according to their religion . Jews who converted to Christianity escaped the disabilities imposed on the others .
 Vladimir Putin recognized the need for progress, if only to maintain and develop the strength of the nation and the state . Like all modern Russian rulers, he recognized the needs for progress .
 What was new was the belief that economic and social change could be separated from political change . What is new is belief that social and political change can't be separated .
 Progressive economic measures were largely the work of a series of ministers responsible for finance and economy .
 We will look more closely at economic and social history in a later chapter of this chapter .
 Nikolai Bunge, who headed the Ministry of Finance from 1881 to 1887, established a Peasant Land Bank, abolished the head tax, introduced the inheritance tax, and also began labor legislation in Russia . Bunge was hoping to stimulate economic development .
 His pioneering factory laws included the limitation of the working day to eight hours for children between 12 and 15 . The prohibition of night work for children and for women in the textile industry also included night work .
 Factory inspectors were established to supervise the carrying out of the new legislation . Factory inspectors will supervise carrying out the carrying of the legislation. Factory inspectors have been established .
 Bunge had to leave the Ministry of Finance because of the strong opposition to his measures and accusations of socialism . Bunge is significant that Bunge left the ministry of finance because of strong opposition .
 Ivan Vyshnegradsky, 1887-92, and Sergei Witte, 1892-1903, would become even more celebrated for their efforts to stimulate industrial growth and modernization . They included a massive program of state railroad building and promotion of heavy industry .
 Nicholas I Nicholas II, Alexander III's eldest son, was born in 1868 . He became the autocratic ruler of Russia after his father’s death in 1894 . Alexander III died in March 1894 at the age of 92 .
 The last tsar possessed personal qualities that many have admired, such as modesty, self-discipline, faith, patriotism, patriotism and devotion to his family . He possessed a deep sense of duty, and a strong sense of devotion, many have said he was modest .
 President Barack Obama's administration has been criticized for its handling of the situation in Afghanistan . The White House has been accused of being too weak to handle the situation . Obama says the U.S. should be strong and adaptable .
 It may well be argued that another Peter the Great could have saved the Romanovs and imperial Russia . It may be argued he could have been able to save his country from extinction .
 In fact, he proved unable to remove his traditionalist political blinders even when circumstances forced him into entirely new situations with great potentialities .
 The Russian ruler enjoyed, he believed, a special bond of almost mystical love of the people . And the Russian ruler believed that he believed he had a 'special bond' with people .
 His model and inspiration was the military, whose rituals he always loved, he said . He said: 'His model was and inspiration is the military'
 Nicholas II in seventeenth-century dress for a masked ball at the Winter Palace in 1903 .
 Nicholas admired what he viewed as a more national and healthy spirit in Russia before Peter the Great . Nicholas admired the spirit of Russia before the Great. He admired Peter's health and national spirit .
 The emperor struck many observers as peculiarly automatic in his attitudes and actions, without the power of spontaneous decision . Emperor's actions were not spontaneous, but spontaneous .
 Various, often unworthy, ministers made crucial decisions that the sovereign failed to understand fully or evaluate . The sovereign failed fully or to evaluate these decisions, he says .
 Alexandra was a German-born convert to Orthodoxy whose devotion to old Russian traditions, moral conservatism, mysticism, and contempt for the reformist ideas of intellectuals were perhaps even more stubborn than Nicholas's . Alexandra became the tsar’s closest confident and advisor . The empress
 Alexandra Rasputin was one of the most notorious sign of Nicholas’s poor judgment . Alexandra was the only person to rise to the position of greatest influence in the state .
 It has been argued that Nicholas may have been a good man, even a saintly one, but that he was a miserable ruler lost in the moment of crisis .
 Lev Trotsky and other determinists have insisted that the archaic, rotten Russian system could not logically produce a leader much different from that ineffective relic of the past . Lev Trotsky has insisted that Russia's archaic system cannot logically produce an effective leader .
 The gods blind those whom they want to destroy. Or, as an old saying has it, the gods blind . Or, it has been said .
 Nicholas II hastened to make clear to society where he stood politically . In the face of expectations that he would relax the restrictive policies of his father and possibly embark on needed reforms .
 In 1895, he bluntly declared that voices have been heard of late, in some zemstvo assemblies, by persons carried away by senseless dreams . “It is known to Me that voices are heard of . late,” he said . Addressing a gathering of representatives of
 Nicholas relied on the Ober-Procurator of the Holy Synod and on other reactionaries such as his ministers of interior Dmitrii Sipiagin and Viacheslav Plehve .
 The government continued to apply and extend the “Temporary Regulations,” to supervise the press with utmost severity, and as best it could to control and often restrict education . The government .
 In 1900 the limits of zemstvo taxation were strictly fixed and the stockpiling of food for emergency was taken away from zem stvo jurisdiction and transferred to that of the bureaucracy . For example, stockpiling food for emergencies was transferred to the bureaucracy instead of the stebust
 Authorities often refused to confirm elections of board members or appointments of zemstvo employees . Authorities tried to assure only people of unimpeachable loyalty to the regime would hold public positions of any kind .
 Official Russian nationalism was closely linked to these conservative political values . Official Russia meant constant talk about the ‘loving communion’ of the tsar and his true Russian people . Restrictions and persecution were imposed for those defined as outside the national fold .
 The state sometimes celebrated, as in the ceremonies marking Nicholas’s accession, the variety of the empire’�s subjects . The state tolerated local customs and native languages, and even encouraged a circumscribed role in administration or education for non-Russians themselves .
 Russian sectarians suffered the most, in particular those groups that refused to recognize the state and perform such state obligations as military service . The sectarians were among those who refused to accept the state .
 Many of them were exiled from central European Russia to the Caucasus and other distant areas . Many of the exiled people were exiled to Russia's Caucasus region .
 The Dukhobory and other sects emigrated to Canada and the U.S. as a result of the policies of the Russian government . Lev Tolstoy helped, incidentally, by helping to emigrate to Canada .
 The state confiscated estates and charity funds of the Armenian Church and harassed other denominations in numerous ways . The state also confiscated the estates of the Armenians and harassed the other denominations .
 Russia banned from buying real estate anywhere in the empire except in the cities and settlements of the Jewish Pale . New pogroms erupted in southwest Russia, including the horrible one in Kishinev in 1903 .
 Finland represented in many respects the most telling instance of the folly of Russification . But the case of Finland represents the greatest telling example of Russia's folly, writes David Frum .
 Finland was an autonomous grand duchy from the time it was won from Sweden in 1809 . It received more rights from the Russian emperor, who became the Grand Duke of Finland . Finland remained a loyal and prosperous part of the state until the end of the nineteenth century .
 Finnish soldiers helped suppress the Poles, and in general the Finns participated actively and fruitfully in almost every aspect of the life of the empire .
 Real Russification began with the appointment of General Nikolai Bobrikov as governor-general of Finland and of state secretary for Finnish affairs in 1898 . Plehve was appointed as state secretary of Finnish affairs by Alexander III .
 Russian authorities argued that Finland could remain different from Russia only as far as local matters were concerned . Finland had to accept the general system in what pertained to the entire state . Russian authorities said Finland must accept the system .
 Governor-General Bobrikov received the right to dismiss Finnish officials and judges and to replace them with Russians in 1902 . In 1902 Governor-general Bobrikov received the right to dismiss Finnish officials and judges .
 In 1903 he was vested with extraordinary powers to protect state security and public order . He represented a definitive extension of the ‘Temporary Regulations’ of 1881 to Finland .
 The opposition in Finland became part of the revolution that spread throughout the empire . The following year the opposition in Finnish became part the revolution .
 Witte and the Ministry of Finance was the location of a very different orientation toward change, which affected many aspects of the Russian economy and life . However, under Nicholas II, as in the reign of Alexander III, as well as Alexander III .
 Sergei Witte was an economic planner and manager of the type exceedingly rare in imperial Russia . He was the type rare in the high officialdom of imperial Russia. Witte is a former Russian minister of the era .
 Witte devoted his energy and ability especially to the stabilization of finance, the promotion of heavy industry, and the building of railroads . Witte dedicated his remarkable energy to the stabilizing of finance and promoting heavy industry .
 In 1897, after accumulating a sufficient gold reserve, he established a gold standard in Russia . The measure added stability and prestige to Russian economic development, and to attract foreign capital .
 Witte encouraged heavy industry by virtually every means at his command, including government orders, liberal credits, and liberal credits . Witte tried to obtain investments from abroad, tariff regulations and improved transportation .
 The minister saw the potential contribution of railroads to stimulating the economy, unifying the empire, and even advancing foreign policy .
 Russian railroad network doubled in mileage between 1895 and 1905 . Trans-Siberian line, built between 1891 and 1903, completed later .
 Russian foreign policy had been undergoing important changes in the decades that followed the Congress of Berlin . Russia's foreign policy has been undergoing major changes in recent decades .
 The most significant developments were the final rupture with Austria-Hungary and Germany and the alliance with France . The final rupture was the alliance between France and Austria and Germany .
 The Alliance of the Three Emperors was concluded in June 1881 for three years and renewed in 1884 for another three years . The League had foundered in the Balkan crisis, but the alliance was renewed in July 1884 .
 If one of the contracting powers engaged in war with a fourth power, except Turkey, the other two were to maintain friendly neutrality . The most essential provision was that if one of Germany, Austria-Hungary, or Russia, engaged in a war with the fourth power except Turkey . The
 Russia and Austria-Hungary had conflicting interests in the Balkans . But it proved impossible for Russia to stay in the same alliance with Austria .
 The Russian quarrel with the Bulgarian ruler, Alexander of Battenberg, failed to stop the unification of Bulgaria and Eastern Rumelia in 1885 . It resulted in the abdication of the ruler and the election of the pro-Austrian Ferdinand of Saxe-Coburg to the
 Bulgaria abandoned the Russian sphere of influence and entered the Austrian zone . It left the empire of the tsars virtually without Balkan allies .
 At the same time tension in relations between Russia and Austria-Hungary increased almost to the breaking point . At the time, relations between the two countries were at their lowest point .
 Germany, by contrast with Austria-Hungary and despite the fact that in 1879 it had become a close partner of the Habsburg state, tried at first to retain the Russian connection . In 1879, Germany became a close ally of the Russian state .
 The Alliance of the Three Emperors expired in 1887, Germany and Russia concluded in secret the so-called Reinsurance Treaty . Bismarck’s “wire to St. St. Petersburg” was the result of the treaty, which was signed in secret
 Following Bismarck’s forced resignation in 1890, Germany discontinued the Reinsurance Treaty and thus severed its connection with Russia . The treaty ended in 1890 and Russia became the only major ally of Germany .
 The Russian rupture with the Germanic powers and the general isolation of Russia appeared all the more ominous because of Anglo-Russian tension over the expansion of the Russian Empire in Central Asia, which, the British felt, threatened India .
 The Russians reached as far south as the vague Afghan border in 1885 when they clashed with the soldiers of the amir . The tension reached its highest point in 1883 when the Russians reached the border of Afghanistan .
 Great Britain and Russia remained hostile to each other well past the turn of the century . They competed for influence in vast lands south of Russia, especially in Iran .
 Political realities pointed to a Franco-Russian alliance—Bismarck’s nightmare and the reason behind the Reinsurance Treaty . For France, it was as isolated as Russia and more threatened .
 Alexander III, his cautious foreign minister Nikolai Giers, and other tsarist high officials reached that conclusion reluctantly, because they had no liking for the Third Republic and no confidence in it . The traditional German orientation in Russian foreign policy died hard .
 France remained the only possible partner, and it had much to offer . Yet France remained a possible partner in the world's most ambitious project .
 Paris alone provided a great market for Russian state loans . Berlin financial market, it might be added, was closed to Russia in 1887 . Berlin was the main source of foreign financial support much needed by imperial government .
 Frenchmen proved remarkably eager to subscribe to these loans as well as to invest directly in the Russian economy . Frenchmen also invested directly in Russia's economy in the 1990s .
 Economics thus joined politics, although it would be fair to say that politics led the way . Economics and politics have joined the debate on the economy .
 Nicholas II blessing troops leaving for the front in the Russo-Japanese War, 1905 . Nicholas II was in charge of troops in Russia during the war .
 Nicholas often spoke of the Russian common people's traditional love and devotion for their tsar . He described moments like these as deeply moving . Nicholas often described the Russian people's love of the tsar and their devotion .
 Through the drawn-out negotiations the French pressed for an ever firmer and more binding agreement . Boris Nolde, William Langer, and other scholars have indicated how . The French pressed the hand of the hesitant Russians, forcing them to accept the agreement .
 In its final form, the alliance provided that if France were attacked by Germany, Russia would employ all available forces against Germany . If Russia were attacked, France would employ the same forces as Germany, or by Italy supported by Germany .
 Additional articles dealt with mobilization, the number of troops to be contributed, and other specific military plans . Additional articles discussed mobilization, mobilization, and more specific military planning plans .
 The Franco-Russian agreement was to remain in force for the duration of the Triple Alliance of Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Italy . The agreement remained in force until the end of the 1930s .
 Nicholas II approved Alexander III's foreign policy on the whole and wanted to continue it . Nicholas II wanted Alexander III to continue his foreign policy . Alexander III died in 1953 at the age of 65 .
 The new emperor proved to be less steady and more erratic than his father in international relations as in domestic affairs . However, as we shall see, as well as international relations, he proved to have been less steady .
 Alexander III relied on the careful and experienced Giers throughout his rule . Nicholas II had several foreign ministers whose differences and personal preferences affected imperial diplomacy . Alexander II relied heavily on Giers during his reign .
 The reign of the last tsar witnessed more than its share of court cliques and cabals, which on occasion exercised a strong and at the same time irresponsible influence on the conduct of Russian foreign policy . In addition, the reign .
 The initiative was in accord with the emperor's generally peaceful views . It was instigated by Russian financial stringency and the difficulty of keeping up with the Austrian armaments .
 Conference failed to agree on disarmament or compulsory arbitration of disputes . It did pass certain “laws of war’—later often disregarded in practice, as in the case of the use of “projectiles thrown from balloons’
 First of a long series of international conferences on disarmament and peace . More important, it became the first of a series of disarmament conferences in the world .
 The Second Hague Peace Conference, in 1907, was also attended by Russian representatives, but again it could not reach agreement on the major issues under discussion . In 1907, Russian representatives attended the Second Hague peace conference .
 The Russo-Japanese War Nicholas II’s own policy, however, did not always contribute to peace . Nicholas II's own policy was not always contributing to peace, however . The war ended in a bloody draw-down in 1945 .
 Aggressiveness and adventurous involvement characterized Russian behavior in the Far East around the turn of the century . The Russo-Japanese War of 1904-5 culminated in the Russo-Asian War .
 The construction of the Trans-Siberian railroad between 1891 and 1903 was justified in terms of the needs of Siberia . It served also to link Russia to Manchuria, China, Korea, and even indirectly to Japan .
 In 1894-95, Japan defeated China, obtaining the Chinese territories of Formosa, the Pescadores Islands, and the Liaotung Peninsula . The Treaty of Shimonoseki was signed by the Japanese government in 1895 . The treaty included recognition of full independence for Korea
 Before Japan could profit from the Liaotung Peninsula, Russia, France, and Germany forced her to give it up . Russia, Germany, France and Germany made it up.
 Russia concluded a secret agreement with China in return for guaranteeing Chinese territory against outside aggression, it obtained the right to construct a railroad through Manchuria to the coast .
 The East China Railway belonged nominally to a private company with a large Chinese participation . It marked in effect the establishment of a Russian sphere of influence in northern Manchuria, an influence centered in Harbin .
 Russian imperialism in the Far East had limited itself to peaceful conquest . The situation became increasingly tense. Russia had legitimate commercial interests in Asia .
 Russia responded to new opportunities more and more aggressively, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Russia responded more aggressively to opportunities in recent years, says Putin .
 Nicholas Il demanded and obtained a twenty-five-year lease of the southern part of the Liaotung Peninsula with Port Arthur . Witte’s opposition to that move was in flagrant disregard of the Russian treaty with China . The murder of two German missionaries in November 1897 led
 Lae wall a tor pe Vladivostok t//A.% es PotArthureg Japan . Japan oa gl f K y Oe "" Dp. J. Japan . Oe .
 tsarist troops remained in Manchuria on the pretext that local conditions represented a threat to the railroad . Russian forces helped to suppress the Boxer rebellion of the Chinese against foreigners in 1900-1901 .
 A group of adventurers with strong connections at the Russian court began to promote a scheme of timber concessions on the Yalu River . The scheme was meant to serve as a vehicle for Russian penetration into Korea . In addition, the group also promoted a scheme to sell timber concessions .
 Foreign Office failed to restrain or control Russian policy in the Far East . Nicholas II sided cheerfully with the adventurers, apparently because he believed in a Russian national mission in Asia . Witte, who objected energetically to the dangerous new scheme, had to leave the Ministry of Finance .
 Japan was ready, well-organized, and in effect more modern than Russia, while Russia was unprepared, disorganized, troubled at home, and at home . Russia found itself diplomatically isolated; Japan used short lines of communication, Russia had to rely on the enormously long single-track
 The Japanese destroyed the Russian navy in the Far East, besieged and eventually captured Port Arthur . The Japanese eventually pushed the main Russian army north in Manchuria . In spite of bitter engagements near Mukden and elsewhere, the Russian army pushed north .
 The Russians had suffered numerous defeats, and the government had to cope with revolutionary unrest at home . The Russian government faced numerous defeats and had to deal with unrest .
 The Japanese had exhausted their finances and, despite their victories, could not destroy the main Russian army or force a conclusion . The Russian army was defeated by the Japanese in the Battle of the Caucasus .
 In response to a secret request, President Theodore Roosevelt arranged a peace conference at Portsmouth, New Hampshire, in August 1905 . Roosevelt arranged the peace conference in response to the secret Japanese request .
 Russia ceded to Japan its lease of the Liaotung Peninsula, the southern part of the railroad up to Changchun, and the southern half of the island of Sakhalin . Both countries agreed to restore Manchuria to China; in spite of strong Japanese insistence, there
 The Russian government ended the war against Japan none too soon, for, as fighting ceased, the country was already in the grip of what came to be known as the Revolution of 1905 .
 The idea of revolution was viewed with fear and hatred by the propertied classes of the population . It was loved and revered by all who dreamed of liberty, and was loved .
 To the Russians who longed for a new life, there was enchantment in the very sound of the word . The Russians longed to be a new person .
 Russians felt obscurely that they were already halfway to liberation . Even as they conceived it, even as they pronounced the sacred words, “Long Live the Revolution,” Russians felt that they had already been liberated .
 The main weakness of the Russian monarchy of the imperial period consisted not at all in representing the interests of a “minority,” restricted in this or that manner, but in the fact that it represented no one whatsoever .
 We will examine social and ideological developments more closely in the following chapters of this article . The following chapters will examine the social, ideological developments in the United States .
 Of course, behind dissatisfied bourgeois, critical intellectuals, and angry workers spread the human ocean of impoverished and dissatisfied peasants . The ocean of discontent has risen in uncounted storms through centuries of Russian history .
 The opposition began to organize in these years, though much of this was necessarily outside of and against the law . Much of the opposition was organized outside of the law, but much of it was illegal . The opposition to the government was organized in the 1970s and 1980s .
 The terrible famine of 1891-92 marked the end of a certain lull in Russia and the resumption of social and political activity with emphatic criticism .
 Liberalism found particularly propitious circumstances for development among the professionals, though also among some gentry landlords and educated urban elites . Liberalism was found to be especially propitious among professionals and urban elites in the UK .
 On the eve of 1905, though their social base remained small, liberals could boast of many prominent names . Organizationally, they established a Union of Liberation in 1903, with its organ, Liberation, published abroad .
 Liberals were a diverse group ideologically, ranging from constitutional monarchists to republicans, from moderate reformists to radical democrats . Liberals were constitutional monarchist monarchists, republicans and moderate reformers .
 Socialists insisted that only the root and branch transformation of all social and political relationships could set Russia on the path to true emancipation . But socialists approached this ideal with the radical insistence that only . Only the root, branch transformation, could set . Russia on path to emancipation, they say .
 Various underground socialist organizations emerged in the early years of the century . Various underground groups emerged in early years .
 Ideologically, they viewed the whole laboring common people as their constituency and socialism as a future society embodying the ethical values of community and liberty . The whole laborer common people were their constituency .
 Marxists, or Social Democrats, were increasingly numerous and influential starting in the 1880s . Marxists were often closely associated with the labor movement .
 The first significant Marxist group in Russia was formed in 1895 in St. Petersburg, Russia . It was formed by the first Marxist group, the first in Russia .
 The Union of Struggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class was led by Vladimir Ulianov, known by his party pseudonym Lenin, and Yulii Tsederbaum, known as Martov .
 Arrests also followed swiftly, though in 1903 the party was reestablished at a congress in Brussels and London . Party was re-established in 1903, but was banned in 1903 .
 The party split at that meeting, mainly over organizational questions, into the Bolsheviks and Mensheviks . Lenin led by Lenin wanted a disciplined organization of professional revolutionaries . Menshevik was led by Martov, who favored a more open association .
 In time, the ramifications of that initial difference acquired great importance . The ramifications of the initial difference became very important .
 Student protests and disturbances became more frequent, constituting an almost continuous series from 1898 on . Student protests, disturbances and disturbances were more frequent .
 Sporadic peasant disturbances kept the tension high in rural areas and offered increased opportunities to the Socialist Revolutionaries . The growth of the labor movement encouraged the Social Democrats .
 In 1902, 1903, and early 1904, committees dealing with the national economy, conferences of teachers and doctors, and other public bodies, all demanded reforms .
 Their “Battle Organization” assassinated a number of important officials, including the two especially reactionary ministers of the interior, Sipiagin in 1902 and Plehve in 1904 . Grand Duke Sergei, commanding officer of the Moscow military region and Nicholas II's second cousin and brother-
 Plehve was replaced as minister of the interior by Prince Dmitrii Sviatopolk-Mirsky . Prince spoke openly as few tsarist officials had before of finding ways for the voice of ‘society’ to be heard .
 In 1904, liberals staged a ‘banquet campaign’ inspired by the French example of 1847-48 . The campaign featured fervent speeches and resolutions calling for democratizing political change . In November and December 1904, the campaign took place in France .
 The same demands have been made with increasing frequency by numerous other public bodies, including the government .
 In particular, professional organizations, such as unions, doctors and teachers, spread rapidly throughout Russia and made their voices heard .
 The Revolution of 1905 ignited by a shocking act of repressive government violence . The revolution was ignited by an act of repression in 1905 .
 Gapon’s union had begun in 1904 as part of a police effort to lure workers away from socialists and nurture their loyalty to autocracy through inexpensive tearooms, edifying lectures, and concern for their material needs .
 Meetings were marked by a mixture of social criticism, moral fervor, and sacred purpose . The organization began to act with increasing vigor to help and defend workers .
 The workers converged on the Winter Palace, unaware of the fact that Nicholas II was not there . Ironically too, the workers were converging with icons and the tsar’s portraits, as faithful subjects, nay, children, of their sovereign, begging him for redress and
 The massacre led to a great outburst of indignation in the country and gave another boost to the revolutionary movement . The massacre was the first of its kind .
 'Bloody Sunday' was a decisive break between the tsar and those loyal to him, authorities say . The tsar's death in 1918 was a major break between him and those who had remained loyal to the Russian tsar .
 Nicholas II declared early in March his intention to convoke a “consultative” assembly; in further efforts toward R.I. Social Democrats demonstrate in 1905 .
 On August 19 an imperial manifesto created an elective Duma with consultative powers, but that too failed to satisfy the educated public or the masses . The Duma was created on August 19, 2013, but failed to meet expectations .
 The revolutionary movement culminated in a mammoth general strike which lasted from the twentieth to the thirtieth of October . It has been described as the greatest, most thoroughly carried out, and most successful strike in history .
 Russians seemed to act with a single will, as they made perfectly plain their unshakable determination to end autocracy . Russians made it clear they wanted an end to autocratic rule in the country .
 To bolster their demands, society had become more organized than ever before . Society had to be more organized, society became more organized before .
 In May, 14 professional unions united to form a huge Union of Unions led by the liberal Kadets . The union is based in New York City, New York .
 Industrial workers established, without seeking official approval, trade unions, in which socialist workers and intellectuals often played leading roles .
 During strikes, factory-based and industry-wide strike committees proliferated . Business owners also began to organize, and business owners also organized .
 During the October general strike, workers and socialists in St. Louis, Missouri, directed it to direct it . Workers and socialists led the general strike in October .
 St. Petersburg, Russia, organized a soviet, or council, in the 1930s . It was a harbinger of the then unknown future . The council was the first of its kind .
 Nicholas II and his government finally capitulated . Paralyzed in their essential activities and forced to recognize the immensity of the opposition, Nicholas II .
 On October 30, the emperor, as advised by Witte, issued the October Manifesto . The emperor issued the document on October 30 .
 The brief document guaranteed civil liberties to the Russians . It also announced a Duma with the true legislative function of passing or rejecting laws .
 The October Manifesto made the empire of the Romanovs a constitutional monarchy . In short, it made the Russian empire a constitutional monarch .
 The left-liberal Kadets considered the government's concessions positive but inadequate . The Kadets are considered positive but insufficient by the Kadets .
 A new party, the Union of 17 October, or Octobrists, felt that enough had been granted and feared that demands for further change would reignite popular violence and challenge the whole social order .
 Even more consequential was the split between almost all liberals and the popular movement . The split between liberals and popular movement was significant .
 Socialists viewed reforms as creating better opportunities to fight for a true democratic transformation of Russian politics and society . Socialists continued to encourage this mass movement and viewed reforms .
 In the middle of December the government arrested the members of the St. Louis-based group . The government arrested them .
 The Soviet’s appeal for revolution found effective response only in Moscow . Workers and some other radicals fought bitterly against the police and the soldiers from December 22 until January 1, 1906 .
 The extreme Right joined the army and the police; Rightist active squads, known as the “Black Hundreds, beat and even killed Jews, liberals, and other intellectuals . The extreme right joined the police and the army .
 Proto-fascist in nature, this newly awakened Right thrived on ethnic and religious hatreds . The Right appealed especially to wealthy peasants and to members of the lower middle class in towns .
 On May 6, 1906, virtually on the eve of the meeting of the First Duma, the government promulgated the Fundamental Laws . The Fundamental Laws were published on May 6 .
 The October Manifesto had merely indicated some of its guiding lines . These laws provided the framework of the new Russian political system . It was merely a guide to the new system .
 He continued in complete control of the executive, the armed forces, foreign policy . Succession to the throne, the imperial court, imperial domains, and so forth. He continued to make war and peace decisions .
 He maintained his unique dominating position in relation to the Russian Church . He maintained unchanged his unique dominance position .
 He was to call together the . annual sessions of the Duma and to disband the . Duma . In which case, he had to indicate the time of the election and of the new Duma meeting .
 In emergency when Duma was not in session, he could issue ukazes with authority of laws . They had to be submitted for approval to the next session of the Duma no later than two months after its opening .
 Duma received important legislative and budgetary rights and functions by the Fundamental Laws, but these rights were greatly circumscribed . The Duma, to be sure, was granted important legislative rights and budgetary functions by Fundamental Laws .
 Almost 40 percent of the state budget, encompassing such items as the army, the navy, the imperial court, and state loans, stayed outside the purview of the Duma . The remainder of the budget was re-enacted in the amounts of the preceding year .
 The Laws did contain complicated provisions for interpellation, that is, questioning of ministers by the Duma . Ministers and the entire executive branch remained responsible only to the emperor .
 The State Council had functioned since its creation by Alexander I as an advisory body of dignitaries . It became the upper legislative chamber equal in rights and prerogatives to the Duma and meant obviously as a conservative counterweight .
 Legislation extended October Manifesto’s promises of reform into social policy . Legislation also extended the October manifesto's promises of social policy into social policies .
 Unions and even strikes were legalized . Employers began to organize . Police retained extensive authority to monitor union activities and to close unions for political activities .
 Nicholas II increasingly regretted the power he ceded in 1905-6 . He would do what he could in the coming years to undo the concessions he had made under duress .
 Nicholas's letters and conversations in the months and years following 1905 make it clear that he had taken Witte’s advice to issue the October Manifesto out of desperation, but that he never would compromise his fundamental political values . Nicholas‘s letters and . conversations in . years
 He refused to accept as a principle, as distinct from an expedient for the sake of stability, limitations on the tsar’s personal authority . The tsar insisted that his title as autocrat be preserved and so much power remain in his hands .
 It has been argued that Nicholas II, along with prominent conservative figures who supported and advised him, ultimately became a source of instability in the emerging political order of late Imperial Russia . Nicholas II and his conservative allies were ultimately destabilised by their support .
 Nicholas II was at the forefront of those embracing a political vision that insisted on situating legitimate state power in the person of the emperor . While ministers like Witte and Stolypin worked to construct a stable polity around the ideal .
 The tsar’s insistent attachment to this increasingly archaic political vision, it has been argued, could only have harmful consequences for Russia . It has also been argued that the tsar's attachment to the increasingly archaic vision could only be harmful .
 The Fundamental Laws introduced numerous restrictions on the position and powers of the Duma . The electoral law emphasized its representative character . The First Two Dumas were the first two .
 The electoral system, despite its complexities and limitations, allowed almost all Russian men to participate in the elections to the Duma . It transformed overnight the empire of the tsars from a country with no popular representation to one which practiced virtually universal manhood suffrage .
 The relatively democratic nature of the electoral law resulted partly from Witte’s decision in December 1905, at the time when the law received its final formulation, to make concessions to the popular mood . Witte's decision in . December 1905 was made in response to the . popular mood
 It reflected a common assumption in government circles that the peasants, the simple Russian people, would vote for their tsar and for the Right . More significantly, it reflected the common assumption that Russia's peasants would vote in favour of the Right.
 Contrary to expectations, the government had suffered a decisive electoral defeat . Contrary to its sanguine expectations, it had suffered an electoral defeat. Contrary to that, it was a decisive defeat.
 The Kadets with 38 percent of the deputies thus emerged as the strongest political party in the Duma . They had the added advantage of an able and articulate leadership wellversed in parliamentary procedure .
 Those to the Left of the Kadets lacked unity and organization and wanted mainly to fight against the regime, purely and simply . Those who opposed the regime lacked unity, organization and lacked unity .
 The cause of the Left in the First Duma had been injured by the fact that both the Socialist Revolutionaries and the Social Democrats had largely boycotted the election to the Duma . The Social Democrats and the Socialist Party had largely Boycotted .
 The deputies with no political affiliation were mostly peasants who refused to align themselves permanently with any of the political groupings, but belonged in a general sense to the opposition . The deputies refused to be permanent members of any political party, but were loyal to opposition .
 The government received support only from the relatively few members of the unregenerate Right and also from the more moderate Octobrists . The government was only supported by a relatively small group of moderate conservatives .
 The emperor and his ministers clearly intended the Duma to occupy a position subordinate to their own . They further infuriated many deputies by openly favoring the extreme Right . Many deputies were angered by the move, which they said would be unacceptable .
 They refused to proclaim their opposition to terrorism, lest their associates to the Left be offended . Similarly, they insisted on a political amnesty, while they refused to declare their opposing to terrorism .
 The imperial regime continued to stand on the side of the landlords . The former British imperial regime stood on the last to stand against the landlords.
 Nicholas II dissolved the First Duma after seventy-three days and forty essentially fruitless sessions . Nicholas II was forced to step down from the Duma in order to find a solution .
 It urged them not to pay taxes or answer the draft call until the convocation of a new Duma . The draft call is expected to take place in Moscow next week .
 It turned out to be a blunder as well, for the country failed to respond to the request . And the country did not respond, and it was a mistake .
 They lost the right to stand for election to the Second Duma which was thus deprived of much of its potential leadership . More important, they lost the chance to be elected to the second Duma .
 The government exerted all possible pressure to obtain favorable results in the election to the Second Duma . The government was assisted by the fact that much of Russia remained in a state of emergency . In contrast to the first election, the government exerted pressure to get favorable results .
 In fact, a polarization of political opinion was the most striking aspect of the election . Both sides gained at the expense of the center, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Significantly, the number of unaffiliated deputies declined by about 50 percent in the Second Duma .
 The Second Duma met on March 5, 1907, and lasted for a little more than three months . The Duma first met in 1907 and lasted three months.
 Ivan Goremykin replaced the first constitutional prime minister, Witte Witte, early in 1906 . Petr Stolypin replaced Ivan Witte in 1906, but was the able and determined Petr Stolepin .
 Stolypin had the Second Duma dissolved on June 16, using as a pretext its failure to comply with his request to lift the immunity of fifty-five, and particularly of 16, Social Democratic deputies whom he wanted to arrest for treason .
 Nicholas II and his minister arbitrarily and unconstitutionally changed the electoral law . The change in the Electoral Law and the Last Two Dumas were made on June 16, 1907 .
 The electoral change was, of course, meant to create a Duma that would cooperate with the government . The change was intended to create an electoral system that cooperates with government .
 The peasant representation was cut by more than half and that of the workers was also drastically cut . The gentry gained representation quite out of proportion to its number .
 The representation of Central Asia was eliminated on the ground of backwardness . Poland, the Caucasus, and some other border areas lost many deputies . Also, Poland and the Caucasus were also eliminated .
 At the same time the election procedure became more indirect and more involved, following in part the Prussian model . The election procedure was becoming more indirect, more involved .
 Minister of the interior received the right to manipulate electoral districts . In addition, the interior minister received a right to manipulation electoral districts.
 200,000 members of the landed gentry were assured of 50 percent of the seats in the Duma . Russia's Duma is expected to be the first state-controlled state of the country to be elected .
 The electoral change finally provided the government with a cooperative Duma . The Duma is now in power for the first time .
 Socialist Revolutionaries boycotted the Third and Fourth Dumas . The Socialist Revolutionary Party was banned from the Dumas in 1918 .
 In 1912 the government made a determined effort to obtain a Right majority that would eliminate its dependence on the Octobrist vote, but it could not quite accomplish its purpose .
 Because of their crucial central position, the Octobrists continued to play a major role in the Duma . However, their number had been drastically diminished .
 For the rest of the rest, the gain of the Right found a certain counterbalance in the loss of the Left . For the other half, the gains of the right found a balance in the balance .
 The Octobrists replaced the Kadets after the electoral change of June 1907 as the most prominent party in the Duma . They represented both the less conservative country gentry and business circles .
 Right Octobrists stood close to the old-fashioned Right . While their Left wing touched the Kadets, their Right Octoberobrists touched up the Kadetes .
 The party enjoyed the advantages of skillful leadership, says Alexander Guchkov . The party operated well in a parliament, he says .
 The Octobrist deputies, it might be noted, were the wealthiest group in the last two Dumas . They were also the richest group of the two .
 The Kadets, who became the loudest voice of the Duma opposition, were, above all, the party of professional people . Their influence extended to large layers of the middle class, as well as some landlords and other groups .
 The Right, which consisted of more than one party, defended to the limit the interests of the landlords, although it also made demagogic efforts to obtain broader support and paraded some priests and peasants in the Dumas .
 Bitter dissatisfaction, widespread among the Russian masses, found a modicum of expression in the Duma Left .
 Stolypin’s Policy: With the Duma under control, the government could develop its own legislative program . With the government under control it could develop a legislative program, he says .
 The architect of the program, Stolypin, has been described as the last truly effective and important minister of imperial Russia . The architect was described as 'last truly effective' and 'important' in imperial Russia.
 Stolypin’s “drive and persistence” and “commanding presence” were decisive in shaping the government's policies in the years 1906-11 . Abraham Asher has argued that Stolypins’ ‘drive’ was decisive .
 Contemporaries and historians have viewed Stolypin variously as the Russian leader doing the most to avert revolution through reform in the years after 1905 . Historians have viewed him as undermining progress by weakening the Duma .
 Terrorism caused some 1,400 deaths in 1906 and as many as 3,000 in 1907 . Socialist Revolutionaries-Maximalists who had split from the main party, terrorism caused 1,000 deaths .
 The victims included police officers and agents, various officials, high and low, and numerous innocent bystanders . The victims were police officers, agents, high-ranking officials and various officials .
 In August 1906, the Maximalists blew up Stolypin’s suburban residence, killing 32 persons and wounding many others, including the prime minister's son and daughter, but not the PM himself . The Maximalist blew up the residence in August 1906 .
 The trials and the execution of sentences were carried out within a matter of some two days or even a few hours . The execution of some of the sentences was carried out in a few days or hours .
 Stolypin never submitted the law creating them to the Duma and it expired two months after the Second Duma had met . The special courts-martial led to the execution of over a thousand persons .
 The Maximalists and many other terrorists were killed or executed, while numerous revolutionaries escaped abroad . Many of them were killed, while others escaped to escape abroad .
 It should be added that Stolypin continued to sponsor police infiltration of the revolutionary movement and an extremely complex system of agents and informers .
 Evno Azeff successfully combined the roles of the chief informer on the Socialist Revolutionaries and of leader of their Battle Organization . The most notorious of the most notorious double agents, the unbelievable Evno . Evno was the leader of the Socialist Party and leader of its Battle Organization
 In the latter capacity he arranged the assassination of Plehve and other daring acts of terrorism . In the former role he was responsible for the murder of the Soviet Union leader .
 Stolypin intended his ‘pacification’ to constitute a prelude to important changes, especially to a fundamental agrarian reform, he says .
 Stolypin’s so-called wager on the strong and the sober . Reform aimed at a break-up of the peasant commune and establishment of a class of strong, independent, individual farmers .
 The emergence of a large group of prosperous and satisfied peasants would, presumably, transform the Russian countryside from a morass of misery and a hotbed of unrest into a conservative bulwark of the regime . The emergence would presumably transform the countryside into a .
 In the first type all peasants simply received their landholdings in personal ownership . The second type of land ownership was based on personal ownership of the land . The first type of ownership is based on land ownership rather than individual ownership .
 In the communes with periodic redistribution every householder could at any time request that the land to which he was entitled by redistribution be granted to him in personal ownership . The communes had periodic redistribution .
 He could also press the commune to give him the land not in scattered strips, but in a single location . The commune had in effect to comply with this request if separation occurred at the time of a general communal redistribution of land .
 The commune had to divide its land into consolidated individual plots if requested to do so by not less than one-fifth of the total number of households .
 Separated peasants always retained rights to common lands, meadows, forests, and the like . The peasants were separated from each other .
 Partitioning even of pastures and grazing lands was permitted in 1911 . Indeed, partitioning even was allowed in 1911.
 Stolypin’s reform made peasants more equal legally to other classes and gave them greater potential freedom of mobility . The reform also gave peasants more potential freedom to mobility .
 Law of 1908 foresaw schooling for all Russian children by 1922 . Government also undertook other reforms, often in cooperation with Dumas .
 The government broadened labor legislation, broadened the army and national defense, and engaged in a variety of other useful activities, including broadening labor legislation .
 Only Stolypin’s controversial agrarian legislation attempted a sweeping change in the condition of the Russian people . Only that legislation had perhaps too narrow a scope, for Stolypins not to confiscate any gentry land, even with recompense .
 Constitutional Russia witnessed a terrorism of the Right in 1906 and 1907 of two Kadet deputies to the First Duma . Terrorism of the Left and the Right usually went unpunished in Russia . The assassinations of two of the Kadet deputy to the first Duma in 1907 and 1907
 Stolypin acted as a nationalist and a Russificator, for one thing reviving the ill-fated policy of trying to Russify Finland . He acted as himself from the western borderlands .
 The prime minister, who was after all something of a constitutionalist, antagonized much of the Right in addition to the Left . He antagonized both sides of the political spectrum, including the Right .
 The emperor prorogue the legislature for three days and suspend two leading members of the State Council . The highhanded tactics made the Octobrist leader Guchkov resign as chairman of the Third Duma . He managed to have one important piece of legislation enacted only .
 On September 14, 1911, Stolypin was fatally shot by a police agent associated with a revolutionary group . He was killed by police agents associated with the revolutionary movement .
 Count Stolypin’s successor, Count Vladimir Kokovtsov, possessed intelligence and ability, but not his predecessor's determination or influence within the government . Count Vladimir Koshkovtsov is a former Russian President Vladimir Putin's successor .
 After a little more than two years he was replaced by the weak and increasingly senile Goremykin . He thus became prime minister for the second time . The weak and often senile Gormykin was replaced as prime minister .
 Vladimir Goremykin assumed the leadership of the Russian government in early 1914 . In a matter of a few months he and Russia had to face the devastating reality of the First World War .
 The difficult question of Russian nationhood in an imperial context was a source of continuing concern and policy . Empire and Nation was a major source of concern for Russian imperial policy .
 Russia was not an ethnic nation but an empire that included large numbers of other ethnicities, some of whom claimed independent national histories and others who were discovering and inventing themselves as nations . As we know, Russia was . not an . ethnic nation .
 Many ethnic and religious minorities were active in urban centers, especially in business and the professions . Many ethnic, religious minorities are active in business, professions .
 Scholars have debated whether or not it is useful to interpret empire in Russia with terms like imperialism, colonialism, orientialism, frontier, and borderlands . These terms suggest useful comparisons to Western histories and practices .
 Imperial administrators and educators often better understood local needs and possibilities . Also, local policies could differ from the policy directives coming from St. Louis schools .
 Individuals were treated differently depending on their professions and their degree of assimilation . And individuals treated differently based on their profession, the historian says .
 Nicholas II, like his father, promoted a renewed Russian nationalism that often had dire consequences for those defined as outside the national fold . On the one hand, the government of Nicholas II promoted a renewal of Russian nationalism .
 Official images of the tsar’s communion with his ‘people’ pointedly excluded non-Russian nationalities . The tsar's official images of his communion with ‘the people’ in Russia were largely absent from the public .
 Nicholas I blamed explicitly on non-Russians, especially Jews and Poles, after 1905 disturbances . This exclusion grew especially strong after the disturbances of 1905, which Nicholas blamed on Jews, Poles .
 The state followed a policy of relative religious tolerance and greater possibilities for native leaders to play active roles in civic life after 1905 .
 The effort to assimilate various ethnic groups into a common imperial polity could sometimes mean respect for local customs and education in native languages .
 Imperial diversity was sometimes visibly celebrated in rituals such as when the tsar or imperial dignitaries visited the borderlands . Imperial diversity in Russia was sometimes visible in rituals like those of the Tsar or dignitary visits .
 The Russian imperial vision in these years was one of integration and uniformity . Overall, the imperial vision was that of the Russian Empire .
 The model was a polity that accepted difference only when it reinforced traditional authorities and imperial unity . Most often, especially in the final years of the empire, the model was that of the British Empire .
 The tsarist government contributed its share to international alignments, tensions, and crises . In the fateful summer of 1914 it decided to support Serbia and thus resort to arms .
 Part of the infamous ‘war guilt’ should not be exaggerated or singled out . Yet its part of the famous "war guilt" should be exaggerated, he says .
 Russian ambitions and eagerness for war were no greater than those of other countries . Russian preparedness for an armed conflict proved to be less than other countries' . Russia's readiness for war was less prepared than any other country's .
 The tsars took no part in the race for colonies overseas that constituted an important aspect of the background of the First World War . The empire of the tsars did not participate in the war .
 Russian interests and schemes in the Balkans and the Near East were paralleled by those of Austria-Hungary and eventually also to some extent by Germany .
 Even the early Russian mobilization found its counterpart in the Austrian mobilization . Even though the Russian and Austrian armies were involved in it, they were also involved .
 Austria merely thought of a quick destruction of Serbia, not of a continental conflagration . No one desired war in the summer of 1914, with the possible exception of Austria-Hungary .
 Once war began, however, various aggressive desires, including Russian ones, were quickly brought into play . Once war started, Russia was quickly brought to play .
 War broke out largely because Europe lacked an effective system to resolve interstate conflicts . Along with rivalry and ambition, Europe at the time had no effective system of resolving interstate conflicts, it was not .
 No one foresaw how devastating and politically catastrophic a new continental war would be . No one predicted how devastating it would be. Also, no one did anticipate how devastating a new war could be .
 The years that followed the Russo-Japanese War witnessed an alienation or Russia from Germany, a virtual breakdown of Russo-Austrian relations, and at the same time a further rapprochement between Russia and France as well as the establishment of an Anglo-Russian Entente .
 The agreement with Great Britain, signed on August 31, 1907, was a landmark in Russian foreign policy . The agreement transformed a relationship of traditional and often bitter hostility into one of cordiality .
 Great Britain and France had reached an agreement in 1904 . The new accord marked the emergence of the Triple Entente of France, Russia, and Great Britain .
 The alignment with France and Great Britain gained in popularity in Russia in the years before the First World War .
 It attracted the support of liberals, of many radicals, of business circles closely linked to French and British capital, and also of numerous conservatives who veered toward Pan-Slavism or suffered from tariff wars with Germany .
 New generation of Russian diplomats eager to advance Russian interests against Turkey and Austria-Hungary after quarter-century of quiescence .
 As early as 1896 the Russian ambassador in Constantinople, Alexander Nelidov, had proposed to his government that Russia seize the Straits, but that proposal was never implemented .
 Russia would accept the Austrian annexation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which Austria had been administering according to a decision of the Congress of Berlin . Austria-Hungary in turn would not object to the opening of the Straits to Russian warships . Austria in turn turned over the annexation of
 Austria-Hungary proceeded to annex Bosnia and Herzegovina before Russia could prepare diplomatically the desired reconsideration of the status of the Straits . Aehrenthal says the move was a betrayal of the mutual understanding, but not according to Izvolsky, Aeh
 Russia was left holding the bag, because other powers, especially Great Britain, proved unwilling to see Russian warships in the Straits . Great Britain was left to hold the bag .
 The tsarist government hesitated to endorse the Austrian coup but was forced to do so after receiving a near-ultimatum from Germany . The tsar government experienced further humiliation when it hesitated to end the coup .
 The years following witnessed repeated tensions, crises, and conflicts in the Balkans and the Near East . In the years following, the Balkans saw repeated tensions and crises .
 Like Austria-Hungary and Russia, Germany also pursued a forward policy in that area . Germany's policy was similar to that of Austria and Russia's .
 First Bulgaria, Serbia, Greece, and Montenegro combined to defeat Turkey and expand at Turkish expense . First time they've done so, they've expanded their territory in Turkey .
 The Bulgarians suffered a defeat by the Serbians, the Greeks, and the Montenegrins, as well as by the Romanians and by the Turks . Next, the victors quarreled and the Bulgarians lost some of their losses . The Serbians and the Greeks also
 The Balkan wars left a legacy of tensions behind them, making Bulgaria a dissatisfied and revisionist state . It further exacerbates the relations between Austria-Hungary and Serbia and further exacerbating the relations .
 Archduke Francis Ferdinand was assassinated by Serbian patriots on June 28, 1914 . Austria delivered a crushing ultimatum to Serbia, and Russia decided to support Serbia . The alternative was another defeat in the Balkans .
 Germany backed Austria-Hungary, while France stood by Russia . With the alliances operating almost automatically, alliances operate almost automatically .
 Austria-Hungary declared war on Serbia on July 28, Germany on Russia on August 1 and on France on August 3 . Austria also declared war against Serbia, Russia and France in August .
 The German attack on Belgium brought Great Britain to the side of France and Russia on August 4 . Great Britain joined Russia and France in the fight against Belgium .
 Russia in the First World War Wars have always been moments of truth in Russian history, revealing the country’s strengths and weaknesses and thereby shaping politics . The country's strength and weaknesses will be shaped by the outcome of the war, writes Vladimir Putin .
 "It was a protracted modern military conflict requiring unprecedented mobilization of society and economy as well as of military machinery and manpower," says President Obama . "The United States was engaged in a protracted military conflict with Russia in the 1990s," he says .
 The outbreak of war in August 1914 quieted political and social protest, focusing hostilities against an external enemy . Initially, however, the outbreak of World War One quieted social protest .
 Hostility toward the German Kaiser did not necessarily translate into enthusiasm for the tsar or the government . Hostility to the German government did not translate into support for the Tsar or government .
 For some, the war fed suspicions that the rich and powerful were pursuing their own interests, not those of the poor . For others, it was the war that fed suspicions of the rich .
 Russia's generals spoke with pride about the brave and righteous enthusiasm of the nation’s fighting men and of their own good spirits .
 Before very long, many Russians began to speak of the war as a catastrophe . The war was declared a catastrophe by Soviet Russia .
 By the end of 1914, nearly 400,000 Russian men had lost their lives and nearly a million were injured . Nearly a million Russian men were injured in the war .
 Far sooner than expected, scarcely trained recruits had to be called to active duty . The process repeated throughout throughout the war as staggering losses continued to mount .
 The army quickly ran short of rifles and ammunition, and even uniforms and food . The army ran out of ammunition, rifles, ammunition and uniforms .
 As many as 25 percent of Russian soldiers were being sent to the front without arms, with instructions to pick up what they could from the dead .
 Soldiers began to complain that they were treated not as human beings or even as valuable soldiers but as raw material to be squandered by the rich and powerful . With good reason, soldiers complained that they had been treated as raw materials to squander .
 Russian troops ceased retreating and there were some modest successes in offensives staged that year, though at great loss of life . Russian troops stopped retreating and died in the fighting .
 The problem of shortages was largely solved by a major effort to increase domestic production . Also, the problem of . increasing domestic production was also solved .
 By the end of 1916, morale among soldiers was even worse than during the great retreat of 1915 . And yet, by the end, morale in the British Army was worse than in 1915 .
 The fortunes of war may have improved, but the fact of the war, still draining away the strength of the country and the lives of so many families and individuals, remained an oppressive fact .
 By the end of 1915, there were many signs that the economy was breaking down under the strain of wartime demand . The economy was beginning to break down under increased strain of war demand .
 Although the causes were complex, the effects were simple and clear, especially for the urban lower and middle classes . The effects were clear for urban low and middle-class, according to the study .
 Inflation rapidly forced down real incomes, and shortages made it difficult to buy even what one could afford . Inflation forced down incomes and shortages forced people to buy what they could .
 Shortages were a problem especially in the capital—patriotically renamed Petrograd— where distance from supplies and poor transportation networks made matters worse .
 Shops closed early or entirely for lack of bread, sugar, meat, and other provisions . Bread, sugar and meat were among the items left on the shelves .
 With good reason, government officials worried about how long people’s patience would last . Government officials responsible for public order worried about public order .
 The Russian command made its share of military mistakes, but the political mistakes of the Russian government proved to be greater and more damaging . The Russian government made more mistakes than any other command in the world's history .
 Nicholas II and his ministers failed to utilize the national rally that followed the outbreak of the war . Nicholas II's government failed to use the rally to boost the morale of the nation .
 In fact, they continued to rely on exclusively bureaucratic means to mobilize the resources of the nation . They proceeded to oppress ethnic and religious minorities in the areas temporarily won from Austria as well as in home provinces .
 Russian defeats, collapse of Russian supply, and the utter incompetence of the war minister, General Vladimir Sukhomlinov, did lead to certain adjustments . Russian defeats and the collapse of the Russian supply led to adjustments, he says .
 The Duma was finally called together in August 1915 for a short session . Sukhomlinov and three of his colleagues had to resign, and the government began to utilize the efforts of society to support the army . The government began the government to use the efforts .
 Guchkov: Efforts to increase production of military materiel were led by public figures and industrialists . These efforts, it should be added, had developed on a large scale, ranging from work in the Red Cross to widespread measures to increase .
 The Zemstvo Union and the Union of Towns, which joined forces under the chairmanship of Prince Georgii Lvov, were especially prominent . The War Industry Committee, led by Guchkov, became especially prominent in Russia .
 Rapprochement between the government and the educated public turned out to be slight and fleeting . But the rapprochements between government and educated public were slight .
 Nicholas II would not cooperate with the moderate Progressive Bloc led by Miliukov . The moderate Bloc included the entire membership of the Duma, except the extreme Right and the extreme Left, and won majority support .
 A contemporary caricature, titled “The Russian Ruling House,” portrays Rasputin as the puppeteer controlling Nicholas and Alexandra . The caricature was published in the 1920s and 1930s .
 Many images of Rasputin and Alexandra were in circulation, often in the form of postcards . Some suggested an immoral intimate relationship between the pair . Many such images were circulated in circulation .
 Nicholas II, confident of God’s guidance and the inspiring effect his presence would have among officers and troops, left for the front to take command of the armed forces .
 It seemed to many Russians that the levers of government had fallen into the hands of the “German” empress and the ‘dissolute” Rasputin . As a result, many Russians believed the levers in government were taken by the German empress .
 In general, the abysmal quality of these high-level appointments made the appointments all the more grating . Rumors were widespread that Interior Minister Alexander Protopopov was demented from advanced syphilis .
 The long and gruesome murder was engineered by a leader of the extreme Right, a member of the imperial family, and an aristocrat related to the family by marriage . It was the murder of an imperial family member and aristocrat .
 As the year 1917 began, there were discussions of a palace coup to restore sanity and leadership to the imperial government . The year 1917 was the year of the year .
 Telegraph wires encircle the world, causing every heart to beat with common human interest . The world's most important news stories will be posted on CNN iReport .
 Our reality is dismal. We have no choice but to live in Russia, says The Wanderer .
 We met the new year with noisy wishes of ‘new happiness,’ but when the year ended there was little to show for it . The year ended with little success for many of the world's countries .
 The gentry, the dominant social group in the country, remained dominant social groups in the 1920s .
 Alexander III and Nicholas II made every effort to strengthen the gentry and support its interests . In fact, as already indicated, both Alexander III . Nicholas II and Alexander III tried to strengthen gentry, and support it .
 The bureaucracy that ran the empire was closely linked on its upper levels to the landlord class . The bureaucracy was closely tied to the Landlord class .
 The ministers, senators, members of the State Council, and other high officials in the capital and the governors, governors, vice-governors, and heads of various departments in the provinces belonged predominantly to the gentry .
 A year later the zemstvo “counterreform” greatly strengthened the role of the gentry in local self-government and emphasized the class principle within that government .
 In the army most high positions were held by members of the landlord class . In the navy, virtually the entire officer corps of the navy belonged to the gentry .
 The government supported gentry agriculture by such measures as the establishment in 1885 of the State Gentry Land Bank . The bank provided funds for the landlords on highly favorable terms .
 Members of the gentry owned 73. million desiatin’ of land according to the census of 1877, 65. million . in 1887, 53. million in 1905 according to a statistical compilation of that year . Nikolai Oganovsky’s calculations say only
 Much of the compensation that the landlords received as part of the reform went to pay debts, rather little remaining for development and modernization of the gentry economy . The emancipation settlement was on the whole generous to the . gentry .
 Most landlords failed to make effective use of their resources and opportunities, says Landlord Magazine . Landlords failed to use their resources to make use of opportunities, he says .
 Members of the gentry had little in their education, outlook, or character to make them successful capitalist farmers . Deprived of serf labor and forced to adjust to more intense competition and other harsh realities of the changing world .
 Landlords preferred to live in Paris or Nice, spending whatever they had, rather than face the new conditions in Russia .
 Others remained on estates and waged a struggle for survival, but, as statistics indicate, frequently without success . Others remained in their estates and fought for survival .
 The fact that a small segment of the gentry did succeed in making the adjustment and proceeded to accumulate great wealth in a few hands does not fundamentally change the picture of the decline of the dominant class in Britain .
 The ‘great reforms’ helped push the gentry down a steep incline, they also led to the rise of a Russian middle class . Both results, to be sure, were not at all intentional . The industrialization of Russia was not intentional .
 The elimination of serfdom constituted only one prerequisite for the development of capitalism in Russia . It is difficult to conceive of a modern industrial state based on serfedom, writes Alexander Nekrass .
 The overwhelmingly peasant nature of the country convinced many observers that the empire of the tsars could not adopt the Western capitalist model as its own . The majority of the Russian Empire was dominated by the Russian peasant population .
 Populists argued that the Russian peasant was self-sufficient, producing his own food and clothing, and that he, in his egalitarian peasant commune, did not need capitalism and would not respond to it . The populists said that the peasant was not responding to capitalism .
 The peasant could not provide a sufficient internal market for Russian industry . Perhaps more to the point, the peasant was miserably poor and thus could not be a sufficient market for industry .
 The imperial government, especially the powerful Ministry of the Interior, was preoccupied with the maintenance of autocracy and the support of the gentry, for a long time in effect turned its back on industrialization . Also the imperial government was preoccupying with maintaining autocracy .
 Russian industrialists could finally rely on a better system of transportation . The railroad network increased in length by some 40 percent between 1881 and 1894 .
 Ministry of Finance under Witte did everything possible to develop heavy industry in Russia . Witte tried to attract capital from abroad and build railroads and attract investment .
 Witte increased Russian exports, drastically curtailed imports, balanced the budget, introduced the gold standard, and used heavy indirect taxation on items of everyday consumption to squeeze the necessary funds out of the peasants .
 In Russian conditions, the state played the leading role in bringing large-scale capitalist enterprise into existence . Thus, in Russia conditions, in Russian conditions,. state . played the . leading role .
 Russia possessed eight basic industrial regions, to follow the classification adopted by Liashchenko . Toward the end of the century Russia had eight industrial regions . The regions are now Russia's main industrial centers .
 The Moscow industrial region, comprising six provinces, contained textile industries of every sort, as well as metal processing and chemical plants . The region was formed in the 1970s .
 St. Petersburg region specialized in metal processing, machine building, and textile industries . The region is famous for its metal processing and machine building industries .
 Polish region had textile, coal, iron, metal processing, and chemical industries . The Polish region was known for its textile and iron industries .
 The recently developed south Russian Ukrainian region supplied coal, iron ore, and basic chemical products . The region has been a source of coal and iron ore .
 The Ural area continued to produce iron, nonferrous metals, and minerals . The area was known for its iron and non-ferry metals .
 The Transcaucasian manganese-coal region supplied substantial amounts of its two products . The region also supplied substantial quantities of its own products .
 Because Russia industrialized late and rapidly, the Russians borrowed advanced Western technology wholesale . Russian factories were often more modern than Western counterparts .
 Progress in certain segments of the economy went together with appalling backwardness in others . Yet progress in certain parts of the country's economy was seen as a sign of backwardness .
 The industrial process juxtaposed complicated machinery and primitive manual work performed by a cheap, if unskilled, labor force .
 Russia acquired huge plants and large-scale industries almost overnight . Russia acquired large plants and factories almost overnight. For technological reasons, but also because of government policy, government policy .
 Russian entrepreneurs and employers came from different classes, from gentry to former serfs . They included a considerable admixture of foreigners . Russian entrepreneurs came from various classes, including the gentry .
 Their leaders included a number of old merchant and industrialist families who were Old Believers, such as the celebrated Morozovs .
 Russian factories relied on huge government orders and also began to sell more abroad . As to markets, since the poor Russian people could absorb only a part of the products of Russian factories, the industrialists relied on government orders .
 Witte and the government helped all they could by such means as the establishment of the Russo-Persian Bank and the building of the East China Railway, not to mention the Trans-Siberian Railway .
 As already indicated, Russian economic activity in the Far East was part of the background of the Russo-Japanese War . The war was the result of the war between Russia and Japan .
 The great Russian industrial upsurge of the 1890s ended with the depression of 1900, produced by a number of causes, but perhaps especially by the “increasing weakness of the base,” the exhaustion of the Russian peasantry .
 The depression lasted several years and became combined with political unrest and finally with the Revolution of 1905 . The depression was the result of political unrest, political instability and political instability .
 Once order had been restored and the Russians returned to work, industrialization resumed its course . Still, once order was restored and work resumed, industrialized resumed its way back .
 Imperial Russia witnessed rapid industrialization, but not as rapid as in the 1890s . Annual industrial growth rate of perhaps 6 percent compared to the 8 percent of the earlier period .
 Output of basic industries again soared, with the exception of the oil industry . The output of basic industry again soared .
 The new industrial advance followed in many ways the pattern of the previous advance, for instance, in the emphases on heavy industry and on large plants .
 With the departure of Witte, the government stopped forcing the pace of industrialization, decreased the direct support of capitalists, and relaxed somewhat the financial pressure on the lower classes .
 Russian industry managed to make the necessary adjustments, for it was already better able to stand on its own feet . Russian industry is already better than ever before .
 Industry often had the help of banks, which began to assume a guiding role in the economic development of the country . Also, industry often had to help of the banks .
 Russian industrialists themselves are gradually gaining strength and independence . But, financial capital aside, they are slowly gaining strength .
 During the years immediately preceding the First World War Russian industry was becoming more diversified, acquiring a larger home market, and spreading its benefits more effectively to workers and consumers . Also, it can well be argued that during the . years immediately before . preceding the . First World . War Russian
 In spite of increasing production in the twentieth century, imperial Russia was falling further behind the leading states of the West . Many analysts claim that Russia is falling behind many of the leading countries of the world .
 Russian industry remained heavily dependent on foreign capital . Foreign capital rose to almost two and a quarter billion rubles in 1916/17 and formed approximately one-third of the total industrial investment .
 The French owned nearly two-thirds of the Russian pig iron and one-half of the coal industries . The Germans invested “A pud equals 36 pounds.”
 Analysts have spoken of Russia’s ‘semi-colonial’ status . Russia is considered to be one of the most powerful countries in the world .
 Russian industry rose on top of a bitter and miserable proletariat and a desperately poor peasant mass . More ominously, Russian industry . Russia's industry . rose on . top of the bitter and . miserable proletariat .
 The condition of the freed peasants remained one of the gravest problems in Russia . Although peasant emancipation was the greatest of the ‘great reforms,’ the condition of freed peasants remains one of Russia’s most serious problems .
 As mentioned, the emancipation provisions proved to be insufficient to develop a healthy peasant economy . The emancipation provisions failed to provide enough support for the peasants .
 Peasants, scholars have argued, felt not only the impossibility of their new situation but also its injustice . Peasans themselves, scholars say, felt the injustice of their situation .
 The widespread belief among peasants that the land ought to belong to those who work it made any settlement that left in place large private land owners using hired labor likely disappointing .
 The emancipation did not even give peasants all of the land that they had formerly been farming for themselves . But it especially grated that it did not give to peasants all the land they had previously been farming .
 A great deal of everyday peasant life changed little after the abolition of serfdom in 1861 . A great number of everyday lives changed little in the wake of the abolition .
 Work, community, family, and religion remained the hallmarks of everyday life in the village . The village was the center of the village's life for more than 100 years .
 Subsistence family farming and handicraft manufacture were still central to daily experience, little changed by technological innovation . Family farming was still a key part of daily experience in the early 1900s .
 Village life was largely controlled by the commune , acting most often through its assembly of male heads of household . The commune was largely dominated by its own assembly of men .
 The family remained the foundational unit of everyday peasant social and economic life . The family was the most important unit of daily life in peasant life .
 In this patriarchal world, women were relegated to domestic and some farming work and to ceremonial life . Women were also relegated to some farming, some farming and some ceremonial work .
 Religious life, in which women had the largest role to play, was an Orthodoxy (though Old Belief was strong in many areas of the country and sectarianism common) that blended folk, magical, and Church traditions .
 Evidence of profound change in the experiences and expectations of peasants in peasants in these years was no less significant . Evidence of significant change in peasants' expectations was no longer significant .
 Most frightening to elites, some peasants were becoming engaged politically . Most frightening was some peasants who became engaged politically. Most frightening is some who became involved in politics .
 In the midst of the national upheavals of 1905-7, peasants voiced their discontent and desires openly in petitions to the government and through new political organizations such as the All-Russian Peasant Union . Peasant groups were formed during the upheavations of the Russian Revolution .
 Even larger numbers took direct action, seizing land, taking and redistributing grain, pillaging landlords’ property, and burning manor houses .
 More subtle but no less important changes in peasant society and culture were also occurring . More subtle changes to peasant society was also occurring.
 In addition to reformers, teachers, clergy, others, were an increasing presence in the village . The village organized cooperatives, mutual assistance organizations and lectures .
 The expansion of schooling and literacy will be discussed in the next chapter . The rise in newspapers and literature directed at common people exposed peasants to knowledge of the larger world .
 Russia’s continuing economic development made it possible for many peasants to leave the village for industrial and urban work . Russia's continued economic development has made it easier for many to leave their village for work .
 Many peasants, especially younger men and women who had been to the city, demonstrated new social values (for example, in personal and sexual relations) began wearing urban-style clothing, and purchased, or at least desired, commodities such as clocks, urban furniture, stylish boots and hats,
 Raised expectations and stimulated desire, of course, could also bring greater frustration . Raises expectations and stimulates desire, however, may also bring frustration .
 These changes brought pleasure and stimulated expectations, but could also bring frustration and danger, especially given peasant economic realities . These changes could bring frustration or danger to peasants .
 As we have seen before, the commune stood at the center of the peasant economy as well as peasant society . The commune was at the heart of the peasants' economic development .
 The communes were given control of peasant lands and made responsible for taxes and recruits . They were in general intended to serve as bulwarks of order and organized life in the countryside .
 As a result, the commune became more important than ever in the lives of peasants . The commune is important to peasants, and it is now more important in their lives .
 The commune made the major decisions about land use, and periodically redistributed the holdings . The holdings were divided into scattered strips among peasant families on the basis of a calculus of hands to work and mouths to feed .
 commune also carried out a wide range of administrative functions to sustain the village community . The commune was also known for its wide-ranging administrative functions .
 The commune controlled who had permission to work away from the village, investigated and punished petty crimes, maintained roads and bridges, cared for needy members of the community, especially widows and orphans without kin and the aged .
 Russia's peasants helped many peasants keep their bearings in post-reform Russia . They usually provided at least minimal security for their members . No doubt many peasants kept their bearings .
 The economic price of communal authority in agriculture may have been high, however, however . The economic value in communal authority may be high .
 In the view of most contemporaries (and most historians, though debate continues), the commune tended to keep productivity low and hence peasant need for more land high . The commune perpetuated backward, indeed archaic, agricultural production .
 To be sure, some circumstances were beyond the peasants’ control, such as shortages in draft animals and fertilizer . The lack of investment capital and the use of less efficient equipment such as wooden plows, also played a role in the crisis .
 Low productivity was also the ‘fault’ of communal agriculture, it has been argued . But it has also been argued that low productivity was the “fault of communal farming .
 The land a peasant family worked might eventually belong to some other family through redistribution . Individuals had little incentive to improve their soil through fertilization, deep plowing, or crop diversification .
 The heads of household who dominated the commune tended to see custom, not innovative scientific advice, as the best guide . More generally, the heads of households who dominated this commune saw custom as best advice .
 At the same time communes greatly hampered peasant mobility and promoted ever-increasing overpopulation in the countryside . The communes were created in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Members of a commune frequently found it difficult to obtain permission to leave, as their departure would force the commune to perform its set obligations to the state with fewer men . The commune's decision to leave was often made difficult for members to leave .
 The head of the household could prevent the departure of one of its members on the ground that that would result in a smaller allotment of land to the household at the next reapportionment . Also, where communes periodically redivided the land among the households, the head could prevent
 Land prices more than doubled between 1860 and 1905, and almost doubled again between 1905 and 1917 . Land prices almost doubled between 1900 and 1917, according to a study published in 1917 .
 In spite of the fact that peasants purchased much of the land sold over a period of time by the gentry, individual peasant allotments kept shrinking . Individual peasants purchased some of their allotments in the 1930s .
 28 percent of the peasant population could not support itself from its land allotments immediately after emancipation . By 1900 that figure had risen to 52 percent, according to historians .
 The allotments still compared reasonably well with the allotments of peasants in other countries proved to be cold comfort . But with the backward conditions of agriculture in Russia they plainly did not suffice .
 Average peasant ownership of horses also declined sharply, with approximately one-third of peasant households owning no horses by 1901 .
 The peasants tried a variety of ways to alleviate their plight, from periodic employment in the cities to migration, but with limited success at best . The peasants, of course, tried to escape their desperate plight, but failed .
 They worked as hard as they could, exhausting themselves and the land, and competing for every bit of it . They worked hard and exhausting themselves, and competed for every part of it.
 In this marginal economy droughts became disasters, and the famine of 1891 was a shattering catastrophe . The famine was the result of a marginal economy in the US .
 At the beginning of the twentieth century, the annual death rate for European Russia stood at 31. per 1,000, compared to 19. in France and 16 in England . In Russia, the countryside led the cities, with the countryside leading the cities . In France, the death rate
 Conditions differed in the enormous Russian Empire, with Siberian peasants, for example, reasonably prosperous .
 The agrarian disturbances culminated in the massive upheavals of 1905-7 . How the peasants themselves felt about their lot became abundantly clear in the agratic disturbances .
 To appreciate the burden that the Russian peasant had to carry, we should take further note of the fiscal pressures on peasants . We should also take a look at the impact of the Russian peasants on their taxes .
 After emancipation peasants paid ten times as much per desiatina of land as did members of the gentry . Official inquiry indicated that after the emancipation the peasants paid annually to the state in taxes .
 These taxes, perennially the main source of imperial revenue, were levied on domestic and imported items of everyday consumption such as vodka, sugar, tea, tobacco, cotton, and iron .
 The tax on alcohol, which Witte made a state monopoly in 1894, proved especially lucrative for Witte . Witte's monopoly on alcohol was especially lucrative .
 Witte promoted the export of foodstuffs, notably grain, to obtain a favorable balance of trade and finance Russia’s industrialization . While relentless financial pressure forced the peasants to sell all they could .
 Foodstuffs constituted almost two-thirds in value of all Russian exports in the first years of the twentieth century . Two-fifths of Russian exports at the time of the emancipation were foodstuffs, compared to some two-fiftyths at time of emancipation .
 The last years of imperial Russia brought some hope and improvement into the lives of the Russian peasants . The period from the Revolution of 1905 to the outbreak of the First World War brought hope and improvements .
 The industrialization of Russia no longer demanded or obtained the extreme sacrifices characteristic of the 1890s, and the new Russian industry had more to offer to the consumer .
 The national income in fifty provinces of European Russia rose, according to Sergei Prokopovich’s calculation, from 6,579. million rubles in 1900 to 11,805 million in 1913 .
 The years preceding the First World War saw a series of bountiful harvests . Luckily, the years before the war, there were plenty of crops to harvest .
 Russian peasants profited, in addition to the growth of the cooperative movement, and from government sponsorship of migration to new lands . The cooperative movement was a remarkable growth of Russian peasants .
 Cooperatives grew from 2,000 in 1901 and 4,500 in 1905 to 33,000 at the outbreak of the First World War . Cooperatives membership extended to 12 million people at the end of the war .
 Credit and consumers’ cooperatives led the way in Russia . Some producers' cooperatives, such as Siberian creamery cooperatives also proved highly successful .
 As to migration, the government finally began to support it after the Revolution of 1905 by providing the necessary guiding agencies and also by small subsidies .
 In 1907 over half a million people moved to new lands . In 1908 the annual number of migrants rose to about three-quarters of a million .
 Pre-war average was about 300,000 a year . After that, it declined to the immediate pre-war averages of about 300-000 .
 Land under cultivation increased from 88. million desiatin in 1901-5 to 97. million in 1911-13 . Land was under cultivation for the first time since 1900s . Land in cultivation increased to 97 million in 1913-1919 .
 Peasant Land Bank became much more active, helping peasants to purchase over 4. million desiatin of land in the decade from 1906 to 1915, compared to 0.96 million in the preceding ten years . Peasant land bank helped peasants purchase 4.million desiatins of land
 State and imperial family lands amounting to about a million and a quarter desiatin were offered for sale to the peasants . The peasants were offered a quarter of a million desiatins in the sale .
 Stolypin’s land reform could well be considered the most important factor in the changing rural situation, because it tried to transform the Russian countryside . The land reform was a major factor in changing rural Russia's situation, writes Alexander Vatkin .
 These peasant proprietors were to have their land in consolidated lots, not in strips . The peasants were to be kept together in lots, rather than strips .
 In a relatively brief span of years, the reform had considerable impact . Historians debate how deep the changes went and what the precise effects of the changes were .
 Only 24 percent of formerly communal households completed their legal withdrawal from the commune, thus transforming their lands into personal ownership .
 Many scholars emphasize greater spread and potentiality of the reform . But many scholars say there is still a long way to go in the world .
 Only 470,000 households in non-repartitional communes had time to receive legal confirmation of their new independent status . The law of 1910 made in effect all householders in such communes individual proprietors .
 At the beginning of 1916 there were over 7 million individual proprietary households out of the total of 13 or 14 million . If we make this adjustment and if we add to the newly established independent households the 3 million or more hereditary tenure households in areas where communal ownership had never developed, we obtain
 In other words, peasant households operating within the framework of the peasant commune had declined to somewhat less than half of all peasant households .
 Consolidation of strips, a crucial aspect of the reform, proceeded much more slowly than separation from the commune, but it too made some progress . Consolidation was more slowly slower than separation of commune separation from commune .
 Of the almost 2.million households that had left communes somewhat more than half had been provided with consolidated farms by 1916 .
 Still, these impressive statistics do not necessarily indicate the ultimate wisdom and success of Stolypin’s reform . Still, the impressive statistics don’t necessarily indicate a success .
 Stolypin has received much praise from many specialists, including post-Soviet Russian historians and such American scholars as Donald Treadgold, who believe that his agrarian reform would have achieved its objective of transforming and stabilizing the countryside .
 Critics have also been numerous and by no means limited to populists or other defenders of the commune as such . But critics are also numerous .
 Stolypin’s reform represented, in a sense, one more effort to save gentry land by making the peasants redivide what they already possessed, and to the element of compulsion in the carrying out of the reform . They have pointed, for example, to the limited
 The reform has largely spent itself without curing the basic ills of rural Russia, critics say . They argue that the reform has not cured the basic problems .
 It added new problems to the old ones by helping to stratify the peasant mass . It created hostility between the stronger and richer peasants whom the government helped to withdraw from the commune on advantageous terms .
 The proletariat was more densely massed in Russia than in other countries . Not impressive in quantity in proportion to total population, the proletariat was in Russia .
 The workers thus formed large and closely knit groups in industrial centers, which included St. Louis, Chicago and St. Paul . The workers formed large groups of workers .
 Minister of Finance Bunge tried to eliminate or curb certain glaring abuses of the factory system . Bunge established factory inspectors to supervise the carrying out of new laws .
 More legislation followed later, with a law in 1897 that limited day work of adults to eleven and a half hours and night work to ten hours . The law was applicable to industrial establishments employing more than 20 workers .
 The ten-hour day was also to prevail on Saturdays and on the eve of major holidays . No work was allowed on Sundays or Sundays or the holidays in question .
 Adolescents and children were to work no more than ten and nine hours a day respectively . Adolescentes and children would have to work between 10 and 9 hours each day . The children's work was to be limited to nine hours per day .
 A pioneer labor insurance law, holding employers responsible for accidents in connection with factory work, came out in 1903 . But an improved and effective labor insurance act, covering both accidents and illness, appeared only in 1912 .
 Unions were finally allowed in 1906, and even then exclusively on the local, not the national, level, level . Unions first allowed in 1903, but they were only allowed on the national level in 1906 .
 Russian workers remained in general in miserable condition . However, in spite of labor legislation, wages probably increased in the years .
 Workers endured overcrowded housing with often deplorable sanitary conditions, an exhausting workday (ten hours a day, six days a week), widespread disease and high rates of premature mortality . Workday was ten hours per day, even after the reforms of the late nineteenth century .
 The positive benefits of urban industrial life also affected the lives of urban workers, though these could be just as dangerous to the social and political status quo . Urban industrial life could also be dangerous for the future, writes David Perry .
 Acquiring new skills and learning to cope with city life often gave workers a new sense of self-respect and confidence, which in turn tended to raise desires and expectations, according to experts .
 The expanding array of consumer goods could provide new pleasures and hope, but with very limited incomes workers were just as likely to feel envy and anger . Workers were also likely to be just as angry with the consumer goods they bought .
 Urban workers were more likely than peasants to be or become literate, exposing them to a range of new experiences and ideas . Urban workers are more likely to be literate than peasants, and to be exposed to new ideas .
 The very act of reading and becoming “cultured” encouraged many commoners to feel a sense of selfesteem . This made the ordinary deprivations, hardships, and humiliations of lower-class life more difficult to endure .
 Medvedev was one of the organizers of a printers’ strike in 1903 and of an illegal trade union, one of Russia’s first in Russia . A worker in a Moscow printing house, he was organizer of a printing house strike and illegal union, he says .
 Dressing in ‘bourgeois fashion’ was a common gesture among ‘conscious’ workers, meant to signal respectability and a recognition of their own human dignity, the violation of which was a central theme in workers’ protests . Unions remained illegal until after
 St. Petersburg in 1878 and 1879 and at a Morozov textile factory near Moscow in 1885 . In 1885 and 1885, he was working at a textile factory in Morozova .
 The short-lived but important Northern Workers’ Union, led by a worker and populist, Stepan Khalturin, helped to organize the early labor movement in the capital .
 St. Petersburg, Riga, Poland, and Ukraine are all major targets for Russia . Russia has invested heavily in industrial areas in Poland and Ukraine .
 The strike movement again gathered momentum in the first years of the twentieth century, culminating, as we know, in the Revolution of 1905 .
 Strikes broke out in almost every industry and every part of the country . Strikes were reported across the country, with strikes taking place in almost all industries .
 The government legalized strikes in December 1905 and unions in March 1906 . The government hoped that legalizing strikes and unions would lead the labor movement onto a more peaceful path .
 Thousands of workers joined legal unions and concentrated on attaining better economic conditions . Thousands joined the legal unions in order to achieve better economic opportunities .
 For their leaders, workers tended to choose activists from the more moderate wing of Social Democrats, the Mensheviks . Menshevik activists emphasized, at least for the short term, legal struggle for realizable and mainly liberaldemocratic gains .
 Trade unions were authorized by law, but were under very close surveillance and control by the police . Police regularly closed meetings, arrested leaders, and shut down union papers .
 Employers tried to take back economic gains workers had made in 1905 . Employers formed their own strong organizations and endeavored, often with success, to take on workers .
 When the strike movement revived in 1910-14, workers’ frustrations were sharply visible, not only in the stubborn persistence of strikers and the revival of political demands, but also in the growing popularity of the more radical Bolsheviks . The strike movement was sharply visible in the years leading up
 Bolsheviks won a majority of workers’ votes to the Duma in almost all industrial electoral districts . In the fall of 1912, 1912, Bolsheviks were in control of almost every industrial electoral district in the country .
 Strikes became especially frequent after the massacre of workers in the Lena gold fields in April 1912 . Police fired into a crowd of protesting workers killing and wounding more than a hundred of them . Strikes became more frequent after police shot at protesters killing more than 100 .
 In 1912, 725,000 workers went out on strike, 887,000 in 1913, and more than 1.25 million from January to July 1914 . More than 1 million workers went on strike in 1914, 1912 and 1913 .
 In July 1914, only days before the outbreak of war, a large and sometimes violent strike broke out in St. Louis . The strike was the largest strike in the history of the city .
 Labor protest could contain a great deal of bitter resentment and anger, even violence . At the same time, labor protest could also contain a lot of anger and violence .
 Of course, evidence of labor protest is not the whole story of working-class mentalities, says John Sutter .
 The average workingclass man lived a debased life marked by drunkenness, passivity before fate, and crass tastes in boulevard fiction, the music hall, and (by the eve of the war) low-brow popular cinema . Many activists among workers, and many ‘
 Working-class women, in turn, were viewed as victims of men's lies about wages spent on drink or of men’s fists . Women were seen as lost in even deeper ‘backwardness” than most male workers, according to reports .
 Historians have argued that such mentalities, tastes, and behaviors were a type of defiance against elite moral norms, even a form of protest against class domination . Some historians have argued .
 The growth of civic space in which organized associations mediate between the individual and the state, citizens communicate with one another on matters of general interest, has enormous implications for politics .
 voluntary associations proliferated in the late 1800s and after . Voluntary associations were a major site for the development of civil society . They proliferated throughout Europe and beyond .
 These included learned societies, literacy and temperance societies, business and professional associations, philanthropic and service organizations, philanthropy and service groups, and philanthropy organizations .
 Before the de facto press freedom of 1905 and the official freeing of the press from preliminary censorship in 1906, newspapers, magazines, journals, and books had become pervasive and powerful media .
 In addition to universities, public schools, law courts, organizations of local rural and urban self-government, and even the Church stood on the uncertain boundaries of being at once state and civil institutions .
 The Revolution of 1905, as we have seen, unleashed civic opinion and organization as never before . The Revolution was a revolution in 1905, but it was never before before . It was the first of its kind .
 The increase of civil rights resulting from 1905 gave these further impetus, including enabling the formation of legal political parties and other new types of civic associations . The increase in civil rights resulted from the increase in the popularity of political parties in 1905 .
 Religion also thrived in this expanding public sphere, though often running outside the official channels of the established Church . Most of these organizations concerned themselves with everyday secular matters .
 St. Petersburg was begun at the end of 1901 . It brought together prominent intellectuals and clergy to discuss the meaning of religion in public life .
 After 1905, religious associations such as the Spiritualist Society and the Russian Theosophical Society formed . Spiritualist societies such as The Spiritualist and Theosophist Society were formed .
 We also see a revival of religious enthusiasm and organization among the urban middle and lower classes . Growing and increasingly visible congregations of religious dissenters, including Baptists, Baptists .
 These years also saw the rise of public movements to extend rights to disadvantaged groups . These years were also seen as a time for the rights of disadvantaged people .
 Also in these years arose organized efforts to promote women’s rights and emancipation . Also in this period, organized efforts were made to promote female emancipation .
 During 1905, women were often heard at meetings appealing for respect as human beings and for equal rights as citizens . Women often appealed for respect and equal rights in 1905 .
 Department stores were key to the rise of consumer life in Russia . Palaces of commerce, department stores were important sites for public display of goods and people .
 In non-Russian areas of the empire, but also among ethnic and religious minorities living in the major Russian cities, these were years of widespread nationalist activism .
 Poles, Ukrainians, Finns, Balts, Jews, Georgians, Armenians, Muslims, and others—defined themselves as “nations” Activists organized movements seeking cultural autonomy .
 Changes in the lives and expectations of non-Russians were not limited to the history of political and nationalist movements, however .
 For many non-Russian communities, these were also years of exploring new possibilities and new identities . Historians are still only beginning to research this non-Russians side of Russian history .
 We see similar movements of national revival and organization, especially after 1905, among Russia’s Muslims . Tatars, Azeris, Central Asians, and others, were similar .
 Muslim organizations proliferated, expressing ideologies ranging from liberalism and socialism to Pan-Islamism and Pan-Turkism . Librarians, charities, credit unions, national congresses, political unions and parties .
 The daily newspaper, itself an institution at the center of Russia’s increasingly vital civic life, reminded readers of how deeply contradictory this life was . Russia's daily newspaper is itself itself a newspaper at the heart of Russia's growing civic life .
 Regular ads as well as daily reportage pointed to Russia’s emerging consumer life . Most evident in rise of department stores, like Moscow's Muir and Merrilies, and glass-covered arcades .
 St. Petersburg ‘Passage’ displayed goods designed not only to cater to material needs but to stimulate new notions of being visibly fashionable and respectable . The exhibition was held at the St. Louis-based St. Pauli Gallery .
 The papers also kept readers informed about the many public entertainments available to those with at least some disposable income .
 Historians have long debated whether the Russian economy and society in the decades before the Great War were heading toward inevitable crisis and revolution or toward a viable civil society and a reformed political order . Conclusion: Historians debate whether Russia's economy was heading toward crisis or toward reform .
 Conditions remained desperately hard for the bulk of the population, aggravated by a limited and faltering parliamentary system, an increasingly conservative ruler, and persistent social disorder and conflict . Conditions improved or declined in the years leading to the war .
 Historians need not oversimplify for the sake of taking sides in a debate . At the same time, historians need not over-simply take sides in debates, they say .
 This was a time, as many contemporaries said, of both progress and collapse . This was also a time of both possibility and crisis . This is the time of hope and possibility, but also of crisis .
 It has been said that revolutions occur not when the people are utterly destitute, oppressed beyond all measure, and deprived of hope, but when there is growth, advancement, and high expectation, hampered by an archaic and rigid established order, .
 Love it, strive toward it, work for it, bring it nearer to it . Transfer into the present as much as you can from it. Love it. Work for it. Bring it nearer .
 The physical, mental, and moral development of the individual, the incorporation of truth and justice in social relationships . This is the brief formula that encompasses, | believe, everything that can be regarded as progress .
 It is a necessity for life, for movement toward the well-being of individuals and humanity, for sociability among people, uniting them with one and the same feelings . It is the necessity for people to be sociable among people .
 The decades that elapsed between the emancipation of the serfs and the revolutions of 1917 constituted an active, fruitful, and fascinating period in the history of Russian culture, but also a cultural time of troubles . The years that elapsed before the revolution of 1917 constitute an active and fruitful period in Russian
 Education continued to grow at all levels, in spite of obstacles and even governmental “counterreforms” In the twentieth century the rate of growth in education increased sharply . In the 20th century, education in the United States grew sharply .
 Russia became a full-fledged contributor to and partner in the intellectual and academic efforts of the Western world . Russia is now a partner in and contribute to the intellectual efforts of Western world, says Putin .
 Russian literature continued its “golden age,” although primarily in prose rather than in poetry . Turgenev, Tolstoy, and Dostoevsky were some of the greats of Russian literature . Russian literature continues its ‘golden era’
 Chekhov, Gorky, and some other outstanding authors maintained the tradition of Russian prose . Later, when the giants died or, as in the case of Tolstoy, stopped writing fiction and the “golden age” came to its end, Chekhova,
 In literature that renaissance meant the appearance once again of superb poetry, the introduction of a wide variety of new trends, and the emergence of exceptionally high standards of culture and craftsmanship .
 The ‘silver age’ also extended to the theater, music, ballet, painting, and sculpture, and in effect to every form of creative expression . The "silver age" extended to all forms of artistic expression .
 The First World War and later the revolutions struck when Russian intellectual and cultural life was exhibiting more vitality, diversity, and sophistication than ever before . The revolutions struck at the time of the Russian Revolution .
 At the same time as the twentieth century began, literature, art, and even widely circulating newspapers and magazines dwelled on a deepening sense of cultural crisis .
 Numerous writers spoke of ‘these times, especially after 1905, as “times of trouble” marked by widespread feelings of uncertainty, groundlessness, and disenchantment . Many writers speak of “these times” as ‘Times of trouble .
 In the view of many, society and culture were physically and spiritually sick, perhaps dying . In the world's view, culture and society was sick and perhaps dying, many thought it was dying .
 The death of Nicholas I and the coming of the ‘great reforms’ meant liberalization in education as in other fields . Education liberalization was liberalized in Russia as well as other fields.
 The zemstvo reform of 1864 opened vast opportunities to establish schools in the countryside . Schools in the rural areas of the country were set up by the reform of the Russian state .
 The increasing thirst for knowledge on the part of the Russians augured well for education in a liberal age . In towns or rural areas, the increasing thirst .
 Official liberalism did not last long, and reaction logically, if unfortunately, showed a particular concern for education . However, as already mentioned, the reaction was logical and logical .
 The growth of education in Russia was hampered by government action . As a result of the government action, the growth of Russian education was hampered .
 After Tolstoy replaced Alexander Golovnin in 1866, the ministry did its best to control education and direct it into desirable channels .
 As in the days of Uvarov, high standards were used in universities and secondary schools to keep the number of students down, hindering especially the academic advancement of students of low social background . High standards were also used to keep students down .
 In secondary education, the emphasis fell on the so-called classical gymnasia, which became the only road to universities proper, as distinct from more specialized institutions of higher learning . Classical gymnasia was the only way to university proper, distinct from specialized institutions .
 These gymnasia concentrated on teaching the Latin and Greek languages, to the extent of some 40 percent of the total class time . The gymnasia was founded in 1903 .
 Less than one-third of those who had entered the gymnasia were graduated .
 Ministers of education made direct appeals in their circulars to subordinates to keep “cook's sons” out of the gymnasia . One of Dmitrii Tolstoy’s successors, Ivan Delianov, in 1887, made similar appeals .
 In general, the government tried to divide education into airtight compartments that students as a rule could not cross . Students were not allowed to cross the airtight compartmentalities .
 Church schools received special attention under Alexander III and Pobedonostsev . Under Alexander III, Church schools were given special attention .
 Following the statute of 1884 concerning Churchparish schools, an effort was made to entrust elementary education as much as possible to the Church . The number of Church parishes schools increased from 4,500 in 1882 to 32,000 in 1894 .
 Advanced education for women, barely begun in Russia, came to be increasingly restricted . By contrast, advanced education in Russia came to an end .
 The Ministry of Education emphasized ‘conduct’ and tried to maintain iron discipline . And in all schools and at all levels, it emphasized “conduct”
 Education continued to grow in Russia as a result of sustained efforts by the state, the Church, and, especially, the zemstva .
 In 1856, only about 8,000 primary schools in the Russian Empire enrolling 450,000 pupils . Forty years later in 1896 there were ten times this number of schools enrolling 3. million pupils . By 1911, 6. million children were in Russian schools, which meant nearly
 Realschule provided secondary education that could lead to admission to technical institutions of higher learning . Modern languages and science were taught in place of Greek and Latin in addition to Latin .
 In 1905 these schools were transferred to the Ministry of Trade and Industry . In 1905, these schools became part of the British government .
 After the Revolution of 1905 schools in Russia profited from a more liberal policy as well as from an increasing interest in education on the part of the government and the public .
 Plans were drawn to institute schooling for all Russian children by 1922, or 1925, according to an estimate following the outbreak of the First World War .
 Educational prospects never looked brighter in Russia than on the eve of the revolutions of 1917 . Educational prospects had never looked better in Russia .
 On the eve of the 1917 revolutions, the majority of Russians remained illiterate . The majority of the population was illiterate at the time .
 Literacy in Russia had increased from only about 6 percent in the 1860s to an estimated 28 percent by 1913 . According to data compiled bv Adolf Rashin .
 The social geography of literacy in Russia is uneven in Russia . But such aggregate data obscure the significant unevenness of the social geography in the country .
 As revealed by the invaluable 1897 census, literacy rates were higher than average among males, city dwellers, workers, youth, and people living in the European parts of the empire .
 Only 17 percent of peasants in European Russia could read in 1897, while 54 percent of industrial and commercial workers could, or 74 percent of male workers in St. Petersburg .
 It's important to underscore that the impact of literacy on individuals was quite varied . It's also important to point out that recent scholars have noted that literacy affects individuals very differently .
 Literacy could mean no more than a rough skill needed to function better at work or could be an important source of pride and self-esteem . Literacy is important for the lower classes, for example, as well as for those in the middle class .
 At the other end of the educational ladder, universities increased in number, although slowly . Universities increased in numbers, but only slowly, according to the figures .
 Russia has twelve universities, all of them belonging to the state . That gave Russia a total of twelve universities . Russia now has 12 universities .
 Women were able to obtain higher education by attending special “courses’ set up in university centers . Special courses began to function in 1872 in Moscow, and began in 1878 in St. Petersburg .
 Konstantin Bestuzhev-Riumin was named after another historian . He was born in St. Petersburg and named after a historian . The city is named after the Russian city of St. Peterburg .
 The total number of students in Russian institutions of higher learning in 1917 has been variously estimated between 100,000 and 180,000 .
 The freedom and variety of intellectual life in imperial Russian universities invite comparison with Western universities . In general, and especially after 1905, the freedom of academic freedom in imperial Russia invited comparison with western universities . The freedom in Russian universities invites comparison with the freedoms of Western universities.
 In fact, in the period from the emancipation of the serfs until the revolutions of 1917, Russians made significant contributions in almost every area of knowledge . The revolutions were the result of the Russian revolution in 1917 .
 Pafnutii Chebyshev in St. Petersburg was one of Russia's most famous mathematicians . Lobachevsky was a mathematician in the early 1900s .
 Dmitrii Mendeleev's periodic table of elements, formulated in 1869, organized the known elements into a system and made an accurate forecast of later discoveries . The most celebrated of Russia was the great Dmitriian Mendeleeva, who lived from 1834 to 1907 .
 Leading Russian physicists included the specialist in magnetism and electricity, Alexander Stoletov, and the brilliant student of the properties of light, Petr Lebedev, as well as notable pioneer inventors such as Pavel Iablochkov .
 Russian inventors, like Russian scholars in general, frequently had little international influence and thus received less than their due recognition because of Russia's isolation and ignorance abroad .
 Alexander Kovalevsky produced classic works in zoology and embryology . His younger brother, Vladimir, made important contributions to paleontology .
 Ilya Mechnikov studied the function of the white corpuscles, immunity, and the process of aging . The famous embryologist and bacteriologist did most of his work in the Pasteur Institute in Paris .
 Medicine developed well in Russia during the last decades of the empire, both in terms of quality and accessibility to the masses . After the zemstvo reform, the nation's medicine was accessible to the public .
 Russian doctors exhibited a remarkable civic spirit and devotion to their work and their patients . Nikolai Pirogov, who died in 1881, was an outstanding anatomist, surgeon, teacher, and public figure, .
 Russian contributions to physiology were especially striking, important, and they overlapped into psychology . Russian contributions were especially important, especially in physiology .
 Ivan Sechenov taught in several universities for about half a century and died in 1905 . He did remarkable research on gases in the blood, nerve centers, and reflexes .
 Russian scholars engaged fruitfully in everything from law to oriental studies and from economics to folklore . They included law, economics, folklore and folklore .
 In particular, Russian historiography flourished in the last decades of the nineteenth and the first of the twentieth century .
 Sergei Soloviev established Russian history as a rich and many-sided field of learning . Vasilii Kliuchevsky, Sergei Platonov, Matvei Liubavsky, Pavel Miliukov, and their colleagues in effect established history .
 Other Russians made notable contributions to the histories of other countries and ages . The medievalist Pavel Vinogradov and the specialist in classical antiquity Mikhail Rostovtzeff also contributed to history .
 Russian historiography profited greatly from the sociological emphasis characteristic of the second half of the nineteenth century . The ‘silver age’ stimulated the history of art, which could claim in Russia such magnificent specialists as Nikodim Kondakov, Alexander Benois, and Igor
 Russian literature continued to be the chief glory of Russian culture . It also became a major source of Russian influence on the West, and indeed on the world .
 Ivan Turgenev, Fedor Dostoevsky, and Lev Tolstoy were the three outstanding figures in Russian history .
 Ivan Turgenev lived from 1818 to 1883 and became famous around 1850 with the gradual appearance of his Sportsman's Sketches .
 He responded to the trends of the time and depicted with remarkable sensitivity the intellectual life of Russia, but he failed eventually to satisfy the Left . He depicted Russia's intellectual life in Russia .
 Six novels, the first of which appeared in 1855 and the last in 1877, described the evolution of Russian society and Russia itself as Turgenev, a gentleman of culture .
 Rudin, A Gentry Nest, On the Eve, Fathers and Sons, Smoke, and Virgin Soil are Rudin's novels . These novels are, in order of publication, Rudin and On The Eve . Smoke, Smoke and Virgin
 Turgenev depicted Russia from the time of the iron regime of Nicholas I, through the “great reforms,” to the return of reaction in the late 1860s and the 1870s .
 He concerned himself especially with the idealists of the 1840s and the later liberals, nihilists, and populists . He was born in 1841 and died in 1918 .
 Turgenev’s hero, Bazarov, gave currency to the concept “nihilist” and to the term itself . Indeed, it was Turgenv‘s hero who gave currency in the concept .
 Turgenev was a consistent Westernizer and liberal . He was appreciative of the efforts of young radicals to change Russia . He advocated gradualism, not revolution, to develop the Russian economy .
 Critics debate whether Rudin and Bazarov are essentially sympathetic or unsympathetic characters . In fact, critics debate to this day whether they're essentially sympathetic .
 In addition to the famous sequence of novels, Turgenev wrote some plays and a considerable number of stories . He has been described as a better story writer than novelist .
 He was already the author of a novel, Poor Folk, when he became involved with the Petrashevtsy . The sentence was commuted to Siberian exile only at the place of execution . He was sentenced to death, the sentence being commuted .
 The writer spent four years at hard labor and two more as a soldier in Siberia . He returned to European Russia in 1856, following a general amnesty proclaimed by new emperor .
 Dostoevsky recorded his Siberian experience in a remarkable book, Notes from the House of the Dead, which came out in 1861 . The book was published in 1861 and came out that year .
 The one-time member of the Petrashevtsy became an aggressive and prolific right-wing journalist, contributing to a certain Slavophile revival, Pan-Slavism, and even outright chauvinism .
 His targets included the Jews, the Poles, the Germans, Catholicism, socialism, and the entire West . He also targeted the Jews and the Poles .
 While Dostoevsky's journalism added to the sound and fury of the period, his immortal fame rests on his late novels, four of which belong among the greatest ever written .
 Crime and Punishment, The Idiot, The Possessed, and The Brothers Karamazov, published in 1866, 1868, 1870-72, and 1879-80, respectively . The brothers were published in the same period as 1866 .
 Dostoevsky was working on a sequel to The Brothers Karamazov when he died . He was apparently at the height of his creative powers in working on the sequel to the novel .
 A closer study of the great novelist’s so-called special Russian traits demonstrates that they are either of secondary importance at best or even entirely imaginary . Yet, a closer study shows that a closer look at the great novel's 'special Russian traits'
 To the contrary, Dostoevsky could be called the most international or, better, the most human of writers because of his enormous concern with and penetration into the nature of man . The Russian-born Russian writer was called the "most international or better of writers"
 The strange Russian author was a master of depth psychology before depth psychology became known .
 He viewed human nature in the dynamic terms of explosive conflict between freedom and necessity, urge and limitations, faith and despair, good and evil .
 Of Dostoevsky’s several priceless gifts the greatest was to fuse into one his protagonists and the ideas they expressed, as no other writer has ever done . The greatest gift of Dostozevsky was his ability to fuse the protagonists and ideas—or rather states
 Where others are prolix, tedious, didactic, or confusing in mixing different levels of discourse, Dostoevsky is gripping, in places almost unbearably so . Therefore, where others are Prolix or tedious, it is gripping and in places unbearable so .
 Russian author Gleb Uspensky reportedly once remarked, into a small hole in the wall, where the generality of human beings could put perhaps a pair of shoes, Dostoevsky said . As another Russian author, Glebsky reportedly remarked, 'Perhaps a pair
 Dostoevsky was one of the greatest anti-rationalists of the second half of the nineteenth century . He inspired existential philosophy, theological revivals, and scholarly attempts to understand the catastrophes of our time .
 Lev Tolstoy is one of Russia’s greatest fiction writers, and one of the most remarkable and influential men in modern Russian life . He is also a great writer of his own novels and works of art and science .
 We have already heard the frequent Russian argument in the nineteenth century that writers should do more than entertain, that they must also speak the truth and take a stand against evil in the world .
 Tolstoy was both idolized and vilified in his own time as a moral critic and prophet . He combined both great literary talent and great moral criticism . Tolstoys was a great literary genius and moral critic .
 After dropping out of university he spent the next few years drinking, dancing, and gambling his way around Moscow and St. Petersburg .
 In 1851, he decided to join his brother in the army and served as an officer in the Crimean War . His brother died in 1851 in the Crimea .
 His first writings were well received and he decided to pursue this career . He decided to focus on writing after his first writing was well received .
 His major works, known throughout the world, include his autobiographical trilogy of the 1850s, Childhood, Boyhood, and Youth . His great epic of individuals and families during the Napoleonic wars, War and Peace, published in 1869; and Anna Karenina, a tragic
 The third period in Tolstoy’s life began around 1878, when he experienced a religious crisis and ‘conversion’ to a truer Christianity . The third time in his life he experienced the religious crisis began in Russia .
 Tolstoy often thought of becoming a hermit or a pilgrim during his final years . During his last years, he often thought he wanted to become a hermits or a pilgrimage .
 In 1910, at the age of eighty-two, he fled his estate, his family, and the world . In 1910 he was forced to flee his estate and his family .
 These three periods of Tolstoy’s long life were less separate than they appear at first glance . The three periods were part of the same period of his life .
 Even as a young man, he was obsessed with selfperfection, as can be seen in his self-castigating diaries filled with rules for himself .
 Later and more seriously, the search for self-understanding and moral perfection can be seen throughout his stories and novels . The search for moral perfection is seen in his novels and stories .
 Self-examination and self-perfection can also be seen in the lives of characters in his great novels, says John Sutter . "Self-examination" can be found in his novels, he says .
 Tolstoy was inspired by the conviction that human beings were born innocent but were ruined by institutions of civilization . He organized educational reform efforts on his own estate on his estate .
 He also featured characters such as Pierre Bezukhov in War and Peace and Konstantin Levin in Anna Karenina, who recognize their alienation from the natural truths that children and common people still understand .
 Russian Orthodox Church excommunicated him in 1901 . His ideas were so influential that he was excommuned by the church .
 Tolstoy was never fully certain he had escaped the baneful effects of civilization and found truth . As the dramatic conclusion of his life revealed, however, he never fully believed he had .
 In retrospect, it is difficult to say whether Tolstoy was more influential as a novelist or as a teacher of nonviolence, an unmasker of modern civilization . Anna Karenina or A Confession—an account of his spiritual crisis— had the greater impact .
 In late imperial Russia at least, Tolstoy's position as a major voice of moral criticism of the status quo, which the government dared not silence, appeared at times even more extraordinary and precious than his literary creations . The government would not silence his views .
 The Russian novel won a worldwide reputation because of the writings of Turgenev, Dostoevsky, and Tolstoy . The novel, which in the second half of the . nineteenth century won a . worldwide reputation .
 Ivan Goncharov, who lived from 1812 to 1891, produced at least one great novel, Oblomov . The novel, published two years before the emancipation of the serfs, represents a farewell to the departing patriarchal Russia .
 Oblomov snored his way to fame as one of the most unforgettable as well as most “superfluous’s” heroes of Russian literature . He was one of Russia's most famous and most unforgettable heroes of the past .
 Nikolai Leskov and Gleb Uspensky were notable novelists of the period . Leskov wrote about the provincial clergy and similar topics associated with the Church and the people . Gleb was a populist and a pessimist, deeply concerned with peasant life .
 Mikhail Saltykov, who wrote under the pseudonym of N Shchedrin, was an able satirist . He fitted well into that critical and realistic age and acquired great popularity .
 Alexander Ostrovsky created much of the basic repertoire of the Russian theater and contributed especially to the depiction of merchants, minor officials, and the lower middle class in general . He died in 1886 .
 New Russian writers came to the fore to continue the great tradition of Russian prose . Toward the end of the nineteenth century and in the early twentieth new . writers .
 Vladimir Korolenko, a populist and optimist, was the author of charming stories expressing his belief in people's fundamental goodness and in the ultimate victory of truth and justice, even in the face of harsh conditions .
 Anton Chekhov, who lived from 1860 until 1904, left a lasting imprint on Russian and world literature . He lived in Russia from 1860 to 1904 .
 A brilliant playwright, he had the good fortune to be writing just as the Moscow Art Theater was rising to its heights . The playwright was writing just before he was writing for the Art Theater in Moscow .
 He is one of the founders and master craftsman of the modern short story . He usually chose to make his simple, gentle, restrained, and yet wonderfully effective comments on the world .
 Afanasii Fet reflected the view, much influenced by the pessimism of Schopenhauer, that reality is ugly . The role of art is to transcend and overcome this world through pure beauty, he says .
 Utilitarian critics like Chernyshevsky heaped abuse and mockery on Fet, contributing to his silence as a writer during most of the 1860s and 1870s . Fet's silence was largely due to the ridicule of his work .
 Fedor Tiutchev, perhaps the world’s outstanding poet of late love and of nature in its Romantic, pantheistic, and chaotic aspects, died in 1873, an isolated figure .
 With pathos, satire, or sarcasm, they described various abuses in Russian life, especially the sufferings of the common people . They used echoes of rough folk speech or soaring moral passion, they said .
 The leading civic poet was Nikolai Nekrasov, whose poetic voice could range from poignant realism to eloquent lyricism, often echoing Russian folk songs . The poet's poetry often echoed Russian folk folk songs, often with echoes of Russian folk .
 His many influential poems were inspired both by the beauty of Russian nature and moral outrage at the poverty and suffering of ordinary Russians .
 The ‘silver age’ in Russian literature dawned toward the turn of the century . It brought new vitality and creativity to Russian culture . The "silver age" was a golden age of Russian literature .
 The World of Art, published in 1898, is often dated from the appearance of the seminal-periodical, The World Of Art . The new period has often been dated from 1898 .
 Almost overnight there sprung up in Russia a rich variety of literary and artistic creeds, circles, and movements . Almost overnight, Russia's literary, artistic and artistic movement was born .
 As Mirsky and other specialists have noted, these groups had little in common, except their denial of ‘civic art’ and their high standards of culture and craftsmanship .
 Form-conscious impressionism and symbolism pushed aside rationalism, positivism, and didactic realism . The form of impressionism was created by impressionism, realism, and symbolism .
 Aestheticism, mysticism, decadence, sensualism, idealism, and idealism all intertwined in different combinations . Aestheticists, mysticists, decadentists, and pessimists all intertwined with different combinations of ideas .
 Some critics have found in “silver age’s writing a tendency toward pretentiousness, obscurity, or artificiality . “Silver age” writing tends to be pretentious or artificial, or pretentious .
 Even when flawed, the works of the ‘silver age’ indicated a new refinement, richness, and maturity in Russian culture . The works of ‘Silver Age’ indicate a new maturity in Russia’s culture .
 In literature, the new trends resulted in a great revival of poetry and literary criticism . Boris Bugaev, known as Andrei Bely, produced some remarkable prose, for example .
 Alexander Blok is considered one of the greatest Russian poets of the age . The symbolist poet lived in Russia from 1880 to 1921 .
 Russia suddenly acquired many brilliant poets . Innokentii Annensky, Bely, Valerii Briusov, Konstantin Balmont, Nikolai Gumilev and Osip Mandelstam .
 The ‘silver age’ was a sign of Russia's cultural florescence but also, it has been argued, of a troubled cultural spirit of the age . The 'silver age' is a sign that Russia's culture has been troubled by its troubled past . The “silver
 A major preoccupation was the self—self-discovery, selfdevelopment, self-fulfillment . A major focus was self discovery .
 Andreev, Bely, Briusov, Hippius, Merezhkovsky, Rozanov, and Sologub dwelled on the darker, egoistic, Dionysian side of the awakened modern self . Still other writers and cultural critics, such as And
 These writers both admired and dreaded the creative powers of the all-too-human ego and id . The influences of Nietzsche and Freud were widely evident . They explored sensuality, lust, cruelty, depravity, madness, disease, death .
 The uncertainties and pessimism so characteristic of the silver age nurtured its characteristic aestheticism, the film was a classic masterpiece .
 Many artists, it was said, felt that the old world was dying, but they were determined at least that it be a beautiful death . Many artists were determined to be the most beautiful artist to have .
 By contrast, futurists took a stance of iconoclastic rebellion in the name of new and modern meanings . Futurists were 'iconoclastic' and 'iconocentric' futurist thinkers .
 Their works deliberately echoed the noisy confusion and chaos of modern life . And their works deliberately echo the noisy chaos and chaos that modern life has created .
 Truth and beauty, they insisted, lay not in the creative subjects or vocabularies of past work but in the new noise of factories and the marketplace and in the primitive and transcendent sounds of “transrational” words . Truth, they said, lay . not in
 They insisted on painting realistic pictures. Breaking with the stifling academic tradition, they insisted on realism .
 “Critical realism” asserted itself in Russian art just as it had in literary criticism and literature . With new painters joining the movement and its influence spreading, “critical realism’s . influence spreading .
 The "itinerants" believed that content was more important than form, that art had to serve the higher purpose of educating the masses . They depicted such topics as the exploitation of the poor, the drunken clergy, and the brutal police .
 Vasilii Vereshchiagin, for example, observed wars at firsthand until he went down with the battleship Petropavlousk when it was sunk by the Japanese .
 Realistic painting was not limited to blunt social commentary, however . Realistic paintings were often painted in the 1930s .
 Artists such as Kramskoy, llya Repin, Vasilii Surikov, Nikolai Ge, and lsaak Levitan produced many compelling portraits, landscapes, and historical paintings . Valentin Serov's paintings are largely unfamiliar in the West but deserving attention
 These works are often introspective and psychological (this was the age of great interest in the self) and lyrical and beautiful .
 Of course, it can be argued that the sympathetic humanism in this work was also a type of social and even political commentary .
 It responded to social concerns of the age, as seen in Modest Mussorgsky’s emphasis on content, realism, and closeness to the masses . Many composers were influenced by nationalism inspiring many composers .
 Music, by the very nature, also reached far beyond social and political argument . But music by the nature of music, it also reaches far beyond the social realm of politics .
 Second half of the nineteenth century was a period of great musical talent and originality . And the second half of this century was the period of the greatest musical talent .
 The spread of musical education aided this process, with a conservatory established in St. Louis, Missouri . The conservatory was established in 1903 .
 Anton Rubinstein’s younger bromer, Nikolai; and still other musical schools in other cities in subsequent years . Anton . Rubinstein's younger brother was Nikolai, the son of Rubinstein .
 Russian composers came to the fore at the time of the Second World War . Composers of the same period were composers of Russia .
 Modest Mussorgsky, Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov, Alexander Borodin, Caesar Cui, and Milii Balakirev were among the composers .
 This musical nationalism was connected especially to the adaptation of folk songs, melodies, tales, and legends and to a romanticized vision of the Russian past . The musical nationalism is connected to a musical nationalism in Russia . It was connected to adaptation of folklore songs and melodies and tales .
 Mussorgsky's Boris Godunov, Borodin's Prince Igor, and RimskyKorsakov’s Sadko all explored national themes . Some of the most brilliant musical work of that age occurred in opera, as in Mussorgski's Boris .
 Tchaikovsky stood out in many ways, not least for developing an elegiac, subjective, lyrical, and lyrical approach all his own .
 During the “silver age,” we see the same remarkable vitality, experimentation, and searching for the new and the true in the visual and performing arts as in literature .
 In music, composers like Sergei Rachmaninov, Alexander Scriabin, and Igor Stravinsky ranged from the lyrical and elegiac to the mystical, Dionysian, and even apocalyptic . The work of composers such as Rachmeninov and Sc
 Scriabin’s music is an eclectic mixture of Chopin, Wagner, Nietzsche, symbolism, and religious mysticism . It offers a mix of Dionysian emotions, mystical spirituality, and pure sound .
 Ballets Russes brought together some of Russia's most innovative painters, dancers, choreographers, and composers . The Ballet Russes was founded in St. Petersburg, Russia in 1909 .
 Diaghilev and his company soon relocated to France, where there was greater artistic freedom and a more sophisticated modern audience, but also where money could be made .
 Ballets Russes placed aestheticism and sensualism at the center, often with exotic “Oriental” overtones . Echoing other “decadent’s” trends in Russian and European culture, the Ballet Russes were influenced by aesthetic
 The most remarkable achievement in Russian visual arts was the innovative modernism of such artists as Marc Chagall, Vasilii Kandinsky, and Kazimir Malevich, still renowned .
 Some artists took a revivalist turn, evoking a seemingly stable and authentic time of pure national identity before Russia’s Westernization . Others crafted nostalgic recollections of the elegance of the eighteenth century .
 Futurist artists, like Mikhail Larionov, Natalia Goncharova, and Malevich, experimented with images of modern machines in motion, with primitivism in style and subject .
 In addition to the fine imperial theaters, private ones came into prominence . Private theaters came to prominence in China .
 The Moscow Art Theater, directed by Konstantin Stanislavsky, achieved the greatest and most sustained fame . He exercised the strongest influence on acting in Russia and abroad through his emphasis on psychological realism . The Art Theater was the most famous theater in Russia .
 It's important to realize that it represented only one current in the theatrical life of a period remarkable for its variety, vitality, and experimentation . But it was important to remember that it was only one of the current current in theatrical life .
 Note the position of the “Black Square” in the traditional icon corner . Note the move of the "Black Square" to the top of the icon corner. Note that this is not the first time the "black square" has been added to the icon .
 Russian art as well as Russian literature in the ‘silver age” formed an inseparable part of the art and literature of the West . The West profited hugely, for example, from literary trends in France or from German thought, and in turn contributed in quite original ways to
 Russian culture was less directly imitative but also more ‘Western” than ever on the eve of 1917 . In a sense, Russian culture . was less direct imitative and more “Western’ than ever .
 Turgenev’s “sons” found their spiritual home first in ‘nihilistic” ideologies, which rejected established political and social authorities in the name of an often vague program of radical change .
 While nihilism emancipated the young Russian radicals from any allegiance to the established order, it was, to repeat a point, more individualistic than social in its spirit of total personal emancipation . Proclamations produced by radical student groups in the 1860s suggest a vague general commitment
 Populism arose in the 1860s and 1870s to dominate much of Russian radicalism until the Soviet era . A more elaborate social creed came with a vengeance in the form of narodnichestvo, or populism .
 We have already seen its political impact in such events as the celebrated ‘going to the people” of 1874, the terrorism of the ’Peoples’ Will,” and the activities of the Socialist Revolutionary party .
 Ideologically, populism was defined by devotion to the common people (improving their lives but also inspiring them to revolution) The belief that Russia had a special historical opportunity to avoid the evils of capitalism thanks to the strength of the peasant commune . Social revolution was even more essential than political
 Populist populists insisted on universal moral truths grounded in human nature . At the heart of this was the natural equality and dignity of all human beings .
 Bakunin’s violent anarchism inspired many of the more impatient populists . Bakunin's violent anarchist movement was inspired by many of his violent tendencies .
 Anarchism appealed to a variety of Russian intellectuals, including such outstanding figures as Tolstoy and Prince Petr Kropotkin, a noted geographer, geologist and radical .
 Kropotkin’s activities, including a fantastic escape from a prison-hospital, were described in his celebrated Memoirs of a Revolutionist written in English .
 Herzen and Bakunin were émigrés, but populist leaders arose in Russia after 1855 . Populist leaders arose after Herzen, Bakunin and Herzen left Russia in 1855.
 Nikolai Chernyshevsky, whose views and impact were not limited to populism, deserves special attention . He exercised a major influence on Russian populists, but nevertheless exercised a big influence on them .
 Born in 1828, Chernyshevsky actually enjoyed only a few years of public activity as journalist and writer . He was editor of The Contemporary, The Contemporary .
 It was probably Chernyshevsky more than anyone else who contributed to the spread of utilitarian, positivist and in part materialist views in Russia .
 Chernyshevsky argued that individual needs and individual happiness must be the basis of morality . He argued that this egoism must be tempered with the rational knowledge that true self-interest lay in seeing the greatest benefit among the largest number of people .
 Chernyshevsky concerned himself with aesthetics as much as economics . He wrote on nineteenth-century French history, demonstrating failure of liberalism, as well as on Russian problems .
 His novel, What Is to Be Done? dealt with the new generation of “critical realists” their ethics and their activities . He sketched both the revolutionary hero and forms of cooperative organization .
 As to the peasant commune, Chernyshevsky showed more reserve than certain of his contemporaries .
 He generally believed that it could serve as a direct transition to socialism in Russia, provided socialist revolution first triumphed in Europe . Yet he generally believed it could be a direct .
 For a time Chernyshevsky collaborated closely in spreading his ideas with an able radical literary critic, Nikolai Dobroliubov, who died in 1861 at the age of twenty-five . He died of a gunshot wound to the head .
 Chernyshevsky's and Dobroliubov’s work was continued, with certain differences, by Petr Lavrov and Nikolai Mikhailovsky . Petr Lavrov continued his work by continuing to work with Petr Lavrov .
 Lavrov, 1823-1900, was another erudite adherent of positivism, utilitarianism, and populism . He emphasized in his Historical Letters of 1870, which many young radicals claimed to have read with “hot tears of idealistic enthusiasm” Lavrov .
 Mikhailovsky used the “subjective method” in social analysis to stress moral values rather than mere objective description . Mikhailovsky championed the peasant commune, which provided for harmonious development of the individual .
 The populist defense of the peasant commune became more desperate with the passage of time . Russia was in fact developing into a capitalist country and because an articulate Marxist school arose to point that out as proof .
 In the early twentieth century, the populist tradition was continued mainly by the Socialist Revolutionaries, led by Viktor Chernov . In the 1930s and 1940s, the Russian Revolutionaries were led by the Communist Party .
 While they borrowed some ideas from the Marxists, they remained distinct in their insistence on popular unity and democracy . They rejected arguments that there was a class divide between workers and peasants that required the rural majority to be subordinate to the urban minority . Their tendency to view socialism as derived more from
 The actual development of Russia seemed to follow the Marxist rather than the populist blueprint . Russia's development of the Soviet Union seemed to have followed the Marxist instead of populist blueprint.
 Marxism made important inroads among Russian intellectuals in the 1890s . It gained adherents both among scholars and in the radical and revolutionary movement .
 The occasion for the split between Bolsheviks and Mensheviks, we have seen, was over how open or disciplined the revolutionary party should be . We have seen that the split was over whether or not the party was disciplined or open .
 The leader of the Mensheviks, Iulii Martov, was attracted to Marxism, not only by its ‘scientific” arguments about the natural progress of history toward socialism . But also by its compelling moral arguments about ending inequality and suffering, he says .
 Lenin voiced his contempt for the political moralizing so common to Russian socialism . By contrast, the Bolshevik leader Lenin spoke out against moralizing . Lenin expressed contempt for moralizing in Russia .
 Martov and the Mensheviks emphasized value to workers’ consciousness of the struggle itself . Lenin and the Bolsheviks emphasized the guidance and leadership workers needed—hence the difference in their visions of the party .
 Marxists like Martov viewed the socialist goal of democracy as an inherent value . Lenin saw democracy as mainly a means to facilitate the struggle for socialism . Lenin said democracy was mainly a way of facilitating the struggle .
 Michael Karpovich, George Fischer, and other scholars have argued that Russian liberalism was by no means a negligible quantity . The main social bases in the professions and the zemstvo system remained small .
 It gained strength steadily and produced able ideologists and leaders such as Pavel Miliukov and Petr Struve . It was founded in the early 1900s .
 It should be noted that liberals viewed themselves as acting for the national good rather than the interests of any particular class .
 The good they sought to promote was, of course, the good of the individual . But also the development of a national community founded on free association and patriotic solidarity, he says .
 Not all thinking and outspoken Russians were liberals or socialists . Conservative conservatism, even reaction, was not the property of the autocratic state . Not all Russians were liberal or socialist .
 Conservatives tended toward Russian nationalism, belief in the need for an absolutist state, anti-individualism . Conservatives tend to believe in the possibility of human-made happiness on earth . Conservatives tended to be more conservative than Russians .
 Mikhail Katkov was the leading conservative voice in Russia . He was able to influence both public opinion and state policy through his newspapers and journals .
 Katkov was a leader among Russian nationalists and Pan-Slavists . He was a vehement advocate of the Russification of non-Russians . He advocated the necessary superiority of Russians within the empire .
 Nikolai Danilevsky predicted that a unified Slavdom was destined by history to be the next great and dominant civilization in the world . The most extreme Russian conservatives were those who predicted a Slavdom to be a dominant civilization .
 A related but different vision of the Slavic mission and future belonged to Konstantin Leontiev . A related and different vision was that of Konstantina Leontev, who was in charge of Slavic missions .
 He viewed Western liberalism, egalitarianism, and materialism as harmful to humanity . He saw Russia’s salvation in its traditional “Byzantinism’— Orthodoxy, autocracy, and a hierarchical society—and its union with countries of the East .
 The "woman question" was a social issue that engaged almost everyone, from conservatives to socialists . The “woman question’s” was an issue for almost everyone in the U.S.
 The “emancipation of women” was a central theme in the writings of Chernyshevsky and other radicals in the 1860s and after, though the issue gained particular prominence and urgency during and after the 1905 revolution .
 Ideologically, the women’s movement was as divided as the larger political world . Ideologically and politically, the movement was divided as well as the political world, says the author .
 Many activists fought directly to overcome women’s inferior status . Others, especially socialists, distanced themselves from such feminism, insisting that women should focus on the “larger” cause .
 We have seen that official, conservative, and much liberal thought included arguments about Russian identity and destiny . We have also seen arguments about Russia's destiny in Russia .
 A large part of this question concerned the place of Russia and Russians within their multinational and multiethnic empire . The question was whether Russia and Russia should be included in Russia's multinational empire .
 Russia as a “European empire” bringing civilization to non-Europeans; Russia as an “anti-European” empire with its own native qualities and virtues, often linked to Asia; and, though this conception emerged only in the late 1800s, it emerged only
 The empire's non-Russian nationalities explored the meanings of their own ethnic and national experiences . The empire’s non-Russians themselves explored their own nationalities .
 We see similar debates among Muslims, notably in the movement for cultural reform . We also see debates about cultural reform among Muslims .
 The Jadid movement sought to create a new modern Muslim steeped in modern cosmopolitan knowledge . Adeeb Khalid and others have tried to create an Islam-inspired approach .
 A major sign and catalyst of change was the growth of native-language publishing, including influential magazines like Mulla Nasreddin from Tiflis . The publications blended the worldview of Western modernity with Muslim identities and values .
 One of the most significant shifts in Russian thought and culture, was the turn toward spirituality and religion . The shift in Russian philosophy and popular culture was the rise of spirituality .
 In Russian philosophy, the ‘silver age’ marked a return to metaphysics, and often to religious belief itself . The “silver age,’s ‘Silver Age,” marked the return of metaphysics and religious belief .
 Among intellectuals, Vladimir Soloviev was the son of the historian Sergei Solovieev . He was a most influential figure in Soviet society .
 He lived from 1853 until 1900 and wrote on a variety of philosophical and theological subjects . He lived in England until 1900 .
 Lev Shestov challenged the dominant rationalism and positivism of the late nineteenth century . The philosopher challenged the dominance of rationalism in the late 19th century .
 Their essays repudiated materialism, atheism, and collectivism that had dominated the thought of the intelligentsia for generations as leading inevitably to failure and moral disaster . They advocated instead a philosophy of individuality, spirituality, and morality .
 Extending and broadening this turn away from narrow rationalism was a remarkable upheaval in spiritual searching and crisis, often called a “religious renaissance” by historians .
 In the years after 1900, many educated Russians returned to the Church to revitalize their faith . In 1905, the excitement and disappointment of 1905 saw many Russians return to the church .
 Religious associations proliferate among both the educated and the urban poor . As we have seen, religious associations proliferated among both those educated and poor .
 A few individual clergy sought to revitalize Orthodox faith . Father John of Kronstadt sought to restore fervency and the presence of the miraculous in liturgical celebration .
 Many artists and writers as well were attracted to the spiritual and the sacred . Many artists, writers and artists are attracted to spiritual matters .
 Many “silver age’s poets sought in their writings to penetrate appearances to discover the spiritual essence of things . Sometimes voiced apocalyptic visions of a transformed world .
 Visual artists were also drawn toward a spiritual understanding of the power and function of images, including explicitly religious ones .
 Alexander Benois, the leader of the World of Art movement, observed in 1902 that in all the arts there was a widespread feeling that the reigning “materialism” of the age was too “astonishingly simple” to answer questions about life or to express ideals
 Lunacharsky’s words: In order to create a new faith that placed humanity where God had been but retained a religious spirit of passion, moral certainty, and the promise of deliverance from evil and death .
 Russian cultural life was not entirely filled with high-minded concerns about politics, society, philosophy, morality, and religion . Russian culture was filled with concerns about society, society and morality .
 Popular fiction, it was feared, eroded traditional popular and national values and tastes in favor of preoccupations with adventure, individual daring, exotic locales, and material success . For popular readers this was a fascinating window into the bustling modern world .
 The enormously popular cinema contributed to this changing popular culture with its ethos of spectacle and sensation and its narratives of melodramatic conflict over values .
 Cultural life, like social and political life, seemed to point in many directions . Cultural life was like that of many directions. Cultural life seemed to be pointing in many ways .
 Pessimists could emphasize artistic defiance of established norms, decadent artistic tastes and interests, widespread public depression and disillusionment, the rise of socialism and other radical ideologies, and intellectual fragmentation .
 Russia did indeed seem to be heading in multiple directions at once, says CNN's John Sutter . But we must also recognize, again, the contradiction and uncertainty, Sutter says .
 We cannot really be sure what might have happened in the absence of the devastating war that began in the summer of 1914 . We cannot be sure of what might've happened if the war hadn't started .
 The same would be said for the revolutionary epoch to which we now turn. The same is said to have been said to be the case in the past .
 As has been indicated in preceding chapters, the constitutional period of Russian imperial history has continued to evoke much controversy . A KUCHLAVOK, SOLDIER, AUGUST 1917, is a Russian soldier .
 Students of the development of Russia from 1905 to the First World War and the revolutions of 1917 have emphasized that Russia had finally left autocracy behind and was evolving toward liberalism and political freedom .
 The change in 1907 in the electoral law indicated that the Duma could no longer be abolished . The Duma was abolished by 1907 in accordance with the law .
 The reformed Russian legislature has gained ever-increasing prestige and acceptance at home, among government officials and the people, as well as abroad .
 Russian society at the time was much more progressive and democratic than the constitutional framework alone would indicate, say optimists . Besides, continue the optimists, Russian society was becoming increasingly progressive every year .
 Modern education spread rapidly at different levels and was remarkably humanitarian and liberal . Russian teachers as a group were remarkably liberal . Modern education was not likely to serve as a buttress for antiquated ideas or obsolete institutions .
 Russian universities enjoyed virtually full freedom and a rich creative life . Russian universities were virtually free and had a vibrant creative life.
 Even the periodical press, in spite of various restrictions, gave some representation to every point of view, including the Bolshevik .
 Government prohibitions and penalties could often be neutralized by such simple means as a change in the name of a publication or, if necessary, by sending the nominal editor to jail, while important political writers continued their work . The government could often neutralize such simple .
 "To be sure, grave problems remained, including economic backwardness and the poverty of the masses," he said .
 Stolypin’s land reform on the way to being solved . Industrialization on the one hand and land reform were on the other, they were . But, through industrialization and land reforms they were not solved .
 Many of them refuse even to call it ‘constitutional” because, according to the Fundamental Laws, the executive branch of the government and in fact, the ministers in particular were not responsible to the Duma . The Duma is not supposed to be responsible for the actions of the
 Duma functioned less as an effective channel for the popular redress of grievances than as a constantly frustrating reminder of the autocracy’s unwillingness to accept real political reform . Limited in power and limited in representativeness by a highly unequal electoral system .
 Nicholas II's hostility to the participation of organized society in Russia’s political life seemed to be growing all the more intense in these final years . Indeed, Nicholas II’�s hostility to organized society grew more intense during his final years.
 The power of nonentities, like Goremykin and Sukhomlinov, were logical end products of the bankruptcy of the regime . Rasputin himself, and the fantastic Rasputina himself, were the result of the collapse of the Soviet regime .
 Social discontent, pessimists argue, was growing not lessening as the economy modernized . Social discontent was growing, not lessened, they say . The U.S. has seen a sharp decline in income tax rates since 2001 .
 The Russian capital is home to political terrorism both of the Left and the Right, and the influence of class hostility, class hostility and democratic freedoms . Vladimir Putin's government has been accused of corruption and political terrorism .
 Assumedly positive developments like urbanization, the growing availability of consumer goods, and widening literacy seemed more likely to generate frustration with the status quo than to lessen social tensions .
 Artists rejected all tradition as bankrupt and philistine or were drawn toward “decadent’ fascination with sex, evil, demons, shadows, and a coming apocalypse . Even cultural life life pointed toward crisis, as artists rejected tradition .
 The pessimists maintain that the war provided merely the last mighty push to bring the whole rotten structure tumbling down . But the pessimists say that war provided only the last push against the rotten structure .
 Russia added an enormous burden to the load borne by the Russian people, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Russia's economy has been hit hard by a wave of anti-Putin rhetoric .
 The destruction of property and other civilian losses and displacement escaped count . Many of the losses escaped count.
 The Russian army tried to evacuate the population as it retreated, adding to the confusion and suffering . The population was added to the chaos and suffering as the army retreated .
 It became obvious during the frightful ordeal that the imperial government had again failed in its tasks, as in the Crimean War and the Russo-Japanese War, but on a much larger scale . The imperial government failed in this war, as it did in Crimean War, and on a larger
 In addition to the army, the urban population suffered as a result of this because it experienced serious difficulties obtaining food and fuel . The urban population also experienced difficulties obtaining fuel and food and food .
 The February Revolution and the Provisional Government . The imperial regime died with hardly a whimper . The February revolution was the first to overthrow the imperial regime .
 In the course of the momentous days of February 23 to 27 riots and demonstrations in the capital—renamed “Petrograd” instead of the Germansounding “St.Germansounding ‘St. Peterburg’ The capital was renamed Petrograd instead
 A shortage of bread and coal during the war in Russia assumed a more serious character . The film "St. Petersburg" was made in response to a shortage of food and coal .
 Thousands of women textile workers walked out of their factories on February 23 . The strike was in commemoration of International Women’s Day but mainly to protest bread shortages .
 Already large numbers of men and women were on strike or idled by fuel shortages or lockouts . Fuel shortages and lockouts have led to shortages of fuel and other services .
 The numbers of strikers continued to grow, as did the size and vehemence of street demonstrations . Demonstrators voiced demands ranging from bread to an end to the war to the abolition of autocracy .
 On February 25 reserve battalions sent to suppress crowds fraternized with them instead . Reserve battalions were no other troops in the city .
 The imperial government might have saved the imperial government, at least temporarily . Resolute action, such as promptly bringing in loyal forces from elsewhere, might have helped .
 authority simply collapsed and many officials went into hiding . Instead, with Nicholas IT away at the front, authority collapsed . Many officials went to hiding .
 On February 26 members of the Duma sidestepped an imperial dissolution decree . The next day they created a Provisional Government, composed of prominent Duma leaders and public figures .
 Prince Georgii Lvov assumed the positions of chairman of the Council of Ministers, that is, prime minister, and of minister of the interior . Prince Lvov was formerly chairman of Union of Zemstva and Towns .
 His more important colleagues included the Kadet leader Miliukov as minister of foreign affairs . Octobrist leader Guchkov was minister of war and of the navy . Alexander Kerensky, the only socialist in the cabinet, was justice minister .
 The new government closely reflected the composition and views of the Progressive Bloc in the Duma . The Kadets obtained the greatest single representation in the new government .
 Nicholas II abdicated March 2 in favor of his brother, Michael, who in turn abdicates the next day . Nicholas II bowed to the inevitable and on March 2 adicated for himself and his only son, Alexis . Michael, Nicholas II's brother, in turn, ab
 Nicholas II, on his side, had appointed Lvov prime minister before renouncing the throne . Nicholas II had chosen Lvov as prime minister . Lvov was Lvov's first prime minister after Nicholas II .
 Provisional Government was quickly recognized, and hailed, by the United States and other Western democracies . It was quickly hailed by the U.S. and other western democracies .
 Workers began electing deputies during the February 1917 strikes . They established a citywide council, calling for elections in factories and in the garrisons .
 The first meeting of the Petrograd Soviet took place on the evening of February 27 in the Tauride Palace, the same building where the new government was taking shape . The meeting took place in the same place as the new Soviet government began .
 The Soviet had no desire to wrest power from the ‘bourgeoisie,’ for its leaders considered Russia too backward for socialism . Dominated by moderate socialists until the fall of 1917, the Soviet considered itself too backward to socialism .
 "They acted boldly in the interests, as they saw them, of the popular masses" "Still, they acted boldly," he says .
 Military units were to establish soldiers’ committees of elected representatives from the lower ranks . Petrograd Soviet was to be the final authority controlling the actions of the military . Military units would be established soldiers' committees .
 Weapons, vehicles, and other materiel were to be taken from the control of officers and put under the authority of soldiers’ committees . The move was to be made to allow soldiers to take control of their own weapons, vehicles and weapons .
 Following the Petrograd lead, Soviets began to be formed all over Russia . Soviets were formed in Petrograd .
 Congress elected an executive committee that became the supreme Soviet body . Congress elected a executive committee to become the supreme body of the Soviet Union .
 Soviets stood much closer to restless workers, soldiers, and peasants than did Lvov and his associates . Lvov enjoyed a large and immediate following in Russia .
 This was almost certainly the most liberal government in the world at that time . This was probably the most progressive government in history, says historian .
 Provisional Government immediately launched a radical program of reform . Government committed to ideals of democracy, freedom, and the unity of all classes and peoples .
 In a matter of weeks, they freed thousands of political prisoners and exiles . They proclaimed freedom of speech, press, assembly, and association . abolished flogging, exile to Siberia, and the death penalty . granted women the right to vote and run for office .
 The first “cabinet of ministers” of the Provisional Government . Poquiers, WR NeKpacehe AA Mansknons, AU WnKrapers .
 Prince Georgii Lvov is first on the left, Kerensky is third and Miliukov sixth from the left . Prince Georgi Lvov was first in a series of pictures taken in the summer .
 This was an ideal of citizenship that disregarded class interests or particularistic needs in favor of ideals of national unity and concord . This was the ideal of citizens disregarding class interests and particular needs .
 They deemphasized the state as the key force in transforming the country in favor of an active civil society, they say . And, consistent with their long years of struggle against autocracy, they deemphasize the state . The state is key force to transform the country, according to
 Although the Provisional Government demonstrated what liberalism might have done for Russia, it failed to overcome the extraordinary difficulties that beset the country, and those who ruled it, in 1917 .
 The new government continued the war in spite of the fact that support for the war continued to decline among the people . The army became daily less able to fight on, and the government continued .
 While convinced that all available land should belong to the peasants, it made no definitive land settlement, leaving that to the constituent assembly . The constituent assembly failed to satisfy the peasantry .
 It proved unable to check inflation, restore transportation, or increase industrial production . The U.S. government was unable to stop inflation or restore transportation .
 A large part of this failure stemmed from the limited authority and power of the new regime . The new regime has been criticised for its lack of authority and the power of it .
 It had little in the way of an effective administrative apparatus . The tsarist police in particular had largely gone into hiding in Russia .
 The Petrograd garrison itself was devoted to the Soviet government . The high command of the army supported the government, but enlisted men remained an uncertain quantity .
 Provisional Government had to promise the Soviet not to remove or disarm that garrison . What is more is more, the Provisional government had to . promise to . not remove or . disarm that . garrison .
 Kerensky’s derisive appellation, “persuaderin-chief,” was in part a reflection of his unenviable position . The former president of the U.S. Senate in New York City was elected to the Senate last year .
 It refused to recognize the catastrophic condition of the country and misjudged the mood of the people, it said . The government "misjudged" the moods of people, the government says . The country has been in a state of crisis since 2008 .
 Many of the government's "mistakes" were understandable given their liberal political values . Of course, many of these “mistakes” were understandable .
 Russia believed that the Russians, like the French at the time of the great French Revolution, would fight better than ever because they were finally free men . Thus, as mentioned, it continued the war, believing that they would fight even better .
 Russia believes abandoning allies France and Great Britain in their struggle against authoritarian Germany would have betrayed their political principles and Russia's best interests as a new democracy . They also sincerely believed that abandoning allies Britain and France and France would have been a betrayal of Russia's political principles .
 In internal affairs, a moderate and liberal position, generally difficult to maintain in times of upheaval, proved quixotic in a country of desperately poor and largely illiterate peasants . The poor wanted the gentry land above all else .
 The government's temporary, “provisional,” nature constituted a special weakness . The government’s temporary, "proportal," nature was "a special weakness," the government said .
 Duma members were deeply conscious of the fact that they had acquired their high authority by chance . The Duma itself had been elected by the extremely restricted suffrage of 1907 .
 They insist fundamental questions of Russia's future can only be settled by a fully democratic constituent assembly . Believing deeply in the rule of law, they insisted that fundamental questions must be settled .
 Such basic decisions as those involved in the land settlement and in the future status of the national minorities had, therefore, to be left to that assembly . The decision was made by the assembly, which is responsible for the settlement of the land .
 Some of the best Russian jurists tried to draw a perfect electoral law, time slipped by . Time slipped by as they drew up a new electoral law .
 When a constituent assembly finally did meet, it was much too late, for the Bolsheviks had already come to power . The Bolsheviks were already in power .
 The Bolshevik victory in 1917 cannot be separated from the person and activity of Lenin . Lenin was a Bolshevik leader in 1917, according to the historian . Lenin died in 1918 in a house fire in the Russian Revolution .
 He returned to Russia thanks to the amnesty the new government granted to exiles . He arrived at the Finland Station in Petrograd on April 3, 1917 .
 The German government had let Lenin and his associates pass from Switzerland though Germany in a sealed train in hopes they would disorganize the Russian war effort . This journey would soon lead to rumors that Lenin was in the pay of the Germans . Lenin was soon rumored to have been in pay of
 The “April Theses” were a dramatic call for revolution against the “bourgeois” Provisional Government . All political power to the Soviets, an immediate end to the war, nationalization of land and its distribution to the peasants, and industry under the control
 Many of his comrades thought he had simply fallen out of touch with political realities, having been out of Russia so long . Many of them thought he was simply falling out .
 Lenin found growing rank-and-file support in the party and soon won over most party leaders . Lenin found popularity in the ranks of the Communist Party in Russia . But Lenin found support in rank and party leaders in the 1930s .
 The crushing burden of the war and increasing economic dislocation made the position of the Provisional Government constantly more precarious . The government's position became more precarious after the war .
 enthusiasm for the new freedoms mixed with growing distrust of the new rulers, who were variously labeled the rich, the upper classes, and the bourgeoisie . Also, enthusiasm for freedom mixed with distrust of new rulers .
 First open crisis occurred in late April 1917 in connection with the government's war policy . The first open crisis was over the war policy of 1917 .
 Provisional Government issued to Russian citizens a “Declaration on War Aims’ that insisted on a purely defensive war . Petrograd Soviet was pressured to renounce annexationist war aims . Provisional government insisted on defensive war against Russia .
 Further pressure forced the government to send a diplomatic note to the allies declaring the same . Further pressure was forced to send the government's diplomatic note declaring the .
 It seemed to many that the Declaration was now shown to have been political deceit and hypocrisy . It seemed that many seemed to be a political deceit .
 Kerensky and General Alexei Brusilov started a major offensive on the southwestern front late in June .
 Initially successful, it soon collapsed because of confusion and lack of discipline . Initially successful but soon collapsed due to a lack of professionalism .
 The Germans and Austrians broke through the Russian lines in turn . The Provisional Government had to face another disaster .
 The problem of national minorities became more pressing as ethnic and national movements mushroomed in the disorganized former empire of the Romanovs .
 The government continued its increasingly hazardous policy of postponing political decisions until the meeting of a constituent assembly .
 Four Kadet ministers resigned in July because they believed that too broad a recognition had been accorded to the Ukrainian movement . Nevertheless, four of them said they were unhappy with the broad recognition .
 Serious tensions and crises in the cabinet were demonstrated by the resignation of the minister of trade and industry, who opposed the efforts of the new Social Democratic minister of labor to have workers participate in the management of industry . Lvov and Viktor Chernov clashed over the implementation of the land policy .
 The crucial land problem became more urgent as peasants began to appropriate the land of the gentry on their own, without waiting for the constituent assembly . The land problem has become more urgent .
 Growing frustration and discontent helped produce the next big crisis, the so-called “July Days” in which tens of thousands of armed soldiers, sailors, and workers took to the streets of the capital, starting on July 3 .
 These crowds in the streets lacked the embracive multiclass character of the February Days . These crowds lacked the enthusiasm of the multi-class crowd .
 By July 4, shootings were reported all over the city, and the numbers of injured and dead began to rise . The number of people killed and injured in the shootings has risen since July 4 .
 Violence erupted whenever cossacks or other forces of authority were encountered . Violence erupted when cossack or other force of authority was encountered . Cossacks and other forces were encountered during the conflict .
 The Soviet Union refused to be forced to take power . What was not clear was how to achieve this end, especially when the Soviet itself refused to take control .
 The Bolsheviks themselves, though tempted and at first uncertain how to respond, also refused to lead this street movement to power . The Bolshevik Party refused to take control of the streets .
 Historians still argue about whether the Bolsheviks organized these events and, if so, to what purpose, they did . Historians are still debating whether these events were organized .
 The goal of overthrowing the Provisional Government was on the Bolshevik agenda . Certainly, the goal was to overthrow the provisional government .
 Without leadership from either the Soviets or the Bolsheviks the movement disintegrated . The Bolsheviks were unable to find leadership in Russia or Russia .
 A heavy rainfall on the evening of July 4 drove the last of the crowds off the streets . A heavy rain on the night of the July 4 finally drove off the crowds .
 The government responded with repression against participating troops and organizations . It responded to the government response to the protests .
 The Bolsheviks were accused of treason, accused of having taken money and instructions from the German government . Hundreds of Bolshevik leaders were arrested and hundreds were arrested .
 In addition, some civil liberties were restricted in the interests of greater social order . Civil liberties were also restricted in order to protect the public's safety .
 The death penalty was restored for military personnel at the front convicted by field courts of treason, desertion, flight from battle, refusal to fight, incitement to surrender, disobeying orders, and mutiny .
 On July 18, Kerensky appointed as the new commander in chief Lavr Kornilov, a toughminded cossack general . Lavr is already greatly admired in conservative circles for his strong advocacy of military and civic discipline .
 In this new atmosphere, various right-wing and conservative groups became more active and bolder . Right-wing groups became bolder and more active in recent years .
 It continued efforts to restore authority and order in the country . Many argued that the government should have pressed their victory and eliminated the radical opposition .
 The government convened a national “State Conference’s” in mid-August . Every type of civic organization was invited to send representatives to the conference .
 The conference accomplished little but did reveal the deep social and political rifts in Russian life . The conference was held in Moscow, Russia's capital, on Sunday .
 Before the meeting, many groups on the Right were already calling for a “strong unified national government” that would “save Russia” through greater order and unity .
 Socialists were blaming Russia’s sufferings on the greed of the bourgeoisie . Socialists, by contrast, warned of the threat of counterrevolutionary counterrevolution .
 The famous “Kornilov affair’ grew directly out of the rising summer flood of talk about disorder, betrayal, and danger, and about the need for discipline, unity, and strong authority . “The famous 'Kornilsov affair' grew out of a
 The affair itself alternated between the ominous and the absurd . It was forged as much by confusion and misunderstanding as by conspiracy . The affair was forged by confusion, misunderstanding and misunderstanding .
 The new commander in chief, Kornilov, was inclined to share the view on the Right that Kerensky and the government had become a prisoner of the Soviet and the Left, he says . He adds that the new commander of the armed forces had become prisoners of the
 In turn, Kornilov saw himself as the man who could rescue the government and Russia, a self-image of himself . In turn he was seen as a well-organized leader of Russia .
 Kornilov appears to have believed, not without reason, that Kerensky also wished to end the power of the Left . He was prepared to support a temporary military dictatorship .
 Kornilov dispatched troops to the capital to “protect” the revolution, which seemed to have included dispersing the Soviet . Kerensky appealed to the people to ‘save the revolution” from Kornillov’s conspiracy .
 In the final days of August, the population of the capital mobilized for defense, while the advancing troops, faced with a railroad strike, encountered general opposition, and short of supplies, became demoralized and bogged down . Their commanding officer committed suicide .
 Their leaders were let out of jail, and followers were armed to defend Petrograd . Petrograd was a major city of Petrograd, Russia, in the 1920s .
 After the Kornilov threat collapsed, they retained the preponderance of military strength in the capital . They retained ever more adherents among the increasingly radical masses, winning ever more followers . The Russian state of the Crimea is now the most powerful in Russia .
 The Provisional Government, on the other hand, came to be bitterly despised by the Right for having betrayed Kornilov . While many on the Left suspected it of having plotted with him . Many on the Right also suspected it had betrayed him .
 The cabinet experienced another crisis and was able to reconstitute itself—for the third and last time—with ten socialist and six nonsocialist ministers . Kerensky remained at the head of the cabinet .
 It should be added that the Kornilov fiasco, followed by the arrest of several other generals, led to a further deterioration of military discipline, making the position of officers in many units untenable . The position of many units is now untenable, according to the Russian army .
 Social Revolution Research on the social history of the revolution has added much to our knowledge of the role workers, soldiers and peasants played in the coming to power of the Bolsheviks .
 It seems likely that Lenin's arguments would have remained only a footnote to the history of 1917 had not so many people found Bolshevik promises so appealing . Social discontent and anger undermined Russia's fragile new order .
 Of course, the erosion of order was in large measure caused by continued economic collapse, especially the abysmal material conditions in the cities and at the front .
 It seemed to many lower-class Russians, deeply distrustful of existing political and social authorities, that the only solution to this crisis was greater power over their own everyday lives . The only solution is greater power, they say .
 Factory workers demanded that their elected committees be allowed to supervise production, oversee supplies and fuel, monitor fines and other disciplinary measures, and supervise hiring and firing . Factory workers say they want to be able to oversee supplies, fuel and fuel .
 ‘Workers’ control’ evolved from supervision to demands for complete managerial power by workers . As economic conditions worsened and distrust of employers grew, ‘workers’ .
 Workers took revenge on those who had claimed power over their lives in the past . Workers also took revenge by being insolent and insubordinate with foremen and employers . Workers were carted out of factories in wheelbarrows in revenge rituals .
 Use of symbols such as the rising sun, broken chains, and female personifications of liberty was common in the early days of the 19th century .
 Crowds repeatedly took control of public squares, boulevards, and streets for meetings, funeral processions, and demonstrations . Workers, soldiers, students, and other townspeople repeatedly took over the streets .
 Alongside these acts of social defiance was a good deal of drunkenness, hooliganism, robbery, and criminal violence . Alongside this act of defiance, there was a lot of alcohol and violence .
 By the fall of 1917, even moderate socialists viewed these upheavals with horror as an upwelling of dark popular instincts and destructive class hatred, leading Russia toward a nightmarish abyss of violence .
 The motivations, goals, and moods of the aroused population were complex and contradictory . The motivations and goals for aroused people were complex, contradictory .
 Judging by the torrent of words, spoken and written, that accompanied this social revolution, certain ideas seem to have been most pervasive . The social revolution was a social revolution in the 1960s and 1970s .
 Freedom pervades the language of almost everyone in the months after the February Revolution, often cast in near religious terms as something ‘sacred” as enabling the ‘resurrection” of the Russian people .
 Most Russians believe in the need for strong and unified political authority to restore order to the country, especially to the economy . Most Russians also seemed to believe in a strong political authority .
 This must be a political power that would serve the interests of the majority against the minority, of the poor against the rich . But this must be the political power of a majority against a minority, the poor vs. the rich.
 Soviet power embodied for many in the idea of Soviet power would establish a bread monopoly to prevent hunger, distribute land to the poor, introduce workers’ control in industry, fix prices to control inflation, expropriate “super-profits,” and even suppress opposition to such
 Most lower-class Russians distrusted the rich and powerful and blamed them for the failures of the revolution since February . Even to brand them as “enemies of the people” and “traitors” to Russia and the revolution, they called them ‘en
 The language of popular revolution was suffused with moral language and feeling . Complicating all this, the language was also suffused by moral language .
 "Ethnic notions of honor and dignity, and of the social rights these entailed, were pervasive. And ethical notions of dignity and social rights were pervasive," she said .
 The revolution, it was said, was about ending ‘humiliation and insult’ and creating a social and political order defined by the “respect” it gave to ordinary people . It was said to end “humiliation, insult” and create a social order
 Whether this is what the Bolshevik revolution accomplished is another story . Whether this was what it actually did is another question .
 The Bolsheviks had good reason to believe that their moment on the historical stage had arrived . The Bolshevik Revolution was the first Russian Revolution in Russia in 1917 .
 It was decided at a meeting of the Bolshevik central committee on October 10, 1917, to organize the immediate armed overthrow of the government . Against much doubt in his own party, it was decided against much doubt .
 The rising popularity of the Bolsheviks, who benefited from the deepening political polarization in the country, is unquestionable . The Bolsheviks benefited from being the only major organized opposition party outside the government .
 Kornilov affair intensified fear of counterrevolution and frustration with the moderate socialists . Bolshevik influence grew even more rapidly after the affair . After the affair, Bolsheviks became even more powerful .
 By September 25, the Bolsheviks had a majority in the Petrograd Soviet, allowing them to elect a Bolshevik majority to the presidium and to elect Lev Trotsky chairman . The Bolsheviks were able to elect the chairman of the presidio of the Soviet .
 The Second Congress of Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies opened in Petrograd on October 25, 1917 . The weeks following brought more of the same, culminating in the opening of Petrograd of the Second Congress .
 Lenin worried the congress might tie the Bolsheviks’ hands by insisting on a Soviet government that included all the socialist parties . Lenin worried, however, and with good reason, that the congress may tie the Bolshevik’s hands .
 Bolshevik “Red Guards’ seized control of major streets and bridges, government buildings, railway stations, post and telegraph offices, the telephone exchange, the electric power station, the state bank, and police stations . October 25 would be officially celebrated as the anniversary of the
 Menshevik and SR speakers denounced the Bolshevik action as a “criminal political adventure” and to call for democratic unity . Mensheviks and SRs denounced the Bolsheviks' actions as ‘criminal political . adventure’
 Most of these socialist opponents walked out of the congress in protest of Bolshevik actions . Left Lenin's party with an even larger majority .
 The Congress declared its commitment to propose immediate peace to all nations, to safeguard the transfer of land into the control of peasants’ committees, and to establish workers’ control in industry . The Congress also declared it .
 Large numbers of Russians across the political spectrum expressed outrage at this violent seizure of power . Many Russians are outraged by the seizure of Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 Many people voiced certainty that this undemocratic adventure would surely fail, and soon . And very many people voiced certain that it would fail . The undecadicated venture would fail and soon, they said .
 The philosophers have only interpreted the world in various ways; the point however is to change it . The philosopher has only interpreted various ways, but the point is that the world is changed .
 Karl Marx: Class struggle is a fight for crude and material things without which no refined and spiritual things could exist . Marx: "Class struggle is always in evidence, which for the historian schooled in Marx is always a struggle"
 Class struggle is not present as a vision of spoils that fall to the victor . But these latter things, which are present in class struggle, are not present in the class struggle . The latter things are present to class struggle.
 "They are alive in this struggle as confidence, courage, courage and humor, cunning, and fortitude, and have effects that reach far back into the past," says author . They are alive as confidence and courage, humor, and courage .
 "They constantly call into question every victory, past and present, of the rulers," says the author of the book . They constantly question the legitimacy of the past and future of rulers .
 The brutal struggle to survive changed the party, its leaders, and their thinking about many things . The brutal battle for survival changed the way the party was built up .
 The whole of Soviet history is a story of great difficulties, crises, and conflicts . Some of them were caused by their own actions, but also of survival and accomplishment . The Soviet Union has a long history of surviving and accomplishment, says the author .
 This history of troubles and adaptations is the subject of the following chapters . This history is the history of the book's adaptations .
 To say that Soviet history was mainly a product of circumstances would miss a key quality that makes this history so remarkable and distinctive, it would miss the key quality of Soviet history . But to say that . Soviet history is mainly a result of circumstances .
 Communists were driven by an all-encompassing ideology, which they would call “Italics in the original.” Perhaps more than any other modern state, the Communists (as they would begin to call themselves) would call themselves “The Communist Party”
 The ideology itself evolved and changed and was misused, some would say “betrayed” But it remained the lens through which every circumstance and decision had to be viewed .
 Debates among Western historians about Soviet history have, at times, been vociferous, especially during the Cold War . Debates have been about the varying weight of circumstance and ideology in shaping the Soviet system . Western historians have expressed concern about the impact of Soviet ideology .
 Early historians told a story almost entirely centered on the state and the party, and often mainly on the leaders of these institutions . Early historians tell a story about the state, the party and often the leaders, often .
 Carl Friedrich and Zbigniew Brzezinski defined the Soviet Union as a polity ruled by a pervasive ideology, a single and highly centralized party, a terroristic police, a monopoly on communications, state control of all weapons, and a centrally directed economy . These studies were often
 This shift tended to displace the ‘totalitarian paradigm’ with a picture of a complex, inconsistent, fractured, and conflict-ridden society . This shift is often seen as a result of the “totalitarian” paradigm .
 Recent work has examined the ‘cultural’ history of Soviet society and politics . This has suggested that this can change our telling and understanding of history . Still more recent work has looked at rituals, myths, memory, subjectivity, and emotion .
 The collapse of Communist rule in 1991, which brought greater opening of the archives, stimulated continued development in our knowledge and interpretations of Soviet history . New appreciation for the power of ideology and brutality of a dictatorial state, but also for the variety of social experience and behaviors .
 Soviet history, like history as a discipline, remains a dynamic and still changing field of study . Soviet history is still changing and changing, as is the discipline of Soviet history .
 As we enter this new historical terrain, we must first look backward, as Soviet Communists often did, at a key intellectual source of revolutionary vision: Marxism . Marxism is Marxism .
 Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels constructed a system of philosophical, social, and political thought in the 1840s . Marx and Engels built a huge and comprehensive, although not entirely consistent, system of political thought .
 The roots of Marxism include the eighteenth-century Enlightenment, classical economics, pre-Marxist socialism, and German idealistic philosophy . Some of the main traditions of Western thought include the Enlightenment and classical economics .
 Most important, this was to be a practical formula that could be used to change a world judged to be filled with inequality, injustice, and suffering . Most important is to be the practical formula to change the world, he says .
 It was an optimistic theory that saw the dark sides of social life creating the conditions for their own overcoming .
 This is a summary that echoes how these ideas were taught in the Soviet Union, for that is their relevance here . We can offer a summary, though this necessarily oversimplifies; also, this is also a summary .
 Materialism, in contrast to philosophical idealism, takes its stand on a ‘scientific’ understanding of the world . Materialism asserts that only matter exists and that consciousness derives from it . Materialists assert that consciousness is only matter, and that only consciousness is consciousness .
 Marxism developed into an emphasis on the primacy of economic relations in shaping human society, culture, and history . In Marxism, this developed into a focus on economic relations shaping society .
 As Marx wrote in 1859, “The mode of production of the material means of existence conditions the whole process of social, political, and intellectual life”
 The dialectic adds change, conflict, and history to this theory, and especially the centrality of class struggle . It adds change and conflict to the theory of the dialectic .
 Dialectics reminds us that everything always changes, that everything exists in dynamic contradiction to other things, that gradual change will eventually result in a leap of qualitative change . Change is positive, such that the world progresses through contradiction and revolution .
 A common theoretical formulation involves the thesis, the antithesis, and the synthesis . The synthesis is a formative formulation of the thesis and antithesis . A common theory of the synthesis involves the synthesis and the thesis .
 A given condition, the thesis, produces opposition within itself, the antithesis . The tension between the two is resolved by a leap to a new condition . The synthesis is the synthesis .
 The synthesis in turn becomes a thesis producing a new antithesis, and the dialectic continues . The synthesis is a thesis that produces a thesis and antithesis .
 Revolution leads to a transformation of society, only to become itself the new established order producing a new antithesis . Eventually revolution leads to the new establishment order, producing a different antithesis of society .
 In this manner the bourgeoisie overthrew feudalism and the proletariat would overthrow capitalism . In this way the bourgeoisie would overthrow feudalism . The proletariat would overthrew capitalism .
 Each revolutionary class is nurtured by the very conditions of the system they are destined to destroy so that history can progress . The revolutionary class nurtures by the conditions they are meant to destroy .
 Centralization of the means of production and socialization of labor is becoming incompatible with their capitalist husk . Centralization and socializing of labor become incompatible with capitalist means .
 Some would argue that the proletarian revolution marks the end of this historic process . Significantly though, and, some would argue, illogically, this is not an end to the revolution . The proletarian revolution is the end to this process, but it is not the end .
 Lenin did a great deal to adapt Marxism to conditions in the world that were quite different than those in Marx’s time . He adjusted theories of capitalism to an increasingly global economy, the surprising conservatism of the working class, and the need to apply Marxism to largely peasant countries .
 Among Lenin’s arguments, those on the party, democracy, the revolution, and the dictatorship of the proletariat, deserve special attention . Lenin's arguments on the peasantry and on imperialism also deserve attention .
 Lenin-led Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks split the Russian Social Democrats in 1903 . The split was due to a disagreement on the nature of the party .
 Mensheviks favored a party open to any who shared its Marxist goals . The Menshevik party was open to anyone who shared the Marxist goals of its Marxist ideals .
 Lenin insisted on tightly knit body of dedicated professional revolutionaries, with clear lines of command and military discipline . Lenin insisted that a tightly knit group of professional revolutionaries would be loyal to him and his wife .
 Behind these different conceptions of the party lay deeper differences, which would have long-term effects on Soviet politics . Behind these differences, the differences would have been long-lasting effects .
 One difference concerned the place of workers in the working-class movement . One difference was the role of workers as a worker in the movement .
 Lenin emphasized the need for guidance and leadership by more “conscious” activists . Mensheviks tended to believe strongly in the consciousnessraising benefits of the experience of struggle itself . Lenin emphasized leadership by "conscious" activists .
 Workers left to themselves would be unable to see beyond the economic struggle and understand that their interests lie in overthrowing the existing social system . As he famously argued in What Is to be Done? , workers left to . themselves would not be able to . see beyond economic struggle .
 Lenin differed from many other Russian Marxists in thinking about democracy . Lenin's views on democracy differ from those of other Marxists .
 The Mensheviks, and even many Bolsheviks before 1917, were attracted to Marxism precisely for its democratic promise to give all people equal political representation and civil freedom . They believed this political democracy would need to be supplemented by the democracy of social rights .
 Lenin was among those who insisted that democracy had no inherent value apart from its usefulness in promoting the cause of the socialist transformation of society . Lenin, by contrast, said democracy was necessary to promote the socialist revolution .
 Lenin decided in 1917 that he and his party could stage a successful revolution in Russia . At first virtually no one, even among the Bolsheviks, agreed . Lenin believed in the imminent overthrow of the capitalist system .
 Marx, Engels, and Marxists in general have neglected the peasants in their teachings and relegated them, as petty proprietors, to the bourgeois camp . The peasants have been neglected in Marx's teachings, he says .
 The April Theses urged the transformation of the bourgeois revolution into a socialist one stated that poor peasants were to be part of the new revolutionary wave . Poor peasants should be included in the revolutionary wave, says the April Theseas .
 Lenin expanded Marxism to view class struggle under capitalism under capitalism in a global setting shaped by imperialism . Lenin also expanded Marxist view of class struggle in a world shaped by capitalism . Lenin's view of imperialism was expanded to include imperialism and imperialism .
 Lenin concluded that in its ultimate form capitalism becomes imperialism, with monopolies and financial capital ruling the world . In his book Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism, written in 1916 and published in 1917, Lenin concluded .
 Cartels replace free competition, and export of capital becomes more important than export of goods . Cartel replaces free competition and free trade is replaced by free competition . Cartels become more powerful and more powerful in the world of finance .
 The disparity between the development of the productive forces of the participants and their shares of the world is settled among capitalist states by wars . War will settle the disparity between capitalist states and the world by wars, writes David Frum .
 Lenin described the dying stage of capitalism as an age of gigantic conflicts . Instead of the original Marxist vision of the victorious socialist revolution as the simple expropriation of a few supercapitalists, Lenin described it as an era of gigantic conflict .
 This externalization, so to speak, of the capitalist crisis brought colonies and underdeveloped areas prominently into the picture . Still more important, this externalization brought colonies into the mix of capitalism .
 The capitalists were opposed not only by their own proletariats, but also by the colonial peoples whom they exploited, more or less regardless of the social order and the stage of development of those peoples . The colonial peoples were opposed to the capitalists' exploitation .
 The proletarians and the colonial peoples were natural allies . Therefore, the proletarians, and colonial peoples, are natural allies. Therefore, they were not enemies of each other .
 Lenin paid much more attention to Asia than did Western Marxists . Lenin, it is worth noting, paid more attention than did the West . Lenin was a Communist Party member .
 Lenin also drew on Russian populist traditions, it has been argued . Besides Marxism, Lenin drew on populist traditions .
 Lenin would later violently condemn populist ideology, but this should not obscure a certain indebtedness to it . Lenin later violently condemned populist ideology but was still indebted to populist ideology .
 Lenin objected to the populists’ moralism and their utopian faith that capitalism could be avoided in Russia and socialism built on the foundation of peasant communes . Lenin objected . He insisted in grounding revolutionary ideology in a scientific view of the world .
 He shared with populists a belief in the creative and heroic power of individuals to change history . But he also believed in the creation of individuals who changed history .
 Lenin and the Bolsheviks liked to portray themselves as tough-minded and “hard” and to romanticize revolutionary violence . The Bolsheviks were inspired by the terrorism of the populist People’s Will . Lenin and Bolsheviks portrayed themselves as ‘tough-minded�
 Marxism-Leninism was founded on the certainty that it is the only truth, for it is built upon scientific laws . The Allure of Truth and Justice is based on scientific laws, according to Marxist Leninism .
 This was also, it has been argued, an intolerant and exclusionary ideology, inherently prone to violence . It has also been argued that it is also, also, a dangerous ideology . It is also argued that the ideology is intolerant, exclusionary .
 "Very often, too, this required struggle against internal enemies who were believed to deviate from the truth," says the author of the book .
 Marxism and Leninism contained quasi-religious qualities, says Lenin . Leninism was used by people other than Marx and Lenin, but it contained quasi religious qualities, he says .
 The Soviet Communists frequently persecuted clergy and believers . Of course, the Soviet Communists hoped to eliminate religion from modern consciousness . The Soviets often persecuted clergy .
 The language of socialist revolution appealed to many ordinary Russians because it resonated with religious notions of truth, righteousness, and salvation . Yet, as scholars have shown, the language of socialism appealed to ordinary Russians precisely because of religious notions .
 The party and government itself, especially in the early years, often framed the socialist dream in sacred and messianic terms . The socialist dream was often framed in sacred terms .
 Berdiaev and other commentators have emphasized the extent to which Marxism, especially in Soviet hands, functioned in religious terms as the ultimate and total truth and the measure of good and evil, and offered a guarantee of salvation .
 Communism could easily be attractive ideology, for both intellectual elites and ordinary working people . As this suggests, communism could be an attractive ideology for both .
 The spread of MarxismLeninism and communist revolutions throughout the world in the twentieth century suggests how effectively this ideology served as a means to protest the inequalities and injustices of capitalism and colonialism .
 Perhaps its greatest strength lies in its explanation of human exploitation and misery . Perhaps its promise is that the combined effort of people and history would inevitably end both .
 In the face of so many reasons in the twentieth century to despair of modem civilization, communism was brilliantly optimistic . Communism was 'brilliantly optimistic' in spite of many reasons to despair, he says .
 It promised, in the often heard Soviet phrase, a “bright future,” no matter how dark the present . It promised to be a ‘bright future’ no matter the present, even though the present is .
 Different scholars have variously emphasized the role of reason and emotion in this promise and appeal . Different scholars emphasize the importance of reason, emotion in the appeal of the Bible .
 As time passed, many of Marxism’s promises seemed disproved by the facts, especially the growing polarization of capitalist society into a handful of rich capitalists and a vast, impoverished majority . Of course, as time passed .
 This optimistic, elaborate, totalizing, and malleable philosophy would make its weight felt in every aspect of Soviet life . Whatever the reasons, this optimistic and totalizing philosophy would be felt in all aspects of life .
 In these days of monstrous contradiction a new Russia is being born. Yes, now, at this very moment when people, deafened by the preaching of equality and brotherhood, are robbing their neighbor in the streets, stripping him bare. In these very moment people are robbed of their neighbor
 The Bolsheviks seized power in Russia in November 1917, 1917 . They managed to consolidate their new position only after several years of bitter struggle . They seized power easily, but only after years of struggle .
 The period of the New Economic Policy has been rightly contrasted with that of War Communism as a time of relaxation and compromise . War Communism was a time when it was relaxed and compromise, writes David Cameron .
 The Soviet government showed more continuity than change in its policies . Yet, on the whole, the Soviet government pursued its set goals with intelligence and determination .
 The Soviet government was organized two days after the October Revolution, on October 27, 1917, under the name of the Council of People’s Commissars . Lenin was the leader of the Soviet government . Lenin died at the hands of Soviet soldiers in August 1944 .
 Lenin was recognized as by far the most important figure of the new regime in Russia . Lenin thus led the government as well as the party and was recognized by many . Lenin led the Russian government and the Communist Party .
 Lenin was born in 1870 in a town on the Volga named Simbirsk, later Ulianovsk . His father was a school inspector, and his father was an intellectual . Lenin was the son of an intellectual family .
 The execution of his eldest brother in 1887 for participating in a plot to assassinate Alexander III has sometimes been considered a turning point for him . He then became a Marxist, suffering imprisonment in 1896 and Siberian exile for the three years following .
 He participated in the publication of a Social Democratic newspaper, The Spark, which was printed abroad beginning in 1900, and in other revolutionary activities, often under the pseudonym of N Lenin .
 Lenin was largely incapacitated by a stroke in May 1922 . The October Revolution, masterminded by Lenin, gave him power that he continued to exercise in full until his death .
 After that he still kept some control until his death on January 21, 1924 .
 Lenin's leadership of the party did not depend on the secret police, but rather on his own personality, ability, and achievement . Moreover, in contrast to Stalin’s later terror, Lenin's later terror was his own personal success .
 Lenin’s cult experienced some remarkable reversals of fortune shortly after his demise, that of Lenin kept, if anything, gaining in popularity throughout the communist world until its collapse in the late 1980s . Perhaps appropriately, the cult of Lenin was gaining popularity throughout communist world .
 The phrase is a quotation from the Communist Manifesto of Marx and Engels . Picturing Lenin in a characteristic pose, the image is a picture of Lenin in characteristic pose .
 The communist myth of Lenin is not far removed from reality in many respects . Lenin is a myth of the Soviet Union, but he is not a communist, he says .
 Lenin was a dedicated Bolshevik who lived and breathed revolution and communism . For Lenin, he was dedicated to the revolution and the revolution of the Russian Revolution .
 Lenin never wavered in his Marxist faith; yet he knew how to adapt it, drastically if need be, to circumstances . Lenin knew how he could adapt it to circumstances, even though he was a Marxist . Lenin was born Lenin in 1903 in the name of Lenin, Lenin died in
 Other outstanding qualities of the Bolshevik leader included exceptional will power, persistence, courage and courage, and the ability to work extremely hard .
 Even Lenin’s simple tastes and modest, almost ascetic, way of life were transposed easily and appropriately from the actual man to his mythical image . Even Lenin's simple tastes were easily transposed to the mythical image of Lenin .
 At the same time, devotion to an exclusive doctrine led to narrow vision . "Devastated" devotion to the exclusive doctrine "led to a narrow vision," he says .
 Lenin’s conviction that he, and sometimes only he, knew the right answer . Ruthlessness followed from Lenin's conviction he knew the best answer . Lenin was the only person in the world to know what was wrong .
 Lenin and the Bolsheviks came to power without a clear blueprint for ruling the country and building socialism or even a clear strategy for governing . At the same time, Lenin's Bolsheviks had no clear plan for governing the country .
 Lenin spoke often, and quite explicitly, of the need for strict control, ruthless suppression, iron discipline, and even dictatorship . Lenin never tired of reminding people that “a revolution is the most authoritarian thing imaginable”
 Some historians have argued that Lenin’s talk about popular participation was a deceitful fig leaf covering his authoritarian and even tyrannical nature . Lenin‘s talk of popular participation is a deceptive fig leaf under his authoritarian nature .
 Others have argued that this contradictory language reflected a contradictory political ideology . Others say it reflected sincere ideals about popular initiative and creativity with strong convictions .
 Much of the first decade of Soviet rule was a history of debates and conflicts over how to balance these two principles . Whatever Lenin‘s actual views, much of the . first . decade of . Soviet rule . was a . history of disputes and conflicts between Lenin’s .
 Bolshevik power spread quickly across the country in the weeks and months following the October Revolution . Relying on local Soviets, Bolshevik power quickly spread across the nation .
 The first serious challenge to the Bolshevik government occurred in January 1918, when the Constituent Assembly finally met . Lenin's government was overthrown in 1918 .
 The Assembly had been awaited for months by almost all political groups in Russia as the truly legitimate and definitive authority in the country . It should be remembered that the Assembly had . been awaited . for months before the Assembly was approved .
 Lenin denounced the Provisional Government for failing to summon it promptly . Lenin himself had denounced the Government for not summoning it promptly.
 As the results slowly rolled in, it became increasingly clear that the Bolsheviks would not have a majority . The Bolsheviks failed to win a majority in the first election since 1917 .
 Social Revolutionaries (not including the scattered dissident Left SR lists) won 38 percent of the vote (Ukrainian SRs won another 8 percent) Bolsheviks 24 percent, Mensheviks 3 percent, and other socialist parties another 3 percent .
 Nationalist parties (Muslim, Armenian, German, Jewish, and others) won approximately 8 percent of the total . Some of these parties had socialist orientations .
 Bolshevik success was impressive, especially in large cities and the northern industrial regions, and the army . Not only was this a victory for socialism, broadly understood, but it was also impressive .
 The elections left the Bolsheviks a minority party, which meant that they could not justify their monopoly control of the government on electoral grounds . Still, the elections left them a minority, which left them unable to justify their .
 The Bolsheviks attempted to delay the opening of the Constituent Assembly, warned of danger to the revolution, arrested some liberals and conservatives . They argued that changed circumstances (such as the split in the SR party) made the elections no longer a true reflection of reality .
 The Bolsheviks decided to let the assembly open on the morning of January 5, 1918, and then to disperse it the next day with troops . Still, the Bolsheviks still decided to disperse the assembly with troops in order to protect themselves .
 Thousands demonstrated in support of the assembly, despite a ban on demonstrations . Demonstrators demonstrate in support for the assembly . Thousands demonstrated against the ban, which bans demonstrations .
 The lack of response to the disbanding of the assembly resulted in part from the fact that it had no organized force behind it . The Soviet government had declared its intention to make peace and also granted the peasants gentry land, thus taking steps to satisfy the two main demands of the people
 The Bolsheviks also had the cooperation of the Left Socialist Revolutionaries who received three cabinet positions, including the ministry of agriculture . Bolsheviks were also joined by the Left .
 The making of peace proved both difficult and extremely costly, with the very existence of the Soviet state hanging in the balance . But making peace proved difficult and costly with the existence of Soviet state still at stake .
 The Allies failed to respond to the Soviet bid for peace and ignored it . The Allies did not expect it to last, not expecting it to .
 Discipline in the Russian army collapsed entirely, with soldiers sometimes massacring their officers . Soldiers sometimes massacred their officers. Discipline in Russia collapsed entirely .
 After the armistice with the Germans in December 1917, the front simply disbanded in chaos . Most men trying to return home by whatever means they could find .
 The Germans proved willing to negotiate, but they offered Draconian conditions of peace . The Germans were willing to talk, but the Germans were not willing to compromise .
 The Germans then proceeded to advance, occupying more territory and seizing an enormous amount of military materiel . The Germans also occupied more territory, occupying a vast amount of territory .
 Many Bolshevik leaders agreed with Trotsky that German demands could not be accepted . In Petrograd many Bolshevik leaders as well as the Left Socialist Revolutionaries agreed . Trotsky: 'In Petrograd, many of the leaders agreed to the demands of German demands .
 Lenin’s authority and determination swung the balance in favor of the humiliating peace . Only Lenin‘s authority . swung the . balance of the . peace in Russia . Lenin's authority and . determination swung . the balance .
 Lenin in all probability saved Communist rule in Russia, for the young Soviet government was in no position whatsoever to fight Germany . Lenin sacrificed much else by sacrificing much else to save his country .
 The Ukraine, Poland, Finland, Lithuania, Estonia, Estonia and Latvia received their independence . Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia also received independence .
 Russia lost 26 percent of its total population; 27 percent of her arable land; 27% of her average crops; 26% of its railway system . 26% her railway system; 26 percent her industrial system; 33% of manufacturing industries; 73% of iron industries . 75%
 Russia lost over 60 million people and over 5,000 factories, mills, distilleries, and refineries . Or to put it in a different terms, Russia lost more than 60 million .
 Puppet states dependent on Germany were set up in the separated border areas . Puppet states were set to be set up by Germany in the border areas of Germany .
 Only the ultimate German defeat in the First World War prevented the Brest-Litovsk settlement from being definitive, and made it possible for the Soviet government to reclaim Ukraine .
 Lenin’s firm direction in disbanding the Constituent Assembly and capitulating to the Germans had enabled the Soviet government to survive . The Soviet leader and his associates proceeded to revamp and even transform Russia politically, socially, and economically, a process that had begun in the first
 Peasants were given complete local control over the use of the land through communes . Workers’ committees were given the power to supervise their own managers . These developments were more the results of a social revolution the Bolsheviks could not control than of Bolshevik policy .
 The existing judicial system was abolished and replaced by elected revolutionary tribunals and people courts . People's courts were replaced with elected revolutionary courts .
 To democratize local government, Soviets were given extensive powers . Workers and soldiers were recruited by the thousands as local officials .
 National minorities were told they had the right to complete self-determination, a policy decision that was also as much recognition of revolutionary realities as a matter of ideological principle . National minorities are told they have the right .
 Many early policies were directed at undermining the position of those who formerly held power and status in Russia . Russia's policies were aimed at undermining those who had previously held power .
 As the state gradually assumed control over scarce housing and other material aspects of life, those who belonged to the upper and middle classes often lost their property, and were considered by the new regime to be suspect by definition .
 Church property confiscated and religious instruction in schools terminated . Church property was confiscated . School property confiscated .
 Gregorian or Western calendar was adopted on January 31, 1918 . Gregorian calendar adopted in New Year's New Year .
 Much early Soviet policy expressed the Bolsheviks’ centralizing and authoritarian approach to transforming Russia, even before the disbanding of the Constituent Assembly . At the same time, much early Soviet policies expressed the Bolshevik's centralizing approach to transform Russia .
 In November 1917, the press was placed under state control . Many ‘bourgeois’ and even moderate socialist papers were closed down . The press was closed down in November 1917 .
 To centralize control of the economy, banks and large factories were immediately nationalized . Foreign trade was made a state monopoly, foreign trade was also made state monopoly . A committee was formed to develop a national economic plan .
 In December 1917, the government established the Extraordinary Commission to Combat Counterrevolution, Sabotage, and Speculation, the dreaded “Cheka,” headed by Felix Dzerzhinsky . It fought against both ordinary hooliganism and looting, which became common after
 From that time on, the political police became a fundamental reality of Soviet life . The political police were a fundamental part of the Soviet life. From that point on, they became a key part of society .
 By the summer of 1918, armed opposition to Bolshevik rule was underway and the economy in shambles . The radical policy of mobilization that some called War Communism began to take shape . Some called it War Communism .
 The nationalization of industry, which began shortly after the revolution, was extended by the law of June 28, 1918 . The law was passed in 1918 .
 Private trade was suppressed, to be replaced by rationing and by government distribution of food and other necessities of life . Private trade gradually suppressed, replaced with rationing .
 The peasants had little interest in supplying food to the government because, with state priorities and the breakdown of the economy, they could not receive much in return . The peasants, however, had no interest in providing food for the government .
 Under the pressure of the Civil War and of the desperate need to obtain food for the Red Army and the urban population, the authorities finally decreed a food levy . The peasants were ordered to turn over their entire harvest, except for a minimal amount .
 As peasants resisted, forcible requisitioning and repression became common . As the peasants resisted they became common. As a result of their resistance, repression was common . The peasants were forced to be requisitioned and forced to leave .
 The rigors of War Communism on the home front largely resulted from and paralleled the bitter struggle the Soviet regime was waging with its external enemies . The home front was the focus of the Cold War in the Soviet Union .
 Beginning in summer of 1918 the country entered a major, many-aceted, and cruel Civil War, when the so-called Whites rose to challenge the Red control of Russia .
 Numerous nationalities asserted their independence from Russian authority . In addition, as will be discussed later, numerous nationalities assert their independence .
 A number of foreign states intervened by sending armed forces into Russia and supporting local opposition movements and governments, as well as by blockading Soviet Russia from October 1919 to January 1920 .
 It appeared to the Bolsheviks that Soviet Russia was isolated in the world and faced serious enemies at home . It certainly appeared to be the case for the Bolshevik Party .
 War Communism was an era of unbridled utopianism, a time when radicals imagined it was possible to make a sudden leap to real “communism” The long dreamed of free society without classes without classes . At the same time, paradoxically, this was a time of
 Bolshevism of violent authoritarianism with efforts at radical emancipation . Here, again, we see the strange but persistent intertwining of violent . authoritarianism and efforts to radical emancipation with emancipation .
 The Civil War was a time of utopian experimentalism . The Red Terror against all enemies (idealized as virtuous violence) was idealized .
 We will describe this more in a later chapter, but it included efforts to liberate women from all restrictions, to create “new people,” to introduce a classless and moneyless economy, and to invent new forms of art and music .
 The counterrevolutionaries drew their strength from army officers and cossacks, from the ‘bourgeoisie,” including a large number of secondary school students and other educated youth . They drew from political groups ranging from the far Right to the Socialist Revolutionaries .
 The crack units of the White Army included a few worker detachments . Such prominent former terrorists as Boris Savinkov fought against the Soviet government .
 Civil servants staged an unsuccessful strike against the Soviet government after it came to power . Civilians staged a strike against it after the government was elected .
 The Left Socialist Revolutionaries attempted an abortive uprising in Moscow in July 1918 . They broke with the Bolsheviks in March 1918 over excessive authoritarianism and Bolshevik determination .
 At about the same time and in part in response to the action of the Left SRs, counterrevolutionaries led by the local military commander seized Simbirsk . Savinkov raised a rebellion in the center of European Russia, capturing and holding for two weeks the town of I
 These efforts collapsed, however, because of the insufficient strength of the counterrevolutionaries once the Soviet government could concentrate its forces against them . The Soviet government was able to focus its forces on them .
 It became increasingly clear that the Communist authorities, in particular the Cheka, had a firm grip on the central provinces and ruthlessly suppressed all opponents and suspected opponents . The Cheka was a key part of the Communist Party's grip on central provinces .
 The Socialist Revolutionaries tried terrorism, assassinating several prominent Bolsheviks . Lenin seriously wounded Lenin himself in August 1918 . Lenin was seriously wounded .
 Earlier, a Left Socialist Revolutionary had killed the German ambassador, producing a diplomatic crisis . Earlier, in July, a left Socialist Revolutionary killed the Germany ambassador .
 Terrorist campaign could not shake Soviet control in Moscow . Petrograd was renamed Petrograd, or central European Russia, in March 1918 .
 It provoked frightful reprisals, a veritable reign of terror, during which huge numbers of ‘class enemies’ and others suspected by the regime were killed . And it provoked a reign of fear, which led to the death of many of the regime’s �
 The borderlands, on the other hand, offered numerous opportunities to the counterrevolutionaries . The borderland offers numerous opportunities for counter-revolutionaries to take advantage of .
 The Don, Kuban, and Terek areas in the south and southeast all gave rise to local anti-Bolshevik cossack governments . The Don and Kuban areas were in the region's most populated areas .
 The White Volunteer Army emerged in southern Russia, led by Alekseev and Kornilov . Anton Denikin’s death in combat was followed by the death of Anton Denickin, a prominent Russian general .
 In Samara, on the Volga, Chernov headed a government composed of members of the Constituent Assembly . Chernov's government was formed from members of Russia's Constituency Assembly .
 The All-Russian Directory of five members was established in Omsk, in western Siberia, in September 1918 . It was a result of a conference attended by anti-Bolshevik political parties and local governments of eastern Russia .
 Following a military coup the Directory was replaced by another anti-Red government, that of Admiral Alexander Kolchak . The Directory was overthrown by an anti-Russian military coup .
 These soldiers were being moved to Vladivostok via the TransSiberian Railroad when a series of incidents led to their break with Soviet authorities and their support of the White movement . These soldiers supported the White Party .
 In the north a prominent anti-Soviet center arose in Archangel, where a former populist, Nikolai Chaikovsky, set up a government supported by the intervening British and French forces .
 General Nikolai Iudenich established a White base in Estonia to threaten Petrograd . In the west, non-Russian borderlands produced numerous nationalist movements in opposition to the Soviet government .
 The Civil War, which broke out in the summer of 1918, first went favorably for the Whites . Civil War began in 1918, and ended in 1918 .
 In late June and early July the troops of the Samara government captured Simbirsk, Kazan, and Ufa . Samara's government captured the cities in late June .
 Kolchak’s units, advancing from Siberia, took Perm in the Urals and almost reached the Volga, almost reaching Volga .
 Nicholas II, the empress, their son and four daughters, along with a family doctor and three loyal servants, were killed in Ekaterinburg, Russia, on July 16, 1918 . The empress and her family were killed when the Czechs and the Whites approached the town
 Denikin’s army, after reversals of fortune, resumed the offensive, and its right wing threatened to link with Kolchak's army in the spring of 1919 .
 Denikin proceeded to occupy virtually all of Ukraine and advance on Moscow . Kolchak’s forced retreat eliminated this possibility, but he continued to advance .
 In the middle of October his troops took Orel and approached Tula, the last important center south of Moscow . Tula is the last major center south-of-Moscow .
 At the same time Iudenich advanced from Estonia on Petrograd, seizing Gatchina, only thirty miles from that city, on October 16, and besieging Pulkovo on its outskirts . At the time, the Russian army was advancing from Estonia .
 The Red Army had had to be created from scratch, but it had constantly improved in organization, discipline, and leadership under Commissar of War Trotsky . It managed to turn the tables on both Kolchak and Denikin .
 The admiral had assumed the title of “Supreme Ruler of Russia” and had received recognition from some other White leaders . He suffered a crushing defeat in late 1919 and was executed by the Bolsheviks .
 The general was driven back to the area of the Sea of Azov and the Crimea by the end of March 1920 .
 A Soviet-Polish war gave respite to the southern White Army . General Baron Petr Wrangel was able to recapture a large section of southern Russia .
 The Red Army concentrated again on the southern front after the end of the Polish war in autumn .
 About 100,000 people were evacuated on Allied ships to Constantinople in midNovember . Wrangel, his remaining army, and a considerable number of civilians were evacuated .
 Other and weaker counterrevolutionary strongholds, such as that in Archangel, have already fallen . Other weaker strongholds such as Archangel, had already fallen.
 The intervention began in 1918 and involved fourteen countries . The Japanese sent a sizeable force into Russia . Over 60,000 men were involved .
 Great Britain dispatched some 40,000 troops, France and Greece two divisions each, and the United States about 10,000 men . Italy and other countries, except for the peculiar case of the Czechs, sent smaller forces .
 The Allies originally wanted to prevent the Germans from seizing war matériel in such ports as Archangel and Murmansk, as well as to observe the situation . The Japanese wanted to exploit the opportunities presented in the Far East .
 Japanese troops occupied the Russian part of the island of Sakhalin and much of Siberia east of Lake Baikal . The Japanese occupied the area of Siberia .
 Detachments of American, British, French, and Italian troops followed the Japanese into Siberia . Allied troops landed in northern European Russia, as well as southern ports such as Odessa, occupied by the French .
 Allied forces assumed a hostile attitude toward the Soviet government, blockaded the Soviet coastline from October 1919 to January 1920, and often helped White movements by providing military supplies .
 The Japanese stayed in the Maritime Provinces of the Russian Far East until 1922 and in the Russian part of Sakhalin until 1925 . This fruitless intervention ended in 1920 with the departure of Allied troops .
 The Soviet-Polish war, which lasted from February 1919 to March 1921, was shaped by desires and illusions on both sides . The war was fought between Soviet and Polish forces .
 The political and military leader of Poland, Josef Pilsudski, started the war as part of his ‘promethean’ plan to create a federation of independent states, allied with Poland, from the Baltic, to Ukraine .
 Some historians argue that the goal was to protect Poland from Russia . Others see this as an effort to reclaim historic lands and re-create something like the pre-partition Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth .
 On the Soviet side, the war was viewed in the context of a desperate hope that sympathetic revolutions would erupt in the West, especially in Germany . The war was seen in the hope of a sympathetic revolution in Germany, especially Germany .
 By 1920, Poland seemed to be the portal to the West . Poland was emboldened by Red Army victories over the Whites, the Communist leadership was feeling optimistic . The Communist leadership felt optimistic .
 The Polish war began as a defensive war to push back Polish advances to the east . It seemed a perfect opportunity to spread the revolution into Europe, inspiring Polish workers to join the cause and then continuing on to Germany .
 The Red Army, led by Mikhail Tukhachevsky and others, managed to reach the outskirts of Warsaw in August and prepared to take the Polish capital .
 Pilsudski’s vision of a line of new states was crushed by Lenin's vision of spreading revolution . What is clear is that both Pilsudsski and Lenin were crushed, says historian John MacIntosh .
 The political disintegration and radicalization of citizens during the First World War in the three land-based empires of Europe . The Russian, Austro-Hungarian, and Ottoman empires . The promotion by the allies of the nation-state formation in this region encouraged nationalist movements .
 Departure from the Russian Empire came quickly after the fall of the autocracy . The Russian Empire was the most prosperous state of the world .
 The fourth congress of Central Asian Muslims, held in December 1917, declared autonomy for Turkestan . Various small republics emerged in Central Asia after the congress .
 Apart from Poland and Lithuania, these were independent states for the first time in their history . Poland, Lithuania, Lithuania and Poland became independent states in 1945 .
 The “Decree on Peace” insisted that all nationalities who felt themselves to be oppressed should have the right to decide by democratic elections if they wished to establish independent nation-states . The ‘Decree’ on Peace, for example, insisted that .
 The Bolshevik leaders hoped to hold the lands of the empire together, theoretically in the spirit of proletarian solidarity . But the Bolshevik leaders also hoped to keep the lands together in the hope of holding them together .
 Advocators of national independence were often condemned as bourgeois nationalists opposed to the interests of the people and socialism . Thus, they were often opposed to national independence .
 Civil War-era images and texts often cast the revolutionary struggle in terms of good and evil . Civil War images often show the struggle between the two sides of the war .
 Often, nationalists had to suppress their own Communists, sometimes after a full-fledged civil war . Sometimes, as in the case of Finland, after a civil war, the government suppressed the Communists .
 In a number of areas, the Red Army and local Communists combined to prevent or destroy independence . In a few areas, local Communists prevented or destroyed independence . The Red Army tried to destroy independence in some areas .
 In Ukraine, the local government, the Rada or central council, proclaimed an independent Ukrainian republic after the fall of the Provisional Government in Petrograd . The local government declared an independent Ukraine republic in 1991 .
 Soviet authorities recognized the new republic, but in February 1918 the Red Army overthrew the Rada . The Rada was declared a republic by the Soviet authorities .
 Soviet rule, established in the spring of 1918, was overthrown by the advancing German army . Soviet rule was in turn overthrown in turn by the German army in the fall of 1918 .
 After the Germans left, the Directory of the Rada deposed Skoropadsky in December 1918, only to be driven out themselves in short order by Denikin’s White forces .
 Following Denikin’s withdrawal in the autumn of 1919, the Red Army restored Soviet authority in Ukraine .
 The Directory of the Rada made an agreement with the Poles, only to be left out at the peace treaty terminating the SovietPolish war . The peace treaty simply divided Ukraine between Soviet Russia and Poland . Ukraine was left out of the treaty .
 Ukrainians supported different movements and fought in different armies as well as in radical peasant movements . They fought in various armies and in radical peasants movements . Ukrainians supported various movements and supported different armies .
 Political divisions survived the collapse of the Ukrainian bid for independence and later divided Ukrainian émigrés . Political divisions survive the collapse and later divide Ukrainian emigrants later divided .
 Young Ukrainian nationalism nurtured especially among Ukrainian intellectuals and professionals . Yet it remains an open question to what extent the young Ukrainian nationalism had reached the peasant majority of the country .
 Among the peoples living to the south and southeast of European Russia, many of whom had been joined to the Russian Empire as late as the nineteenth century, independence movements arose and independent states were proclaimed .
 Local interests clashed and bitter local civil wars developed . Time was when local interests clashed with each other . Local civil war broke out between the two sides .
 In certain instances foreign powers, such as Turkey, Germany, and Great Britain, played important roles . In some cases foreign powers such as Germany, Turkey, and Turkey, played significant roles .
 The traditional interpretation of Soviet nationality policy in these years emphasizes the use of military force to suppress independence efforts and support power by local Communists .
 Menshevik government was toppled by the Red Army in 1921 in Georgia . This account is part of the story almost everywhere, though it is most accurate in Georgia, where it was most accurate .
 A variety of factors undermined the strength of the nationalists . Elsewhere, this basic scenario was complicated by a number of factors that undermined nationalists .
 Ethnic Russians opposed separation from Russia . In many of these regions, ethnic Russians lived there and worked there .
 Many non-Russians, especially peasants and workers, found Bolshevik promises of land reform and radical social change appealing, especially when combined with promises of respect for local national cultures . Also, many non-Russian peasants, workers and peasants, especially in Russia, found it appealing .
 Some non-Russians saw strategic advantages to be had in remaining within the empire . Others saw the advantages to remain within the Russian empire .
 In Armenia, notably, the nationalist Dashnaks viewed Soviet rule as a hedge against invasion by Turkey . Dashnak-led rebels overthrew the new Soviet government after a few months, the Red Army restored Soviet power .
 On December 30, 1922, the USSR came into being as a federation of Russia, Ukraine, Belorussia, and Transcaucasia . The USSR was formed from the Soviet Union of Soviet republics .
 Later in the 1920s, three Central Asian republics received ‘Union Republics’ status . Three of the republics were later known as the Soviet Union .
 Compared to the empire of the Romanovs, the new Soviet Union had lost Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and the Polish territories, all of which had become independent . The Soviet Union also lost western Ukraine and western Belorussia to Poland, Bessarabia to
 In spite of these reductions, the USSR emerged as a large and potentially powerful country . The USSR emerged in spite of the reductions, it was still a powerful nation .
 Bolsheviks were concerned not to repeat the tsarist empire’s colonial domination of the peripheries . The Bolsheviks themselves, however, were not interested in repeating the imperial domination of Russia .
 They hoped that Soviet socialism would be a model for colonial peoples around the world . The Soviet Union hoped that it would be the model for other colonial peoples . But they were not happy with the results of their efforts .
 The question of how to rule immediately became a very important one. Thus, the question of . how to . rule is very important, and it is not easy to explain .
 Iosif Stalin favored close unity with Russia and an active policy of socialist social and economic development . Stalin was the commissar responsible for nationalities policy . He favored the Soviet Union and Russia .
 The legal form of the Soviet Union as, in theory, was a federation of equals . It reflected this approach . The legal system of Soviet Union reflected this .
 A reliance on local elites and efforts by the ruling state to nurture national and ethnic identity was also important . Even more important was a reliance on . local elites, efforts to nurture . identity .
 Some historians have argued that these actions were concessions resulting from Bolshevik weakness . Historians have also argued that this was a sign of weakness by the Bolsheviks .
 Others have seen a more visionary policy of trying to move national identity from bourgeois nationalism to new Soviet forms . Others say the policy is a more ambitious policy of moving national identity forward .
 Few observers believed that the Bolsheviks would survive the ordeal of Civil War, national independence movements, war against Poland, and Allied intervention . Reasons for the Red Victory?
 Lenin himself, apparently, had serious doubts on that score, especially if international revolution did not bring support and aid to Soviet Russia . Lenin: "International revolution didn't bring support"
 He understood that he had no choice but to fight for the survival of Soviet power . But he also understood, and continually reminded his sometimes despairing comrades, that they had to fight .
 Victory in Civil War became a legendary Communist epic, as important as the revolution itself . Victory in the Civil War, therefore, became an important Communist epic .
 A closer look allows us to explain the Bolshevik victory without recourse to Marxist theories of inevitability or the superhuman qualities of Red fighters . Yet, a closer look at the history of the Russian Revolution explains the success of the Bolsheviks .
 Allied intervention represented anything but a determined and coordinated effort to strangle the new Communist regime . The Soviet view to the contrary notwithstanding notwithstanding notwithstanding, the Allied intervention was anything more than a coordinated effort .
 Allied policies toward Russia never amounted to more than a half-hearted support of White movements . Kennan, Ullman, and other scholars have shown how much misunderstanding and confusion went into the Allied policies .
 Allied soldiers and sailors saw even less reason for intervening than did their commanders, it might be added . Allied soldiers, sailors and sailors, however, saw less reason to intervene .
 Ill-conceived and poorly executed, the Allied intervention produced in the end little or no result . The Allied intervention was poorly executed and failed to achieve any of its aims .
 The Poles, by contrast, knew what they wanted and obtained it by means of a successful war . The Poles were the only ones to know what they want and get it by war .
 Their goals, however, did not include the destruction of the Soviet regime in Russian territory . Their goals were to destroy the regime in Russia proper .
 National independence movements also had aims limited to their localities, and were, besides, usually quite weak . National independence campaigns were also aimed at localities .
 The Soviet government could, therefore, defeat many of them one by one and at the time of its own choosing, repudiating its earlier promises when convenient, as in the cases of Ukraine and the Transcaucasian republics . The government could also repudiate its earlier promise when convenient
 The White armies were many, contained an extremely high proportion of officers, and often fought bravely . The White Army was many, and contained a large proportion of officer officers . It was the most successful of the White armies in the world .
 The Soviet government controlled the heart of Russia, including both Moscow and Petrograd, most of its population, and much of its industry . The great bulk of military supplies were intended for the First World War .
 White armies constantly found themselves outnumbered and, despite Allied help, more poorly equipped . The White armies were constantly outnumbered by the Allied armies .
 The Red Army enjoyed the inner lines of communication, while its opponents had to shift around on the periphery . Also, the Red Army had the ability to communicate with its opponents, while the opponents had shifted around .
 The Reds possessed a strict unity of command, whereas the Whites fought, in fact, separate and uncoordinated wars . Still more important, the Reds possessed . The White Army fought, instead of the Reds, fought, for example, in a war that lasted for years .
 Ultimately, however, it was probably the political failure of the White movement that ensured Red victory . The political failure was probably to blame for the defeat of the Red Party, says historian .
 Anti-Bolshevism represented the only generally accepted tenet in this camp, which encompassed everyone from monarchists to Socialist Revolutionaries . The anti-Russian camp included monarchists, Socialist Revolutionists and monarchists .
 There were also policy choices that limited their bases of support . But there were also policies that limited the bases of their support .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has shown open hostility to the desires of non-Russian nationalities . Putin has also shown hostility to non-Russians in the past .
 Most White leaders believed strongly in “Russia one and indivisible’’—a principle shared from the moderate liberal Left to the reactionary Right . Not only rejected separatism but also fought against it .
 Denikin antagonized the Ukrainians by his measures to suppress the Ukrainian language and schools . Iudenich weakened his base in Estonia because he would not promise the Estonians independence .
 White leaders were often quite clear that if restored to power, the radical land reform that peasants had enacted on their own by seizing estate lands would be reversed in the name of law and the principle of private property . The Bolsheviks wisely endorsed the outcome that the outcome was that the Bolsheviks
 The peasants, the great majority of the people, tended to support neither side but were likely to be more hostile to the Whites . The upper and middle classes generally favored the Whites, and the vast majority of workers backed the Reds .
 There were plenty of reasons for peasants to view both sides with hostility . There are plenty of ways to view the two sides .
 Both Red and White armies forced peasants into their armies, requisitioned grain and horses, and used terror against suspected opponents . Both armies used terror to terrorize suspected opponents, terrorizing peasants .
 The ‘Green’ movement was a sign of peasant hostility to both sides of the war . The “Green” movement was formed during the Civil War .
 In many rural areas, Green armies violently attacked both armies and defended peasants against both the draft and forced requisitioning . Green armies were often attacked by peasants in rural areas .
 A number of Green leaders were associated with the anarchists, who rejected any form of central state control over local lives . This was a view peasants naturally found congenial .
 The Crisis at the end of the Civil War Soviet Russia was exhausted and ruined . The crisis was the beginning of the Cold War .
 The droughts of 1920 and 1921 and the frightful famine during that last year added the final, gruesome chapter to the disaster . The famine in 1921 was the worst drought in the world .
 In the years following the originally “bloodless” October Revolution, epidemics, starvation, fighting, executions, and the general breakdown of the economy and society had taken something like 20 million lives . The revolution was originally "bloodless"
 Another 2 million had left Russia rather than accept Communist rule . The émigrés included a high proportion of educated and skilled people .
 War Communism might have saved the Soviet government in the course of the Civil War, but it also helped greatly to wreck the national economy . War Communism helped greatly wreck the country's economy .
 With private industry and trade proscribed, much of the Russian economy ground to a standstill . The state is unable to perform these functions on a sufficient scale . The Russian economy has been hit hard by the government's economic measures .
 It has been estimated that the total output of mines and factories fell in 1921 to 20 percent of the pre-World War level, with many crucial items experiencing even more drastic decline .
 The peasants responded to requisitioning by refusing to till their land . The peasants refused to till the land .
 By 1921 cultivated land had shrunk to some 62 percent of the prewar acreage . The harvest yield was only about 37 percent of normal .
 The number of horses declined from 35 million in 1916 to 24 million in 1920, and cattle from 58 to 37 million during the same span of time . Horses declined between 1916 and 1920, while cattle declined between 1917 and 1920 .
 The exchange rate of an American dollar, which had been 2 rubles in 1914, rose to 1,200 in 1920 . In 1914, the exchange rate for the American dollar rose to 2.5 rubles .
 Growing resentment at Communist authoritarianism and brutality, which had intensified in the course of the Civil War, sparked uprisings in the countryside and unrest .
 peasants had attacked detachments of Communists and workers come to requisition grain . Already during the Civil War, peasants had occasionally attacked .
 peasants turned against Bolshevik interference in their economic lives . But once no longer faced with the threat of White victory, viewed as the return of the landlords, peasants turned .
 Grain requisitioning teams were ambushed and other representatives of state authority in the countryside were attacked . Grain requisitions teams were attacked and grain requisition teams ambushed .
 In some regions, notably western Siberia, the middle Volga, Tambov province, and Ukraine, massive uprisings broke out starting in late 1920 . Ukraine, Ukraine, and Siberia, were some of the most violent regions .
 Some peasants also demanded the reconvening of the Constituent Assembly . Some peasants have also demanded a reconvenction of the Assembly . The assembly is currently in recess .
 Rural unrest was the greatest threat to Communist power in 1921 . Urban unrest among urban workers broke out in early 1921 . The unrest was politically more unsettling than rural unrest .
 Workers often demanded also the restoration of civil rights, the end of coercive management practices in factories . One-man management had been introduced in 1918, effectively ending workers’ control .
 Kronstadt naval base rose in rebellion against Communist rule in March 1921 . Kronstadt was one of the sources of the October Revolution, celebrated by the Communists .
 It is worth noting that the sailors and other Kronstadt rebels demanded free Soviets, an end to one-party rule, freedom of speech and press . They also demanded an end not only to forced grain requisitioning but also to all state control of the economy .
 Although Red Army units ruthlessly suppressed the uprising, the well-nigh general dissatisfaction with Bolshevik rule could not be more forcefully expressed .
 Communists who felt that the idealistic purposes of the Revolution were being lost sight of were increasingly outspoken in these months . Complicating this crisis still further, Communists felt that they were losing sight of .
 This was not the first time dissident factions had arisen within the party . This is not the only time Dissident factions have arisen in the party.
 In 1918, “Left Communists’ opposed the Brest-Litovsk treaty as a betrayal of world revolution . Lenin’s proposals to introduce strict labor discipline into industry to revive economy were criticized .
 In 1919, a short-lived “Military Opposition’s” opposed Trotsky’‘s plans for a Red Army that would employ traditional discipline and make use of former tsarist officers . The opposition to Trotsky's plans was similar to a similar opposition in 1919 .
 Once the Civil War had ended, criticism of party policy became more open and vehement . Criticisms of the Republican Party became more frequent once the war ended .
 The ‘Workers’ Opposition’ opposed the imposition of traditional discipline in industry, the use of ‘bourgeois specialists’ in management, and efforts in 1920 to subordinate completely the trade unions to the state .
 Lenin inaugurate his New Economic Policy in place of War Communism . Lenin had finally admitted that a world revolution was not imminent .
 Lenin proved to be the realist who had to overcome considerable doctrinaire opposition to have his views prevail in the party and, therefore, in the entire country .
 peasant rebellions and the Kronstadt uprising were violently crushed . Protests were met with lockouts and mass arrests, and critics within the party were forced into silence with a ban on factions .
 The state kept its exclusive hold on the ‘commanding heights’ of the economy, that is, on finance, on large and medium industry, on modern transportation, on foreign trade, and on all wholesale commerce .
 Private enterprise was allowed in small industry, which meant plants employing fewer than twenty workers each, and in retail trade . Private enterprise, however, was allowed only in small industries .
 The government's change of policy toward the peasants was perhaps still more important . The government has changed its approach to the peasants .
 Instead of requisitioning their produce, the government established a definite tax in kind, particularly in grain, replaced later by a money tax . The tax was introduced during the Second World War .
 The peasants could keep and sell on the free market what remained after the payment of the tax, and thus they were given an obvious incentive to produce more . The peasants were able to keep what remained and sell it .
 Authorities even permitted a limited use of hired labor in agriculture and a restricted lease of land . Eventually the authorities even permitted the use of hire labor and a limited land lease .
 The government also revamped and stabilized the financial system, introducing a new monetary unit, the chervonets . New legal codes were put into operation to help stabilize a shattered society .
 After the frightful starvation years of 1921 and 1922, many more Russians would have perished, but for the help received from the American Relief Administration headed by Herbert Hoover, from the Quakers, and from certain other groups, the Russian economy revived .
 In 1928 the amount of land under cultivation already slightly exceeded the pre-World War area . In 1928, the amount under cultivation in the area was slightly higher than pre-war land .
 During the NEP period, the government demanded that state industries account for costs and pay for themselves . It should be added that during the time of War Communism, the state industries were not required to account for their costs .
 It was highly characteristic of NEP that 75 percent of retail trade fell into private hands . 75 per cent of the retail trade was sold off to private hands, the government says .
 In general, the socalled Nepmen, the small businessmen allowed to operate by the new policy, increased in number in towns, while the kulaki—or kulaks, for the term has entered the English language—gained in the villages .
 Kulak, meaning “fist,” came to designate a prosperous peasant, a man who held tightly to his own . The prerevolutionary term, used by Soviet sources, also has connotations of exploitation and greed . Kulak means ‘fist’ and
 The social results of the New Economic Policy naturally worried many Communists . These social results were naturally worried by the Communist Party's policies .
 Many Bolsheviks viewed NEP less as a temporary retreat and more as a unique path to socialism in a backward peasant country like Russia . At the same time, scholars have argued, many Bolsheviks, including Lenin himself, began to view NEP as a . unique path .
 Notions of a decades-long evolution to socialism, based on gradually raising the cultural and economic level of the population, began to compete with notions of returning to Civil War strategies of forcing the country into socialism .
 These debates came to be closely linked to personalities and to the struggle for power that gained momentum after Lenin’s death in January 1924 . Lenin's death in 1924 led to the death of the Russian leader .
 The Struggle for Power after Lenin's Death . Two main points of view competed among Soviet Communists during the 1920s . Lenin's death was the focus of the struggle for power .
 The so-called Left position, best developed by Trotsky, emphasized the need to overcome rapidly Russian backwardness through the active leadership of the party and state . The Left position is best described by Trotsky as the need for active leadership .
 These principles produced vigorous criticism of current party policies in both economics and inner-party administration . These principles also produced vigorous criticisms of current policies .
 Rapid industrialization was urgent, the Left argued, if the socialist ideals of Soviet Russia were not to drown in the country’s massive petit bourgeois peasant population . The Left argued that rapid industrialization needed to save Soviet Russia's socialist ideals from drowning .
 This required aggressive state economic planning and accumulation of capital for investment by squeezing peasants and the private sector . The peasants were squeezed through high taxes and high industrial prices, but also through wage controls and low investment in consumer goods .
 At the same time, the Communist “vanguard” leading this effort must be improved by fighting against “bureaucracy” in the party and the state . The Communist "vanguard" must also fight against bureaucracy in the Communist Party and state .
 The Left condemned the widespread practice of appointing local party secretaries . Accused the party of nurturing a political culture of ‘passive obedience’ and ‘careerism’
 Stalin came in for particular criticism, for, as general secretary of the party, he was in charge of appointments . Stalin was also criticised for his role in appointing Soviet leaders .
 Trotsky was born in Radomyslsky, a Russian born born in the same name . Zinoviev and Kamenev shared Trotsky’s view of the revolution .
 Nikolai Bukharin was the chief opponent of the Left, representing the position of the party majority, including Stalin, until the late 1920s . He was the main opponent to the Left until the end of the 1920s, when Stalin took over .
 Bukharin and the Right, as they would be called later when Stalin turned against them, agreed with the Left that Russia’s backwardness was the most serious obstacle to building socialism in Russia . The Right was later called the Right .
 Bukharin mocked the Left for trying to create a “Genghis Khan plan” that would require such a massive apparatus and such use of coercion that economic growth would be impeded .
 He agreed that industrialization was essential but insisted that this must be based on a consumption model that used the workings of the market . He said industrialization must not be based not on a production model that squeezed the private sector but on consumption .
 His objections to the plans of the Left were as much political as economic, however, as well as economic . His objections were to the Left's plans for the future, however .
 Unlike many other Bolshevik leaders during the Civil War and after, Bukharin eschewed the style of wearing military dress . Unlike other leaders, he eschewed military uniforms .
 Lenin's letter to the party congress in December 1922 called Bukharin “the favorite of the whole party.” resentment, and possibly rebellion. resentment, possibly rebellion . resentment .
 Stalin, Stalin, it is clear, never felt entirely comfortable with such arguments, and neither did many of the more militant Communists . Stalin never felt comfortable with these arguments, nor did many other militant Communists.
 Stalin co-opted the Left’s economic program, but only after defeating the Left did Stalin turn against the ‘Right Deviation,’ partly, it is argued . Stalin's economic program was co-opted by the Left, but Stalin turned against the Right Dev
 The struggle for power that followed Lenin's death was decided by Stalin’s superior control of the party membership . As has often been described and analyzed, the struggle for . power followed by . power . Stalin's superior control . of the . party membership was decided .
 Stalin managed to build up a following strong enough to overcome Trotsky’s magnificent rhetoric and great prestige . Kamenev's party organization in Moscow and Zinoviev's in Petrograd were named Leningrad after Lenin’�s death .
 Lenin called Trotsky “personally perhaps the most capable person” in the Central Committee of the party . Lenin allied himself with Kamenev and Zinoviev against Trotsky, whom they envied and considered their rival for party leadership .
 He kept accusing his opponents of factionalism, of disobeying the established party line and splitting the party . He kept saying that he wanted to keep the party in order .
 The general secretary's rivals and opponents recanted or were exiled . They lost their former importance. They were exiled or recanted, but they were still important .
 Trotsky was expelled from the Soviet Union in January 1929 and eventually murdered in exile in Mexico in 1940 . Trotsky was almost certainly murdered on Stalin’s orders .
 Stalin's rise to supreme authority can well be considered an impressive, if gruesome, study in power politics . Stalin's ideological aspect should not be forgotten, as should its ideological aspect .
 Stalin's political approach attracted allies and admirers . Two related characteristics of Stalin's approach attracted admirers and allies . Stalin's style of political approach was one of the key factors of his success .
 First, he simplified and even sacralized ideology for the masses of ordinary Communists, he said . He said: "First he simplified ... ideology for ... ordinary Communists"
 Lenin's Foundations of Leninism reduced Communist ideology to its simplest terms . Stalin took the lead in treating Lenin’s works as dogma and dissent as heresy .
 Stalin mocked Trotsky's theory of "permanent revolution" as a theory of “permanent hopelessness,” which showed too little “faith” in the Russian proletariat, he says . Stalin mocked this theory of a permanent revolution, which shows too little faith in the
 Stalin argued that Russia did not depend on others to achieve heroic goals . Offering an alternative theory of “socialism in one country,” Stalin argued .
 Only Stalin offered a sweeping program and a majestic goal to be achieved by Soviet efforts alone . The Soviet Union had the most success of all Soviet efforts .
 The same party congress that condemned all deviations from Stalin’s line enthusiastically adopted measures . The measures signified the end of the New Economic Policy and the beginning of the First Five-Year Plan, the party congress .
 WALTER DURANT: Life has become better comrades, life has become more joyous . When you are living joyously, work turns out well, he says .
 The Rykovs, Bukharins, Zinovievs, and Kamenevs were only temporary employees of the state, which could sweep them out from its offices as so much useless trash . These Whiteguard insects forgot that the real masters of the Soviet country were the Soviet people,
 These contemptible lackeys of the fascists forgot that the Soviet people had only to move a finger, and not a trace of them would be left . The Soviet people would only have to move one finger to leave the Soviet Union, writes Alexander Nekrassovski .
 The Stalin era was a time of enormous change and suffering but also great achievement . Stalin's Stalin era, some even speak of a Stalinist revolution, was a period of great change .
 These years saw massive, forced industrialization, which resulted in displacement, hardship, and economic growth . These years were the years of the Industrial Revolution .
 These years experienced the sudden collectivization of all agriculture, resulting in famine, death, and anger but also modernization . These years were also known as the years of famine and death .
 Stalin era was marked by a “great terror” in which “enemies” of all sorts were purged and executed . Stalin era marked by ‘great terror,’ in which enemies of all kinds were killed and purged . “Enemies�
 Some historians have compared Stalin to Hitler in his dictatorial control and brutality . Others have argued that Stalin could not and did not rule through coercion and terror alone .
 Scholars continue to investigate and debate how best to define this system, how to measure its effects, and how to understand what it meant for people who participated in and lived through it .
 He was one of the few Bolshevik leaders of more or less proletarian origin . In fact, it has often been mentioned that he was a Bolshevik leader .
 Iosif Dzhugashvili was born in 1879 in the little town of Gori near the Georgian capital of Tiflis—or Tbilisi . He attended a Church school in Gori until 1894 and then went to the theological seminary .
 In 1899, however, he was expelled from the seminary for reasons that are not entirely clear . He was expelled in 1899 for reasons unknown .
 Stalin had become acquainted with some radical writers, including Marx and Lenin . By that time, apparently, Stalin became acquainted with Marx and . Lenin . Stalin had also become acquainted .
 Between 1902 and 1913 Dzhugashvili engaged in a variety of conspiratorial and revolutionary activities . He suffered arrest and exile several times during those years .
 He managed to escape repeatedly from exile from exile, which has suggested police collusion to certain specialists . He has escaped from exile and has been found guilty of murder .
 Stalin’s last exile, however, continued from 1913 until the February Revolution . Stalin's last exile was from 1913 to February Revolution, but he continued to be exiled until February .
 Lenin first attracted Lenin's attention when he organized a daring raid to seize funds for the party . The Georgian Bolshevik first attracted his attention after organizing a raid on the party's funds .
 Stalin’s revolutionary activity developed in such Transcaucasian centers as Tiflis, Batum, and Baku, as well as in St. Petersburg, Russia . Stalin's revolutionary activity in the region also developed in the late 1930s .
 In contrast to many other Bolshevik leaders, Stalin never lived abroad . Stalin left the Russian Empire only to attend a few meetings . Stalin never left the Empire to attend meetings in Russia .
 The party welcomed him as an expert on the problem of nationalities . Because of Stalin’s Bolshevik orthodoxy and Georgian origin, he was welcomed as a party expert .
 As a member of the Revolutionary Military Council of the Southern Front he played a role in the Civil War, for example, in the defense of Tsaritsyn against the Whites . He was also a member in the Revolutionary . Military Council .
 Tsaritsyn was renamed Stalingrad in 1925 and Volgograd in 1961 . Incidentally, it was later renamed Stallingrad and renamed Volgogsrad .
 It might be noted that in the course of executing his duties he quarreled repeatedly with Trotsky . Trotsky quarrelled repeatedly with Stalin .
 Stalin’s real bid for power began in 1922 with his appointment as general secretary of the party . The position gave him broad authority in matters of personnel . Stalin's real bid to power started in 1922, when he was general secretary .
 The long-time official Soviet view of Stalin as Lenin's anointed successor distorts reality, for, in fact, the ailing Bolshevik leader came to resent the general secretary's rigidity and rudeness . In his so-called testament, Lenin warned the party leadership against Stalin .
 Stalin's rivals failed to heed Lenin's late forebodings, and, before too long, Stalin's party machine rolled over all opponents . Stalin’s rivals fail to heed his late forerages, and before too soon, the party machine had rolled over .
 The complete personal dictatorship which began in 1928 was to last until the dictator's death in 1953 . The dictator's personal dictatorship lasted until he died in 1953 at the age of 80 .
 Interpreting Stalin and Stalinism has for many years been the subject of sometimes fierce scholarly debate . Interpreceptions of Stalinism have been subject to fierce debate .
 In part, the heated arguments can be explained by the Cold War . The interpretation of Soviet history is also a matter of ideology and even morality . The Cold War made the interpretation of history also an ideology and morality .
 The focus here is on Stalin himself and on a system of party-state rule in which indoctrination, repression, and terror held all of Soviet political, social, and cultural life in an iron grip . Scholars have debated whether Stalin was a rational actor or was inspired by unreasonable paranoia,
 Scholars like Merle Fainsod, Robert Conquest, Adam Ulam and Robert Tucker have offered excellent examples of this approach .
 Starting in the 1970s, “revisionist” historians, notably Sheila Fitzpatrick, have questioned the one-sidedness of the totalitarian paradigm .
 Scholars have argued that the Stalinist system could not and did not rule only through coercion and terror . Without denying the repressiveness and violence of the regime, some have deemphasized its centrality .
 Scholars point to support within the population for many of Stalin’s policies . They argue that the party and state were often responsive to people's desires and values . Reinvestigating the relationship between state and society is possible, they say .
 The opening of the archives after the end of Communist rule has not resolved these debates, though some revisionists have been surprised at how extensive and often arbitrary the brutality was .
 In agriculture individual peasant cultivation gave way to a new system of collective farming . Individual peasant cultivation became part of the revolution in agriculture . Individual farmer cultivation became common practice .
 The Soviet system as we came to know it acquired its definitive form in the 1930s . A vast social transformation accompanied the economic, while at the same time the entire Soviet system acquired its final form .
 A number of considerations explain the regime's decision to force rapid industrialization . The regime has been forced to make rapid industrializing changes .
 Ideologically, Marxism did not provide a plan for the industrialization of a peasant country . Industrialization was assumed to be a precondition of a socialist revolution, not the result of it .
 The “dictatorship of the proletariat” over a largely rural population needed to be corrected quickly if the revolution was not to drown in this alien class environment . The ‘dictatorships of the . proletariat’ over a mostly rural population . needed to . be corrected
 The collectivization of agriculture represented the very important step from an individual and, therefore, bourgeois system of ownership and production to a collective economy . Likewise, the collectivizing of agriculture was an important step to socialism .
 After the October Revolution, the Soviet government proceeded to nationalize Russian industry . The Soviet government nationalized Russian industry after the revolution .
 In 1921 the State Planning Commission, known as Gosplan, was organized to draft an economic plan for the entire country . Gosplan was organized in 1921 to draft economic plans for the country .
 It studied resources and proposed production figures; eventually drew up the five-year plans . It drew up plans for five years .
 By 1928 Russian industry had regained its pre-World War level . Further rapid advance appeared quite uncertain .
 The Soviet Union needed investment in the producer goods industries and a new spurt in production . The industrial plant was restored and in operation, but the Soviet Union still needed investment .
 The “socialist sector” of the economy lacked funds, while the “free sector,” particularly the peasants, failed to rise to government expectations . Yet the socialist sector of the country lacked funds and the peasants failed to meet expectations, the government says .
 On top of these economic pressures for changing course, there are political pressures, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 The persistence of capitalism, the continuation of poverty, the visible social presence of petty capitalists in the city and rich peasants in the countryside frustrated many . Even those who defended NEP as a path to socialism frustrated and angered many . NEP was the unheroic gradualism .
 Many were ready for this “retreat,” as NEP was originally called, to end and longed for a new heroic march forward . Many of those ready to end the "retreat" were ready to do so, but many were not .
 Stalin’s Five-Year Plan also proved attractive because it promised that the Soviet Union could become a truly socialist country without waiting for world revolution . Stalin's Five-year Plan was also attractive because of the promise that it promised to become socialist without waiting to wait for revolution .
 The economic factors involved in the execution of the Plan acquired great significance, all the more so because planners set sail in essentially uncharted waters and often could not foresee the results of their actions . The Plan went into operation .
 The Soviet state paid to the collectives for their grain only a distinctly minor part of the price of that grain charged the consumer . The remaining major part constituted in effect a tax .
 The Soviet state charged all consumers and kept real wages down while productivity went up . That tax, plus the turnover or sales tax, produced the formula for financing the continuous industrialization of the Soviet Union .
 In addition to ideology and economics, other factors entered into execution of the five-year plans .
 Many scholars assign major importance to considerations of foreign policy and of internal security and control . Security and control is a key part of the foreign policy .
 Preparation for war began in earnest after Hitler came to power in Germany in 1933 . While Japan was further developing its aggressive policies in the Far East, it developed aggressive policies .
 The stress on internal security and control in the five-year plans is more difficult to document . The stress is more likely to be on the internal security of the government .
 Police considerations were consistently uppermost in the minds of Stalin and his associates . Yet it might well be argued that police considerations were always uppermost .
 The Five-Year Plan in Four Years,” 1930. point of view, represented a tremendous extension of Communist control over the population of the Soviet Union . It was buttressed by such additional measures as the new crucial role of the Machine Tractor Stations .
 The First Five-Year Plan lasted from October 1, 1928, to December 31, 1932, that is, four years and three months . It was the first five-year plan for the first time .
 The fact that Soviet authorities tried to complete a five-year plan in four years is a significant comment on the enormous speed-up typical of the new socialist offensive . Soviet authorities completed a five year plan in just four years . The speed up is a sign of the speed up of the
 High targets were set and then revised upward to fantastic levels . Very high targets set then revised upwards to higher levels . The world's first ever high-flying plane crashes out of control .
 As one economic historian has observed, “in the absence of divine intervention it is hard to imagine” how these goals could have been achieved . As one historian has noted it is “hard to imagine how’s possible”
 The intent of these goals, it has been suggested, was more to inspire by their daring than to offer rational t‘gs . It has therefore been suggested that the intent of the goals was to inspire more daring than offer rational ones .
 8 percent of all industrial investment during the First Five-Year Plan went into heavy industry . According to Alexander Baykov's calculation, eight percent of industrial investment in the first five-year plan went to heavy industry.
 Whole new branches of industry, such as automobile, agricultural machinery, aviation, machine tool, and electrical, were created from slight beginnings or even from scratch .
 Magnitostroi in the Urals and Kuznetsstroi in western Siberia, began to take shape . Gigantic industrial complexes, exemplified by Magnitstroi, are now being built in Russia .
 Magnitogorsk, for instance, acquired in a few years a population of a quarter of a million . Magnitogsk is one of Russia's most populous cities .
 Heavy industry, concerned with means of production, exceeded its quota, registering 103. percent . Light or consumer goods industry produced 84. percent of its assigned total . Heavy industry registered 103.9 percent of the assigned total of production .
 Soviet production claims included great exaggerations, difficult to estimate because of the limited and often misleading nature of Soviet statistics for the period . Of course, Soviet production . of the . period, it is impossible to estimate .
 Quality, however, was often sacrificed to quantity . Quality of production varied greatly from item to item, with remarkable overfulfillments of the plan in some cases .
 The great industrial spurt was accompanied by shortages of consumer goods, rationing, and various other privations and hardships . Besides, the great industrial . spurt . was accompanied . by shortages . and rationing . The hardships extended to all of the people, who at the same time
 The whole country underwent a quasimilitary mobilization reminiscent of War Communism . The whole . country underwent an .imilitary . mobilization reminiscent . of War . Communism .
 Speeches and articles in the press described industry as a battlefield with “fronts,” “campaigns, and “breakthroughs” Workers were organized into “shock troops” and those who dissented or failed in their tasks were treated as if
 The “Great Turn,” as it was called, was a revolution that sought to transform all aspects of society . The ‘Great Turn’ was the 'Great Turn' of the 1930s and '60s .
 The trial of engineers in the Shakhty coal mines for sabotage and conspiring with imperialists was the most visible incitement to renewed class struggle . Public trials of ‘bourgeois experts’ started in 1928 .
 Communists were encouraged to challenge authority of established experts, especially if they were from ‘alien’ class backgrounds . Communists encouraged to take on authority of experts in society . Communists believed to be from “alien” class backgrounds.
 A storm of purges was unleashed against non-Communist and non-worker engineers, foremen, teachers, journalists, state officials, writers, and others . The purges were unleashed against workers, engineers and foremen .
 This “cultural revolution, as it was called, was initiated by the state and party, but it had its enthusiasts throughout Soviet society . This ‘cultural revolution’ was initiated in the Soviet Union, but had enthusiasts throughout the society .
 Class hatred for ‘bourgeois’ specialists was widespread among working-class Communists . Class hatred was widespread for 'bourgeoise specialists' in the Communist Party .
 This cultural revolution also brought to the fore radical ideas about transforming society . It was a cultural revolution for the first time in history .
 For example, educators envisioned a system of school communes in which labor and study would be combined .
 As already mentioned, the collectivization of agriculture, planned originally as a gradual advance, became a flood . The collectivizing of agriculture was planned as a gradually gradual advance .
 Tens of thousands of trusted Communists and proletarians were sent from towns into villages to organize kolkhozes and establish socialism . The celebrated “25,000” in one instance, actually 27,000, were sent out to establish socialism.
 Local authorities and party organizations, with the police and troops where necessary, forced peasants into collectives . Police and troops were used in order to subdue peasants .
 In turn, peasants were united against the regime and engaged in massive resistance, including direct violence against representatives of the state . The mass slaughter of their own cattle and horses rather than hand them over to the collective farm was widespread .
 Kulaks lost their property and were arrested, along with their families, and sent to labor camps in Siberia or Central Asia . Kulaks were sent to work camps in far-off Siberia .
 In 1932 a terrible famine swept Ukraine, the North Caucasus, and parts of central Russia . It was caused by the disruptions of collectivization, excessive procurement quotas, and bad harvests .
 Some historians have seen in this famine a deliberate policy of genocide against the Ukrainian people . Some historians, especially Ukrainians, have seen this famine as a deliberate genocide .
 By the time the famine eased in late 1933, over 5 million people may have died of starvation . Over 5 million may have been killed by the famine .
 Stalin himself applied the brakes to his own policy after the initial fifteen months . Stalin's policy was put in place after the first fifteen months of the policy .
 In 1930, he criticized collectivizers for excessive enthusiasm . He reemphasized that collectives were formed on the voluntary principle, not by force .
 At the same time he announced certain concessions to collective farmers, including right to retain a small private plot of land and a limited number of domestic animals and poultry . Collective farmers will also be able to retain private plots of land .
 Authorities resorted to less direct pressure, such as a temporary suspension of taxes and priority in obtaining scarce manufactured goods . But before long their number began to increase again when the authorities resorted to lesser pressure .
 By the end of the First Five-Year Plan more than 14 million peasant households had joined the kolkhoz .
 68 percent of all cultivated land in the Soviet Union was under kolkhoz agriculture, and 10 percent under sovkhoz agriculture . Only 22 percent remained for independent farmers .
 A sovkhoz is essentially an agricultural factory owned by the state, with peasants providing hired labor . The sovkoz is a state-owned factory, owned by peasants .
 The kolkhoz was the norm for the Soviet countryside . Instead they relied on the kolk hoz as the norm . It was used as a way of living in the countryside .
 A kolkhoz—kollektivnoe khoziaistvo, collective economy or farm, was owned by all its members, although it had to deliver the assigned amount of produce to the state and was controlled by the state . A kollechtiv
 The members also cultivated their small private plots, and with remarkable intensity, success . The members of the group also cultivated small plots .
 Machine Tractor Stations provided indispensable mechanized aid to the collectives, notably at harvest time, helping to coordinate the work of different kolkhozes and acting as another control over them . Stations were finally abolished in 1958 .
 Soviet government found it easier to introduce collective farms in those regions where communal agriculture prevailed than in areas of individual proprietors . The kolkhoz bore very little resemblance to the commune .
 Members of a commune possessed their land in common, but they farmed their assigned lots separately, undisturbed, and in their own traditional way . Members of the commune had to share their land with each other .
 Organization and regimentation of labor became the very essence of the kolkhoz . Organization and organization of labor was the essence of Kolkhooz's labor .
 Second Five-Year Plan lasted from 1933 through 1937 . Third Plan began in 1938 and was interrupted by the German invasion in June 1941 .
 They stressed the development of heavy industry, completed the collectivization of agriculture, and did their best to mobilize the manpower and other resources of the country to attain the objectives .
 The Soviet people lived through eight and a half more years of quasi-wartime exertion . The Soviet Union lived through a period of almost eight years in the Soviet Union .
 These plans also differed in certain ways from the first and from each other . Yet these plans differed from the previous ones, they also differed from other plans .
 The Second Five-Year Plan was drawn on the basis of acquired knowledge more expertly than the first . It tried to balance production to avoid extreme overor underfulfillment . It was drawn up on the advice of experts and experts .
 It emphasized “mastering the technique,” including the making of especially complicated machine tools, precision instruments, and the like .
 The first plan allowed more for consumer goods than the first plan did . Also, it allowed a little more for consumers goods than it did the first .
 Military considerations became paramount in the course of the Second Five-Year Plan, and especially during the third, military considerations became crucial .
 Military considerations linked to ideology had of course always been present in the planning of Soviet leaders . Military considerations always present in Soviet leaders' planning, says historian .
 The airplanes flying overhead bear the names of Lenin, Stalin, Gorky, Kalinin, Molotov, and other Soviet leaders . The airplanes are flying overhead .
 The planes in the distance spell out “Stalin” to build a powerful socialist state quickly, perhaps in a decade, or be crushed by capitalists . The planes spell out "Stalin" to build the state quickly and perhaps be crushed .
 Soviet leaders did what they could to arm and equip Red forces . They accelerated the development of industries inland, east of the Volga, away from exposed frontiers .
 Both the Second Five-Year Plan and the Third, as far as it went, were proclaimed successes, and again the official claims, in spite of their exaggeration, had some sound basis in fact .
 Soviet share in world production amounted to 13. percent in 1937, compared to 3. in 1929 and to 2. for the Russian Empire in 1913 . On the basis of official—and doubtful—figures, the Soviet share of world production was 13.% in 1937 .
 The Soviet Union made its amazing gains while the rest of the world experienced a terrible depression and mass unemployment . Moreover, the Soviet Union's amazing gains were made while the world was suffering from mass unemployment and mass depression .
 In agriculture collectivization was virtually completed and, except for the wilderness, the Soviet countryside became a land of kolkhozes and sovkhozes . The Soviet countryside was the land of Soviet Russia .
 Less than 250,000 kolkhozes replaced over 25 million individual farms . The kolkhoozs replaced over 250 million individual farm farms .
 The famine and other horrors of the First Five-Year Plan did not recur . It was the first five-year plan to tackle the problem of hunger and disease . The famine, other horrors, were never to recur again .
 In fact, agricultural production increased somewhat, and food rationing was abolished in 1935 . Food rationing in the 1930s was abolished .
 The economic success of Soviet agricultural policy remained much more doubtful than the achievements of Soviet industrialization . Still, the economic success remained more doubtful .
 They showed far greater devotion to their small private plots than to the vast kolkhoz possessions . They showed great devotion to small plots rather than the vast possessions .
 In other ways, too, they remained particularly unresponsive to the wishes of Communist authorities .
 A full evaluation of Soviet social engineering should also take account of the costs . The Soviet state of social engineering is worth a lot of money, it is claimed .
 Any overall judgment of the first three five-year plans is of necessity a complicated and controversial matter . An evaluation of the plans is necessary to make an overall judgment .
 The plans did succeed—and succeed strikingly—in developing industry, particularly heavy industry, and in collectivizing agriculture . The plans succeeded in developing heavy industry and collecting agriculture .
 Skepticism as to the feasibility of the plans, extremely widespread outside the Soviet Union, turned to astonishment and sometimes admiration .
 Production greatly increased, but entire new industries appeared, while huge virgin territories, including the distant and difficult far north, began to enter the economic life of the country .
 Red armed forces, by contrast with the tsarist army, obtained a highly developed industrial and armaments base, a fact that alone justifies the five-year plans, in the opinion of some critics . The Red army's development of armaments is one of the reasons for the plans,
 The entire enormous undertaking was Carried out almost wholly by internal manpower and financing, except for the contribution of several thousand Western specialists in all fields who were invited to help .
 The five-year plans proved to be an effective way to industrialize a relatively backward country . Considered by many as Stalin’s chimera, the plans proved by many to be effective .
 Soviet authorities could accomplish their aims only by imposing great hardships on the people and by mobilizing the country in a quasi-military manner for a supreme effort . Soviet authorities were able to accomplish their . aims only through imposing great . hardships .
 Piece work became common and wage differentials grew by leaps and bounds . Piece work was common in the 1930s and 1940s, and wage differences grew leaps .
 The new emphasis on “socialist competition’s” culminated in the Stakhanov movement . The new focus on ‘socialist competition’ was the emphasis on socialist competition .
 In 1935 Alexei Stakhanov, a coal miner in the Donets Basin, was reported to have overfulfilled his daily quota by 1,400 percent in the course of a shift .
 The government used their successes to raise general production norms over a period of time . Their accomplishments stemmed in different degrees from improved technique, enormous exertion, and cooperation .
 Some Stakhanovites were actually killed, but they could not reverse it . Most workers resented this speed-up, but it was impossible to reverse it. Most workers must have resented it .
 After the October Revolution, and especially in the 1930s labor unions, served as agencies of the state, to . promote its policies and rally the workers behind them, rather than as representatives of labor interests and point of view . After the . October . Revolution, especially in . 1930s
 Hardships of Soviet life included a desperate shortage of consumer goods, as well as totally inadequate housing combined with a rigid system of priorities . The Soviet Union was founded in 1945 .
 The black market flourished, and indeed remained an essential part of the Soviet economic system . As a result the black market thrived, it was essential to the Soviet economy .
 Criticisms of the first three five-year plans have also pointed to top-heavy bureaucracy and excessive red tape . Agriculture also has a relatively low productivity per worker and production per inhabitant, and a relatively poor quality of the items produced .
 It can legitimately be asked whether a different regime could have industrialized the country better and with less pain . It can be legitimately asked whether the country could be industrialized better and less pain.
 For extreme painfulness emerged as a fundamental aspect of the first three five-year plans . For extreme pain, extreme pain has emerged as an important part of the government's plans .
 While all suffered from some extent, some groups of the population suffered beyond all measure . Some groups of people suffered beyond the measure of their suffering .
 One such group, as already mentioned, was the kulaks and their families . The kulak family is one of the largest groups of people in the world .
 Another, overlapping but by no means identical with the kulaks, was the inmates of the forced-labor camps . Another overlapping but not means identical, was inmates of forced-camp camps .
 The system encompassed millions of human beings on the eve of the Second World War . Despite the extremely high mortality rate in the camps, millions of people died in the system .
 Forced labor was used especially on huge construction projects, such as the Baltic-White Sea and other canals, and for hard work under primitive conditions in distant areas, as in the case of the lumber and gold industries . Forced labor also used in the construction of large construction projects such as
 The political police, from 1922 to 1934 known as the OGPU, developed veritable concentration camp empires in the European Russian and Siberian far north, in the Far East, and in certain other areas of the Soviet Union . After 1934, the political police guarded and administered forced labor .
 The Great Purge of the 1930s helped fill forced-labor camps and formed another major, although perhaps unnecessary, aspect of the five-year plans . The great purge was part of the Great Depression .
 Stalin’s extermination of all opposition or suspected opposition marked his assumption of complete dictatorial power . It also marked the extermination of . all opposition and his assumption . of complete . dictatorial . power .
 The real purge began in December 1934 with the assassination of one of the party leaders who was boss in Leningrad, Sergei Kirov, and reached high intensity from 1936 to 1938 . The purge was aimed at sabotaging or wrecking the industrialization of the country .
 The purge eventually became enormous in scope . It was directed primarily against party members, not against the White Guards or other remnants of the old regime .
 The assassin of Kirov, proclaimed to be a member of the Left Opposition, was shot, together with about a hundred alleged accomplices . About a hundred people are believed to have been involved in the shooting .
 The three great public trials featured sixteen Bolshevik leaders, notably Zinoviev and Kameney, in 1936, and another seventeen in 1937, including Bukharin and Rykov, in 1938 . While uncounted people disappeared, the three great trials featured 16 Bolshevik leaders .
 In all but four cases received the death penalty . Invariably they confessed to the fantastic charges and confessed to being involved in the crime .
 Observers and scholars have tried since to find reasons for the staggering confessions in everything from torture to heroic loyalty to Soviet communism . The confessions have been made in the hope of uncovering the truth behind the confessions .
 Marshal Tukhachevsky and seven other top commanders perished at the same time . The purge spread and spread, affecting virtually all party organizations and government branches, the army, the political police itself .
 Party members expected to denounce enemies of the regime at their places of work . Everywhere, party members were expected to denounced enemies of regime at work .
 Large numbers of government officials, military officers, engineers, scientists, intellectuals, artists, and writers . Swept up in the terror were government officials and military officers .
 Children encouraged to denounce their parents for criticizing the regime . Children were encouraged to speak out against the regime's regime .
 Entire groups were specially targeted, notably foreign communists (who had often fled to the Soviet Union from German and Italian fascism) and non-Russian nationalities suspected of nationalism .
 Before the purge had run its course, Nikolai Ezhov himself and many of his henchmen fell victim to it . Ezhov was one of the most prominent figures in Russia's history .
 Those caught up in the widening circle of accusations and denunciations would likely be expelled from the party, fired from work, imprisoned, perhaps tortured , sent to a labor camp or perhaps shot .
 The great purge reached its height when Ezhov— hence Ezhovshchina — directed the NKVD from late September 1936 until the end of July 1938 . Ezhov was the head of the NKvd during the purge of the Soviet Union .
 The full scope of the ‘Great Terror’ is difficult to measure, given the lack of reliable statistics . But we can have some idea of the dimensions of its dimensions .
 The entire prerevolutionary Bolshevik leadership was exterminated between 1936 and 1938 . Almost the entire pre-revolutionary Bolsheviks were exterminated by the Bolsheviks .
 Anyone who had ever participated in one of the many opposition groups within the party or had simply criticized Stalin perished . Certainly, anyone . had ever . participated in the many . opposition groups in the party .
 Most agree that at least 1. million people were arrested . The total numbers of those arrested are unknown, but most agree that 1 million people are arrested .
 Many were executed after a summary trial or sent to the growing network of NKVD prison camps known as the “Gulag’s” The Gulag is the acronym for the Main Directorate of Corrective Labor Camps .
 Scholarly estimates of the number who died during the terror are quite varied . Scholarly estimate is that the number of people who died in the terror attacks is quite varied.
 A recent study by the Russian organization Memorial identifies 724,000 people sentenced to execution during the peak period between October 1936 and November 1938 . The study was conducted by Memorial, using declassified archives .
 Scholars argue many more were shot without record or died in camps without formally being sentenced to death . Many scholars argue that many more died in the camps without record .
 Of course, the effects of the terror were felt not only by the immediate victim, but also by friends and especially by family members . The effects were felt by the victims' friends and family members, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Most of the prisoners were utterly bewildered by the fate which had befallen them . Most of them were bewildered and confused by their fate .
 The vast resources of the NKVD were concentrated on one objective: to document the existence of a huge conspiracy to undermine Soviet power . The vast . resources were focused on one . objective .
 The extraction of real confessions to imaginary crimes became a major industry in the 1990s . The extractions of imaginary confessions became a big industry .
 Millions of innocents were transformed into traitors, terrorists, and enemies of the people . Under the zealous and ruthless ministrations of NKVD examiners, millions of innocent people were turned into terrorists .
 In many areas of the country and among many groups, arrests and executions were by quota . Suggesting the arbitrariness of the purge, in many areas, many groups were arrested and executed .
 A priori was decided a priori that a certain percentage of the population were enemies of the people . The decision was made by a majority of the country's population .
 Archive documents show that when Stalin received quota lists, he sometimes raised the targets . Archive documents also show that Stalin sometimes raises the targets of targets .
 The great purge assured Stalin’s dictatorial control of the party, the government, and the country . Stalin's system was the basis for the great purge . The purge was meant to ensure the party and the government of Russia .
 As frequently pointed out, the Old Bolsheviks, members of the party before 1917 and thus not creatures of the general secretary, suffered enormous losses . The party had a long history of losing members, including members of Bolsheviks .
 Except for a few lieutenants of Stalin, such as Viacheslav Molotov, born Skriabin, almost no leaders of any prominence were left . Almost no leaders were left after the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 Lenin’s entire Politburo had been wiped out . With the exception of Stalin himself and of Trotsky, who was murdered in 1940, Trotsky was murdered . Lenin's entire PolitBuro was wiped out.
 The Politburo remained by far the most important body in the country, because its 14 members and candidate members were the general secretary's immediate assistants . There is much evidence that they implicitly obeyed their master .
 Other party organizations followed the instructions they received as best they could to the letter .
 The peculiar relationship between the party and the government in the Soviet Union has been elucidated in many studies . The party is the leading partner as well as a driving force in carrying out state policies, according to studies .
 A 1934 poster depicting a happy peasant family was published in 1934 . It was one of the world's most famous posters of the day .
 On the bookshelf are works by Gorky, Lenin, and Stalin, and on tractors, agricultural technology, and setting up rural reading rooms .
 Note the centrality in this poster of electric light and the phonograph . The phonograph is also featured in the poster .
 The party dominated the social and cultural, as well as the political and economic, life in the Soviet Union . The party, as will be shown in a later chapter, in fact dominated social, cultural, and political, life .
 Stalin's system could not rely solely on iron-fisted control, repression, and fear . At the same time, recent scholars have argued, Stalin’s system couldn’t rely solely . On the basis of this, the system was not as strong as its iron-
 As we have seen, enthusiasm for socialist construction, class hostility to ‘bourgeois’ specialists, -nd personal ambition to rise in the hierarchy at the expense of ideological ial aliens could win the regime allies and supporters .
 After the end of the First Five-Year Plan, mobilization for its own sake gave way to a tendency to promise material benefits as well . Especially after the first five-year plan, mobilization became more of a priority .
 Stakhanovite workers were shown being rewarded with new clothes, bicycles, phonographs, radios, china, linen, and pianos . They were portrayed spending their leisure time not only at party meetings but also at parties and dances .
 Movies, popular entertainment, music, art, and literature all held out this promise of a happy life . However, however allusive it remained for so many and however contradicted by the brutalities of the age .
 Newspapers filled with stories about enemies and purges but also with advertisements for attractive new hats and shoes . Newspapers were filled with reports of dances and carnivals in the parks .
 It gave the ballot to all Soviet citizens, for no “exploiters’s” remained in the country . Elections equal, direct, and secret, made elections equal and direct .
 In fact, it emphasized democracy and contained in Chapter X a long list of civil rights as well as obligations . Chapter X contained a list of obligations, including rights to freedom of expression .
 Permissiveness of the new constitution never extended beyond the Communist framework . Yet, as has often been demonstrated, the permissiveness never extended .
 Chapter I affirmed that the basic structure of Soviet society could not be challenged . Thus Chapter I affirms that the structure of the Soviet society was not challenged . The Soviet Union was ruled out of competition .
 The Constitution of 1936 mattered little in a country ruled by an absolute dictator, his party, and his police . Still more important, the niceties of the Constitution mattered little to the dictator's party, the police .
 Ironically, the height of the great purge followed the introduction of the Constitution . Ironically, it happened after the new Constitution was introduced .
 While the larger nationalities received their own union republics, smaller ones obtained, in descending order, autonomous republics and national areas . Smaller nationalities got their own unions republics .
 The Soviet Union was one of the most highly centralized states of modern times . It was a highly centralized state of Soviet Union .
 A bicameral Supreme Soviet replaced the congresses of Soviets as the highest legislative body of the land . The Supreme Soviet became the highest-ranking body of Soviet republics in the 1930s .
 One chamber, the Union Soviet, represented the entire Soviet people and was to be elected in the proportion of one deputy for every 300,000 inhabitants . One chamber represented the whole Soviet people .
 The two chambers received equal rights and parallel functions, exercising some of them jointly and some separately . Some of the chambers exercised some of the functions jointly or separately .
 The Supreme Soviet met twice a year, usually for no more than a week at a time . Elected for four years, although with the Second World War intervening the second Supreme Soviet was elected until 1946 .
 In the interims between sessions a Presidium elected by the Soviet had full authority . The Soviet-era Presidium was elected by a Soviet-controlled Presidium .
 Supreme Soviets unanimously approve all actions taken by their Presidiums . Almost always, Supreme Soviets approve all decisions taken by the Presidium . Supreme Soviets often approve their decisions unanimously .
 The acquiescence and obsequiousness of the Soviet legislature in its dealings with Soviet rulers is revealing . Still more revealing was the acquiescence of the legislature in dealings with the Soviet rulers .
 In the Constitution of 1936 the executive authority continued to be vested in the Council of People’s Commissars . The Council had to be confirmed by the Supreme Soviet . The Supreme Soviet had to confirm the decision by the Council .
 Many branches of the Soviet economy came to be managed by separate commissariats . Their number exceeded the number of ministries or similar agencies in other countries .
 Heavy industry fell under central jurisdiction, while light industry was directed by Union-Republican commissariats . Heavy industry falls under central authority, but light industry is directed by light industry . In general, heavy industry was overseen by central authority .
 The Soviet legal system, while extensive and complicated, served party and state needs both explicitly and implicitly and had only limited independent role in Soviet society . The legal system was extremely complex and very complex .
 The political police generally operated outside even Soviet law . Besides, the political police often operated outside of the law .
 Soviet central government served as the model for the governments of the union republics, although the latter established single-chamber, rather than bicameral, legislatures by omitting a chamber of nationalities .
 Stalin’s Soviet regime, which took its definitive shape in the 1930s, was to undergo before long the awesome test of the Second World War . Stalin's regime took its final shape in 1930s .
 In a sense it passed the test, but it can well be argued that the war raised more questions about the regime than it settled .
 Soviet foreign policy from the time of Brest-Litovsk and Allied intervention to the summer of 1941 . But, before turning to the Second World War, it is necessary to . summarize Soviet . policy .
 "Everybody in our country knows that this war does not in any way resemble the wars that went before it," says President Obama . "Now everybody in the country knows ... this war is not like any other war," says Obama .
 It no longer goes to the head like young wine; it has become cold and deliberate . It's become cold, deliberate and deliberate. It's not going to be young wine, it's cold and deliberately going to head like wine .
 Our Government committed no few mistakes; at times our position was desperate, as in 1941-42, when our army was retreating, abandoning our native villages and towns in Ukraine, Belorussia, Moldavia, the Leningrad Region, the Baltic Region, and the KareloF
 The Russian people did not do that, for they were confident that the policy their Government was pursuing was correct . They made sacrifices in order to ensure the defeat of Germany, he said .
 The confidence which the Russian people displayed in the Soviet Government proved to be the decisive factor which ensured our historic victory over the enemy of mankind, over fascism .
 Soviet foreign policy could only partly be shaped by Marxist ideology, says Stalin . Soviet policy was only partly shaped by ideology, he says .
 Marxism provided no explicit guidance for the foreign relations of a Communist state in a capitalist world, just as it did not indicate how Communists should rule and develop a rural society . Marxism did not provide guidance for foreign relations in the capitalist world .
 That the Bolsheviks had to conduct international relations in a largely hostile world was one of several major paradoxes of their position . The Bolsheviks conducted international relations with a hostile world in a hostile environment .
 Lenin and his associates regularly predicted that revolution in the West would destroy capitalism . They regularly expressed the fear that without it Russian socialism was doomed . Without it, they feared that Russian socialism would be doomed .
 Lenin insisted that, while revolutions failed to arise in the West, one had to adapt realistically to circumstances . Lenin said that while these would certainly occur one day, one must adapt to circumstances in the meantime .
 Lenin’s ideas about global imperialism helped explain the failure of revolution in the West . He focused attention on the potential for revolution in colonialized East and South . Lenin's ideas helped explain both the failure and the potential of revolution .
 The Bolshevik government inherited an international position and national interests that had little in common with their ideological desires and values . The Bolsheviks inherited a position that was little common with the country's interests .
 They repudiated treaties and debts and published secret diplomatic documents . They did their best to break with tsarist Russia, repudiating treaties and debt .
 The country's leaders could not entirely divest the country of its past and of national interest . But they could not completely divest themselves of their past and national interest, they say .
 Soviet foreign policy evolved in the direction of traditionalism, nationalism, and imperial expansionism . In fact, as the Soviet regime developed and after Soviet Russia became the self-proclaimed center of international Communism, many scholars say .
 As a multinational country ruled from Moscow, the Soviet Union was also a type of empire . Likewise, it has been argued, as a multinational . country ruled out of Moscow, it was also an empire .
 When Trotsky became commissar of war in 1918, his assistant, Georgii Chicherin, replaced him as commissary of foreign affairs . The Soviet Foreign Policy in the Twenties was dominated by Soviet foreign policy .
 Chicherin was of gentry origin and for many years of Menshevik, rather than Bolshevik, affiliation . Chicheri was born in 1913 and died in 1918 in a war of honor .
 Chicherin was entrusted with handling of Soviet foreign policy for over a decade . He worked under the close supervision of Lenin, Stalin, and the Politburo .
 As mentioned previously, positions of real power in the Soviet system have been at the top of the party hierarchy, not in any of the commissariats . The Soviet system was dominated by the Communist Party .
 One of Chicherin’s main tasks was to obtain recognition for the Soviet Union and to stabilize its position in the world . One of his main tasks in the post-war Soviet Union was to get recognition .
 Communist revolutions had failed outside Soviet borders . In spite of transitory successes in Hungary and Bavaria, Communist revolutions failed outside the borders .
 With defeat of White movement and end of Allied intervention, the Bolshevik regime appeared to be firmly entrenched in Russia . On the other hand, with the defeat of the White movement, the Bolsheviks were still in power .
 The Comintern was established in 1919 with Zinoviev as chairman . It refused to pay tsarist debts or compensate foreigners for their confiscated property . It demanded huge reparations for Allied intervention . Yet the Soviet Union supported the Comintern .
 In particular the Comintern, composed of Communist parties scattered throughout the world, who were bent on subversion and revolution, constituted a persistent obstacle to normal diplomatic relations . The Comintern was clearly directed from the Soviet Union .
 Most other states, on their side, looked at Soviet Russia with undisguised hostility and suspicion . Most of the Soviet Union looked at Russia with suspicion and hostility .
 The Soviet Union gradually broke out of its isolation after the end of the Civil War and the start of the New Economic Policy . The country was isolated from the Soviet Union after the war .
 USSR and Great Britain concluded an economic accord in March 1921 . In March 1921, the USSR and the UK signed an economic agreement .
 In 1922, a Soviet delegation participated in an international economic conference, held in Genoa, Italy . The Soviet delegation took part in the Genoa conference .
 Soviet representatives used the conference to reach an agreement with Germany . The conference bogged down on the issues of debts and reparations, among others .
 Treaty of Rapallo of April 16, 1922, established economic cooperation between the Soviet Union and Germany . The treaty was supplemented later by a commercial agreement, followed by some political and military ties .
 Great Britain formally recognized the Soviet Union in 1924 . France, Italy, Austria, Sweden, Norway, Denmark, Greece, Mexico, and China before the end of the year .
 Lloyd George’s remark on trading even with cannibals has often been quoted . Lloyd George's remark on trade even with cannibalism is often quoted in the UK .
 Other countries, including notably the United States and most Slavic states of eastern Europe, continued to ignore the Soviet Union and refuse recognition .
 Chicherin succeeded in bringing Soviet Russia into the diplomatic community of nations . Still, all in all, he succeeded in getting Russia into diplomatic relations .
 The course of Soviet foreign policy could be tortuous and even paradoxical became clear in the case of China . China's relationship with the Soviet Union has been described as 'tortuous'
 Stalin chose to support the Kuomintang, the nationalist movement of Sun Yat-sen and Sun’s successor Chiang Kai-shek . He sent hundreds of military specialists to help the Nationalists .
 For a time Communist infiltration appeared successful, and Soviet position and prestige stood high in China . But the Soviet position in China remained high in the 1950s and 1960s .
 In 1927, Chiang Kai-shek turned against the Communists, massacring them in Shanghai and evicting Soviet advisers . He turned against them soon after he assured himself of victory in the struggle for the control of the country .
 When the Chinese Communists, on orders from Moscow, retaliated with a rebellion in Canton, they were bloodily crushed . The Chinese Communists were on orders to crush the rebellion . When the rebellion was quashed by Moscow, the Chinese Communist Party was crushed .
 Although defeated in China, the Soviet Union managed to establish control over Outer Mongolia after several changes of fortune .
 In the mid-1920s it concluded useful treaties of neutrality and friendship with Turkey, Persia, and Afghanistan . Also, in mid-1919s, it concluded friendly treaties with Turkey and Persia .
 It should be added that the Bolshevik regime renounced the concessions and special rights obtained by the tsarist government in such Asian countries as China and Persia . The Bolshevik government renounced those concessions .
 It held on to the Chinese Eastern Railway, weathering a conflict over it with the Chinese in 1929 . But it weathered a conflict with China in 1929 over it .
 Chicherin’s efforts in the 1920s to obtain recognition for his country and to stabilize Soviet diplomatic relations developed into a more ambitious policy in the 1930s .
 The new approach aimed at closer alliances with status quo powers in an effort to check the mounting challenges to the postwar order and the growing threat of aggression . Devised apparently by Stalin and the Politburo and executed by Maxim Litvinov, who served as commissar for foreign affairs
 Litvinov’s emphasis on disarmament and collective security culminated in the Soviet entrance into the League of Nations . The Soviet policy was a model for collective security and disarmament .
 The Bolshevik leadership had for a long time been predicting a great confrontation between the socialist and capitalist worlds . They regarded Great Britain and France as their main enemies and the League of Nations as the chief international agency of militant imperialism .
 Anxieties about the threat posed by fascism increased during the 1930s . It became a major theme in speeches by party leaders, in the press, and, as we have seen, the purge trials . The purge trials were a major part of the purge trial .
 In 1934, Soviet diplomacy dramatically changed directions and pursued collective security, which focused on convincing England, France, and the United States to unite with the USSR to contain German expansion .
 The 'popular fronts' of the 1930s led to a strange rapprochement between the USSR and Western democracies as well as a new cordiality between Russia and Chiang Kai-shek .
 The rapprochement with the West collapsed in a catastrophic manner in 1938 and 1939 to set the stage for the Second World War . Based on dire expediency rather than on understanding or trust and vitiated by mistakes of judgment .
 As early as 1929 the Soviet Union used the occasion of the making of the Kellogg-Briand Pact outlawing war to formulate the Litvinov Protocol, applying the pact on a regional basis . The pact was made in 1929 and applied to the region .
 In 1932 the Soviet Union concluded treaties of nonaggression with Poland, Estonia, Latvia, and Finland, as well as with France . The Soviet Union also concluded treaties with Poland and Estonia, Estonia and Latvia .
 In 1933 the United States finally recognized the Soviet Union, obtaining from the Soviets the usual unreliable promise to desist from Communist propaganda in the U.S. The United States also received a promise that the Soviets would not interfere with Communist propaganda .
 In the spring of 1934 the nonaggression pacts with Poland and the Baltic states were expanded into ten-year agreements . In the summer of that year, the pacts were expanded to ten years .
 In the summer of that year the Soviet government signed treaties with Czechoslovakia and Romania . The establishment of diplomatic relations with the latter country marked the long delayed, temporary Soviet reconciliation to the loss of Bessarabia .
 The following year witnessed the conclusion of the Soviet-French and Soviet-Czech alliances . The Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia were allied against each other .
 Both call for military aid in case of an unprovoked attack by a European state . Both called for military assistance in case an uninvoked attack .
 The Soviet-Czech treaty added the qualification that the USSR was obliged to help Czechoslovakia only if France, which had concluded a mutual aid treaty with the Czechs, would come to their assistance . The treaty was added to the qualification 'only if France' would help the Czech
 France, it is worth noting, failed to respond to Soviet pressure for a precise military convention . Neither Poland nor Romania wanted to allow the passage of the Red Army to help the Czechs .
 Communist parties, reversing themselves, were to cooperate in their respective countries with other political groups interested in checking fascist aggression, and they were to support rearmament . Communist parties were also to cooperate with other parties interested in stopping fascist aggression .
 League and great powers individually accomplished little or nothing . Yet both the League and the great powers failed to achieve any of their goals .
 Italy completed its conquest of Ethiopia, while Japan developed its aggression on the Asian mainland . Italy completed the conquest of Ethiopian, and Japan completed its aggression .
 In the summer of 1936 a great civil war broke out in Spain, pitting Franco’s fascist rebels and their allies against the democratic and left-wing republican government . The Spanish civil war was fought by Franco's fascist rebels against the government of Spain .
 France and Great Britain hesitated, compromised, emphasized nonintervention, and let the Spanish republic go down . Once more, the Soviet Union proved eager to stop fascism .
 The position and prospects of the Soviet Union became graver and graver in the course of the 1930s . The Soviet Union's position became worse and worse over the years .
 In the Far East in 1935 the Soviet Union sold its dominant interest in the Chinese Eastern Railway to the Japanese puppet state of Manchukuo . In the 1930s, the Soviets sold their dominant interest to the puppet state, thus eliminating one major source of conflict .
 Relations between Japan and the USSR remained tense, as Japanese expansion and ambitions grew . The Soviet leaders continued to send supplies to Chiang Kai-shek as well as to direct and support Communist movements in Asia .
 In 1938 and again in 1939 Japanese and Soviet troops fought actual battles on the Manchurian and Mongolian borders . Red Army better than holding its own and hostilities were terminated as abruptly as they had begun .
 Hitler’s Germany represented an even greater menace to the Soviet Union than Japan, says historian . Hitler's Germany represented a greater threat to the Soviets than Japan's Japan, he says .
 The Fiihrer preached the destruction of Communism and pointed to the lands in the east as the natural area of German expansion, its legitimate Lebensraum . The FIIhrer said the east was a natural area for German expansion .
 Western powers failed to check the aggressor in the case of Japan and Italy, writes CNN.com's John Defterios.com .
 Hitler annexed Austria to the Third Reich in March 1938, making a shambles of the Treaty of Versailles . Following the remilitarization of the Rhineland in 1936, Austria became a major factor in the war . Austria's annexation of Austria in 1938 made a sh
 The climax of appeasement came in September 1938 at Munich . Soviet Foreign Policy from September 1938 until June 1941 .
 Great Britain and France capitulated to Hitler's demand for Germany’s annexation of the Sudetenland, a largely ethnically German area of Czechoslovakia . Chamberlain and Daladier flew to Munich and sealed the arrangement with Hitler and Mussolini .
 The extreme Soviet suspicion of the settlement can well be understood, especially since the Soviet government was not invited to participate in it . Still, it can be well understood, since the extreme Soviet suspicions can be understood .
 France failed to come to the aid of the Czechs and Prague had to accept its betrayal by the great powers . Although it had expressed its readiness to defend Czechoslovakia, the Soviet Union had been forced to remain a helpless bystander when France failed .
 After Munich the Franco-Russian alliance appeared to mean very little, and the USSR found itself, in spite of all its efforts to promote collective security, in highly dangerous isolation . Moreover, after Munich, the Franco and Russian alliance appeared very little .
 Hitler developed further aggressive designs in eastern Europe . Hitler in the meantime developed further designs .
 In March 1939 he disposed of what remained of Czechoslovakia, establishing the occupied German protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia and a puppet state in Slovakia . The occupied German-occupied state was established in March 1939 .
 This step both destroyed the Munich arrangement and made plain Nazi determination to expand beyond ethnic German boundaries . This step destroyed Munich arrangement . It made plain . Nazi determination . to expand into ethnic German borders .
 Hitler demanded the cession of Danzig to Germany and the right of extraterritorial German transit across the Polish “corridor” to East Prussia . Next Hitler turned to Poland, demanding the right to extraterritory German transit in Poland . Hitler also demanded that the c
 Poland did not stand alone against Germany in the summer of 1939 . Poland was not alone in the fight against Germany .
 France and Great Britain finally saw the folly of appeasement after Germany had seized the remainder of Czechoslovakia .
 At the end of March they made clear their determination to fight if Poland were attacked . The Polish government made clear they would fight if they were attacked in March .
 As war clouds gathered, the position of the Soviet Union became all the more significant . The Soviet Union's position in the Middle East became more significant in the 1930s .
 Molotov replaced Litvinov as commissar for foreign affairs in May . He retained his office of Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars, equivalent to prime minister .
 First time since Trotsky in 1918 a Communist leader of the first rank took charge of Soviet foreign policy . Thus for the first time since . Trotsky in . 1918 a . Communist leader . took charge . of the . first rank .
 Molotov had not been personally committed to collective security and, therefore, could more easily undertake a fresh start . Moreover, in contrast to his predecessor Litvinov, he had no personally committed security .
 Molotov, again in contrast to Litvinov, was not Jewish . In retrospect commentators have also noted that Molotsov, again not Jewish, was also Jewish .
 Great Britain and France began in the summer to negotiate with the USSR concerning the formation of a joint front against aggression . After an exchange of notes in the spring of 1939, the two countries began to negotiate .
 Western powers failed to come to terms with the Soviet Union, or even to press the negotiations, sending a weak and low-ranking mission to Moscow . The Western powers did not press the Soviets to press their case, but failed to even press the talks .
 The Soviet government remained extremely suspicious of the West, especially after the Munich settlement, and eagerly sought ways of diverting impending hostilities away from its borders . Soviet government sought ways to divert impending hostilities from borders .
 The German-Soviet NonAggression Treaty was signed in Moscow on August 23 . Secret talks had begun as early as May . The treaty was known as the Nazi-Soviet Pact and the Hitler-Stalin Pact .
 Fortified by the pact, Hitler attacked Poland on the first day of September 1939 .
 Both parties to the pact expected to gain major advantages by means of it . Yet both parties to be part of it expected to get major advantages .
 The pact enabled the Soviet Union to advance its perceived interests in eastern Europe . No less important, the pact also enabled the Soviets to advance their perceived interests .
 Whether the aim was to create a ‘buffer zone’ to protect the USSR in the case of a later German attack or to expand Soviet power into the region is still subject of scholarly dispute .
 The Soviets took advantage of the opportunity to take advantage of it, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 The Red Army occupied eastern Poland, incorporating its Belorussian and Ukrainian areas into the corresponding Soviet republics . The Soviet Union annexed eastern Poland into eastern Poland in 1953 .
 Soviet government signed mutual assistance pacts with Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, obtaining a lease of Baltic bases . The Soviet government obtained the lease of Baltics bases .
 Western democracies refused to recognize union republics after they were occupied by Soviet troops in 1940 . In July 1940, they were incorporated into the USSR as union republic republics . Western democracies refuse to recognize this .
 The Soviet Union eventually imposed its will on Finland . In spite of the heroic Finnish defense and the surprising early reverses of the Red Army .
 In the summer of 1940 the USSR obtained from Romania, by means of an ultimatum, the disputed region of Bessarabia as well as northern Bukovina . The USSR obtained an agreement with Germany to obtain from Romania the disputed part of the region . In 1940 the
 The Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic was formed from the territory acquired from Romania . The new Moldavians were formed in the Soviet-Moldavian state of Moldova .
 For “security reasons, large numbers of native elites and intellectuals were systematically deported eastward from annexed regions . For ‘security reasons’, many of the native elites were deported eastwards .
 In April 1941 the Soviet Union signed a five-year nonaggression treaty with Japan, which had chosen to expand south rather than into Siberia . The treaty was signed in 1941 .
 Soviet government did not know it, but time was running short for its efforts to strengthen its position on the European and Asian continents . But, although they did, the Soviet government didn't know it .
 Following his stunning victory in the west in the summer of 1940, Hitler decided to invade the Soviet Union . Following his success in the West, he decided to enter the USSR in 1940 .
 The defeat that Germany suffered in the autumn in the aerial Battle of Britain apparently only helped convince the Nazi dictator that he should strike his next major blow in the east . The defeat in the air battle of Britain was only the result of the battle .
 A change of government in Yugoslavia made the Germans invade Yugoslavia as well as Greece, which had stopped an earlier Italian offensive . The Germans invaded Yugoslavia, Greece and Yugoslavia .
 German troops aided by Finnish, Romanian, and other units attacked the USSR along an enormous front from the Baltic to the Black Sea . The new date of June 22 was June 22, and on that day German troops helped by Finnish and Romanian units .
 The blow was indeed staggering. The Soviet Union in the Second World War . The Soviets were defeated in the war .
 The German blow caught the Red Army off guard, perhaps surprisingly, the German blow . The Red Army was caught off guard by the Germans .
 Stalin and the Politburo ignored Western warnings as well as their own intelligence . They did not expect such an early, sudden, and powerful offensive . Stalin ignored warnings from Western warnings and intelligence, says historian .
 Stalin disappeared from public sight for more than a week—leading to rumors about nervous shock . Stalin's disappearance led to rumors that he was suffering from a nervous state of mind . Stalin vanished from public view for over a week .
 The Germans aimed at another Blitzkrieg, intending to defeat the Russians within two or three months or in any case before winter . The Germans hoped to defeat Russia within two to three months .
 The German war machine rolled along the entire front, particularly in the north toward Leningrad, in the center toward Moscow, and in the south toward Kiev and Rostov-on-Don . Although it encountered some determined resistance, the German machine rolled .
 Entire Soviet armies were smashed and taken prisoner at Bialystok, Minsk, and Kiev, which fell in September . The fall of the Soviet Union in September was the worst of all Soviet armies .
 In the north, Finnish troops pushed to the Murmansk railroad, and German troops reached, but could not capture, Leningrad . In the northern part of the Soviet Union, Finnish forces pushed to Murmank .
 The city underwent a two-and-a-half-year siege, virtually cut off from the rest of the country . Its population was decreased by starvation, disease, and war from 4 to 2 million .
 The city would not surrender, and it blocked further German advance north . Yet, the city did not surrender and the Germans would not .
 In the middle of October German tanks broke through the Russian lines near Mozhaisk, some sixty miles from Moscow .
 Stalin and the government left the city for Kuibyshev, formerly Samara, on the Volga . Stalin's government moved the city to a new city, formerly known as Samara . The city of Samara was located in the Soviet Union .
 Marshal Georgii Zhukov had his troops fall slowly back on the capital, reducing the German advance to a crawl . Instead of abandoning Moscow as in 1812, he had his forces fall back on Moscow . The Russian capital was reduced to a mere crawl by a slow march .
 The Germans proceeded to encircle the city on three sides, and they came to within twenty miles of it, but no farther . The Germans were able to come within 20 miles of the city .
 Late in November the Red Army started a counteroffensive against the extremely extended German lines on the southern front, recapturing Rostovon-Don at the end of the month . The Red Army recaptured Rostov-Don in November .
 In early December it struck on the central front, attacking both north and south of Moscow as well as in the Moscow area itself . The Russian capital is located in Russia's capital, Moscow .
 On January 20, the Red Army recaptured Mozhaisk, thus eliminating any immediate threat to Moscow . The Red Army was able to recapture Mozhasisk .
 German troops had to retreat much farther west before they could stabilize the front . German troops retreated much further west before the front could stabilize .
 The German army probably came near complete collapse in the winter of 1941/42 . Its lines overextended, its troops unequipped for cold weather and exhausted, the German army .
 Experts believe only Hitler’s frantic determination to hold on prevented a catastrophic withdrawal . Some specialists believe that only Hitler's frantic determination . prevented a . catastrophic withdrawal.
 As it was, the German army gave up about 100,000 square miles of Soviet territory, but retained 500,000 when fighting finally quieted down .
 In retrospect it seems clear that, in spite of its many victories, the great German campaign of 1941 in Russia failed . In retrospect, it seems that, despite the success of the campaign, the campaign failed .
 The Blitzkrieg turned into a long war on an enormous front . The Red Army remained very much in the field, and the Blitz was very much at work .
 Quite possibly Hitler came close to crushing the Soviet Union in 1941, but he did not come close again . Quite possibly . Hitler came nearly to crush the . Soviet Union, but never did so again .
 The Nazis had to win quickly or not at all . Taking into account Soviet resources and the determination to resist, the Nazis must win quickly . The Nazis were forced to take advantage of Soviet resources .
 Although the Soviet Union bore the brunt of Nazi armed might from the summer of 1941 until the end of the Second World War in Europe, it certainly did not fight alone . The Soviet Union did not suffer alone in the war .
 Churchill welcomed Soviet Russia as an ally the day of the German attack . But shortly before he had been ready to wage war against the USSR in defense of Finland .
 Great Britain and the United States arranged to send sorely needed supplies to the Soviet Union . After the Japanese strike at Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, the U.S. became a full-fledged combatant .
 British convoys began to reach Murmansk and Archangel in the autumn of 1941, while American aid through Persia started to arrive in large quantity in the spring of 1942 .
 Axis powers had major enemies to fight in Africa and eventually in southern and western Europe, as well as in the east . More important, the Axis powers also had enemies in Africa, southern and eastern Europe, too .
 Germans opened their main offensive early in July after occupying Kerch area and capturing Sevastopol . After a month of bitter fighting, the Germans took control of the Kerch region and captured Crimea .
 Marshal Fedor von Bock had his main army of over 300,000 men cross the Don and drive to the Volga . The main army was blocked on the approaches to Voronezh, Russia, by the German .
 The industrial city of half a million people was strung along the right bank of the Volga, Russia . It had no fortifications or other defensive advantages .
 General Vasilii Chuikov’s 62nd Army, supported by artillery massed on the other bank, fought for every house and every foot of ground .
 Hitler assumed command of the German army in December 1941 and possibly saved his troops from catastrophe in the winter of 1941/42 . Hitler began to make disastrous strategic errors in 1941-42 .
 He kept pounding at Stalingrad for fruitless weeks and even months . He would not let his troops retreat even when a Soviet counteroffensive began to envelop them .
 Marshal Friedrich Paulus and some 120,000 German and Romanian troops surrendered to the Red Army in January 1943 . Eventually, at the end of January 1943, the Germans and Romanian forces surrendered .
 The German offensive had captured Rostov-on-Don once more and had swept across the northern Caucasus, seizing such important points as the port of Novorossiisk and oil center of Mozdok .
 The extended German lines crumbled under Zhukov’s counteroffensive in December . But again, the extended German line crumbled again under the counteroffensive . The two sides fought again in December, but again the lines collapsed .
 The invaders had to retreat fast into southern Ukraine and the Crimea and were fortunate to extricate themselves at all . The invaders were forced to retreat from southern Ukraine .
 After some retreats and counterattacks in the winter of 1942/43, the Germans tried one more major offensive in Russia the following summer . After some further retreats, counterattacks and retreats in the summer of 1943/1944, the German offensive was completed .
 Some forty divisions, half of them armored or motorized, totaled approximately half a million men . They struck early in July in the strategic watershed area of Kursk, Orel and Voronezh with some forty divisions .
 After initial successes and a week or ten days of tremendous fighting of massed armor and artillery the German drive was spent . The Red Army in its turn opened an offensive .
 Before very long the Red drive gathered enough momentum to hurl the invaders out of the Soviet Union . Eventually to capture Budapest, Vienna, Prague, and Berlin, stopping only with the end of the war .
 The smashing Soviet victory was made possible by the fact that the German forces had exhausted themselves . The Soviets were able to defeat the Germans in the Battle of the Second World War .
 Their quality began to decline probably about the end of 1941, while the increasing numbers of satellite troops pressed into service, notably Romanians, could not measure up to the German standard .
 Time and again, as in the case of Stalingrad, he would not allow his troops to retreat until too late . Time . again, time and again . He would not let his troops retreat until . too late, as . well .
 The Red Army, on the other hand, in spite of its staggering losses, improved in quality and effectiveness . Red Army's losses were staggering, but the Red Army was able to hold on .
 German forces suffered from shortages of weapons and equipment from Soviet factories, Allied aid . The battle-tested German forces showed initiative and ability .
 As long as they fought on Soviet soil, the Germans had to contend with a large and daring partisan movement in their rear as well as with the Red Army . The Germans faced a huge partisan movement as long as the Germans fought in Russia .
 The Americans and the British mounted a staggering offensive against German cities and industries . And they began to experience increasing pressure and defeat on other fronts, as well as from the air .
 The battle of Stalingrad coincided with Montgomery's victory over Rommel in Egypt and Allied landings in Morocco and Algeria . The battle coincided with the Allied landing of the Allies in Algeria and Morocco .
 Allied troops invaded Sicily in the summer of 1943 and invaded the Italian mainland that autumn . Allied forces invaded Sicily and Italy in the fall of 1943 .
 As the Russians began to invade the Third Reich from the east, the Allies were pushing into it from the west . The Allies were also pushing into the Second World War .
 The Red Army recovered much of occupied Soviet territory in the autumn of 1943 and in the winter of 1943/44 . The Soviet Union was invaded by the Red Army in October 1943 .
 In the following months Soviet armies advanced rapidly in eastern and central Europe, while other armies continued to wipe out remaining German pockets on Soviet soil .
 Romania and Bulgaria quickly changed sides and joined the anti-German coalition . Romania, Bulgaria and Romania have joined anti-Germany coalition . The coalition is based in Romania, Romania, and Bulgaria .
 The Red Army was joined by Tito partisans in Yugoslavia and entered Belgrade in September 1944 . Tito's partisans were part of the Red Army in Yugoslavia .
 Red forces took Budapest in February 1945 and Vienna in mid-April . After some bitter fighting, Red forces captured Vienna and Budapest in April 1945 .
 The great offensive into Germany proper began in the autumn of 1944 . Red forces, after capturing Vilna, penetrated East Prussia .
 Konev in the south, Zhukov in the center, and Marshal Konstantin Rokossovsky in the north invaded Germany on a broad front . It gained momentum in January 1945 when large armies invaded Germany .
 On April 25, 1945, advanced Russian units met American troops at Torgau, on the Elbe, near Leipzig, Germany .
 The Red Army entered Dresden on the eighth of May and Prague on the ninth of May . Dresden entered on May 8 . Prague entered on the same day .
 The Soviet Union entered the war against Japan on August 8, 1945, three months after the German surrender . Urged by its allies and apparently itself eager to participate, the Soviet Union joined the war in 1945 .
 By that time Japan had already been defeated by the U.S. and other powers . Japan was defeated by Japan in World War II .
 The American dropping of an atomic bomb on Hiroshima and Nagasaki led the Japanese government to surrender . Scholars continue to debate whether the atomic bombings were necessary for this end .
 In spite of claims of Soviet historians and propagandists, the role of the USSR in the conflict in the Far East and the Pacific was, therefore, fleeting and secondary at best . The role of Russia in the war was therefore, however, fleeting .
 Red forces were able to occupy Manchuria, the Japanese part of Sakhalin, and the Kurile Islands . Red forces also captured many prisoners, but suffered many casualties .
 In the course of the war the Soviet Union established close contacts with its allies, in particular with Great Britain and the United States . The Soviet Union became close allies of the British and American armies .
 It accepted the Atlantic Charter formulated by Roosevelt and Churchill in August 1941 . It promised freedom, self-determination, and equality of economic opportunity to all countries . It participated fully in the preparation and the eventual creation of the United Nations Organization .
 Of the various high-level conferences of the Allies during the war, the three meetings of the heads of state were the most important . The three meetings were most important in the war .
 They took place at Teheran in December 1943, at Yalta in the Crimea in February 1945, and at Potsdam near Berlin in July and August 1945 .
 Stalin had assumed the position of prime minister and generalissimo, that is, chief military commander, while remaining the general secretary of the party . Stalin represented the Soviet Union on all three occasions .
 Roosevelt headed the American delegation at Teheran and Yalta, and Truman, after Roosevelt's death, at Potsdam . Roosevelt's visit to the Middle East was the first since his death .
 The heads of the three world powers devoted large parts of their conferences to a discussion of such major issues of the Second World War as the establishment of the ‘second front’ and the entry of the Soviet Union into the struggle against Japan .
 They made important provisions for the time when peace would be achieved . But, especially as victory came nearer, they also made provisions for peace .
 Many eastern European historians argue that the Yalta conference deserves particular attention—and opprobrium—as the place where the Western powers implicitly agreed to give Stalin a free hand in the region . This interpretation of this interpretation is much debated .
 Even Churchill, generally more skeptical than Roosevelt, famously commented after Yalta, “Poor Neville Chamberlain believed he could trust Hitler” Neville Chamberlain .
 These conferences produced considerable, if largely deceptive, harmony . The conferences produced some of the world's largest summits .
 During the war years important disagreements developed among the Allies . Yet even during the war, important disagreements had developed among Allies .
 The Soviet Union was bitterly disappointed that the Western powers did not invade France in 1942 or 1943 . The Soviets were disappointed with the lack of a Western invasion of France .
 Soviet authorities continued to supervise closely all relations with the outside world and to restrict the movement and activities of foreigners in the Soviet Union .
 Early difficulties and disagreements concerning the nature of postwar Europe became apparent . Perhaps more important, early difficulties were still to be seen .
 After Germany attacked the Soviet Union, Soviet authorities established relations with the Polish government in exile in London . The Polish government was established in exile after the war with Germany .
 The Nazi-Soviet Pact and the course of the war exacerbated long-standing resentment in Poland over Russian behavior toward their country .
 Russian policies toward Poles reflected their own deep suspicions and anxieties . Russia's policies toward Poland reflected its own deep anxieties and fears of Poles .
 In historical memory, especially, two dark events of these years stand out . The events of this year stand out as a dark time in America's history .
 The first was the massacre of thousands of Polish officers in the Katyn Forest near Smolensk, which the German radio announced to the world in April 1943 after their own invading troops captured this area .
 The charge, which led to the break in relations between Moscow and the Polish government in London, was long denied by the Soviet government, though it has since been confirmed . This charge, though long denied, has now been confirmed, by the Russian government .
 When the Red Army reached the Vistula in August 1944, it failed to cross the river to assist an uprising against the Germans in Warsaw, which was finally crushed in October . Second, when the . Red Army . didn't cross the . river to help an uprising . in Warsaw
 The Soviets witnessed (intentionally, critics argue) the annihilation of the anti-German, but also the Polish underground . In this manner, critics say, the Soviets witnessed the annihilation . The Soviet invasion of Poland was intended to destroy the underground .
 Soviet authorities would not even provide airstrips for Allied planes to help the Poles . Some evidence supports the official explanation that Red troops could not advance because they had exhausted their supplies and needed rest and regroup .
 Allies agreed at Yalta to recognize Lublin government expanded by several representatives of the London Poles . London Poles were among the representatives of Lublin's government . The Allies agreed to recognize the Lublin Government expanded by London Poles at the end of WWII .
 They also agreed that free elections would be held to establish a democratic government in Poland . No mechanisms were established to ensure this, though no mechanisms have been established . Free elections were also agreed to be held in Poland, but no mechanism was established .
 Historians argue the Yalta agreement amounted to Western surrender to Soviet wishes . Historians say it amounted to surrendering the West to the Soviet Union .
 The Soviet performance in the Second World War presents a fascinating picture of contrasts . An Evaluation of the Soviet performance on the battlefield .
 Seldom did a country and a regime do both so poorly and so well in the same conflict . Seldom has seen a nation and regime do so poorly, but it did so well during the conflict .
 The Red Army suffered catastrophic defeat in the first months of the war . Far from purposely enticing the Germans into the interior of the country or executing successfully any other strategic plan, it was not a success .
 The Russians were smashed as badly as the French had been a year earlier, except that they had more territory to retreat to and more men in reserve . Indeed, the Russians were smashing as badly .
 Soviet forces did not make the most of their admittedly difficult position . The German army was at the time the best in the world, but the Soviet forces were not at all successful .
 Some top Red commanders, such as Marshal Semen Budenny, proved as incompetent as the worst tsarist generals . The Civil War cavalry hero Marshal Budenny proved to be the most incompetent .
 The enormous number of prisoners taken by the Germans testified not only to their great military victory, but also to the Soviet unwillingness to fight . The prisoners were taken in part to the Germans' success in the war .
 Even more significantly, the Soviet population often welcomed the Germans . Even more importantly, the Soviets often welcomed them .
 This was strikingly true in the recently acquired Baltic countries and in large areas of Ukraine and Belorussia . It also occurred in Great Russian regions near Smolensk and elsewhere .
 In addition to Red partisans there developed anti-Soviet guerrilla movements, which were at the same time anti-German . The Red partisans were also known as anti-Russian .
 In Ukraine, nationalist bands continued resisting Red rule even long after the end of the Second World War . Ukrainian nationalist bands resisted Red rule long after end of WWII .
 Tens of thousands of Soviet citizens liberated by Allied armies in Europe did all they could not return to their homeland . To the great surprise of the Western democracies, tens of thousands did not return .
 The war created a sense of besieged national unity and provided the government with a source of legitimacy as defender of the homeland . Indeed, in many respects the war strengthened Communist rule, especially by creating a sense .
 The Red Army did finally hold the Germans and then gradually push them back until their defeat became a rout . In spite of its staggering losses, the Red Army finally held the Germans .
 Red infantry, artillery, cavalry, and tanks all distinguished themselves in the Second World War . Red infantry and artillery repeatedly distinguished themselves during WWII .
 The names of such commanders as Zhukov and Rokossovsky became synonymous with victory . The names were used in the Soviet invasion of Russia .
 In addition to the regular army, daring and determined partisans also fought the invader to the death . The battle was fought to death .
 The government managed under most difficult conditions to organize the supply of the armed forces, the government says . The government says it is working under difficult conditions .
 It should be stressed that while Soviet military transportation depended heavily on vehicles from Lend-Lease, the Red Army was armed with Soviet weapons .
 The centralized structure of the Soviet economy enabled it to mobilize resources and adapt production to war needs . The Soviet economy was able to adapt to the needs of the war .
 The mass evacuation of factories and workers to the east was essential in keeping Soviet war industries out of German hands . The evacuation was an impressive organizational feat .
 Government control remained effective and morale did not break on the home front . Although many people died of starvation in Leningrad and elsewhere, government control was effective .
 Eventually the Soviet Union won, at an enormous cost, it is true, a total victory . The Soviet Union eventually won at a cost, but it was at a huge cost .
 "Better military command and the mobilization of economic resources were critical," says President Obama . "Certainly, improved military command ... was critical"
 The mobilization of human resources may be the more compelling explanation . But it may also be the reason for the surge in human resources .
 It has been argued that to win the war the Nazis had merely to arm Soviet citizens and let them fight against their own government . The Nazis had to arm citizens to fight against the Soviet government .
 The Nazis treated the Soviet population with contempt and brutality, as documented in Alexander Dallin’s study and other works . Instead, the Nazis treated them with contempt, brutality, instead .
 The Nazis used the kolkhozy as convenient structures for their own purposes . Instead of liberating peasants from collective farms, the Nazis used it as a convenient structure for its own purposes.
 As many as 3 million civilians were deported to forced labor camps in Germany . Ukrainians, Russians, Belorussians, Poles, and especially Ukrainians were among those deported .
 Millions of Jews, Roma and Communists were executed on the spot or sent to German death camps . Millions of Jewish, Roma, and Communists died in the Holocaust . Millions were sent to death camps in Nazi Germany .
 The stated Nazi war aim in the East was the colonization of eastern Europe and Russia, which foresaw not only complete economic and political subjugation in the interests of the German fatherland . The extermination of millions of people, including the extermination of Jews and gypsies, was planned .
 Their purpose was certainly not to free Soviet subjects from tyranny much less encourage them to free themselves . The purpose was to encourage Soviet subjects to take their own lives .
 The bloody signs of these plans in Nazi behavior greatly contributed to the enthusiasm with which Russians fought during the war . The bloody . signs of this . Nazi behavior contributed to . the enthusiasm of Russians fighting during the . war .
 Official propaganda during the war was filled with true tales of heroism, courage, and sacrifice . Official propaganda in WWII propaganda was full of tales of bravery and heroism .
 As Nazi onslaught advanced, the Soviet Union became more united than ever before . One can argue that, as the Nazi onslaught progressed, the Soviets united .
 What united Soviets behind the war efforts was not class struggle or world revolution, but nation, home, and family . The Soviet Union was united behind the efforts .
 The Communist government consciously utilized the prestige of Russian military heroes of the past and the manifold attractions of nationalism . The Soviet Union was founded by the Communist Party in 1945 .
 Wartime speeches, journalism, political posters, and literature all emphasized the need to defend the nation and the lives of one’s wife and children .
 The government also took practical measures to strengthen popular support of the war effort, such as giving collective farmers more freedom to market products grown on private plots .
 There were implied promises of further changes in political and social relations . And there were implied promise of further social changes .
 The government spoke of a new and better life that would follow the end of the war . The government said the war would be over and over .
 The war helped the Soviet regime create a new patriotic political culture . In other words, the war helped . The Soviet regime created a new patriotism culture, the author says .
 This new solidarity would help bolster the legitimacy and even popularity of the Soviet regime more than any other event in Soviet history . The new solidarity born of suffering and struggle would help boost the legitimacy of the regime, historian says .
 It is not surprising that remembrance of the ‘Great Patriotic War’ would remain a permanent part of Soviet culture . It would become a key element in post-Soviet nostalgia, especially in post Soviet nostalgia .
 Popular support to free the Soviet Union from the Nazi threat carried with it political risks . But mobilization of popular support to Soviet Union was politically risky, with risks .
 As we shall see, disappointment with expectations that the regime had changed during the war, and that people would be rewarded for their sacrifices, would feed new discontent . We shall see how this would feed into discontent .
 No name is nearer or dearer to millions of people -- the builders of Communism . No name nearer or more dearer than millions of . people—the builders of . Communism. No name . dearer . to millions .
 No name is more respected and esteemed by the laboring millions in the People's Democracies, liberated from fascist fetters by the valiant Soviet Army and now happily laying the foundations of Socialism .
 "The eyes of all the common men and women the world over, of all those who cherish freedom and true democracy, are now turning to him with hope," says President Barack Obama .
 We demand that our comrades, both as leaders of literary affairs and as writers, be guided by the vital force of the Soviet order—its politics . BORIS POLEVOI, 1950 .
 The matches were ready to burn with shame for the factory that produced them, but they couldn't . Only thus can our youth be reared, not in a devil-may-care attitude and a spirit of ideological indifference, but in a strong and vigorous revolutionary spirit .
 The Second World War brought tremendous human losses and material destruction to the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was devastated by the war .
 Millions of soldiers died, millions of civilians perished in the shifting battle zone and in Germanoccupied territory . In addition to the millions of soldiers who died .
 In contrast to the First World War, most atrocity stories of the Second World War were true . Most atrocity tales of the war were true, but some of them were not true .
 Hitler’s war in the East was one of annexation and extermination . Mass shootings and mass deportations to death camps were common .
 Jews, Roma and Communists were targeted for complete annihilation, especially Jews and Communists . The general Nazi goal of depopulating Ukraine and Russia encouraged murderous brutality .
 To the dead may be added perhaps another 20 million for the children that were not born in the decade of the 1940s . The children born in 1940s may also be added to the dead .
 Scholars have noted that conditions in Stalin’s labor camps also contributed to higher than normal mortality rates . Most deaths in the Gulag were due to conditions created by the war, though it is also argued that most deaths were caused by war .
 Of those alive at the start of the war, nearly one in five were dead at its end . Of those who survived the war at its start, nearly 1 in 5 were killed at the end .
 Survivors were physically crippled and emotionally scarred . Many of the survivors had to be physically crippled . Survivors were left with physical and emotional scars .
 Huge areas of the country were devastated—frequently more than once—at the hands of the retreating Red Army or the withdrawing Germans . In addition to the destruction suffered in the fighting, huge areas were devastated .
 The Red Army followed the scorched-earth policy, trying to destroy all that could be of military value to the enemy . Red Army tried to destroy everything that could have military value, says historian .
 The Nazis attempted to demolish everything when they were forced to abandon Soviet territory . The Nazis often did so with remarkable thoroughness .
 They flooded and wrecked mines and developed special devices to blow up railroad tracks . For example, they both flooded mines and blew up railroad lines .
 Scholars debate how to measure the devastation, but the general picture is clear . Scholars debate whether to measure how much damage has been caused .
 Millions of buildings were destroyed, including tens of thousands of factories, schools, and libraries . Millions of people were killed and millions of others were injured .
 The Soviet economy lost thousands of tractors and combine harvesters and millions of horses, cattle, hogs, sheep, and goats . Millions of horses and cattle were lost in the Soviet Union .
 It is likely that the economy lost about two-thirds of the reproducible wealth in occupied Soviet areas and one-quarter of the . wealth of the Soviet Union as a whole .
 It led to a strong upsurge of patriotism and nationalism, promoted by the Communist government itself . The Communist government did all it could to mobilize the people for supreme effort and sacrifice .
 The army acquired new prominence and prestige, whereas from the time of the Civil War it had been kept in the background in the Soviet state . The army became a major force in Russia after the Second World War .
 Religion profited from a more tolerant attitude on the part of the authorities . Religion, as already mentioned, profited by a tolerant attitude .
 In addition, a striking religious revival developed in German-occupied territory . In addition to religious revival, a religious revival also developed in Germany-occupied territories .
 While the Soviet government maintained control over the people, it somewhat relaxed its iron grip . The Soviet government relaxed its grip on the Soviet Union .
 In particular, some kolkhozes simply collapsed, the peasants dividing the land and farming it in private .
 On the whole, because of lessened controls and a great demand for food, many peasants improved their position during the war years .
 In the German zone of occupation the people immediately disbanded the collectives . The collectives were disbanded .
 The war also led to closer and friendlier relations with Western allies and made widespread contacts between the Soviet and non-Soviet world inevitable .
 Millions of Soviet citizens, prisoners of war, deportees, escapees, and escapees had their first look at life outside Soviet borders . Millions of Soviets had first glimpse of life outside the Soviet borders.
 Baltic countries, eastern Poland, Bessarabia, and northern Bukovina, brought up under non-Communist systems and in different circumstances, were joined to the Soviet Union . Other millions, the inhabitants of the Baltic countries .
 Second World War was the great rise in the Soviet Union's position and importance in the world . Another obvious result of the war was the rise in Russia's role in world power .
 The USSR came to dominate eastern Europe, except for Greece, and much of central Europe . The USSR became dominant in eastern Europe in the 1970s .
 Barring Allied expeditionary forces, it had no military rival on the entire continent . Barring the Allied forces, there were no military rivals in Europe .
 The international Communist movement had reached its nadir with the Soviet-German treaty and Hitler's victory in the west . It was experiencing a veritable renaissance in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Communists emerged as a great political force in many European countries, including such important Western states as France and Italy . After the German attack on the USSR, Communists had played major roles in numerous resistance movements, including those in the USSR .
 Only exhausted Great Britain and the United States remained as major obstacles to Soviet ambitions in the world . With the total defeat and unconditional surrender of Germany and Japan, the earlier defeat of Italy, and the collapse of France, only exhausted British and U.S. remained major obstacles .
 Stalin and the Politburo had their postwar policy cut out for them . In a sense, Stalin and his colleagues had a job to do with the Soviet Union .
 The Soviet Union had to rebuild the Soviet Union and to continue the industrial and general economic advance . They had to do so to continue to advance the country's economic progress .
 Marxists had to reimpose a full measure of socialism on the recalcitrant peasant . They had to supervise and control closely such nonMarxist sources of inspiration and belief as religion and nationalism .
 They had to combat the “contamination” that had come to their country from the non-Soviet world, and they had to make all their people, including the inhabitants of the newly acquired territories, into good Soviet citizens . The Soviets had to fight the ‘contamination
 They had to exploit the new position of the USSR and the new, sweeping opportunities open to the Soviet Union and international communism in the post-war world .
 Observers who were surprised by the course of Soviet politics at home and abroad from 1945 until Stalin’s death in the spring of 1953 had failed to understand Stalin and the nature of the Soviet system or believed that they had undergone a fundamental change .
 Stalin and the Politburo resorted, characteristically, to a five-year plan, and indeed to a sequence of such plans . To repair war damage and resume the economic advance, Stalin resorted to a plan of five years to rebuild the economy .
 The Fourth Five-Year Plan lasted from 1946 to 1950 and was proclaimed overfulfilled in four years and three months . The plan was cut out of the same cloth as its predecessors .
 The demobilization of more than 10 million men provided the needed additional manpower, for the total number of workers and employees had declined from 31 million in 1940 to 19 million in 1943 .
 The rebuilding of devastated towns and villages gathered momentum after the inauguration of the Plan . The rebuilding had begun as soon as the Germans had left, but gathered momentum .
 Russian industry, especially heavy industry, was supposed to achieve new heights of production . Labor productivity was to rise 36 percent, based on an increase in the amount of capital per worker .
 "As usual, every effort was made to force the Soviet people to work hard," says Soviet leader Vladimir Putin .
 A financial reform of December 1947 wiped out wartime savings by requiring Soviet citizens to exchange money for a new currency at the rate of ten to one . Soviet citizens had to exchange the money they had for the new currency .
 Official retail prices went up, although the concurrent abolition of rationing and of certain other forms of distribution alleviated somewhat the hardships of the consumer . Official retail price went up but rationing was abolished .
 Foreign economists noted a certain improvement in the urban standard of living as well as a redistribution of real income within the urban population .
 The Fourth Five-Year Plan obtained a great boost from reparations and other payments collected from defeated Germany and its allies . Reparations were made from Germany and other nations .
 In 1947, three-fourths of Soviet imports came from eastern Europe and the Soviet zone of Germany, that is, from the area dominated by Red military might . The Soviet zone was dominated by Soviet military might and dominated by eastern Europe .
 Total value of Soviet ‘political’ imports, including reparations, especially favorable trade provisions, and other economic arrangements, has been estimated at the extraordinary figure of 20 billion dollars .
 Some reparations were made in the form of complete factories that were dismantled, transported to the Soviet Union, and reassembled there . The Soviet Union also made reparations in the 1980s and 1990s .
 In the end the Plan could well be considered a success in industry, much like its predecessors, in spite of the frequently inferior quality of products and uneven results, which included underfulfillments .
 The Plan marked a further industrial shift east, which grew in relative economic importance compared to the pre-war period .
 By mobilizing resources the Soviet Union managed to maintain the very high annual industrial growth rate characteristic of the first three plans . Western economists estimated by Western economists at some 12 to 14 percent on average on average .
 The Fifth Five-Year Plan lasted from 1951 to 1955 and thus continued beyond Stalin’s rule . The plan was designed to keep the Soviet Union in power .
 The U.S. made great advances in such complex fields as aviation and armament industries and atomic energy, it apparently made great progress in such fields .
 The war, to repeat, produced sweeping destruction, a further sharp decline in the already insufficient supply of domestic animals, and at the same time a breakdown of discipline in many kolkhozes .
 By September 1, 1947, about 14 million acres had been taken away from private holdings of members of collectives as exceeding the permissible norm .
 The Politburo and the government mounted a new offensive aimed at turning the peasants at long last into good socialists . Moreover, the Politbure and the . government mounted . a new . offensive aimed . at turning . the peasants into good . socialists .
 This was to be done by greatly increasing the size of the collectives, decreasing their number and increasing the number of working units in a collective, in the interests of further mechanization and division of labor . The size of collectives was increased by decreasing their numbers and increasing their size .
 Nikita Khrushchev spoke of grouping peasants in agrogoroda, veritable agricultural towns . The towns would do away once and for all with the diffusion of labor, the isolation, and the backwardness characteristic of the countryside .
 Authorities did move to consolidate some 250,000 kolkhozes into fewer than 100,000 larger units . The agrogoroda proved unrealistic, or at least premature .
 In spite of all these efforts, some hostile critics believe largely because of them, peasants failed to satisfy the demands of Soviet leaders . Khrushchev in effect admitted after Stalin’s death that insufficient agricultural production remained a major weakness of the Soviet economy .
 Soviet Union acquired five new republics during the time of the Nazi-Soviet Pact . Five republics were formed in the Soviet Union in the early 1950s .
 The territories were lost, together with other large territories, when Germany invaded the USSR and reacquired when the Red Army advanced west . They were lost together when the USSR invaded Germany .
 The five Soviet Socialist Republics raised the total number of component units of the USSR to sixteen . Estonia, Latvian, Lithuanian, Estonian, Lithuania, Karelo-Finnish, and Moldavian raised the number of components units .
 In July 1956, the Karelo-Finnish SSR was downgraded to its prewar status of an autonomous republic within the RSFSR, reducing the number of union republics to fifteen . In July 1957, however, it was re-evaluated as a prewar
 The KareloFinnish Republic largely failed as an expression of Finnish culture and nationality . The inhabitants had a choice of staying or moving to Finland, virtually no people remained in the area annexed from Finland .
 The downgrading, therefore, seemed logical, although it might have been connected with the desire to Russify that strategic area still more effectively . It might also be connected to the desire .
 Already in the 1930s, “national operations” had persecuted Poles, Germans, Finns, Cossacks, and Koreans to root out alleged nationalism .
 Ethnic Germans from the Volga region, Chechens and Ingush from the north Caucasus, Crimean Tatars, Kalmyks, KalMyks, Meskhetian Turks from Georgia, and others .
 These deported nations were usually allowed to return to their homelands after Stalin’s death . The disruptions and resentments would linger for a very long time . The deportation of these deported nations was a major source of resentment .
 The newly incorporated areas faced particular violence, since the goal was to rapidly assimilate them to the Soviet system . The goal of assimilating them was the rapid integration of Soviet society .
 The occupation of these lands in 1940, and reoccupation as the Red Army advanced against the Nazis, was accompanied by deportations, arrests, and executions .
 Intellectuals, army officers, government officials, landowners, and clergy were especially targeted . Intellectuals and army officers were often targeted .
 In Stalin's last years, the Soviet labor camp empire bulged at the seams . Stalin's final years were the last years of Soviet labor camps in Russia .
 The leadership and contributions of the Russian people were insistedently emphasized during the war . On the other hand, both during the . war and especially afterward, the . leadership and contribution of the . Russian people was insistently emphasized .
 Union-wide elections were held in 1946 for the first time since 1937, and again in 1950 . Union elections were also held in 1950, 1946 and 1946 .
 The new Supreme Soviets acted as no more than rubber stamps for Stalin and the government . The Supreme Soviets were no more of a rubber stamp for Stalin's government, he says .
 Minimum age for office holders was raised from 18 to twenty-23 . Minimum age was raised to 20-23 in order to be elected office holders .
 Their number was reduced in the postwar years and they were more strongly centralized in Moscow . More important, their number of their number was also reduced .
 After his death its announced membership was reduced to ten, so that as an institution it differed from the Politburo only in name . The name was restored after Khrushchev's fall .
 The postwar years also witnessed militant reaffirmation of Communist orthodoxy in ideology and culture . The post-war period was also seen as a period of 'militarism' in ideology .
 The death of Stalin in the opinion of some specialists, again left the problem of succession wide open . That death—engineered by Stalin in some specialists—again left the question of succession open .
 The aging dictator was surrounded during his last years by a few surviving old leaders, his long-time associates, such as Molotov, Klement Voroshilov, Lazar Kaganovich, and Anastas Mikoyan .
 Malenkov in particular appeared to gain consistently in importance and to loom as Stalin’s most likely successor . Stalin's successor is likely to be a Soviet dictator .
 Stalin's last decade saw extremely important developments in Soviet foreign policy . Stalin's first decade of Soviet policy was in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Crucial events of the postwar years included the expansion of Soviet power in eastern Europe . The polarization of the world into the Communist and the anti-Communist blocs, headed by the Soviet Union and the United States, respectively .
 That the Soviet Union proved intractable in dealings with the West, that it did what it could to expand its own bloc (including betraying the promise of freedom and democratic elections in eastern Europe) followed logically from the nature and new opportunities of Soviet communism .
 Other scholars have pointed to a deep tradition of anticommunism in the West, especially in the United States, and to America’s own ambitions for a dominant role in the postwar world .
 A related argument emphasizes Soviet anxieties about Western intentions after the war, specifically fears that the capitalist West would take advantage of the Soviet Union’s economic debility in the wake of the war .
 Stalin understood Russia was not yet ready to survive a major new attack against it . Stalin understood that Russia wasn't ready to withstand a major attack against Russia .
 The postwar break between Russia and the West can also be explained by short-term considerations . The break between the West and Russia can be explained in the short term, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The Soviet leaders, too, had prepared little for the postwar period, and in their preparation they had concentrated on such objectives as rendering Germany permanently harmless . In their preparation for the post-war period, they had .
 Stalin, the ‘father of the peoples,” stands with representatives of varied Soviet nationalities . Stalin stands before a map showing plans for massive canals and hydroelectric projects . Stalin's "father of peoples" is shown in a photo of Stalin's visit to the Soviet Union
 The Soviet Union and the Allies cooperated long enough to put into operation their arrangement for dividing and ruling Germany . Top Nazi leaders were brought to trial before an international tribunal at Nuremberg in 1946 .
 In February 1947, the victorious powers signed peace treaties with Italy, Romania, Bulgaria, Hungary, and Finland . The victorious powers also signed peace agreements with Italy and Romania .
 Soviet Union confirmed its territorial gains from Romania and Finland, including a lease of the Finnish base of Porkkala . The Soviet Union obtained extensive reparations for the loss of territory .
 USSR obtained the so-called Carpatho-Ruthenian area from friendly Czechoslovakia in 1945 . Rounding out its acquisitions, the USSR also obtained the area of the Czech Republic . The area was part of the Soviet-Czechoslovakia pact .
 Most inhabitants of that region spoke Ukrainian . They had not been connected with any Russian state since the days of Kievan Rus .
 cooperation between the USSR and the Western powers broke down quickly and decisively . But cooperation between Russia and the West broke down rapidly and decisively, says historian .
 The Soviet Union refused to participate in the Atomic Energy Commission created by the United Nations in 1946 . No agreement on the international control of atomic energy could be reached .
 In the same year a grave crisis developed over the Soviet government's efforts to obtain significant concessions from Persia, or Iran, and its refusal to follow the example of Great Britain and the United States and withdraw its troops from Iran after the end of the war .
 Soviet forces did finally leave Iran, but the hostility between former allies became increasingly apparent . Western pressure and the airing of the question in the United Nations forced Soviet forces to leave Iran .
 The end result in each case was the firm entrenchment of a Communist regime cooperating with and dominated by the Soviet Union . Many details of the process varied from country to country .
 Greece won a bitter civil war against the Communist-led Left . Greece fell into the British sphere rather than the Soviet sphere . Great Britain and the United States supported the government of Greece .
 Finland survived as an independent nation after independence . The fact that Finland survived in Finland remains puzzling . Finland is one of the world's most successful nations .
 Moscow first overestimated the strength of Finnish Communists, who did play a prominent part in the government of the country immediately after the war . Then decided not to force the issue in changing international situation after the Finnish Communists failed to seize power .
 In particular, the Soviet Union probably wanted to avoid driving Sweden into the camp of Soviet enemies . In Sweden, Sweden was considered a major ally of the West .
 Large and strong Communist and allied parties in France and Italy were forced out of coalition governments and had to limit themselves to the role of an opposition bent largely on obstruction . Similarly—at a greater distance from the USSR—the large and strong .
 It has frequently been said that communism won in Europe only in countries occupied by the Red Army . That point deserves to be kept in mind, and that point should be remembered .
 The Soviet Union preferred to rely in all cases on local party members, while holding the Red Army in readiness as the ultimate argument .
 Usually, the “reactionary” elements, including monarchs where such were present, would be forced out of political life and a “united front” of “progressive’ elements formed to govern the country . Usually, a united front of progressive elements
 Communists had the most trouble with agrarian parties, just as the Bolsheviks had met their most dangerous rivals in the Socialist Revolutionaries . It is worth noting that the eastern European Communists had most trouble in the 1930s .
 In Roman Catholic countries, such as Poland and Hungary, they also experienced strong and persistent opposition from the Church . The Church is also in opposition to the Catholic Church .
 The Communist seizure of power in Czechoslovakia proved particularly disturbing to the non-Communist world . It occurred as late as 1948 and disposed of a regime headed by President BeneS . BeneS had enjoyed popular support and maintained friendly relations with the Soviet Union .
 As in the USSR, the political police played a key role in social transformation and control . Political police were key to social transformation in the Soviet Union .
 For most of Communist eastern Europe, with the notable exception of Poland, occupation by Moscow was harsher than occupation by Nazi Germany . Local scholars in these countries have argued strongly that for most of . Communist eastern . Europe's most communist countries have been occupied by Moscow .
 Winston Churchill was among the first Western statesmen to speak openly of the danger of Communist influence in eastern Europe . Winston Churchill, at the time out of office, was at the height of the Soviet Union's influence .
 In a speech at Westminster College in Fulton, Missouri, in March 1946, he described an “iron curtain” separating the “Soviet sphere” from the rest of the continent . He described the "iron curtain" separating the "Soviet sphere" from rest of Europe .
 The foreign policies of the U.S. soon reflected this sense of global divide and a “cold war’ - a term that began to be used in the United States around this time . The foreign policy of the US in the 1930s reflected a global divide, a �
 President Truman appealed to Congress for funds to provide military and economic aid to Greece and Turkey . This policy came to be known as the Truman Doctrine .
 In June 1947 the Marshall Plan was introduced to help rebuild the economies of European countries devastated by war . The Marshall Plan helped rebuild European economies devastated by the war .
 The Soviet Union and its satellites would not participate in the plan . The plan became a powerful bond for the Western bloc . It was the first time the Soviet Union would participate .
 In 1949, twelve Western countries, the United States, Great Britain, Canada, France, Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, Norway, Denmark, Iceland, Italy, and Portugal signed the Atlantic Defense Pact of mutual aid against aggression .
 A permanent North Atlantic Treaty Organization and armed force were subsequendy created, under General Eisenhower’s command . General Eisenhower's command was responsible for the creation of the organization . A permanent armed force was then created under the same name .
 In 1949, the United States Congress passed a broad Mutual Defense Assistance Program to aid American allies all over the world . The program was passed by Congress in 1949 . Also in 1949, Congress passed the Mutual Defense Aid Program .
 The U.S. and other countries organized to meet the perceived Soviet threat . With these agreements and with numerous bases girding the USSR, the United States and others organized to .
 In 1947 the Communist Information Bureau, known as Cominform, replaced the Communist International, which had been disbanded in 1943 . The Communist International was disbanded in 1945 .
 Cominform aimed at better coordination of Communist efforts in Europe . Bringing together Communist parties of the USSR, eastern Europe, France, and Italy . Comininform aims to better coordinate Communist efforts .
 Zhdanov, who represented the Soviet party, set the unmistakably militant tone of the organization . He was the leader of the Communist Party in the Soviet Union .
 Communist cooperation was dealt a major blow by the break between Yugoslavia and the USSR, backed by its satellites, in the summer of 1948 . Yugoslavia and USSR broke up in summer of that year .
 Tito chose to defy Stalin because he wanted to retain full effective control of his own country . Tito resented the role assigned to Yugoslavia in the economic and other plans of the Soviet bloc . He chose to disobey Stalin in order to retain control of the country .
 He succeeded in his bold undertaking because he had a strong organization and support at home in contrast to other eastern European Communist leaders, many of whom were simply Soviet puppets . The Soviet Union did not dare invade Yugoslavia, apparently from fear of international complications .
 Tito’s unprecedented defection created the new phenomenon of ‘national’ communism, independent of the Soviet bloc . Tito was the first person to defect from the Soviet Union to defect in the 1950s .
 The Western world confronted the Soviet in many places and on many issues . The Soviet Union confronted the Western world in many ways, including in many areas .
 Soviet Russia’s constant use of its veto power in the Security Council resulted in little more than a constant confrontation in the U.N. history .
 Of the eighty vetoes cast there in the decade from 1945 to 1955, seventyseven belonged to the Soviet Union . The vetoes were cast in the 1950s and 1960s .
 The Allied Control Council in Germany failed to function almost from the beginning . No agreement could be reached concerning the unification of Germany or the peace treaty with that country .
 Federal Republic of Germany with its government in Bonn was established in the Western-occupied zones in May 1949 . German Democratic Republic was created in the Soviet-held area in October of the same year .
 Cold war reached its height in the summer of 1948 when Soviet authorities stopped the overland supply of the American, British, and French sectors of Berlin . Cold war in Germany reached its peak in summer 1948 .
 Postwar events in Asia were as important as the developments in Europe . Postwar developments in Asia are important as those in Europe, says historian John Defterios .
 Communists made bids to seize power in such different areas as Indonesia, Malaya, and Burma . Communists tried to take power in Indonesia, Burma and Malaya .
 The great Chinese civil war ended in 1949 with Chiang Kai-shek’s evacuation to Formosa—or Taiwan— and the proclamation of the Communist Chinese People's Republic, with Mao Zedong at its head, on the mainland .
 Soviet Union took no direct part in the Chinese war . It helped Chinese Communists with supplies and fully backed Mao's new regime .
 China could not be expected to occupy the role of a satellite, such as Bulgaria or Czechoslovakia . The Communist world acquired in effect a second center of leadership, the Communist world says .
 By an agreement concluded in 1950, the USSR ceded to Communist China its railroad possessions in Manchuria, although briefly retaining a naval base at Port Arthur .
 Two governments were formed, one in American-occupied southern Korea and the other in the Soviet north, the thirty-eighth parallel dividing the two . No agreement could be reached by the victorious powers .
 U.S. forces and some contingents from other countries came to the assistance of South Korea in execution of a mandate of the United Nations . Tens and even hundreds of thousands of Chinese “volunteers” intervened on the North Korean side .
 The Soviet army itself did not participate in the war, although the North Koreans and the Chinese used Soviet-made aircraft and weapons . Soviet advisers, as well as Soviet pilots and other technicians, were in North Korea .
 No armistice could be concluded until the summer of 1953, after Stalin’s death . The front of the Soviet Union was stabilized in summer of 1951, but no peace agreement was reached until 1953 .
 Stalin’s final years were also marked by an intensified “cult of personality” as Khrushchev would brand it . Stalin's final years marked by intensified ‘cult’ of personality,’ as Khrisschev would label it .
 Statues and pictures of the ‘great leader’ proliferated, songs and poems were written in his honor . His every pronouncement was treated as sacred truth, and his eulogists vied with one another to find greater superlatives to describe him .
 Stalin grew increasingly distrustful of all around him . At the same time, Stalin became increasingly suspicious of his surroundings . Stalin's paranoia grew in the eyes of Stalin .
 Stalin's final months, especially, had a certain weird quality to them . Stalin’s final months had a strange quality, especially in his final months .
 The madness that kept peering through the method during his entire rule asserted itself with new vigor . It could be that the madness that keeps peering into the method asserted itself .
 In January 1953, nine doctors were accused of having assassinated a number of Soviet leaders, including Zhdanov, and of planning to murder others . They were accused in January 1953 of having planned to kill others . In March 1953, 9 doctors were found guilty of planning and murdering Zhdan
 Stalin suffered a stroke on the first of the month, and on the morning of the sixth the news came that he had died the previous night . Then on March 4 it was announced that Stalin had suffered a . stroke .
 Some of the dictator’s entourage especially close to him disappeared at the same time . The dictator's entourage was also known to have disappeared .
 Leninist principles of party leadership are characterized, above all, by the highest principle of collective leadership, by adherence to the norms of party life as fixed in the statutes of our party . Second, systematically and consistently to continue the work done by the party’s Central Committee in recent
 Third, to restore completely the Leninist principles of Soviet socialist democracy, expressed in the Constitution of the Soviet Union .
 "Under the red banner of peace and labor we have scored outstanding successes that are admired by all honest people of the world," he said .
 President Vladimir Putin wishes Soviet citizens the "greatest success in their noble work and the greatest happiness" Putin: "Permit me from the bottom of my heart"
 Stalin's stroke was followed by three days of silence from the Kremlin and, in all probability, by hard bargaining among top Soviet leaders . Stalin was assassinated on May 1, 1973 .
 When the dictator’s demise was announced, the new leadership proclaimed itself ready to govern the country . The new leadership emphasized the solidarity of its members as well as its unity with the people .
 The shrill tone and the constant repetition of both assertions must have covered many suspicions and fears, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Malenkov emerged clearly in the chief role, for he became presumably both the senior party secretary, which had been Stalin's most important office, and prime minister .
 Beria and Molotov stood next to Malenkov, forming a triumvirate of successors to the dictator . Beria was the leader of the Soviet Union during the Second World War . Molotsov and Beria were the two successors of the former dictator .
 Stalin's burial in the Lenin Mausoleum in Red Square was March 9 . The three, in that order, were the key living figures during Stalin’s burial .
 As early as the middle of March, however, it was announced that Malenkov had resigned as the party secretary . He remained prime minister and continued to be treated as the top personage in the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev was promoted to the position of first party secretary . The title was the title used instead of that of general secretary associated with Stalin . Later it was announced he had been promoted .
 In the summer of 1953, Beria was arrested and then executed in secret, with a number of his followers, on charges of treason and conspiracy . Or, as Khrushchev related to some visitors, he was killed at the Presidium meeting at which he had expected to assume full
 In any case, it would seem that in the race to dispose of one another Beria had narrowly lost out .
 Beria's fall marked a certain weakening in the power of the political police . Beria’s fall marked the fall of Beria, who was in charge of the country's political police.
 In February 1955, Malenkov resigned as prime minister, saying he was guilty of mistakes made in Soviet agriculture . He was accused of having incorrectly emphasized the production of consumer goods at the expense of heavy industry .
 Nikolai Bulganin, a prominent Communist leader, replaced Malenkov as head of government . Nikolai had been a member of the Politburo since 1948 .
 Khrushchev, Beria, Chou En-Lai, Malenkov, Voroshilov, Kaganovich, Bulganin, Molotov. former office of defense .
 Zhukov’s rise marked the first appearance of an essentially military, rather than party, figure in high governing circles in Soviet Russia . The rise marks the first . appearance of a essentially . essentially military . rather than a party, instead of a . party, was the first
 Stalin was accused of creating a ‘personality cult’ around himself, of ruling in arbitrary and tyrannical ways . Stalin accused of killing many party activists and leaders, of decimating the army leadership . Stalin also accused of unjustified mass deportations of nationality groups .
 At the same, these colossal crimes were viewed as a deviation from the essentially correct norms and policies of Marxism-Leninism . The crimes were rectified by the collective leadership that replaced the despot. At the time, they were seen as deviation from Marxist-Leninist policies .
 Khrushchev could not help but implicate himself and other leading Communists, at least indirectly, in Stalin's crimes and errors . Besides, he implicates himself and others, including himself, in the crimes of Stalin's .
 Khrushchev’s denunciation of Stalin struck at some “old Stalinists,” his main competitors . Khrushchev's denunciation strikes at some of his main rivals, his main rival .
 Khrushchev and his allies may have been trying to save communism from Stalinism by blaming the worst aspects of the Soviet past on one individual rather than on the system itself, or on the party as an institution or on its guiding ideology . No less important, they may be trying to
 In practice, the revelations of Stalin’s crimes did undermine the faith of some people in the system that produced Stalin . The revelations did undermine some people's faith in some of the system .
 The conflict at the top reached its culmination in the spring and early summer of 1957 . The Hungarian rebellion of the preceding autumn and certain other events at home and abroad had raised grave questions concerning the orientation and activities of the new Soviet administration .
 Khrushchev took his case to its entire Central Committee, successfully reversing the unfavorable decision . Khrushchchev was ousted from the Presidium and other positions of power of the “anti-party group” of Malenkov, Molotov, Kaganovich, and
 While Khrushchev’s enemies were dropped from the Presidium, its membership was increased to fifteen, giving the general secretary further opportunities to bring his supporters into that body . The Presidium was expanded to 15 members, with the membership increased to 15 .
 In March 1958, Bulganin resigned as head of the government . He had been disloyal to Khrushchev the previous year . In March 1957, he resigned from the Russian government .
 Khrushchev himself replaced Bulganin, thus combining the supreme effective authority of the party and of the state . Khrushchev became the leader of the Soviet Union in 1959 .
 Khrushchev’s biography and personality shaped his actions and policies . The former Soviet Union leader's biographer says he is proud of his achievements .
 He was born in 1894 into a poor peasant family in a southern Russian village . He was the son of a Russian peasant family .
 Starting in 1908, Khrushchev lived in the Donbas region of Ukraine . He became a skilled metalworker with ambitions to become an engineer . He was born in 1908 in Donbas, Ukraine .
 His education included no more than four years of primary school . After the revolution, he briefly attended a special school for workers and gained additional technical training .
 In this light, the ‘secret speech’ can be seen as the act of a devoted Communist and pragmatist and as a type of repentance . The "secret speech" is seen as a kind of repentance, says the author .
 Khrushchev's reforms involved significant initiatives in a number of areas, though many produced unexpected results or simply failed . Many of the reforms failed or failed .
 His first priority was agriculture, where he tried to stimulate production through administrative reorganizations, by encouraging more active party involvement in production, and through heroic “campaigns”
 He tried to encourage better industrial management and more production of consumer goods, again through administrative reorganizations and campaigns . He was also involved in reorganizing industrial management .
 These policies resulted in an advancing economy and substantial improvements in people’s everyday material lives . These policies, as will be discussed later, resulted in a larger economy .
 After the long winter of Stalinist cultural politics, a ‘thaw’ began . After the required adherence in all the arts to the strictures of Stalinism, the “socialist realism” began .
 Writers and artists, but also scholars and journalists, were able to speak more openly of the crimes of the past, to criticize inadequacies in Soviet life, and, especially, to pay more attention to the experiences of the individual .
 Khrushchev and the Congress returned to the grizzly issue of Stalinism, detailing and documenting many of its atrocities . In a much more unexpected development, the Congress also documented many of the atrocities .
 The removal of Stalin’s body from the mausoleum in Red Square must have had a powerful impact on many Soviet minds . The renaming of cities named after Stalin, with Stalingrad becoming Volgograd, must have been a powerful influence .
 Khrushchev seemed triumphant at the party congress in 1961, but his fortunes were in decline . In retrospect, he seemed triumphant, but in fact, his fortunes had been in decline. In the 1960s, he was seen as a leader of the Soviet Union .
 That year followed Khrushchev’s decisive defeat of his competitors for power in the “anti-party group” and the inauguration of the space age with the launching of the first Sputnik . That year was the sensational Soviet inauguration with the launch of the Soviet inauguration
 There was a bounteous harvest and industrial production continued to grow at a strong rate . The harvest was bounteous and the economy continued to be strong .
 Khrushchev’s exhortations, and his economic, administrative, and party reorganizations, together with his hectic campaigns to remedy particular deficiencies, were increasingly ineffective in resolving the crisis . The next chapter will discuss the role of the Soviet Union in Soviet Russia .
 Khrushchev had to resort to an unprecedented purchase of Canadian wheat to forestall hunger at home . In his last years and months in office he saw industrial growth decline sharply .
 De-Stalinization or, more broadly, of Soviet life seemed to produce as many problems as it resolved . "Liberalization" seemed to be producing more problems than it resolved, historian says . De-stalinization was a form of Soviet state of mind, he says .
 It led in effect to soul-searching and instability rather than to any outburst of creative communist energy, says historian .
 The world situation—also to be discussed later, deteriorated even more sharply from the Soviet point of view . The situation in the Soviet Union would have been even worse if the situation had worsened .
 In 1960 the conflict with China, which dated back to Khrushchev's original de-Stalinization of 1956, burst into the open . From about 1963, the break between the former allies seemed irreparable .
 Khrushchev’s survival of the catastrophe of his apparently largely personal foreign policy might be considered a sign of the continuing power of the single leader in the Soviet authoritarian system . The survival of his own foreign policy is a sign that the single Soviet leader is still powerful .
 The leader no longer had at his command the mechanisms of power that Stalin had . And the leader, in turn, no longer . No longer had . at his . command, Stalin had. The leader, he said, "No longer . had at least . at least one of the
 Khrushchev made the mistake of acting in an increasingly autocratic and arbitrary manner during the time he was in power . It would seem that during this time he acted in an arbitrary manner .
 In many ways, Khrushchev’s relatively brief reign was a culmination of a long history of revolutionary politics . The Brezhnev era was the beginning of a new era of Russian revolutionaryism .
 Khrushchev oriented his government and the party toward “building communism” domestically and internationally . He pursued these goals through dramatic campaigns and reforms . The goal of building communism was to build communism domestically, internationally .
 The new collective leadership that came to power in 1964 was the first generation of rulers to come of age after 1917 . Leonid Brezhnev was chosen as party leader, quickly emerging as the dominant figure .
 They were children during the revolution; most received technical educations; all were promoted rapidly through the party and the state during the First Five-Year Plan . All benefitted from the Great Purge, which opened opportunities to enter the higher ranks .
 Overall, they were practical men concerned with stable power and effective policies of economic development . They were also practical men .
 Political scientists studying the regime described the years that this steadily aging and increasingly conservative generation were in power as a time of “oligarchical petrification” of government . Political scientists also said the years of the regime were also a time for the “modernization”
 Close studies of Soviet politics after Khrushchev paid less attention to the formal claims of ideology and more to how Soviet institutions actually worked . Close studies looked at Soviet institutions in the wake of the Cold War .
 This led to interpretations such as Jerry Hough’s notion of a ‘return to normalcy’ involving rational administration, institutional pluralism, and political interest groups, he says . Hough: “This is a return to normalness’. This is a
 The radical ideas of limiting terms in office and encouraging public criticism of bureaucracy were replaced by a conservative policy that ensured job stability for the bureaucracy .
 The Congress agreed to allow the Presidium to again be called, as in the days of Stalin, the Politburo, and the first secretary of the party to be called the general secretary . The Presidium was also agreed to be again called as in Stalin's days as the Polit
 The power and role of the KGB grew rapidly, though mass terror, viewed as dangerous to the system, was not reinstated . Mass terror was not reinvoted in the Soviet Union in 1945 .
 Ideologically, rhetoric shifted from talking about the coming of “communism” to a focus on the achievements of the past that had created a society of ‘developed socialism” in the present . Ideological rhetoric shifted .
 Socialist rhetoric did not disappear, especially when criticizing Western capitalism and imperialism . Of course, socialist rhetoric was not disappeared, especially in the 1930s .
 The growth of the economy was slowing and society, as we shall see, was increasingly alienated from the government and the whole socialist project . Similarly, society was also being alienated from government .
 The Soviet leadership launched important initiatives in these years, including strengthening Soviet military might, economic policies emphasizing development in such crucial sectors as agriculture and energy . The USSR sought to maintain superpower status of the USSR with less political danger and economic cost .
 At the heart of domestic politics during the Brezhnev years was a generous policy of catering to the interests of elites combined with a growing welfare state for the population at large .
 In practice, this meant, for example, that greater job security than ever before was assured . In practice it meant, this means, that great job security was assured. But in practice, it was not always enough .
 Institutional interests are respected by providing departments with good budgets . Institutional interest is respected by giving departments good budgets, says Dr. John Defterios .
 The effect, scholars have argued, was to create a loyal managerial class, one of the keys to the stability of the system . Scholars have argued that this created a loyal management class .
 At the same time, the Soviet welfare state grew, partly as a means to ensure popular toleration of this increasingly hierarchical society . The welfare state was a means of ensuring public toleration in the Soviet society . It was also a way to ensure public tolerance of the growing state of Soviet
 Individuals were offered opportunities for upward mobility, even the opportunity to join the privileged elite, through hard work and political loyalty . Hard work and loyalty is key to upward mobility in the U.S.
 Political scientists have spoken of an implicit ‘social contract’ between the government and the population . Political scientists say the social contract is an implicit 'social contract' between government and population .
 Repression remained (for publicly criticizing policies, for spending unauthorized time with foreigners, for damaging or stealing socialist property, for illegal buying and selling) but it was not random or inexplicable . Repression was for public criticism of policies and for unauthorized contact with foreigners .
 Some commentators began to write of a Soviet version of consumer attitudes and a consumer society . Indeed, living standards measurably rose, and some commentators wrote of the Soviet version .
 This is not to say that Soviet citizens did not notice or resent the growing privileges of the elite . Soviet citizens were aware of the growing privilege of the elites .
 Anecdotes, a form of subtle everyday critique of the systems, often spoke of this inequality . The stories of people's experiences often speak of inequality in the society .
 Brezhnev government attempted essentially palliatives rather than fundamental reform . Yet, the Brezhnaev government attempted palliative reforms . Brezhnnaev's government attempted to reform the Soviet Union .
 Brezhnev died on November 10, 1982, at the age of seventy-five . He had outlived such near-peers as Kosygin and Suslov, and the chief party ideologist Suslov .
 The remaining leaders still belonged to the same well-established group and were of comparable age and orientation . Yet, as far as one could tell, they were of similar age and, as well as one, orientation .
 Nikolai Tikhonov, who replaced Kosygin as prime minister, was born in 1906 . Konstantin Chernenko, probably closest to Brezhnev at the time of the latter’s death, was only five years younger . Dmitrii Ustin
 Some observers were surprised by the rapidity and smoothness of the transition . That the general Secretaryship of the party went to Iurii Vladimirovich Andropov, sixty-eight .
 Brezhnev had a particular fondness for motor vehicles . The Soviet leader was a keen admirer of cars and cars . He was one of the world's most powerful men .
 Andropov's earlier service included the position of ambassador to Hungary in 1954-57, when he became linked to the brutal suppression of the Hungarian revolt and to the institution of a liberal economic policy .
 Andropov addressed himself immediately to purging the administrative apparatus and to strengthening labor discipline by such spectacular measures as police searches in public places for absentee workers . He was a sharp critic of the stagnation and corruption under Brezhnev, and became a strong leader .
 His activity was cut short by kidney failure, and he died after only about a year and three months in office .
 Andropov was replaced by Chernenko, Brezhnev’s intended heir and already a sick man, who lived for barely another year . Chernenko died in 1953, but died a year later .
 On March 11, 1985, Mikhail Sergeevich Gorbachev, Andropov’s protégé, was elected by the Politburo to the general secretaryship of the party . Then, in 1985, Gorbavachev was elected to general secretary of the
 Khrushchev transferred direction of a good proportion of industry from ministries in Moscow to regional Economic Councils . The move was aimed at a geographic dispersion, or deconcentration, of authority, in 1957 .
 The aim might have been to give local party bosses more authority in economic matters and thus to stimulate local initiative . Another aim might be to give them more authority on economic matters .
 The Sixth Five-Year Plan, scheduled to run from 1956 to 1960, was cut short in 1958 . It was replaced by a Seven-Year plan to last from 1959 through 1965 . The plan was scheduled to last until 1965 .
 Official explanation stressed discovery of vast new natural resources that altered Soviet economic prospects . Official explanation for the change stressed the discovery .
 The Sixth Five-Year Plan had fallen behind its assigned norms of production and the Soviet leadership decided to try a fresh start . The more likely reason was that the Sixth Five -Year Plan .
 Western economists judged the industrial goals of the Seven-Year Plan to be quite realistic . Western economists such as Robert Campbell and Naum Jasny judged the plan to be realistic .
 The plan called for a rate of industrial growth approximately 20 percent slower than that achieved during the Fifth Five-Year Plan . Special attention was paid to further electrification and development of the chemical industry .
 In this sense it was also less ambitious than the abortive Sixth Five-Year Plan . It was less ambitious .
 In results, the Soviet economy continued to gain in relative output on the American economy, helped by such developments as the recession in the United States and the Western world in general .
 The Soviet housing and general building program aimed to increase total Soviet building investment by 83 percent . The Soviet government planned to invest 83 percent in Soviet housing .
 Even when executed not in its entirety, this aspect of the Seven-Year Plan constituted a major contribution to the improvement of the Soviet standard of living . The Seven-year Plan was not executed in entirety and with buildings of inferior quality .
 Superior quality and unflagging attention were devoted, by contrast, to such advanced technical fields as atomic energy, rockets, missiles, and space travel .
 The USSR achieved a series of pioneering successes in rockets and space travel . Sputnik I was the first artificial satellite launched in October 1957 . The first satellite was launched by the USSR in 1957 .
 Khrushchev years were the most important years of Soviet agriculture . Soviet agriculture was a key part of the Soviet Union's agricultural policy .
 Fearsome efforts to raise agricultural production constituted, together with certain concessions to the consumer, the salient new features of Soviet economic policy . The Soviet Union's economic policy aimed at increasing agricultural production .
 The gross output of agriculture in 1952 was only some 6 percent above 1928 . The magnitude of the Soviet farm problem can be seen from the fact that, by contrast with industrial achievements, the gross output was only 6 percent .
 This undertaking, supported by great exertion as well as a mighty propaganda effort, gave remarkably mixed results from year to year, depending on weather conditions, but did not live up to expectations .
 He further decided to boost drastically the production of such foods as meat, milk, and butter .
 Official claims and promises, especially the latter, differed sharply from reality . Official promises and promises to be met with reality, especially from reality.
 The mass planting of corn, often in unsuitable conditions, might have been unwise . The huge gamble on virgin lands, which were difficult to cultivate, might also be unwise, says historian .
 Soviet authorities resorted to the old method of further socialization to increase production . To increase production Soviet authorities had to increase socialize .
 Between 1953 and 1957 the number of sovkhozes increased . The kolkhoz share of land under cultivation fell from 84 to 72 percent .
 As late as September 1958, Khrushchev, other leaders, and the propaganda machine still spoke of the more truly socialist nature of the sovkhoz system of agriculture .
 The official policy toward collective farms continued to be ambivalent . The official response to the collective farms was ambivalent.
 There is a consensus among experts that the income of the members of the kolkhozes, extremely low at the time of Stalin’s death, increased markedly in subsequent years . There is also a consensus .
 In 1958, the government enacted measures to disband the Machine Tractor Stations . The kolkhozes were able to obtain in ownership all the agricultural equipment they needed . The government disbanded the machines in 1958 .
 The years witnessed a great stress on increasing the ‘indivisible fund” of a collective . That part of its revenue belongs to the entire kolkhoz and is not parceled out among individual members . This fund is used for such ‘socially valuable
 Khrushchev and other leaders returned to the theme that the private plots of the members of a kolkhoz are meant merely to augment a family’s food supply rather than to produce for the market . The private plots should become entirely unnecessary with further successes of socialist agriculture,
 The leadership of Soviet agriculture did not dare carry out the elimination of the 20 million small private plots of the members of the collectives . Perhaps they had been predicated on a further drastic socialization of agriculture, perhaps on the elimination or near elimination .
 Khrushchev’s frantic efforts after the Congress to bolster farm production . This time demanded the abolition of the grass rotation system in favor of planting feed crops such .
 Khrushchev enthusiastically promised that communism was to replace socialism as the culminating phase in the evolution of Soviet society, was within reach . As we have mentioned, we have been told that communism is within reach in Soviet society .
 The details of communist society were somewhat vague, in general terms it was to be an economy of abundance that would satisfy all the needs of the population . In general terms, the economy would be to be a society of abundance .
 communism would eliminate inequalities between town and country, industrial and agricultural work, mental and manual labor . Communism would eliminate income differentials between people, industrial, agricultural work and mental labor . communism would finally eliminate inequalities .
 Even some of the abundant consumer goods would be available in the form of ‘appliance pools” of refrigerators, washing machines, or vacuum cleaners .
 Khrushchev objected to the last to private automobile ownership and projected instead public car pools . Apparently, he objected to private car ownership .
 Free public health services and transportation would be followed by free public meals, which would virtually eliminate kitchen drudgery for women . Free health services, transportation and public meals would also be free .
 Academician Stanislav Strumilin and others constructed models of communal cities of the future . Parents would be allowed daily visits to their children, who would live separately under the care of a professional staff .
 Communism would seem to imply a great diminution in the role of the family, if not its abolition . Indeed communism seems to imply that the family should be abolished .
 The role of the school would expand, and so would the roles of labor brigades, comrades’ courts, and other public organizations . By contrast, the role of a school would be expanded .
 They remained committed, if less and less effectively, to economic development . But they remained committed to developing the country .
 In the middle and late 1960s, Soviet agriculture measures were enacted to bolster Soviet agriculture . In the 1960s the Soviet Union took steps to bolster its agriculture .
 Collective farmers finally received a guaranteed wage, which made their position comparable to that of the sovkhoz workers . Earlier they had the last claim in the distribution of gain, rendering their very existence marginal .
 Also, pensions and social services were extended to the kolkhoz members . Pension, social services and social support were extended for the members .
 State increased the amount of resources devoted to agriculture over a period of years . Investment in agriculture came to constitute over a third in the allocation of the total national investment .
 Another 4. percent of the national income was assigned to subsidize retail food prices, to keep these down despite heavy production costs . The government also assigned 4.5 percent of national income to keep food prices down .
 Soviet Union spent 5 billion dollars in 1975-76 alone to buy grain abroad, more money to buy meat and butter, as well as similar huge purchases later . Soviet leadership mounted enormous effort mounted by the Soviet leadership to develop agricultural sector .
 The Soviet government signed contracts with Italian and French companies to help develop the automobile industry in the Soviet Union . Subsequently the Soviet government agreed to sign contracts with companies to develop the Soviet-made cars .
 The Eighth, Ninth, and Tenth Five-Year Plans, covering the years from 1966 to 1980, testify to the slowdown of the Soviet economy . Soviet crop failures in 1972 and 1975 necessitated massive purchases of grain abroad .
 Western economists reported that the plans’ targets were “generally—sometimes widely—missed, affected as the USSR has been by declining reserves of labor and other retardational forces,” and successive plans tended to set lower targets .
 Soviet heavy industries and military production seemed to grow at high rates . Only Soviet heavy industry, military production grew at a high rate .
 Alexander Dallin observed in 1977 that “no liberalizing reforms seem to be in the offing’s offing; rather there is strong emphasis on centralism in planning and management, he said . Despite these problems, “No liberalizing . reforms seem . in
 Since the fall of Khrushchev and in general since the death of Stalin, the standard of living of the urban and especially of the poverty-stricken rural population apparently continued to improve .
 During the 1960s and 1970s, wages and salaries steadily increased . Food supplies improved, the amount and variety of consumer goods grew . New housing continued to be built .
 Additional needs could often be satisfied in the growing ‘second economy’ where one could purchase foreign products, illegally manufactured goods, scarce Soviet goods and then resold, goods obtained illegally .
 As the economy began to falter in the 1970s and early 1980s, however, these improvements slowed . The improvements slowed as the economy faltered .
 At the same time, the Soviet Union was bearing very heavy military expenditures, exemplifying by the deployment of antimissile ballistic systems and by the growth of the Soviet navy . At the time, Russia was carrying a heavy military expenditure .
 Economic activities in the USSR spread out, and the economic map of the country underwent constant change . Economic activities spread out of the USSR in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Novosibirsk as a great scientific and technological center in Siberia, the Bratsk Dam, the Baikal-Amur mainline railway, and oil and natural gas fields beyond the Urals . The new problem of the industrial pollution of Lake Baakal, the new
 Faced with an economic slowdown, the government decided to shift the emphasis and the incentives from the sheer volume of production, to sales and profits .
 Under the new system managerial bonuses were to depend, not on output as such, but on sales and profits . The latter factor finally gave serious recognition to the element of cost in Soviet production .
 In January 1966 forty-three enterprises from seventeen industries, with a total of 300,000 workers, switched to the new system . The new system was introduced in January 1966 .
 Some economic reform was realized in industry, transportation, and retail trade, and it spread to the sovkhozes and to the construction sector . Some of the reforms were realized in industries, transportation and retail .
 The new system proved to be very little difference between the new system and the old system . Yet, ambivalent and probably insufficient to begin with, it was emasculated in the process of implementation .
 More prominent was the new emphasis on material incentives, on the provision of more and more differentiated rewards . The new emphasis was on providing more and better rewards .
 Although widely applied, these incentives did not lead to an important improvement in performance . The incentives were widely applied but did not result in an improvement in productivity .
 The Tenth Five-Year Plan, 1976-80, and the Eleventh that succeeded it, although on the whole less ambitious than their predecessors, witnessed repeated inability of the Soviet economy to meet set goals, a decline in labor productivity .
 Some specialists considered 1979, the first of the unprecedented four successive years of bad grain harvests, a disastrous turning point . Some experts say 1979 was the first year of four consecutive years of poor harvours .
 Everything from transportation bottlenecks and difficulty in maintaining the supply of energy to ever-increasing alcoholism and inflation, combined to retard Soviet economic development . Then and in the years immediately following, seemingly everything, from . transportation bottleneckks and . difficulty in . maintaining the . supply of
 Brezhnev regime saw a sharp rise in living standards, but the last stagnant and disappointing years saw shortages of food and consumer goods . Other observers wrote more generally of the first successful period of the Brezhnov regime .
 An economic assessment of the development of the Soviet economy under Brezhnev’s stewardship, from 1964 to 1982, was written at the time of his death . It described the following conditions, in comparison with the United States.
 Steady growth of aggregate output over the eighteen-year period, averaging 3. percent per year . Industrial output growing at an average annual rate of 4. percent .
 Per capita consumption rose at an average annual rate of 2.0 percent in Soviet Russia . Living standards rose at a steady pace in the Soviet Union .
 Significant growth in Soviet military power in absolute terms as well as in relative terms visa-vis-vis the United States .
 Reduction of the gap in productivity between the Soviet Union and the United States. Reduction of productivity .
 While in 1965 the productivity of an average Soviet worker was only 30 percent that in the United States, by 1982 it was 41 percent . By 1982, productivity of a Soviet worker in the U.S. was 41% .
 At the beginning of the 1980s, the physical output of many key commodities in the Soviet Union equaled or exceeded that of the United States . The Soviet Union's output of major industrial commodities to the point where at the start of the . 1980s .
 Steady deceleration in the growth of the Soviet economy . On the other hand, there also was Steady Deceleration . The Soviet economy also grew steadily in the 1980s .
 The average annual growth of GNP declined from the peak of 5. percent during 1966-70 to 3.% during 1971-75, to 2.0% during 1976-80, and to an estimated 2.3% during 1981-82 . GNP fell from 5.
 Steady deceleration in the growth of living standards . Average annual growth of per capita consumption declining from a peak of 4. percent during 1966-70 to 2.0 percent during 1971-75 .
 Over the eighteenyear period the average growth rate of GNP originating in agriculture amounted to only 1. percent . Over the same period, the average GNP originated in agriculture grew only 1 percent .
 Lack of growth of agricultural productivity both in absolute terms and in relative terms vis-a-vis the U.S. The United States is the only country with the lowest productivity in the world .
 Brezhnev's reign was characterized by the highest priority being given to the growth of investment and defense spending except during the period 1964-70 . The highest priority was given to growth of defense spending and investment during the era of the Soviet Union .
 Per capita consumption of an average Soviet citizen today is still not much more than one-third that in the United States. As a result, the per capita consumption is still less than one third that of U.S. citizens .
 The facts and the statistics seemed reasonably reliable, but explanations of them differed . But while the facts and statistics seemed reliable, explanations of those differed .
 Possibly the most important issue was to what extent Soviet economic difficulties were of a temporary and relatively remediable character and what extent they were intrinsic to the system . The most important question is whether the economic difficulties in the Soviet Union were temporary and remediable .
 For the system to survive, it needed to be more responsive to the needs and wishes of the population . For the future, the system must be responsive to people's wishes, the government says .
 Economic policies paid much more attention than in the past to raising the material standard of living . This was especially evident, as we have seen, in economic policies, which paid more attention .
 The renunciation of terror was another essential step away from the past, writes CNN.com's John Defterios . "The renunciation was another important step away," he says .
 Stalin's death and especially Beria's fall in the summer of 1953 resulted in a considerable diminution in the role and power of the political police . Stalin’s death and the fall of Beria in 1953 led to a much diminished role of the police .
 Immediate steps were taken to assure the population, and especially the party, that terror would no longer be part of the Soviet system of rule . The Soviet Union was forced to end terror in order to protect the population .
 New regulations and supervisory structures limited the autonomy of the political police . The political police are still in charge of the country's police force .
 Work began on a new legal code, promulgated in 1958, which offered citizens more legal protections . Immediate work began on the new code .
 Khrushchev's 1956 speech castigated the state’s security apparatus for mistakes and crimes, leading to the posthumous vindication (rehabilitation) of some of its victims .
 Thousands of political prisoners were released from the notorious Gulag of forced labor camps . Thousands, perhaps millions, were released in the Gulag .
 It seems that Soviet citizens gradually lost the immediate and all-pervasive dread of the political police that they had acquired under Stalin . It seems to have lost the dread of political police under the Soviet regime .
 Stalin’s death was also followed by some relaxation of party control in the field of culture . As we shall see in a later chapter, we will also see how the party relaxed its control of culture in Russia .
 Khrushchev’s denunciation of the late dictator in itself suggested the need for a thorough reevaluation of a great many former assumptions and assertions .
 For a number of months in 1956 some Soviet writers exercised remarkable freedom in their approach to Soviet reality and criticism of it .
 Restrictions were lifted after the Polish crisis and the Hungarian uprising in the autumn of that year . Restrictions reappeared after the outbreak of the Polish and Hungarian crises .
 Khrushchev’s successors assumed a much harder line against dissent, as illustrated by the arrest, trial, and sentencing of Andrei Siniavsky and lulii Daniel in 1965 .
 The amount of covert opposition and bitterness that this control and the Soviet system in general created can only be surmised . It is not known how much covert opposition was created by this system .
 Uprisings against Communist regimes took place not only in East Germany, Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Hungary, but also in the USSR itself . They were mainly to protest food shortages, price increases and other changes in living and working conditions .
 These included uprisings in the Vorkuta and Kengir forced-labor camps in 1953 and 1954 . Workers’ uprising in Novocherkassk, Kazakhstan, in 1962 .
 The government invariably responded to these protests with severe repression . The government always responded to the protests by violent repression .
 The thawing of Soviet society and the emerging of opposition views gave rise to blossoming of samizdat . Self-published, illegally produced, reproduced, and distributed literature was self-published .
 The opposition was harassed and suppressed in many ways, including on occasion incarceration in dreadful mental hospitals . The late Andrei Sakharov’s, progressive, generally Westernized, views and the late . Andrei Amalrik's personal, catastrophic, almost Chaadaev-like
 The Gulag volumes are likely to be linked as indissolubly to the way we remember the Russia of Stalin . Pushkin's Eugene Onegin and Turgenev’s Gentry Nest have been linked to the landed gentry .
 The opposition remained a highly troublesome element in Soviet society but also a sign of the complexity of that society and of its own sources for change . Isolated, weak, armed only with a belief in individual moral regeneration, the opposition remained .
 Jewish self-affirmation, protest, and massive migration to Israel (about 235,000 emigrants up to 1985, some 10 percent of the total Jewish population of the USSR) represented another development to disturb the post-Stalin Soviet scene .
 The decision to let dissatisfied Soviet citizens leave raises more questions for the Soviet system than it settled . One suspects that the decision was made to solve the immediate problem of dealing with those people and responding to world public opinion .
 Their alienation from Soviet society was little different from those of their non-Jewish fellow citizens . Their alienation is little different than that of non-Jews in Soviet society .
 The former Draconian regulations had made a virtually impenetrable ‘iron curtain’ between the Soviet people and the outside world . Soviet authorities began to welcome tourists, including Americans, and allow increasing numbers of their citizens to travel abroad .
 Always strong on organization, they arranged numerous “cultural exchanges,” ranging from advanced study in many fields of learning to motion pictures .
 Soviet scientists, scholars, athletes, dancers, and musicians, not to mention the astronauts, drew deserved attention in many countries of the world . Soviet scientists and scholars, scholars and athletes, among them, were well-known .
 Soviet citizens welcomed distinguished visitors from the West and vigorously applauded their performances . At the same time Soviet citizens welcome distinguished visitors to the West .
 Soviet citizens were becoming better acquainted with the West and the world . Bit by bit, Soviet citizens began to become more aware of the West . The Soviet Union was losing its grip on the West in the 1980s .
 Soviet foreign policy became much more nuanced and complex after Stalin’s death . Foreign Relations and the Cold War Soviet foreign relations became more nuanced after Stalin's death .
 The simple view of the world as filled with enemies was replaced, in Ted Hopf’s words, “by a continuum of difference” that recognized a wide range of different interests and positions among nations, but also by recognition that some difference was not harmful to the Soviet
 This led to greater tolerance of divergence within the Communist bloc, though only to a point, and to the new dogma that the capitalist and socialist worlds could coexist and resolve their differences without war . The new dogma led to the belief that the socialist and capitalist worlds could .
 Stalinist approach would lead to new conflicts, he says . At the same time, greater flexibility and tolerance reflected also greater self-confidence and security .
 The Soviet Union viewed itself, with good cause, as a “great power” with its own sphere of influence and interests . The USSR viewed itself as a "great power" with own spheres of influence .
 The Soviet Union hoped to expand this sphere by fomenting socialist revolutions in other countries, which hopefully would bring them new allies . Indeed, the Soviet Union was hoping to expand its sphere of influence in the world .
 Still, this domination was handled, most of the time, with far more subtlety and effectiveness than in the past . Still, it was handled by the government with far less subtlety than the past, the president says .
 Stalin's death and Malenkov’s assumption of the leading role in the Soviet Union immediately marked some lessening of international tensions as well as some relaxation at home . The death of Stalin and the assumed leadership of the USSR marked a lessening in international tensions .
 In the spring of 1954 an international conference ended the war in Indo-China by partitioning it between the Communist Vietminh in the north and the independent state of Vietnam in the south .
 The Soviet Union had not participated directly in the Indo-Chinese conflict, but that local war had threatened to become a wider conflagration . Its termination enhanced the chances of world peace, according to the historian .
 In January 1954, the Council of Foreign Ministers of the four powers met in Berlin to discuss the German and Austrian treaties, but without result . The treaty was inoperative for a long time, but was never resolved .
 The Soviet Union joined the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization, or UNESCO, in April . The USSR joined UNESCO, the International Labor Organization, and the International Economic and Scientific Organization, that April .
 Malenkov spoke of a further improvement of international relations and of a summit meeting . The two countries will hold a further summit meeting this year .
 Even moderate relaxation had its dangers for the Soviet bloc became, however, quickly apparent . That a policy of even moderate relaxation was quickly apparent, however .
 In early June 1953, demonstrations and strikes erupted in Czechoslovakia, assuming a dangerous form in Pilsen . Rioters seized city hall and demanded free elections .
 In the middle of the month East Berlin and other centers in East Germany rose in a rebellion spearheaded by workers . Workers proclaimed a general strike in East Berlin . The rebellion was led by workers who proclaimed a General strike .
 Beria’s fall that summer might have been affected by these developments, for the police chief had stressed relaxation and legality since the death of Stalin . Beria's fall might have affected his fall, for example .
 Malenkov’s resignation from the premiership in February 1955 ended the role of that former favorite of Stalin on the world scene . The resignation of the former prime minister in 1955 ended his role .
 Bulganin, who replaced Malenkov as head of government, became the most prominent Soviet figure in international affairs . He usually traveled in the company of and acted jointly with party chief, Khrushchev .
 The Soviet Union paid special court to India and other neutralist countries . Neutralist countries had been condemned as lackeys of imperialism .
 At the same time the two Soviet leaders claimed to be ready to settle the points at issue with the U.S. and the West . At the time, Soviet leaders said they were ready to solve the issues with the United States .
 In May 1955 the great powers managed to come to an agreement and conclude a peace treaty with Austria . The treaty included the permanent neutralization of that state as well as certain Austrian payments and deliveries to the USSR .
 The height of the détente was reached at the summit conference in Geneva in July 1955 . The summit conference was held in Geneva .
 Both Bulganin and Eisenhower insisted that their countries would never engage in aggressive action . While no concrete problems were solved at that meeting, the discussion took place in a remarkably cordial atmosphere .
 Following month Soviet authorities announced a reduction of their armed forces by 640,000 men . The following month they announced a further reduction of 640,500 men .
 The “spirit of Geneva” proved to be an enticing dream rather than a reality . The ‘spirit of the Geneva’ was a dream, but it was a disappointment .
 Since the rapproachement between the USSR and the West failed to last, the polarization of the world continued . Since the Soviet-West rapproach failed, the polarizing world continued, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Great Britain, France, Pakistan, and Thailand joined the four countries already allied, the United States, Australia, New Zealand, and the Philippines, to establish a new barrier to Communist expansion .
 West Germany rose steadily in importance as an American ally and a member of the Western coalition . In Europe, West Germany became an important ally of the United States .
 The Soviet Union in turn concluded the so-called Warsaw Treaty with its satellites in May 1955 to unify the Communist military command in Europe . The treaty was signed by the Soviet Union and its satellites .
 The first sign of a new policy toward the rest of the socialist world came when Khrushchev, Bulganin, and a large delegation visited Belgrade to essentially admit Stalin’s mistakes in his intolerance of Tito .
 As long as Belgrade accepted its status as a younger brother to the Soviet Union, this would become a source of tension . Moscow would tolerate their different approach to socialist construction . Belgrade would have to accept its different approach .
 Molotov was replaced as foreign minister by Shepilov, who opposed softer policies . In April 1956, the Cominform was dissolved, and Molotsov was replaced by the foreign minister . Molotkov was replaced in April 1956 as foreign secretary by Shepherov .
 Khrushchev’s not-so-secret speech in February 1956, which was summarized or even read at meetings of Communists in eastern Europe, was a particular stimulus of trouble . The speech was read at Communist meetings of eastern Europe .
 Moscow's recognition of Stalin's errors and crimes seemed to authorize demands for systemic reform . Moscow’s recognition of the crimes and crimes seems to have authorized demands for reform .
 Political explosions in Poland and Hungary reflected changing conditions in the country . Political explosions reflected these rapidly changing conditions . Poland's political explosion in Hungary and Poland reflected these changes .
 In late June 1956, workers took to the streets in the city of Poznan . In Poland, in the late 1950s, workers were protesting against the government .
 Scores of people were killed when Polish troops were sent against them . Scores of Poles were killed during the Polish invasion .
 Polish intellectuals were calling for a relaxation of controls . At the same time, Polish intellectuals called for a relax of controls on the internet .
 In October, Wladyslaw Gomulka, who had been imprisoned as a “reactionary,” was reinstated as party secretary . Khrushchev and other Soviet leaders flew to Warsaw to settle the crisis .
 The day after the Soviet leaders left, hundreds of thousands of people took to the streets in Warsaw in support of Gomulka . Hundreds of thousands were in Warsaw the day after they left .
 In July, Moscow sent Mikoyan, a supporter of Khrushchev’s de-Stalinization, to Budapest to remove Rakosi . Rakosi was a Soviet-era ally of the late Soviet leader .
 By October, demonstrators in the streets were demanding the restoration of Nagy to power . Demonstrators were demanding withdrawal of Soviet troops from the country and freedom of speech .
 Nagy was restored, but the demonstrations continued and grew increasingly violent . Nagy is restored but demonstrations continued to grow increasingly violent as students encountered security forces .
 Nagy formed a coalition government that included non-Communists in October . Nagy began negotiations to withdraw Hungary from the Warsaw Pact . At the end of October, Nagy announced the withdrawal .
 This could spread through the whole region, and give opportunity to the Western powers . This could give them an opportunity to help the region, writes Peter Bergen .
 Mikoyan reported from Budapest that the Hungarian army could not be relied upon to restore order . The Hungarian army is not expected to be relied on to help restore order, he said .
 On November 4, Soviet tanks and troops began their assault on Budapest, the center of the rebellion . Budapest was the site of the uprising against the Soviet Union .
 Witnesses describe brutality as soldiers attacked anyone on the streets and tanks fired at buildings . Witnesses describe great brutality as troops attacked anyone .
 The moral shock of the Hungarian intervention stimulated Western hostility toward the Soviet Union . Although the Western powers were reluctant to intervene, the moral shock prompted Western hostility .
 Khrushchev’s behavior on the international scene showed a certain pattern, writes David Frum . Frum says the Russian leader's behavior showed a pattern .
 He remained intransigent, pushing every advantage he had, be it troubles in newly independent states, such as the Congo, or Soviet achievements in armaments and space technology .
 He talked incessantly in favor of coexistence and summit conferences to settle outstanding issues . Nevertheless, he said incessantly that coexistence was possible .
 He paid friendly visits to many countries, including the U.S. in 1959 . Also visited the United States in 1959, and visited many countries .
 The summit conference in the summer of 1960 was never held . Two weeks before it was scheduled to begin Khrushchev announced that an American U-2 spy plane had been brought down deep in Soviet territory .
 In 1961 Khrushchev met the new American president, John F Kennedy, in Vienna . But in 1961 he met Kennedy in Vienna, Austria, to meet him again .
 The fall, Soviet authorities came to assert, would occur without a world war . But that fall, they said, would happen without a war . The fall of the Soviet Union was declared a success .
 Khrushchev overreached himself and brought the world to the brink of a thermonuclear war . The confrontation between the U.S. and the USSR in October 1962 over the Soviet missiles in Cuba resulted in a stunning Soviet defeat . In the autumn of that same year, however
 The outcome strengthened the argument for peaceful coexistence and emphasized caution and consultation in foreign policy . Washington and Moscow have a "hot line," symbolized by the celebrated “hot line” between Washington and Russia .
 The Soviet Union proceeded to measure carefully its reactions and its involvement even in such complicated and entangling crises as the IsraeliArab wars of 1967 and 1973 and the Vietnam War . It was the Soviet Union .
 In the latter conflict, the Soviet Union denounced “American imperialism” and provided valuable matériel to North Vietnam, but it avoided escalation . The Soviet Union provided valuable material but avoided escalation in the conflict .
 Following the complete victory of communism in Indo-China in 1975, the Soviet Union might have felt that it had a freer hand on the international stage, in Angola or elsewhere . Yet, following the shattering impact of the catastrophic American policy in Vietnam on the American public on the U.
 With the Soviet Union as well as the United States acquiring a secondstrike capability, that is, the ability to retaliate and inflict ‘unacceptable damage” on the enemy after absorbing a nuclear blow, a true balance of terror settled on the world .
 Ever-improving technology made virtually all established strategic concepts obsolete . Ever-better-ever-better technology made almost all established strategies obsolete .
 Numerous bases and indeed whole sections of the globe lost their importance in terms of the possible ultimate showdown between the two nuclear giants . Numerous bases, indeed sections, were lost in the possible showdown between them .
 From the mid-1970s it was authoritatively estimated in the West that the USSR had caught up with the United States in overall nuclear military strength . Evidence available since 1991 has led some specialists to conclude that these estimates were based on successful Soviet efforts to exaggerate the size and effectiveness of
 The enormous economic burden, terror, and inconclusiveness of the arms race did not lead to a full negotiated settlement . Yet the enormous economic burdens and terror of the weapons race led to an arms race, the author says .
 The nuclear nonproliferation agreement was signed by the two superpowers and other states in early 1968 . Following the earlier banning of nuclear tests in the atmosphere, the agreement was agreed in 1968 .
 1975 witnessed the celebrated joint effort of the Russians and the Americans . Other agreements were reached concerning outer space, where 1975 witnessed joint effort .
 The crucial issue of military limitations itself was tackled in numerous negotiations, but these remained inconclusive . Negotiations were also inconclusive over the issue of limitations .
 The difficulty in the negotiations resided not only in the complex of aims, attitudes, and policies of the two superpowers, but also in the nature of scientific and technological advance, which rapidly makes prearranged schemes of limitation obsolete .
 Détente scored a resounding success at the Helsinki conference in the summer of 1975 . Western countries accepted in effect the Communist redrawing of the map of central and eastern Europe following the Second World War in exchange for promises of greater contacts between the two worlds .
 A comprehensive economic agreement between the USSR and the U.S. failed over the questions of the most favored nation clause, credits, and the fate of Soviet Jews . But a comprehensive economic deal between the two countries failed .
 Before long détente was again swamped by new international developments, to be detailed later in this chapter . Furthermore, before long, new developments were also being discussed .
 Soviet leaders found welcome in Gaullist France and other capitalist countries, but their standing in the Communist world deteriorated . Soviet-American relations improved and became more stable after the Cuban confrontation .
 The conflict with China broke out into the open around 1960 and widened and deepened thereafter . The conflict between China and the U.S. broke out in the 1960s .
 The withdrawal of Soviet personnel from China in August of that year and the discontinuance of assistance . relations between the two countries quickly became extremely antagonistic . Relations between China and the Soviet Union quickly became antagonistic.
 China became an atomic power and formulated large claims on Soviet Asian territory . Moreover, China became a major player in the Cold War .
 International crises such as the war in Vietnam only intensified the hostility between the two great Communist states . Observers noted that international crises such a war in which Vietnam was defeated only intensified tensions .
 Although China remained far behind the USSR in industrial and technological development, it was still viewed as posing a major threat to the Soviet Union in the future, if not in the immediate present .
 The twelve years that followed the suppression of the Hungarian revolution witnessed Soviet attempts to adjust to changing times, to allow for a Communist pluralism with a considerable measure of institutional and eventually even ideological diversity .
 In Zbigniew Brzezinski’'s phrase, satellites were to become junior allies . Satellites were to be junior allies, he said .
 Even Tito usually received a kind of fraternal recognition, and he spoke with authority . Tito was known for his role in World War II . He was assassinated in 1968 .
 East European countries proceeded with de-Stalinization, economic liberalization, and other important changes . Yet tensions persisted and indeed increased, both between the different East . countries and the Soviet Union .
 Romania under its new leader, Nicolae Ceausescu, showed a remarkable independence from the Soviet Union . Romania remained barely within the Communist bloc and continued a hard-line policy at home .
 The 'Prague Spring' of 1968 saw armed intervention by Soviet troops into a ‘fraternal’ socialist country . Then came the ”Prague spring” of 1968 and another armed intervention . The Prague Spring was the first uprising in Czechoslovakia .
 In the years before 1968, there was a growing desire among Czechoslovak intellectuals and reformist party members for more rapid de-Stalinization and reform . Czechoslovakia fell into disarray in 1968 after the fall of communism .
 Brezhnev supported removing unpopular party leader Antonin Novotny, who was replaced by a representative of the reformist wing of the party, Alexander Dubéek . After a visit to Prague at the end of the 1967, he supported removing the unpopular leader of the Communist Party
 Dubtek announced a dramatic program of change that included freedom of the press, reducing the power of the political police, greater market freedom in the economy, and, after a transition period, free elections . Dubtek said it would be a "revolutionary state of democracy"
 The reforms were confirmed and extended at a party congress . They led to consternation in the governing circles of the Soviet Union, East Germany, Poland, and Bulgaria .
 The Soviet leaders tried to limit the reforms, and an unprecedented face-to-face discussion between the members of the Politburos of the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia seemed to resolve the conflict . The Soviets and Czechs agreed to limit reforms .
 On August 20, Soviet troops, assisted by the troops of Warsaw Pact allies, invaded Czechoslovakia with half a million soldiers and occupied the country . The invasion took place in the summer of 1968 . The Czech Republic was invaded by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 By now it was clear that the Soviet Union was determined to insist on the control of dissent, maintenance of a planned economy, and subordination to the Union .
 The repercussions of the intervention lasted long after the summer of 1968 and not only in the emergence of the Brezhnev doctrine . The repercussions for the intervention were long after that summer, 1968 .
 More European socialists turned away from the Soviet Union after 1968 . Western powers grew increasingly wary of the communist state .
 Evidence of a crisis in the Communist world may have been in Poland, though . Economic stagnation, social discontent, political alienation, and resentment of Soviet domination pointed to the eventual collapse of Soviet power in eastern Europe .
 In the late 1970s, after dissident intellectuals offered support to striking workers, a unique alliance of workers and intellectuals emerged . The alliance would become a major threat to Communist power in Poland and beyond .
 It has been argued that this movement, out of which the ‘Solidarity’ trade union would emerge, was the beginning of the end of Communist rule in eastern Europe . Indeed, it was argued that it was the start of the . end of the Communist rule .
 Already in the 1970s, a growing underground of labor and dissident organizations and publications began to develop . The underground of dissident groups and publications was developed in 1970s .
 His visit to Poland a year later has been described by participants as a brief national festival of liberation . A year later, he visited Poland again, a year after his visit .
 President Obama spoke openly of the need for human rights and national and religious freedom . He spoke openly about the need to human rights .
 Pope's spiritual and moral stature as Pope and his support for change inspired many Poles . Pope's support of change inspired Poles to become more powerful and more influential in the world .
 The government hesitated to suppress the opposition, in part at least, because of Poland’s heavy dependence on continuing Western loans, which were required to keep the troubled economy solvent . Poland's heavy reliance on Western loans is needed to keep Poland's troubled economy afloat .
 In the wake of a massive and successful strike of workers at the Lenin Shipyard in Gdansk, a nationwide independent labor union calling itself “Solidarity” was established . The union was led by electrician and labor activist Lech Walesa .
 Solidarity took the form of a social movement seeking fundamental change, Solidarity . Solidarity is now a movement for fundamental change in the United States .
 Thousands of opposition publications are being printed without censorship . The government was effectively losing control of the situation, the government says .
 Moscow had reliable allies able to command a strong armed force . But rather than an invasion, a military coup was planned, for this time Moscow had allies .
 The coup took place, in close cooperation with the Soviet authorities, on December 13, 1981 . The coup was carried out in a joint effort to overthrow the government .
 General Wojciech Jaruzelski was simultaneously minister of defense, prime minister, and first secretary of the party . He had been given increasing authority in the preceding months . Jaruzelki was the leader of the Polish Party .
 He declared martial law, created a ruling Military Council of National Salvation . Arrested Solidarity’s leaders and supporters, and expanded censorship .
 "From a military standpoint, the operation was carried out rather effectively. Active resistance against the overwhelming force of the regime was quite limited," says President Bashar Assad's spokesman .
 The ‘success’ of General Jaruzelski’s junta was very dubious . Nevertheless, the “success” of the junta is very dubious, he says .
 Thousands of Solidarity activists, including Walesa and other dissidents, were arrested and placed in internment camps . Some leaders of the movement escaped arrest and an underground opposition formed .
 Western sanctions and passive resistance to the regime were making the task of running the country extremely difficult for the Jaruzelski regime . Western economic sanctions and continuing passive resistance made the task very difficult for Jaruzelki regime, he says .
 The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in late December 1979 may have been the most damaging decision of the Brezhnev era . The invasion may have damaged the Soviet Union's international reputation and for the Soviet system itself .
 The invasion was in support of a Communist government in Afghanistan that had overthrown a military dictator in 1978 . The invasion included collectivization of agriculture, unveiling and educating women, attacking influential religious leaders .
 The radical measures stimulated an Islamic rebellion that threatened the Afghan government . They also raised the specter of Islamic uprisings in Central Asia and elsewhere in the Soviet Union .
 In the wake of the invasion, the United States took a much harsher stance toward the Soviet Union . The U.S. offered material support to the rebels in the Soviet invasion .
 The brutal ten-year war became a “bleeding wound,” as Gorbachev would call it before ending the war in failure in 1989 . The brutal decade-long war was a ‘bleeding . wound’
 The mujahideen rebels enjoyed much popular support and operated on rugged lands they knew well . Soviet losses were enormous .
 About 14,000 soldiers died during the war and a great many more were wounded and disabled . The war was one of the most bloody years of the Great Depression in Europe .
 As of 1985, tension between the Soviet Union and the United States, the East and the West was not confined to the crucial problems of Afghanistan and Poland .
 The two sides opposed each other all over the world, from Central America to southern Africa, Lebanon, and Cambodia . Rather than opposing each other, the two sides were opposed to each other .
 Western European countries continued to support the building of a natural-gas pipeline from western Siberia to western Europe . U.S. objections and sanctions against particular companies have led to the pipeline's demise .
 The Soviets were prepared to proceed with the installation of U.S. middle-range missiles to counteract the already established Soviet ones . The installation was most especially opposed for years by Brezhnev .
 The very important Soviet-American disarmament negotiations remained deadlocked . Soviet-U.S. disarmament talks were deadlocked at the time .
 SALT II was not ratified by the United States Senate, and its future chances appeared slim . The future chances were slim, especially after the departure of Carter from the presidency .
 Critics accused the tougher anti-Soviet policies of the Reagan administration of largely precluding adjustment and agreement . In fact, numerous critics accused the anti-Russian policies of Reagan administration .
 Reagan’s tough stance was responsible for the collapse of communism, writes Andrew Hammond . Reagan's tough stance is not shared by most historians, he says .
 With his crimson banner, symbol of struggle, Beacon of salvation for the oppressed, We will crush the yoke of fate, And capture enchanting paradise, We said . With his red banner, . symbol of . struggle, we will crush . fate, we said .
 The Soviet people put their heart and soul into their work. That is why the Soviet people had to do so much . That's why they put their hearts and soul in their work, he says .
 Socialist realism is the basic method of Soviet literature and literary criticism . Socialist realism was the basis of Soviet literary criticism in 1936 .
 "It demands of the artist the truthful, historically concrete depiction of reality in its revolutionary development," says the artist . "The artist must be truthful and historically concrete"
 The truthfulness and historical concreteness of the artistic depiction of reality must be linked with the task of ideologically remolding and educating the working people in the spirit of socialism . Moreover, the truthfulness of the . historical conculteness of . the artistic . depiction of . reality must
 The moral and ethical significance of the emergence of the human rights movement in the USSR in the 1960s is huge . Despite the small numbers of people involved and a certain apocalypticism, the movement is huge, notwithstanding small numbers .
 It created the mental preconditions for democratic transformation in the USSR and for the development of an ideology of human rights worldwide . It changed the moral climate and created the . development of a . ideology of a human rights ideology worldwide .
 The Communist regime imposed a remarkable degree of social and cultural homogeneity across this vast land . Despite the enormous size, huge population, and tremendous ethnic and cultural variety among the peoples of the USSR, the Communist regime succeeded in imposing a remarkable social homogeneity .
 In the 1930s, writers were actually called “engineers of human souls” that embraced society and culture as well as politics and economics . Thus, we can interpret Soviet social and cultural history as a story of totalitarian human engineering .
 For these years also saw sudden shifts in social and cultural policy, a great deal of imagination and experimentation, widespread enthusiasm for the new, and much disorientation, disappointment, and discontent . For many years, there were sudden shifts and sudden shifts .
 It is precisely in social and cultural life that we begin to see signs of the disintegration of the Communist order that would contribute to its collapse in 1991 . The Communist order was disintegrated in the social, cultural life of the Soviet Union .
 Its membership was estimated at the surprisingly low figure of less than 25,000 in 1917 . It passed the half million mark in 1921 and the million mark of membership in the late 1920s .
 Many Communists perished in the war, many new members were admitted into the party, especially from frontline units . Many new members of the Communist Party were admitted to the party .
 Postwar recruitment drives further augmented party membership to between 7 and 9 million in the immediate postwar years . As many as 13 million in 1967, more than 16 million in 1978, and almost 20 million in 1980s .
 Little Octobrists for young children, Pioneers for those aged nine to fifteen . Union of Communist Youth, or Komsomol, with members between 14 and twenty-six .
 The first two organizations, and eventually even the Komsomol, acted as party agencies for the general education of the younger Soviet generations, opening their doors wide .
 From the official standpoint, Soviet society had only one ideology and only one outlook, the Communist . Citizens and groups of citizens differed solely in the degree to which they embodied it .
 The word parttinost, usually translated as “party-mindedness,” summarized the essential quality of a Communists life and work . Parttinost is the name of a Communist Party member .
 Party members were expected throughout their lives to continue their own education in Marxism-Leninism . In particular, they were expected to carry out party directives to the letter and influence those with whom they came in contact .
 It constituted in effect the greatest single mark of status, importance, and, above all, of being an ‘insider” in the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was the place to be seen as an outsider .
 Almost all prominent figures in the country were members of the Communist Party . Although, many Soviet Communists were people of no special significance .
 After the Second World War special efforts were made to assure that such fields as university teaching and scientific research were largely in the hands of the Communists .
 It became much easier for outstanding people to join the party. Conversely, it became much harder for outstanding members of the party to join .
 Before 1917, the party of the proletariat had a largely bourgeois leadership and a relatively small mass following . The party had a relatively large mass following before 1917 .
 During and after the revolution, large numbers of workers entered the ranks of the Communist Party . Special recruitment campaigns were organized to increase proletarian membership .
 With the stabilization of the Soviet system and the inauguration of the five-year plans, the “Soviet intelligentsia,” in particular technical and administrative personnel of all sorts, became prominent . The Soviet system was stabilized and the plans were launched in 1953 .
 On eve of the Second World War the party was described as composed of 50 percent workers, 20 percent peasants, and 30 percent intelligentsia, with the last group on the increase .
 Social origin became less significant with time, and authorities tried to bring all prominent people into the party . That increase continued after the war, as social origin became more significant .
 It might be noted that, in relation to their numbers, peasants were poorly represented . This indicates the difficulty the Communists experienced in permeating the countryside .
 The proportion of women increased up to about one-quarter of the membership of the party . The party has seen an increase in women in recent years .
 The structure rose from level to level to culminate in periodic party congresses . Party congresses were important events in Soviet history, and in the permanently active Central Committee .
 Communists were supposed to provide supervision and inspiration . Communists made it their business to see that no undesirable trends developed and that production goals were fulfilled . At every step, from an individual factory/or collective farm to the ministries and other superior governing agencies, Communists would provide supervision .
 At higher government levels, as already indicated, the entire personnel consisted of Communists . This did not eliminate party vigilance and control of the Communist Party .
 In general, rotation between full-time government positions and party administrative positions was common . Party members were in charge of government positions .
 Stalin’s dictatorial power had grown to such enormous proportions that it had even cast a shadow over the party itself . It should be noted that the guiding role of the party asserted itself with increased force after Stalin's death, for the .
 The Revolution was inspired by a hatred of the old dominant classes, which led to widespread assaults on their property and position and sometimes on their persons . The revolution was in many ways inspired by the hatred .
 The result was a rapid and sweeping leveling of traditional Russian society . The result of the result was the rapid rise of traditional Russia society .
 The landowning gentry, for centuries the top social group in Russia, disappeared rapidly in 1917 and 1918 . Landowners were seized by peasants as peasants seized their land and often demolished homes .
 Workers seized control of many businesses and then when the Bolsheviks nationalized finance, industry, and trade . The upper bourgeoisie, financial, industrial, and commercial, was eliminated when workers seized control .
 Lower bourgeoisie staged a remarkable comeback during the years of the New Economic Policy . The middle and especially the lower bourgeoisie, to be sure, staged a comeback .
 The final destruction came with the implementation of the five-year plans . Their final destruction was the destruction of the plans themselves .
 If the gentry occupied the stage in Russia too long, the bourgeoisie was cut down before it came into its own . The gentry were cut down by the bourgeoisie before they came into their own, says historian John Macdonald .
 The clergy, monks and nuns, and other people associated with the Church constituted yet another group to suffer harsh persecution, although in their case it stopped short of complete annihilation .
 The old intelligentsia was deeply fractured by the revolution . Finally, the old intellectuals were deeply fractured, writes David Frum . Frum says the revolution was a victory for Russia .
 Many intellectuals and writers embraced the revolution and participated actively in building socialism . Many would perish in Stalin's terror. Many would be killed by Stalin's brutal terror.
 Many opposed the new regime as a violation of liberal and humanistic values . The Communists distrusted and persecuted the old upper classes, from which most had come . But many opposed it because they had come from the upper classes .
 We can say that the intelligentsia as an independent and critical force in Russian life was no more. Indeed, we can say, we . say that we can . say . Indeed, it is no more than that, it's a sign that Russia is not ready to embrace the
 There was no place outside the establishment for independent and intellectually engaged individuals who stood opposed, as a matter of absolute principle, to everything that restricted and harmed the human personality . There was 'no place outside of the establishment'
 In time, especially after Stalin’s death, we see again the rise of an independent and critical intelligentsia opposed to the status quo. Yet, in time, we will see again, especially in time after Stalin's death, the author writes .
 Traditional Marxism envisioned socialism coming to an urbanized and industrialized society . The Soviet Union was for most of its history a land of peasants .
 Only in the mid-1960s did the number of city dwellers finally exceed the number living in the countryside . City dwellers began to live in cities in the 1960s .
 Even in the final years of the Soviet Union, the rural population still numbered almost a third of the total . The rural population was still a large part of the country's population .
 In the two demographic catastrophes of Soviet history, peasants—and peasants as soldiers—suffered the most, dying by the millions . The Second World War and collectivization are associated with the deaths of peasants and soldiers .
 On the one hand, Bolsheviks believed themselves to be acting in the name of ‘the people,” that is, of the workers and peasants . On the other hand, the Bolsheviks were acting in defense of “the people” on both sides .
 Marxists viewed peasants (with the possible exception of semi-proletarianized ‘poor peasants”) as petit bourgeois property owners . Marxists thought peasants would support the building of communism only after they were fully proletarianized by leaving the countryside or once agriculture had been transformed
 Lenin’s original endorsement of the peasant seizure of land had great appeal in the countryside . Lenin understood this to be a necessary but temporary “compromise with peasant desires.”
 The rural masses proved reasonably well inclined toward the new regime and on the whole apparently preferred it to the Whites during the Civil War . Influenced by the Bolshevik land policy and by revolutionary soldiers returning home—a point effectively emphasized by Oliver Radkey—the new regime .
 The Bolsheviks tried to split the peasants, inciting the poor against the betteroff . Besides, the Bolsheviks also tried to incite the peasants against each other .
 During NEP, the official policy was one of smychka, of the ‘bond’ uniting the proletariat with the peasants . The official policy of NEP was to unify the proletariat and the peasants.
 Rural soviets, staffed by urban Communists along with some poor peasants, competed with the traditional power of the peasant commune . Rural sovets were staffed with urban Communists and poor peasants . Urban Communists competed with traditional power in rural areas .
 Communists tried to organize the poorer peasants against the richer kulaks, though this required greatly exaggerating the actual extent of social differentiation in the villages . Communists also tried to exaggerate the extent of the social differentiation .
 Communists found this gentle approach to peasants distasteful and dangerous . Many Communists called for a more aggressive policy toward the traditional peasantry . But many Communists found it distastefully and dangerous to the traditional peasants .
 The First Five-Year Plan resulted in such an all-out offensive against the peasantry, often framed in the language of class war and proletarianization, as well as class war . It was often framed as a class war against peasants .
 Countless peasants, recalcitrant or relatively prosperous or simply unlucky, populated forced-labor camps . The camps were filled with peasants and laborers .
 The peasants, in spite of their resistance, were finally pushed and pulled into collectives . But, as we know, the peasants, as well as their resistance to collectives, were pushed into collective .
 A typical member of a kolkhoz was a new phenomenon in Russian history . The typical member was a member of the typical member, a new Russian history.
 The novelty resided not in peasant poverty nor in the heavy exactions imposed on peasant labor, but in the minute state organization and control of work and life, the novelty resided in the novelty .
 While peasants profited from certain Soviet policies, some of them rose to higher stations in society . The bulk of the rural masses remained miserable and at times miserable .
 Soviet peasants supported the five-year plans by their labor, as already explained . Soviet peasants received very little in return for their labor .
 An urban worker and a peasant and his son are shown in stereotypical dress . A peasant and an urban worker are shown wearing stereotypical dress.
 The party and the government continued their social engineering, as well as the increase in the size of the collective farms, the abortive agrogoroda, and the temporary emphasis on the sovkhoz form of agriculture, among other things .
 Communists were not likely to relax until peasants disappeared as a separate group, having been integrated into a completely industrialized economy . Indeed, from their point of view, they would not relax until they had been integrated in an industrialized society .
 That revolution was made in their name, and they gave the new regime its greatest social support . That revolution is made in the name of the revolution, and it was made of their support .
 Upward social mobility for workers was an essential part of the new system, says the government . Upwards social mobility is essential to the success of the social mobility of workers, he says .
 Large numbers of workers and Communists of working-class origin were promoted into more responsible positions in the economy, the administration, the military, and the party . Workers and Communists were promoted .
 Many received special training to become engineers and other technical specialists . Many were trained to be engineers and technical specialists.
 Many prominent people throughout Soviet life, including much of the post-Stalin ruling class, owed their positions to this policy of proletarian promotion .
 Soviet industrialization created a much larger labor force than ever before in Russian history . The Soviet Union's labor force was created by the Soviet state of mind .
 The peasants of yesterday became the workers of today. In huge numbers, the peasants of today became workers of tomorrow. The peasants became workers today.
 Whether the condition of workers in the Soviet Union improved compared to tsarist times is difficult to measure . Even more difficult is to judge how the conditions of working-class life would have developed had there been no revolution and capitalism survived .
 On the one hand, Soviet workers certainly benefited materially from communism, especially as the economy grew and stabilized . On the other hand, the Soviet workers benefited materially, especially from the economy .
 An extensive welfare state provided workers, and all Soviet citizens, with free medical care, subsidized prices for basic foods, job protection, vacation and travel opportunities, and guaranteed pensions . Soviet citizens were protected by the welfare state, including virtually no unemployment .
 Real wages were low, especially in the early years, for industrial development . Industrial development was made possible by directing resources toward production rather than consumption . On the other hand, real wages were .
 Through most of Soviet history, there was relatively little to buy in the stores . For the same reason, through most of the Soviet history there were relatively little stores to buy .
 Workers also suffered from the inadequate supply of housing and the low quality of urban housing . Workers were also suffering from the lack of housing in the city .
 Governments placed more emphasis on improving workers standards of living . Yet, these areas too saw improvement .
 In the workplace, the revolutionary ideals of ‘workers’ control’ were quickly set aside as the needs of increasing production took precedence . In the past, workers’s struggle for workers' control was quickly abandoned .
 The power of management over the everyday lives of workers was matched by trade unions made to serve the interests of the state more than the needs of individual workers .
 Workers could not strike or otherwise express their discontent . In contrast to tsarist days, workers were not allowed to strike or express their grievances .
 Many Soviet workers remained far from the model of conscious proletarians . alcoholism, indiscipline, and poor work habits persisted in the late Soviet years . Perhaps a reflection of these conditions, alcoholism and indiscipline .
 The material condition of the Soviet proletariat did improve, however, after the death of Stalin . The material conditions did improve after Stalin's death, however .
 In particular, the five-year plans produced a tremendous expansion of administrative and technical personnel . Together with the already existing party and government bureaucracies, they became, broadly speaking, the leading class in the country .
 Scientists, writers, artists, professors, and other intellectuals, purged and integrated into the new system, became prominent members of the privileged group . Scientists, . writers, . artists, and professors, were among those purged .
 Army and naval officers and their families provided additional members of the family .
 The privileged, distinguished primarily by their education and nonmanual occupations, came to compose about 15 percent of the total population . Altogether, the privileged came to constitute about 15% of the population . The privileged were distinguished primarily .
 Brezhnev era has been called the “golden age” of the Soviet elite, especially for the ‘nomenklatura”—appointed government, party, and managerial elites, in other words the bureaucracy . This privileging of the elite began in
 Elite status meant access to better medical care, better housing, and to scarce or better commodities . Elite status was a key component of elite status in elite society .
 The Soviet Union, in other words, was becoming a class society, though determined, not by capitalist relations to the means of production, but by Communist relations to power . It has been argued that the Soviet Union was not a capitalist society, but a Communist society .
 The transformation occurred essentially during the 1930s, but on the whole it continued and developed further during the Second World War and in the postwar years .
 State laws and regulations were crucial in this process . They reflected, as well as contributed, to basic social and economic changes . State laws were crucial to this process, says CNN.com .
 Experiments such as the “Orchestra without a Conductor” or house communes were meant to nurture a spirit of collectivism and egalitarianism . House communes and attacks on ‘bourgeois specialists’ were among experiments .
 Iconoclasm and imagination were encouraged in the arts and literature, as will be discussed later . Iconocasm was encouraged by the writers and artists of the novel and the arts .
 A sustained effort was made to undermine the family. Perhaps most important, as part of an effort to liberate individuals, is the family .
 Marriage is no longer a sacrament, but a simple legal agreement between two people, easily broken . Marriage is now a legal agreement, not a sacrament but a marriage agreement . Marriage was no longer sacrament, it was an agreement between the two people .
 A divorce could be obtained merely at the request of one of the partners . A postcard was enough to get a divorce . A divorce was only a request from a partner .
 Efforts to establish collective kitchens and day care centers were made . Efforts were made to set up collective kitchens, day care facilities .
 Artistic and literary expression, as will be seen, was made more uniform and conventional than ever before . Artistic, literary expression is now more uniform, conventional, and conventional .
 Ranks, titles, decorations, and other distinctions, whether bureaucratic, military, or academic, were restored and acquired vast importance . Ranks and titles were restored in the 1930s .
 Traditional uniforms blossomed everywhere, reminding observers of tsarist Russia . Traditional uniforms remind observers of the tsarist era .
 Generalissimo Stalin toasting marshals at a gargantuan Kremlin reception presented a far different picture from Lenin in his worn-out coat haranguing workers in squares and factory yards .
 In schools, experiments of the 1920s were halted and classroom discipline reinstated . Uniformed uniforms, formal lecturing, learning by rote, and homework were also reinstated .
 While instruction in Marxism-Leninism and party history remained obligatory, traditional academic subjects were re-emphasized .
 Party glorification of the party and its leaders was joined by a new emphasis on patriotism and Russian national tradition . And glorification was also joined by the new emphasis of patriotism .
 In family policy, greater ceremony was restored to marriage, divorce became difficult and expensive . Homosexuality was made a criminal offense, and abortion was outlawed . Abortion was outlawed.
 Especially after the losses of the Second World War, particular emphasis was placed on having many children .
 Mothers with five or six living offspring received the Motherhood Medal . Those with seven or eight were awarded a decoration known as Motherhood Glory . Mothers with ten children achieved the status of Heroine Mother .
 Financial grants to large families helped further the implementation of the new policy . Financial grants were also used to help implement the policy .
 The press extolled family life and the role of women as mothers as mainstays of the socialist order . Throughout these years, the press .
 In post-Stalin years, signs of social and cultural ‘retreat’ were noticed in Russia . These were less the result of official policy than of gradual changes in everyday life and mentalities .
 Most often mentioned at the time was the widespread retreat into private life . Most of the time, it was a period of private life.
 Soviet citizens valued family above work, social recognition, or participation in organizations . Opinion surveys showed that Soviet citizens value family above social recognition or participation .
 Making “cozy” private spaces for oneself and one’s family became of prime importance . Making ‘cozy spaces for one and one's family became a priority for many .
 Scholars have argued that family and friends in the late Soviet years became “private institutions” that offered bases of loyalty and cultural value that functioned as alternatives, and even as subtle opposition to the official order .
 Drinking, of course, was pervasive throughout this bourgeoning private and unofficial civic life . "Drinking" is pervasive throughout the city's drinking scene .
 In the 1970s, Soviet officials worried about the “lack of Soviet consciousness” among the youth . In the mid-1980s, Gorbachev spoke of a “spiritual crisis” in the Soviet Union in which much of the population had become alienated from
 Women were to be liberated from social discrimination, domestic violence, and the drudgery of housework . Women were freed from social discrimination and domestic violence .
 Actual results were contradictory, though; and actual policies also varied in different periods . Actual results also varied, though, and actually policies were contradictory .
 Before 1917, economic development created new opportunities for women to work outside the home . In general, as before 1917, women were able to find work outside of home .
 Educational and cultural opportunities gave women both a space for personal development and the notion that their function could be more than only serving their families . Women's role in shaping the lives of women was important to their families and their communities .
 Party and state committed to principle of gender equality and women’s liberation, party and state were committed to gender equality, party said .
 In various ways, patriarchal and conservative values persisted in various ways . Still, patriarchal values persisted and even strengthened, says author .
 After 1917 a special branch of the party was established to address the condition of women, known as the Zhenotdel, or Women’s Section . To realize their commitment to women, after 1917 a . special branch was established . after 1917 .
 Women’s activists tried to mobilize women for self-education and to defend their right to be treated as human beings . At the very least, women's activists are trying to mobilize .
 Many Communists spoke of socializing domestic work and childcare in order to free women for more public roles . Many Communists, including Lenin, spoke of the socialization of domestic work to help women .
 Given the harsh economic conditions, the goals were largely utopian . Yet, given the upheavals in family life caused by war and revolution, these goals were mostly utopian .
 Even official political propaganda in the 1920s was as likely to portray women as happy mothers surrounded by their children as to show women factory workers .
 During the great industrialization drive of the 1930s, women’s emancipation was reduced mainly to participation in production . During the Great Industrialization drive, women were allowed to participate in production in factories .
 In 1930, the Zhenotdel was abolished, for separate advocacy of women’s issues was seen as unnecessary and a distraction from allegedly more important concerns . In 1930 it was abolished .
 Industrialization opened the gates to women’s employment as never before, says author . Industrialization has opened the doors to women's employment in the U.S. On the other hand, industrialization has also opened the door to employment in India .
 The freedom to visibly dissent from established tastes was a sign of greater personal freedom in Russia after Stalin’s death . The freedom was sign of growing alienation from the system and growing alienation into higher education .
 Another major source of inequality was the fact that women remained responsible for housework, cooking, and childcare . Women were still responsible for cooking, cooking and cleaning .
 As we have mentioned, motherhood was actively promoted and harnessed to social needs . Motherhood is now being actively promoted in the world of motherhood .
 Soviet leaders believed it essential to support reproduction and women’s role as mothers . In the interests of economic growth, the Soviet leaders thought it essential .
 Beginning in the Stalin era, the Soviet leadership viewed women’s primary responsibility to society to be the bearing and raising of children . The Soviet leadership . viewed women as responsible for raising children .
 Numerous policies were enacted to strengthen the family, as we have seen . Numerous policies have been enacted, as well as the welfare of the family .
 WWII propaganda emphasized a view of women as the embodiment of the home and family for which men were fighting . The Second World War brought large numbers of women into the workforce and even the army .
 After the war, the celebration of women’s domestic role and the family became stronger than ever . The celebration of the family and the role of women in the domestic role was celebrated .
 After Stalin, as part of the larger effort to improve standards of living, serious attention was paid to the status and condition of women .
 A major focus of state concern was how to best mobilize women as a “demographic resource’—in a word, to have more children, but also raise them more effectively . Still, especially due to the persistent effects of wartime population decline, a major focus . was how
 There was much discussion of a crisis of masculinity, where men felt that their status and dignity were harmed when their wives worked outside the home . Also, there was much public discussion of the crisis of . masculinity .
 The position of women in late Soviet society was contradictory, as Gail Lapidus and other scholars have described . Women's position was contradictory in the Soviet society, as well as contradictory, they have said .
 Positive signs included high levels of women’s employment and an increase in education . Women came to be proportionately better represented as students in Soviet institutions of higher learning than men . The great majority of medical doctors in the late Soviet years were women .
 Few women reached the top rungs of their profession, medicine included, and they were strikingly absent at the highest levels of both party and government . At the same time, few women were able to reach the highest rungs in their profession .
 The multiplicity of nationalities, ethnicities, languages, and religions in the USSR defined Soviet society as a multinational state no less than it did that of the Russian Empire . Soviet society was defined by nationalities and ethnicities in the Soviet Union .
 For most of the Soviet period, ethnic Russians formed about half of the population of the country . Ukrainians and Belorussians also made up about a quarter of Russia's population .
 The rest of the population included a huge variety of peoples, ranging from groups with long national histories and strong national identities, such as the Armenians .
 By religious confession or at least residual religious identity, the Soviet Union included not only Eastern Orthodox, but also many Catholics, Protestants, Jews, Muslims, Buddhists, and shamanists .
 Soviet authorities developed several basic policies in dealing with national groups that were often quite contradictory . The policies were often contradictory and often contradictory .
 Soviet state promoted education, created opportunities for individuals from local nationalities to hold positions of local influence . Language and cultures of local peoples were preserved and taught .
 All histories had to be interpreted in the simple terms of class struggle and the progressive march of secular civilization . All histories must be interpreted as the progress of secular society .
 The policy of favoring local elites, allowing the use of local mother tongues in schools and in public, had both benefits and risks . It also encouraged limited preservation of and development of ethnic traditions .
 As long as the system was stable and the economy strong, these limited local privileges nurtured support for the system and even a certain “Soviet” identity . The system is stable and strong, as long as it is stable, the economy is strong, the government says .
 These policies kept alive national and ethnic identities that could lead to demands for independence . But these policies also kept alive—indeed, sometimes helped created—national and ethnic . identities .
 Cultural autonomy could become cultural nationalism, and that could lead to separatism . In other words, cultural autonomy could be cultural nationalism . In turn, it could also lead to separatistism .
 Stalin and the Politburo began to stress the Russian language and the role of the Great Russian people as binding cement of their multinational state . Moreover, after a controlled measure of Great Russian patriotism and nationalism became respectable in the Soviet Union, Stalin and . Stalin and Stalin . Stalin .
 The trend continued during the Second World War and in the postwar years . This trend continued through the 1950s and the 1960s .
 Eastern peoples of the USSR were made to use the Cyrillic in place of the Latin alphabet for their native tongues . Eastern peoples were made use of Cyrillics instead of Latin alphabet . The Russian language received emphasis in all Soviet schools .
 Histories had to be rewritten again to demonstrate that the incorporation of minority nationalities into the Russian state was a positive good rather than merely the lesser evil as compared to other alternatives .
 The new interpretation was fitted into Marxist dress by such means as stress on the progressive nature of the Russian proletariat and the advanced character of the revolutionary movement . Basically contrary to Marxism, the new interpretation of Marxism was fitted with Marxist dress .
 Stalin gave violent expression to some of the worst kinds of prejudices . Stalin, and some other Soviet leaders as well, went further, giving violent expression . But Stalin and some others as well went further and went further .
 Jews, especially Yiddish-speaking intellectuals, had been especially targeted in the Great Purge . Many thousands of Jews were sent to the camps or executed . Jews were especially targeted by the Nazis .
 Jews shared in the fate of many persecuted individuals and groups during the terror . But the immediate postwar years brought a new attack directed at Jews alone . This attack was particularly painful and ironic given the devastation inflicted on Soviet Jews by the Nazis .
 A fierce campaign against “cosmopolitanism’— which soon became a euphemism for Jews — led to a purge of Jews from many institutions, widespread arrests, and a general atmosphere of fear . A fierce . campaign against . ‘cosmopolitanist’ — which soon
 Evidence suggests Stalin was planning a mass deportation of all Jews to the Soviet east . Evidence suggests that Stalin planned to deport Jews to east .
 Growing restrictions on Jewish religious and language education was one of the reasons many Jews sought to emigrate . The post-Stalin years saw nothing comparable, but continued and growing restrictions on religious education .
 Stalinist repressions effectively limited nationalist protests in the Soviet Union . Stalinist repression was effectively limited to nationalist groups in the country .
 Organizations were founded in Ukraine, Lithuania, Georgia, and elsewhere . samizdat publications appeared; and occasional street protests were mounted .
 The broader populations still generally showed little interest in the national question . The broader population showed no interest .
 Education Education played an extremely important role in the development of the Soviet Union . Education education was extremely important in Soviet Union's development .
 Educational advances were a most important part of state planning . Educational advances made the striking Soviet economic and technological progress possible .
 As already indicated, education also stood at the heart of the evolution of Soviet society . The Soviet Union was one of the world's most successful statesmen .
 Less than half of the Russian people were literate at the time of the Bolshevik revolution . Less than 50 per cent of the population was literate .
 Years of civil war, famine, epidemics, and general disorganization that followed the establishment of the Soviet regime resulted in a decline of literacy and in a general lowering of the educational level in the country .
 Beginning in 1922, the authorities began to implement a large-scale educational program . Aimed at establishing schools for all children, but also at eliminating illiteracy among adults .
 By 1938, a network of four-year elementary schools covered the USSR . More advanced seven-year schools had been organized for urban children .
 The total elimination of illiteracy proved more difficult, although the government created more than 19,000 “centers for liquidating illiteracy” by 1925 . The government persevered in its efforts to eliminate illiteracy .
 The census of 1926 registered 51 percent of Soviet citizens, aged ten and above, as literate; that of 1939 81. percent . The census was conducted in 1926, 1939, and 1951 .
 85 percent of the Soviet people must have been literate at the time of the German invasion, and almost all at the end of the Communist regime . Projecting the increase, the increase would be the largest increase in literacy in Soviet history .
 The four-year and the seven-year schools became basic to the Soviet system . The four and seven year schools were basic to Soviet education .
 This type of school provided more class hours in its ten years than does the American educational system in twelve . The school, for boys and girls from seven to 17, provided more classes hours than the American education system in 12 years .
 After initial experimentation with some progressive education and certain quite radical methods of teaching the young and combining school and work, in the 1930s and after Soviet education returned to entirely traditional, disciplinarian, and academic practices . Soviet education in Soviet Russia returned to academic practices in the 1950s and
 The emphasis centered on memorization and recitation, with a tremendous amount of homework . The emphasis was on memorizing and reciting .
 Soviet schools were especially strong in mathematics and science, that is, in physics, chemistry, biology, astronomy, and astronomy, as well as geography and drafting . Soviet schools also strong in geography, geography, drafting, and drafting.
 The book being held by the rider reads “proletarians of all countries, unite.” with certain other academic subjects . The rider is being held in a book held by him . The book is held in the rider's memory .
 Six years of a foreign language were taught in a ten-year school . For instance, six years of foreign language was taught in ten years .
 The Soviet Union had special schools for children with musical and artistic gifts, military schools, also foreign language schools, and the like . Special schools were also known for special military schools .
 Beyond secondary schools were technical and other special schools, as well as full-fledged institutions of higher learning . Beyond secondary school, there were also special schools .
 Soviet authorities placed much more emphasis in higher education on institutes that concentrated on a particular field, such as technology, agriculture, medicine, pedagogy, or economics . Soviet authorities developed the old university system .
 Study in institutes ranged from four to six years; a university course usually took five years . Study in the institutes between four and six years is considered a four-year course .
 Older Soviet students, as well as schoolchildren, were required to attend all their classes . Schoolchildren were subject to strict discipline, and followed a rigidly prescribed course of study .
 The educational effort of the party and the government extended beyond schools to libraries, museums, museums and clubs, the theater, the cinema, radio, television, and even circuses . The educational efforts extended beyond school to libraries and museums .
 All of these, of course, were owned by the state, were constantly augmented, and were closely coordinated to serve the same purposes . All of the state’s resources were used in the same way .
 More peculiarly Soviet was the practice of oral propaganda in squares and at street corners . More than 2 million propagandists were sponsored by the party .
 Further expansion and diffusion of education constituted an essential part of the later five-year plans . However, the rate of educational advance slowed down compared to the earlier period .
 Soviet education, and indeed Soviet culture, greatly profited from the prerevolutionary legacy . Soviet education and culture profited greatly from pre-revolutionary education .
 The high standards, the serious academic character, and even the discipline of Soviet schools dated from tsarist days . The high standard, the discipline and high standards were among the reasons for Soviet schools to remain high .
 The main Communist contribution was the rapid dissemination of education at all levels and on a vast scale . Imperial Russia was slowly moving toward universal schooling .
 Soviet students studied with remarkable diligence and determination . Many observers noted that Soviet students were dedicated to their studies .
 All-pervasive emphasis on uniformity, memorization, and Marxist ideology was the chief vice . Soviet education was the main Soviet virtues in Soviet education .
 The closer a discipline was to the pronouncements of Soviet Marxism, the more rigid, restrictive, and distorted it became, according to critical histories of Soviet education . It has often been observed in critical histories that the closer it was to Marxism the more restrictive it became .
 Many scholars and teachers learned how to acknowledge Marx and Lenin deftly while working with a good measure of independence and honesty . On the other hand, many scholars and . teachers learned . how to deal with Marx and . Lenin .
 Often, notably in history, this meant close attention to documentable facts and limited analysis and interpretation . Often in history it meant close scrutiny of facts .
 As a rule, there was more intellectual freedom in fields like mathematics and theoretical physics than in the social sciences and humanities . Still, as a rule of academic freedom, there were more academic freedom in math and physics fields .
 The political drive to transform the country and its people, the traumas of civil war and world war, the dramatic shifts in policy and the idealism, and the repression were all reflected in Soviet culture . The Soviet culture was reflected in the country's struggle to transform itself and its
 ‘Proletarian’ was mainly understood in ideological terms as reflecting a properly understood Marxist point of view . While this often meant that priority was given to individuals of working-class backgrounds, ‘proletarians’ were more important .
 In later years, the notion of partiinost (partymindededness) served the same function as partymindness .
 At the same time, the development of culture was valued as an essential part of socialist development . At the time, culture was seen as a vital part of the socialist revolution .
 Their books could not be published nor their music played without official authorization . Even when their income depended primarily on royalties, their books were not published .
 The quality of Soviet creative work varied enormously over time and by field . Soviet creative works vary enormously over the years .
 The experimentalism of first years after the revolution and of the early 1920s, the radicalism of the First Five-Year Plan, the conservative rigidities of the 1930s, and the conservative . The “thaw” of the late 1950s and early 1960s,
 Different fields were more or less subject to the demands of doctrine. And different fields were subject to different demands .
 It was easier to do excellent work in science or to compose original music than to write the best possible history or literature . Thus it was easier for science or music to write excellent work than for literature .
 In almost all fields, fruitful as barren, the influence of the party and ideology left its mark . Still, the party's influence has been strong in almost every field, including politics .
 For a variety of reasons, science was a privileged area of Soviet culture . Science and Scholarship was a key part of the Soviet Union .
 It was obviously and immediately useful and, indeed, indispensable if the USSR were to become the military, technological, and economic leader of the world . The USSR was to become an economic and military leader, and to become a world leader, it said .
 It was fully endorsed by Marxism, which prided itself on its own scientific character . Marxism, it said, "prided itself in its own Scientific character"
 In fact, some writers have commented on an almost religious admiration of science and technology in the Soviet Union . It is an expression in part of the old revolutionary titanism and determination to transform the world .
 Science, while subject to the dialectic, lies on the whole outside Marxist doctrines, which concentrate on human society . Science constituted a “safer” field in the Soviet Union than sociology or literature .
 Communist interference with science included difficulties in accepting Einstein's ‘petty bourgeois’ theories . Trofim Lysenko’s virtual destruction of Soviet biology, particularly genetics, together with the elimination of a number of leading Soviet biologists, notably Nikolai Vavilov .
 Lysenko’s theories gave Marxist environmentalism a new dimension and made a Communist transformation of the world seem more feasible than ever . The only trouble was that Lysenko's theories were false, he says .
 Even Soviet biology staged a comeback, although it took many years and several turns of fortune finally to dispose of Lysenko’s authority . But Einstein's views had to be accepted, at least for practical purposes; and even Soviet biology .
 Science profited from the large-scale financing and organization of effort provided by the state . Science especially profited by the large scale financing, organization of efforts provided by state .
 The Sputniks, the shot at the moon, the photographing of the far side of the moon have emphasized the achievements of Soviet applied science . Soviet rockets, missiles, and atomic and space technology have been emphasized by Soviet rockets and missiles .
 The contributions made by espionage and by German scientists brought to the USSR after the Second World War are more difficult to assess . The contributions to the Soviet Union were made in espionage, according to the author .
 The state, of course, financed and promoted to the full all the expensive technological programs referred to above . The state is responsible for many of the expensive programs .
 It also organized, in connection with the fiveyear plans, a great search for new natural resources, vast geographic expeditions, and other projects .
 The work of Soviet scientists in the far north acquired special prominence in the Soviet Union . Scientists in the north of the country were given special attention to their work .
 Soviet applied science received perhaps too much praise in the world press . However, the overall excellence of Soviet science was not sufficiently appreciated .
 The scope of its scientific effort exceeded that of all other countries except the United States . With theoretical physicists like Lev Landau, experimental physicists like Abram loffe and Petr Kapitza, chemists like Nikolai Semenov, mathematicians .
 Soviet social sciences and humanities did not compare with the sciences . Soviet social science and humanities were not as good as the sciences. The humanities and social sciences were poor compared to the sciences, the author says .
 Sputnik II, November 3, 1957; first moon rocket, Lunik I, January 2, 1959; first retrieval of animal from orbit, August 20, 1960; first launching from orbit . Venus probe, February 12, 1961; first human in space, Lieutut.
 Col. lurii A Gagarin, April 12, 1961; first double launch with humans . Col. Lurii was first double-deployed rocket to carry out a mission in space .
 First woman in space, Valentina Tereshkova, June 16, 1963; first triple-manned launching, Col. Pavel Popovich, August 12, 1962; First woman to be in space in space . First triple-menned launch was Col. Popovich's first
 Vladimir Komarov, space commander, Konstantin Feoktistov, scientist, Dr. Dr. Feokstistov . Vladimir Komov: "Space One" is the first Russian space shuttle mission to orbit Earth .
 First person to walk in cosmic space, Lieut. Boris Egorov, physiologist, October 12, 1964 . First person in space walked in space in 1964 .
 The Soviet Union also announced the first loss of a person in actual space flight, Col. Col. Michael Schurkovsky .
 Marxist thought in the USSR was crude and undeveloped compared to certain Western and eastern European varieties . Official ideology itself, especially after the 1920s and before the brief Gorbachev era, proved to be remarkably barren, with the result that Marxist thought was crude .
 Until the early and middle 1930s Mikhail Pokrovsky’s negativistic school held sway . In history, until the early . and middle . 1930s, the school was a Soviet state of Soviet Russia .
 Pokrovsky took an extremely critical and bitter view of the Russian past, in effect declaring it of no importance . He took a very harsh view of Russia's past and declared it of 'no importance'
 With the Soviet consolidation and turn to cultural conservatism in the 1930s, Pokrovsky and his school were denounced . The authorities began to promote intense work in the field of history and in such related disciplines as archaeology .
 Soviet historians turned to collecting and editing sources in Soviet history . Historians turned to collect and edit Soviet sources .
 Some valuable work was also done in social and economic history, with at least one Soviet historian, Boris Grekov, making contributions of the first rank . Grekov was originally a prerevolutionary specialist, and made contributions of first rank.
 Soviet historiography suffered enormously from the party straitjacket, most especially in such fields as intellectual history and international relations . Yet in general, in spite of the change in the 1930s and a certain further liberalization following Stalin’s death, Soviet Historians suffered enormously
 Nikolai Marr, 1864-1934, was an outstanding scholar of Caucasian languages who apparently fell prisoner to some weird theories of his own invention . He played the same sad role that Trofim Lysenko had played in biology .
 Marr's strange views almost destroyed philology and linguistics in the Soviet Union, denying as they did the established families of languages in favor of a ubiquitous and multiform evolution of four basic sounds . Endorsed by the party, Marr was a member of the Communist Party .
 Soviet scholars enjoyed more contact with the outside world and somewhat greater freedom in their own work . From the spring of 1953, Soviet scholars were able to enjoy greater freedom .
 In particular, they no longer had to praise Stalin at every turn, prove that most things were invented first by Russians, or deny Western influences in Russia . As they had had to do in the worst days of Zhdanov, they now no longer have had to .
 Entire disciplines or sub-disciplines, such as cybernetics, were eventually permitted and promoted . Cybernetics and certain kinds of economic analysis were eventually allowed and even promoted .
 Some excesses of Stalinism were gone, but compulsory Marxism-Leninism and partiinost remained . Yet, while some excesses were gone some of the excesses remained .
 Like other educated Russians, writers and artists responded to the Communist revolution differently . Writers and artists reacted differently to the revolution in the Soviet Union .
 As artists, many felt aesthetically alienated from the new proletarian standards for culture . And as artists, they had to deal with the new standards . Many artists were left feeling aesthetically alienated from their work .
 Many fled Soviet Russia, enriching European and American culture . As a result, many fled the Soviet Russia . Many fled the country .
 The least political tried to ignore the new order—to create art outside official channels, to write or paint for art’s sake alone .
 Other writers and artists sought to be part of the revolution, as they understood it, to produce ‘revolutionary” art and literature . Other writers, artists and writers sought to produce "revolutionary" art, literature .
 It helped that in the early years the Soviet government tolerated a variety of artistic currents and positively encouraged avant-garde artists . The Soviet government in the 1960s encouraged the growth of the Soviet state of art .
 More commonly, writers and artists benefited from state subsidies, studio space, and publishing and exhibition opportunities .
 This attachment to the cause of the party and the state, however, would soon prove to be increasingly constraining . This dependence on official aid would soon proved to be constraining, he says .
 Literature in the early Soviet years continued in certain ways the trends of the “silver age,” in spite of the heavy losses of the revolutionary and civil war years .
 Symbolists like Blok and Bely and acmeists like Mandelshtam and Akhmatova continued publishing excellent poetry and developing their work .
 Many brilliant new writers emerged, often elaborating on pre-revolutionary traditions . And many brilliant new . writers emerged .
 Isaak Babel, Mikhail Bulgakov, Iurii Olesha, Boris Pasternak, Boris Pilnyak, Andrei Platonov, Evgenii Zamiatin, and Mikhail Zoshchenko were among those whose first major works appeared after 1917 .
 Formalist criticism rose and flourished, as did the highly original work of the literary critic and language theorist Mikhail Bakhtin . The work was highly original, as well as the work of Bakhtins .
 Non-Communist writers created numerous groups and movements, tolerated by the party as “fellow travelers” The term was coined to denote nonproletarian or nonrevolutionary writers who were willing to accept Soviet power .
 At the same time, organizations of “left” or “proletarian” authors competed for influence and state support . At the time, ‘left’ and ‘proletarians’ were competing for influence in Russia .
 Proletcult established studios to promote literary and artistic creativity among workers . Founded in 1918 and continuing through the 1920s, they established studios for workers .
 Among professional “proletarian” writers, conflicts over literary style and content and over party policy produced a whole series of proletarian writers’ organizations . The All-Union Association of Proletarian Writers was founded in 1920 with the First Five-Year Plan . The militant Russian
 The voices of orthodox Marxist critics of deviant literary trends were becoming shriller and more influential . The voices were becoming more influential, with the voices of Marxist critics becoming louder .
 A number of suicides could be read as marks of disillusionment or protest . The suicides could also be seen as a sign of disillusioning or even protest .
 All literary groupings were abolished, along with all independent publishing houses and journals, replaced by a single Union of Soviet Writers . But the greater change came in 1932, when all literary groups were abolished . All independent publishing house and journals were replaced by the Union .
 In effect, Soviet literature now literally became an organ of the government and writers employees of the state . The state of Soviet literature is now a state of its own .
 Members of the Writers’ Union enjoyed secure incomes and potential privileges . But they were required to write according to official standards .
 When writings did not conform, or when standards changed, authors had to be ready to rewrite them . Writers had to rewrite the offending texts when they didn't conform .
 Many writers, including Akhmatova, Mandelshtam, Pasternak, Olesha, Babel, Babel and Bulgakov, withdrew into public literary silence .
 Socialist realism often meant that Stalin and his associates dictated proper literary form and content . Sufficiently vague in theory in theory, socialist realism was often vague in practice . In practice, Stalin dictated the content of the novel .
 The result was a flood of novels, stories, poems, and plays, as well as movies (a genre much valued by the party for its propaganda value), idealizing Soviet life, portraying the Russian past in a patriotic light .
 The socialist realist hero was always a paragon of both moral and physical beauty, with no fundamental inner conflicts and no psychological ambiguities . He was always an ideal socialist hero with no  inner conflicts .
 Instead of the grim world around them, authors urged to see things as they should appear and will appear in the future . Instead of seeing grim world, authors were urged to be optimistic about future .
 The quality and lasting appeal of Stalinist literature was often very low . Artistry subordinated to revolutionary purpose and much of the complexity of life was deliberately drained out of socialist realist literature .
 A few gifted men, such as Alexei N Tolstoy, 1883-1945, wrote popular historical and contemporary novels . Mikhail Sholokhov, 1905-84, wrote the novels The Quiet Don and Virgin Soil Upturned, describing Don cossacks .
 Soviet poetry, especially hampered by the injunction to be simple and easy-understood, proved to be inferior even to Soviet prose . Soviet poetry was especially hampered .
 The government has contributed more to the enjoyment of its readers by publishing on a large scale the Russian classics and world classics in translation .
 In post-Stalin years, the Writers’ Union continued to insist on the socialist realist principles of partiinost, ideinost and narodnost .
 Forbidden themes such as Stalin’s purges and labor camps were briefly allowed in the film . The film was released in March 2013 .
 Soviet society accepted greater objectivity in writing about everyday Soviet life . Author: "Greater objectivity was accepted in Soviet society"
 Literary critics openly admitted that much socialist realist literature was emotionally shallow and false . Critic: "Socialist realists were emotionally shallow, false"
 Pasternak was excoriated in the Soviet press for the novel's ideologically incorrect perspective on the Soviet past . He was forbidden to travel abroad to accept the Nobel Prize for his novel, Doctor Zhivago .
 The post-Khrushchev years saw increasing demands to depict Soviet achievements, but also increasing variety and even subtle deviance .
 Many writers avoided heroic topics to focus on the complexities of everyday human relationships . Many writers avoid heroic topics in order to focus instead of heroic topics .
 The “village prose” school of writers offered readers more realistic portraits of the hardships of rural life . The village prose emphasized traditional values such as closeness to nature, simplicity, and moral decency .
 We see a similar emphasis on individual experience and feelings in the songs of popular bards like Vladimir Vysotsotsotsky and Bulat Okudzhava . The songs of these bards include: "I love you, I love you"
 Most Soviet readers preferred books about individuals, feelings, and relationships to accounts of heroic labor or revolutionary devotion . While classic socialist realism continued to be produced, studies of readers’ tastes make it clear .
 Works about the war, crime and detection, and espionage, were especially popular . Works about espionage and crime were also popular .
 Alexander Solzhenitsyn's story about forced labor camps, One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich, was forbidden after 1965 to publish anything . One of the hallmarks of the literature of the ‘thaw,’ was the work of the "thaw’
 All of his later works were published abroad and smuggled back into the Soviet Union . The works were smuggled back to Russia and published abroad .
 Many writers similarly found themselves forbidden to publish or even on trial for sedition . Many writers found themselves on trial or even in prison for their opinions .
 Much of the best Russian literature in the Soviet era was written abroad . In fact, much of it was written overseas .
 Some of the outstanding expatriate authors of the ‘first wave’ of emigration were Ivan Bunin and Alexei Remizov . Both died in Paris, in 1953 and 1957, respectively .
 Some Russian émigré Russian writers wrote influential works in English or other languages . Vladimir Nabokov and later the poet Brodsky were influential writers in English and other languages.
 In recent years, especially since the fall of communism, émigré literature had been reclaimed as an essential part of the whole of Russian literature . In the 1990s, it was reclaimed as a vital part of Russia's literature .
 The first postrevolutionary decade was closely linked to the silver age and to contemporary trends in the West . The first decade of the 20th century was a period of 'golden age'
 Most of the artists who embraced the revolution viewed it as essentially about freedom and possibility, often expressed artistically in art fully freed from representational art .
 Many artists insisted that revolutionary art had to be useful to the revolution as well as the revolution . The revolution was a major source of inspiration for revolutionary art .
 Artists designed monuments and festival decorations for public squares, clothing, books, and other objects, using the most modern designs . Artists used modern designs to decorate public squares .
 In the first Soviet decade diverse styles thrived, ranging from transcendental abstractions to Marc Chagall’s nostalgic and magical portraits .
 Arts in the Soviet Union acquired a most conservative and indeed antiquated character . However, once “socialist realism” established its hold on Soviet culture, arts became conservative and antiquated .
 Stalin-era painting and sculpture restored traditional realism to visual representation but always in a heroic and positive mood .
 Brightly colored paintings of happy peasants laboring in sunny fields of grain or of strong and joyous factory workers became commonplace .
 Soviet architecture turned away from the avant-garde creativity of the early Soviet years toward the design of heavily ornamented apartment and office buildings, grand boulevards and squares suitable for parades . The notorious Moscow skyscrapers of Stalin’s declining years combined the styles of
 After Stalin's death, uninspired realism dominated mainstream painting, while architecture became modest and functional . After Stalin’s death, realist art dominated mainstream .
 The emotional power of music made the party's cultural guardians concerned to ensure that music also contributed to the building of socialism . Party's cultural . guardians concerned that music . also contributed . to the . building of . socialism .
 Creativity and originality were much more pronounced in music than in painting, however, partly because music stood further from Marxist and ‘realistic” injunctions .
 This was one of many such attacks on ‘formalism’ and ‘leftism” in music . This is one of several such attacks against “formalist’s and “leftist”
 Sergei Prokofiev spent many of the early Soviet years abroad, ironically because he found that his revolutionary music was not appreciated but also because of poor financial support for music .
 In later years, Aram Khachaturian and Alfred Schnittke would again demonstrate the potential of Soviet classical music to achieve international recognition .
 In the 1960s and 1970s, singer-songwriters such as Vysotsotsky and Okudzhava created a genre of performed folk poetry . They drew on various song traditions in both prerevolutionary and Soviet Russia to create an original musical form .
 The history of the performing arts was contradictory, like so much else . "The history of performing arts is contradictory," says the author . "It's contradictory," he says .
 As critics have noted, these arts were short on creativity and development, but long on execution and performance . The arts are short of creativity, but short on execution, performance .
 High standards were continuations from tsarist days, aided by increased state subsidies and a very developed system of artistic education and training .
 Soviet musical education produced a series of brilliant classical musicians . David Oistrakh, Sviatoslav Richter and Emil Gilels were among the first allowed to tour abroad .
 Ballet was largely stagnant in the realm of choreography, the clock had stopped for most purposes in 1917 . Ballet choreography has been largely stagnant for most of the century .
 The ballet backed by more funds and a better system of schools and selection than in any other country . Also, the ballet was backed by funds and more funds than in other countries .
 Rudolf Nureyev and Mikhail Baryshnikov defected to the West in 1961 and 1974 . The rigid traditionalism of Russian ballet (along with the many other restrictions in Soviet life) led some of its best dancers to defect to the west .
 Tatlin’s utopian design for a headquarters for the Communist International was a massive symbol of revolutionary modernism . Although never built, Tatlin's utopian design was a model for a Communist International .
 The building was to provide meeting space, offices, and a communications center . The building will also be used as a meeting space and offices .
 Soviet filmmaking had its own trajectory of experimentalism, socialist realism, and traditionalist realism . While selected imports were a continual presence in Soviet cinemas, Soviet films were a constant presence .
 Sergei Eisenstein, 1898-1948, was perhaps the most artistically brilliant Soviet filmmaker of the revolutionary and Stalinist epochs . Eisenstein faced the most difficult political relations with Stalin’s regime .
 Grigorii Alexandrov’s cheery musical comedy films of the 1930s . Audiences were more interested in light and entertaining films, notwithstanding their heavy-handed ideology, such as their heavy handed ideology .
 Classical columns, large exterior ornaments, grand entryways, and marble interiors decorated with chandeliers in the main public spaces were characteristic of these buildings . These buildings were meant to convey the grandeur and power of socialism .
 With the coming of the ‘thaw’ after Stalin's death, alternative artistic approaches surfaced, sometimes tolerated but often criticized and forbidden public display . Khrushchev visited an exhibit of modern art in Moscow only to mock it with crude humor .
 In film too, a new period of innovation in form and a focus on less ideological themes began in the more liberal 1960s, as can be seen in the work of Andrei Tarkovsky . In film audiences were still more likely to prefer light comedies or heroic adventure films .
 Religion in the Soviet Union constituted an anomaly, a threat, and a challenge from the Communist point of view . Religion was an anomaly and a threat to the Communist state of mind .
 Bolshevik efforts to “modernize” Russia necessarily meant, as they saw it, replacing superstition, mysticism, and fictions of religion with a scientific worldview . The Bolsheviks wanted to replace superstition and mysticism with a science-based worldview .
 Initially, this campaign was directed mainly against the Orthodox Church as an institution . Now, it has been directed mainly towards the church as a church .
 The Bolsheviks disestablished the Orthodox Church, which had been closely linked to the imperial regime . They ended financial support for the Church, confiscated vast amounts of property and transferred control of parish schools to the state .
 During the Civil War, revolutionaries frequently arrested and sometimes summarily executed priests and monks . They confiscated or destroyed sacramental objects, and closed many churches and monasteries .
 The government moved even more vigorously, if less violently, against the Church . Once victorious in the Civil War, the government moved more vigorously .
 The government ordered the seizure of all Church valuables, temporarily imprisoned Patriarch Tikhon . The government tried to break up the Church from within by assisting a modernist “Renovationist” or “Living Church” group .
 After Tikhon’s death in 1925, the government prevented any new patriarch being elected and Church leadership fell to provisional appointees . The government prevented the government from appointing a new patriarch .
 Although atheism indeed grew in the Soviet Union, this antireligious movement was far from successful .
 Attacks on the Church often inspired resistance and solidarity with Church and clergy . Local efforts to ensure that religion thrived even without state support were successful . Attacks on Church inspired resistance .
 The disestablishment of the Orthodox Church enabled “sectarian Christian faiths to grow as well as other religions . Also, the disestablishment enabled ‘sectarian’ Christian faith to grow, as well .
 Faith and spirituality flourished as a source of meaning and hope in the turbulent years of the 20th century . The nation's first black president was assassinated in 1968 .
 During the First Five-Year Plan and during the bloody terror of the late 1930s, persecution of religion was particularly intense . During the radical upheavations of the First . Five-year Plan and the bloody . Terror of the . 1930s was especially intense .
 The assumption that severely restricting religious institutions and promoting rationalist thought would lead religion to disappear proved vain . However, the assumption that severe restrictions on religious institutions would lead to the disappearance of religion proved vain.
 According to an unpublished census of 1936, 55 percent of Soviet citizens still identified themselves as religious . Many others presumably concealed their belief in religion .
 Stalin and the Politburo assumed a more tolerant attitude toward religion in the 1930s . That fact in conjunction with the general social stabilization, the . 1930s made Stalin and . the . PolitBuro assume a more . tolerant attitude .
 The war and patriotic behavior of the Church in the war added to its acceptance and standing . The Church's actions in the War added to the acceptance of the Catholic faith .
 In 1943 the Church was permitted to elect a patriarch, the statesmanlike Metropolitan Sergius obtaining that position .
 Huge numbers of churches in Russia were shut down and often demolished . Churches were often demolished or destroyed in Russia .
 Most of the church buildings that survived were put to secular uses as factories, warehouses, and museums or simply stood empty . Some churches continued to function, but most of them stood empty, their ritual objects removed and their walls whitewashed .
 The ecclesiastical authorities were also allowed to establish a few theological schools, required to prepare students for the priesthood, and to open a limited number of new churches .
 The activities of the League of the Militant Godless and antireligious propaganda in general were curtailed . Anti-religion propaganda was curtailed in the 1930s .
 The patriarchal Church declared complete loyalty to the regime, and supported, for example, its international peace campaigns and its attempts to influence the Balkan Orthodox . In return, the Patriarchal Church declared its support for the regime .
 The Church in the USSR, however, remained restricted to strictly religious, rather than more general social and educational functions . Even the constitution proclaimed merely the freedom of religious confession, as against freedom of antireligious propaganda . The Church remained a designated enemy of Marxist ideology .
 Khrushchev especially, as well as his successors, increased the pressures against religion even when “liberalizing” other aspects of Soviet life . The pressure against religion increased even when "liberalizing" other parts of life .
 It should be added that other Soviet Christians, such as Baptists, and other religious groups, shared their histories with the Orthodox . Jews and the numerous Muslims also shared history with Orthodox Christians .
 They, too, led a constricted and precarious existence within a fundamentally hostile system . They profited from relaxations when they occurred, profiting from relaxedations . They were too constricted to relaxations .
 Even before Gorbachev's policy of glasnost enabled a new renaissance of religion in Russia, its revival in the growing unofficial space in everyday social and cultural life was another visible sign of the weakening hold of the Communist regime over people’s lives .
 The 1970s and 1980s saw a proliferation of religious prayer and study groups . Young people rediscovered their family’s religious traditions, and attended religious services .
 We see socialism as a system of high culture and morality...a society in which the life of working people is saturated with material and spiritual fulfillment, rejecting consumerism, lack of spirituality, and cultural primitiveness .
 The most perilous moment for a bad government is when it seeks to mend its ways, says the U.S. government . The most dangerous moment is when a government is seeking to mend itself, says a former president .
 Only consummate statecraft can enable a king to save his throne when, after a long spell of oppressive rule, he sets to improve the lot of his subjects . Only statecraft will enable a monarch to save a king's throne .
 In the years leading to the collapse of the Soviet Union and Communist rule in 1991, no scholars predicted its imminent demise . GAVRIIL DERZHAVIN: "No scholars predicted" its demise before the collapse .
 As the preceding chapters have described, the system was pervaded by problems, both structural and in people's attitudes . As the previous chapter has described, we have found that the system is pervading by problems .
 Mikhail Gorbachev was a primary cause of the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1990s . The collapse was a major cause of that collapse, though variously with blame or appreciation . Mikhail's role in the collapse was to blame or to blame, but not necessarily blame .
 As long as history is account of what happened and is happening rather than of the logical alternatives, the period of glasnost and perestroika will remain linked to its extraordinary protagonist, a contradictory man of intelligence, optimism, energy, intensity, and self-confidence .
 Exactly what Gorbachev and his original associates, such as Eduard Shevardnadze and Alexander Yakovlev, had in mind when they began reforming the Soviet Union .
 The overwhelming factors in what transpired appear to have been a sincere desire to address the Soviet Union’s deepening problems . The dizzying power of contradictory forces unchained by even slight reform, and continual improvisation in the face of the unexpected .
 The unfolding events in the USSR and eastern Europe stunned everyone, especially those who had any regard for the communist system, and that includes by definition the entire Soviet leadership . The events in eastern Europe shocked everyone, including those who believed in the Soviet system .
 There may well be, however, one quite major exception to this almost total disjunction between purpose and accomplishment .
 Gorbachev, Shevardnadze insisted that one of the pillars of their new thinking was the absolute realization of the inadmissibility of nuclear war in human affairs . The U.S. and the Soviet Union and the United States should cooperate, he says .
 It can be argued that Soviet foreign policy came to reflect that realization . With all qualifications, it can't be said to be a Soviet policy .
 If so, the gain to the world was incalculable, although the realization itself is elementary, and its roots even in the Soviet Union largely preceded Gorbachev . The gains were incalable, but the gains were not always realized .
 The Warsaw Pact was renewed and extended for twenty years on April 26, 1985 . It was abolished, following the complete collapse of communism in eastern Europe, on February 25, 1991 .
 At the foundation of Gorbachev’s reform lay the recognition that the Soviet Union was facing a crisis . The Soviet Union faced a crisis in the 1980s and 1990s .
 When Gorbachev was named general secretary, his mandate was to address this crisis, first by admitting it publicly . The crisis was a major problem for the Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 Recognition of deepening “stagnation’s” was matched by recognition of cultural and ideological crisis . The term widely used to speak of the 1970s and early 1980s was widely used .
 Gorbachev and other party leaders acknowledged the widespread withdrawal from public life, the spread of alcoholism and drug addiction, the growth of crime, crime, “weakened respect for work,” pessimism, and cynicism .
 Gorbachev’s actions were shaped by a fairly well developed set of ideological beliefs, evident in his many speeches . The former Soviet leader rose through the ranks as Komsomol activist, party chief in the Stavropol region near the Caucasus .
 Gorbachev believed strongly in the ideals of Leninist socialism . He found it difficult to accept cynicism he found throughout much of Soviet life, including in the party . Most important was the tangible decline of Soviet society .
 Gorbachev argued that the country could be revitalized through a combination of ‘democratization’ and an improved vanguard . The Soviet Union could be revived through ‘democracy’ or ‘vanguard’, he said in a statement .
 Democratization was key to revitalizing the economy and people's faith in the socialist system . Democratization has been key in revitalizing people's confidence in the economy .
 Gorbachev constantly appealed to citizens to become more involved in public life and take more initiative . The former Soviet leader constantly appealed for citizens to take more responsibility .
 Lenin believed strong central authority was essential in times of change . At the same time, he also believed, following Lenin as well as a longer Russian political tradition, that strong central authorities were essential . Russia has a long tradition of central authority in its politics .
 For both democracy and strong power to be effective, certain qualities were necessary . For democracy, strong power was necessary, but certain qualities are necessary, says historian .
 Strong power is of no use, he insisted, if leaders are not of the highest quality, are not a true vanguard . Strong power can only be used if the quality of leaders is at the highest .
 Even before he came to power, he fought to improve the behavior of local leaders, to eradicate what he called bureaucratic boorishness, self-satisfaction, red tapeism, inertia, careerism, and incompetence .
 If economic stagnation was to be overcome, citizens and leaders alike would have to play a more active, committed, and responsible role in the country’s development . Citizens and leaders should play more active and responsible roles in development, she says .
 His language, as can be seen, was full of disgust for undisciplined behavior .
 Gorbachev was exceptionally hard working and refused to drink hard liquor . The former Soviet Union leader refused alcohol . He was known for his hard-working work .
 The emphasis on universal as opposed to class values was not entirely orthodox . These were clichés in Soviet ideology, though the emphasis was not always orthodox .
 Gorbachev took these clichés quite seriously and sought to make them real . More to the point, every indication is that he took the clichés seriously . The former Soviet leader sought to live up to the expectations of the West .
 The first two or three years of the Gorbachev regime, inaugurated on March 11, 1985, displayed a fairly “traditional” cast . The first 2 or 3 years of that regime, in the early 1980s, were a fairly "traditional"
 The new party secretary, then the youngest man in the Politburo, had to concentrate on strengthening his position . Over a period of time he effected a major turnover of ruling and high administrative personnel .
 On July 1, 1985, Shevardnadze became a member of the Politburo . The following day he was appointed foreign minister, replacing Andrei Gromyko, who was moved to a more ceremonial high office .
 Other new men entered the Politburo, while Viktor Grishin, Gorbachev's original rival for the position of party secretary, retired . Other new members of the party were also included in the party leadership .
 Gorbachev’s early talk about the need for reform was relatively bold, but actual policy was cautious and relatively traditional . In fact, the early 1980s was a relatively traditional approach to reform .
 Some have suggested he was biding his time until his power base was strong enough . Others have suggested that he was waiting for his political base to grow stronger .
 Others argue he was responding to his growing knowledge of the depth of the problems and the failure of his earliest measures . Others argue that he was reacting to the failures of his early measures .
 From March 1985 to the fall of 1986, his policies were quite similar to the proposals and exhortations of earlier Soviet reformers . In any case, from March 1985 until the fall 1986, he said .
 The draft plan was presented by Gorbachev in October 1985 . It called for doubling the national income in fifteen years . Special emphasis was on modernization of equipment and increase in labor productivity .
 This was to be realized by an economic policy of “acceleration,” which involved a major campaign against alcoholism, a struggle against absenteeism, and an anticorruption campaign .
 Allowing greater freedom of criticism in print and speech, though an important policy shift, was treated not as an end in itself but as a way to expose incompetent and corrupt managers or bureaucrats . The move was treated as an attempt to begin mobilizing society to participate in developing the economy .
 Almost none of Gorbachev's initial effects made any difference . Unfortunately, almost none of the initial effects of the Soviet-era regime made any significant changes .
 The government’s own economic, especially financial, policies led to budget deficits and inflation, thus made matters worse . Indeed, the government's own economic . policies . led to deficit and inflation .
 Before long under the new administration and its vacillating and confusing direction, the economy began to lose what cohesion it had had under Brezhnev without gaining anything to replace it . The economy began losing cohesion and cohesion under the leadership of the Soviet Union .
 On April 28, 1986, a nuclear reactor exploded in Chernobyl; the resulting medical and environmental catastrophe threw a glaring light on multiple Soviet deficiencies, including engineering .
 The tragic episode, treated at first in the firm tradition of Stalinist secrecy, eventually became an opening into a more radical glasnost . Indeed, that tragic episode became both an opening and a strong argument in its favor . It was treated in a firm tradition, treated in the
 Kadar of Hungary, Ceausescu of Romania, Honecker of East Germany, Gorbachev of the Soviet Union, Chinh of Vietnam, Jaruzelski of Poland, Castro of Cuba, Zhivkov of Bulgaria, Husak of Czechoslovakia, Hus
 In late 1986, Gorbachev made it clear that censorship would be relaxed and journals would be given much greater freedom to criticize and offer solutions to problems . In late 1990s, journals were given much more freedom to criticise and criticize .
 Reform-minded editors were put at the helm of leading publications and journals . They began discussing political and social problems, past and present, as never before . Reform- minded editors began discussing politics and social issues in their papers .
 Newly daring works of literature and history were published . Newly daring and previously banned works of fiction and history .
 The definition of anti-Soviet propaganda was greatly narrowed in a 1987 law . Dissident exiles like Andrei Sakharov were allowed to return home and be active in politics . Political prisoners were released .
 In 1987, directors of enterprises were given greater autonomy in setting prices, wages, and output targets . The move began a turn away from centralized planning in the 1980s .
 Laws on “individual labor activity” and cooperatives resulted in the emergence of the first private businesses since the 1920s . Private businesses are usually small service enterprises like cafes, but also distribution companies and even private banks .
 These new entrepreneurs, many of whom would make great fortunes after 1991, were mainly individuals who already had access to material and political resources, which meant primarily officials of the state and the party .
 Gorbachev insisted that these changes were consistent with “the socialist choice” the Soviet Union had made and would adhere to . This was to be a middle ground between the failed system of planned Communist economics and the exploitative economics of capitalism .
 These measures created opportunities for corrupt officials and organized crime to extort money from this emerging, but still fragile, private sector . These measures also created opportunities to corrupt officials, organized crime, officials say .
 The entire meeting was televised—an unprecedented level of openness and publicity for the party . The entire event was televised . The meeting was held in New York City .
 Speeches detailed the worsening economic conditions in the country, the problems in education and health care, the past lies about achievements, and some of the crimes of the past . Speeches also addressed the problems of the country's economic conditions .
 Divisions in the party also became clear, as conservatives castigated the press for excessive criticism . radicals like Yeltsin attacked the continuing privileges of the old party elite, he said .
 The old Supreme Soviet would be made into a smaller, full-time legislative body elected by the Congress . Congress would replace the old Soviet Supreme Soviet with a new, smaller, smaller body .
 This was the beginning of a process, it seemed, of shifting power away from the often distrustful and divided party and toward “formed state.”
 The elections to the new Congress in March 1989 saw unprecedented public mobilization and many official party candidates defeated, including by mavericks like Yeltsin . The elections were held in Russia's capital, Moscow .
 In 1990, Gorbachev created the new post of president of the USSR, to which the Congress of People’s Deputies elected him in March 1990 . To link his own power more to the reformed state than to the troublesome party, he created the post .
 This was not entirely a revolution from above nor an entirely coherent one . This was the first time the U.S. has seen a major change in the way it has done so far .
 He vacillates between allying himself with radicals and conservatives, eventually alienating both . Trying to maintain a centrist position, he vacillated between alliances with radicals, conservatives and moderates .
 Reform was spinning out of Gorbachev's control, often forcing him to leap forward to keep up with the changes . Reform was often leading him onto the defensive or forced him to jump forward . Reforms often led him to the defensive, leading him on the defensive .
 The party’s humiliation in the 1989 elections was a dramatic sign of this loss of control . The party's humiliation was a sign of its loss of power in the 1990s .
 The rise of nationalist and secessionist movements in the various republics, to be discussed later, was another was another .
 The public sphere of the press and even the streets became an arena . “We shall look at things realistically” declares a typical glasnost poster from 1987 .
 Intellectuals, journalists, and literary writers were publishing increasingly bold works in which no issue or argument seemed taboo . No issue of taboo seemed taboo in the 1960s .
 Mass demonstrations in favor of greater reform were organized, especially in Moscow . Demonstrations were organized by “informal” democratic organizations such as the Democratic Union, the Moscow Popular Front, Memorial, and Democratic Russia .
 Most dangerously, these years saw the revival of numerous nationalisms, suppressed but still alive in the Marxist superstate . Nationalisms were suppressed, suppressed and still alive, but still still alive .
 The new time of troubles, like the original one at the end of the sixteenth century and the beginning of the seventeenth, was to have its national phase . The new era of troubles was to be a national phase, and it was to become a national period .
 The Rise of Nationalisms and the Breakup of the Soviet Union . Because of the diversity, richness, and specificity of national experiences and actions in the last years of Soviet Union, it is impossible to present in a brief general account of the rise of nationalism and national movements .
 It is important to recall here that Soviet nationality policies themselves contributed to the rise of nationalism, or rather nationalisms, in the Soviet Union . The USSR's official ideal that the USSR was a multinational state and of its consequent policies to encourage national cultures and identities .
 Economic development, urbanization, and education also contributed to the rise of national and ethnic leaders . Economic development and urbanization contributed to rise of the leaders .
 As long as the economy was strong, national elites found good reason to feel loyal to the Soviet Union . National elites felt loyal to Soviet Union as long as economic prosperity was strong .
 The economic crisis made continued alliance seem less and less essential . Economic crisis made economic crisis seem less important .
 Once Gorbachev loosened the bonds on public expression, it became clear that Soviet policies had not eradicated national identities and aspirations . National aspirations and aspirations have not been eradicated by Soviet policies .
 At the same time, demands for greater autonomy were also about local power and independence from the stifling Soviet state .
 Nationalism was not simply a revival of the past, a return of the repressed, it was a return to the past . Nationalism is not merely a revival, it is a return, it's an attempt to revive the old .
 For many Soviet citizens, alienated from the Soviet system and even from Gorbachev's promises to make Soviet socialism work, nationalism offered an alternative faith, and an alternative path to prosperity .
 Lithuania was forced to join the Soviet Union only at the start of the Second World War . Lithuania had been independent states between the two world wars . Lithuania was one of the last independent nations to join Soviet Union .
 Greater freedom of expression under glasnost allowed memories of Soviet domination to come to the surface .
 Estonia proclaimed on November 17, 1988, the right to reject Soviet laws when they infringed on its autonomy . Estonia was the first large-scale noncommunist political coalition, the People’s Front, received recognition, in June 1988 .
 Estonian became the official language of the Estonian Republic in January 1989 . Lithuanian, Lithuanian and Latvian language also became official languages in Latvia . Estonian law was enacted in even more rigorous form a week later in Lithuania .
 In May 1989, Lithuanian legislature adopted a resolution seeking independence . Lithuanian statehood was adopted by Lithuanian parliament in May 1989 .
 A million Estonians, Latvians, and Lithuanians created a human chain on the fiftieth anniversary of the Nazi-Soviet Pact that ended the independence of the Baltic states . Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia formed the human chain in August 1989 .
 By the end of that year, the governments of the Baltic republics had all declared Soviet occupation and annexation of their countries to have been illegal .
 Lithuanians constituted at least three-quarters of the total population of their republic, Latvians and Estonians composed only a little more than half of theirs . All three new states tended toward rather exclusive policies that mandated a single official language and, for citizenship, a residential or familial connection
 In February 1991, 91 percent of the voters in Lithuania approved independence . In March, referendums in Estonia and Latvia gave independence a three to one majority . Many Russians and people of still other ethnic backgrounds wanted to escape the Soviet system .
 "Once the crisis became obvious, he attempted persuasion, political maneuvering with the many elements involved, including different kinds of communists, and coercion" "Never to the extent of mass military repression," he says .
 In 1990, he went to Vilnius, the capital of Lithuania, hoping to convince both leaders and milling crowds to check the nationalist course of development, but his trip was in vain .
 Lithuanian republic declared independence on May 16, 1990 . Oil blockade began in mid-April 1990 and forced republic to suspend independence declaration .
 More violent coercion consisted of such incidents as army intervention in Vilnius, resulting in the death of 14 people, and assault by Black Berets on a Latvian government ministry building in Riga, in January 1991 .
 Gorbachev objected to the aggressiveness and impatience of the movement in the Baltic republics, not to their goal of independence, which could be legitimately obtained in time . Personally he retained the hope that they would decide to remain in a reformed Soviet Union .
 While nationalisms developed in a parallel and cooperative way among the Baltic states, they were on a collision course in Transcaucasia . Nationalisms developed parallel and cooperatively among Baltic states .
 Armenia, Georgia, Azerbaijan have quite different cultures and histories . Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia and Azerbaijan have very different cultures . Armenia and Azerbaijan are both located in the Caucasus .
 Azerbaijan, not a distinct nation-state until Soviet times, represented the Turkic element so prominent in the past and present life of the area . Azerbaijan was not an Azerbaijani nation until Soviet-era Soviet times .
 Most Georgians are Orthodox, most Armenians are Eastern Christians but not Orthodox . Most Azerbaijanis are Turkic-speaking Muslims . Most Armenians and Georgians live in Eastern Christians .
 People of the Baltic republics could agree on 1940 as the dark year when Soviet power crushed their independence . Also, the people of the Caucasus each had particular experiences and memories of recent history .
 Authorities blamed local officials and started an investigation, but Communist control could not be restored . Communist control in Moscow was not restored after the incident .
 The local party, which, as in Lithuania, tried to play an independent role, lost the crucial election . Georgia emerged with a noncommunist government headed by Zviad Gamsakhurdia .
 On April 1, 1991, Georgians responded to the question of whether they agreed “that the state independence of Georgia should be restored on the basis of the independence act of May 26, 1918,” with a turnout of 90.53 percent of the 3 million Georgian voters .
 In the summer of 1991, there even existed widespread interest in restoring the ancient Georgian monarchy . In the person of Giorgi Bagration, a racecar driver then living in Spain, was recognized as heir to the throne .
 Georgians did their best to limit and control those of the constituent minority groups in their state . The Adzharians, the Abkhazians, and perhaps especially the Ossetians, were often to the point of fighting .
 Most extensive fighting in Transcaucasia took place between Armenians and Azerbaijanis and their respective republics . The most extensive fighting took place in the entire Soviet Union .
 The hostility of the two peoples came to center on Nagorno-Karabakh, an Armenian-populated area within the republic of Azerbaijan . The area is located in the Azerbaijak Republic of Azerbaijan, a self-proclaimed region of Armenia .
 Armenians claimed it for themselves on grounds of nationality and of alleged mistreatment of its inhabitants . Armenians claim the land on the basis of nationality . The Armenians said they were mistreated by Armenians .
 Azerbaijanis refused to give up what they considered part of their national homeland . The Azerbaijanis are now in possession of Azerbaijan .
 Demonstrations and violence broke out on both sides, notably in Sumgait where anti-Armenian crowds rioted for two days . Violence broke out between protesters and protesters .
 Azerbaijan blockaded railroads carrying vital supplies into Armenia and Armenia deported Azeris . Armenia deported Azerbaijanis after blockading railroads into Armenia . Azerbaijan blocked railroads with vital supplies in Armenia .
 At least twenty-five people were killed in Baku, Azerbaijan, in January 1990 . Attacks on Armenians and some Russians were particularly traumatic .
 On January 20, the Soviet army intervened against the Azerbaijani rioters, who were also seeking independence . The Soviet military intervened against rioters seeking independence from Azerbaijan .
 The central government was blamed both for intervening and for intervening late . Both sides were accused of inflaming hostility among nationalities for its own purposes .
 The Armenian-Azerbaijani border was transformed into front lines . The opponents were well provided with weapons and matériel stolen or otherwise obtained from the Soviet army .
 Although active fighting gradually abated, the situation remained volatile . The situation was still volatile in the early 1990s .
 Masses of people migrated between the two republics and even to Moscow and other distant points . Masses migrated between Russia and the Soviet Union .
 Armenians were brutally moved by the Soviet army into the Armenian republic from their native villages in Azerbaijan . Some Armenians have been brutally moved into the Soviet-Armenian republic . Armenians are now living in the Armenian Republic .
 The Russian republics proved among the less self-assertive major components of the former Soviet Union . They were deeply affected by the political and nationalist turmoil .
 The party and the administration were relatively successful in maintaining their positions in Soviet Central Asia . Party and administration was relatively successful .
 The explanation for that success may well lie in the comparative underdevelopment of the area, with its extreme reliance on a single crop , poverty, its poverty and its population explosion, and especially its dependence on huge government subsidies .
 From the Russian point of view, the struggles for independence in the Baltic, the Caucasus, and Central Asia were less emotionally fraught than the struggles of Slavs to free themselves from Moscow’s rule .
 Russian history can be said to have begun in what later became Ukraine . This was especially the case with Ukraine, whose history was so intertwined with Russia’s .
 Ukrainian politicians appealed to all the inhabitants of the republic . In contrast to more exclusive Baltic nationalists, Ukrainian politicians appeal to all of the inhabitants .
 Ukraine gave some indication of willingness to participate in certain kinds of associations but always with reservations and conflicting problems . As to its relation to Soviet and, later, Russian governments, Ukrainian governments, later expressed reluctance to participate, but always had reservations .
 Problems included Ukrainian sovereignty over Crimea, management and disposal of atomic weapons, and division and control of the armed forces .
 The eastern and the smaller western parts of Ukraine are sharply different from each other . Ukraine's eastern and western parts have sharply different views of the country .
 It was especially in the latter, Soviet only since 1939 or 1945, that the many-sided religious revival included the restoration, at times a militant restoration, of the formerly prohibited Uniate Church, a Catholic jurisdiction . anticommunism and anti-Russian nationalism thrived while anticomm
 Belorussians, whose history and culture was closely connected to that of Ukraine and Russia, had a less developed nationalist movement . Belorussianians had a much less developed nationalism movement .
 The leaders of the republic tended to be more loyal to Moscow and more willing to compromise with Moscow’s desires . In any case, the leaders of Russia's republic tend to be loyal to the Kremlin .
 If the USSR began to collapse as minority national republics asserted their sovereignty, it became all but inevitable that the USSR was doomed . In March 1990, the Russian Soviet Federated Socialist Republic did this .
 Gorbachev and his government received no support from the Russian republic as they were trying to control the non-Russian nationalities of the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union tried to control non-Russians .
 The leaders of the Russian government began to treat the ‘center’’—Soviet authorities in Moscow—as standing in the way of Russia’s progress . They insisted on Russian “autonomy’ and even “sovereignty” and supported other
 Russians enjoyed certain advantages within the Soviet Union, such as the privileged position of their language . Russians enjoyed a greater acceptance of their cultural and historical past .
 Gorbachev had brought Yeltsin to leadership positions in Moscow in 1985 from provincial Sverdlovsk . Yeltsins had been party boss in Sverdalovsk, where Yeltsina had been a provincial party boss . Gorbache had brought him to Moscow in
 Gorbachev saw in him a fellow reformer but soon found him to be a most difficult ally . He bridled at authority and demanded a faster pace of change, demanding a more rapid change .
 Yeltsin delivered a harsh speech before the Central Committee criticizing the slow pace of reform, the obstructionism of the central party apparatus and especially the Politburo, and especially Gorbachev's complacent and hesitant leadership .
 In turn, he was denounced by Gorbachev and the Politburo and dismissed as head of the Moscow party organization . In the 1980s, he became a member of the Communist Party in Moscow .
 Yeltsin was the first freely elected president of the Russian Soviet Federated Socialist Republic . In 1989, he won a landslide victory to the new Congress of People’s Deputies from the city of Moscow . Patriarch Alexis II of Russian Orthodox Church blessing Yeltsins in 1989 .
 In the Congress, he continued to speak out boldly against privilege and corruption . In the meetings of which were televised, he spoke out publicly against privilege .
 He began to focus his efforts on the emerging Russian rather than Soviet political arena, however, however .
 In March 1990, he won election to the newly created parliament of the Russian republic . He was elected head of its Supreme Soviet .
 Yeltsin won the election on June 12, 1991, a stunning display of democratic procedure and popular support . He then convinced the Russian parliament to hold a referendum that approved creating a new post of president directly elected by citizens .
 Elections had already brought other liberals to office in the Russian republic . Anatolii Sobchak became mayor of Leningrad and Gavriil Popov, of Moscow .
 Liberalism combined with nationalism and a religious revival in Russia . Historic towns, places, and streets regained their old names . The white-blue-red flag and double-headed eagle of the tsarist state were restored .
 The day Yeltsin was elected president, the Leningrad voters also decided that their city should again become St. St. Petersburg . The city was renamed St. Vladimir in 1991 .
 Russian leaders made it clear that their vision of Russian statehood was based not on ethnic Russian nationalism . This was on the rise in the Russian population and associated with a number of right-wing nationalist groups . At the same time, Russia was seen as a multinational federation .
 Dazzling change acquired a certain operatic quality, while the basic processes of economic and social life were grinding down . Immense problems, of course, continued; indeed, the entire dazzling change .
 The mere administration of the RSFSR became a near impossibility, with everyone from the Tatars on the Volga to the Yakuts in eastern Siberia . The nomadic tribes of the far north lay claim to their historic rights, their diamonds, or their reindeer .
 The excruciating interplay between Gorbachev and Yeltsin came to occupy center stage on the Soviet scene . It was part of a series of attempts by each to drive the other out of politics, including a collaboration .
 If we view the unraveling of the Soviet system in a broader context, we can see that it was in eastern Europe that this disintegration began, especially subject nations pulling away from Moscow’s control, began .
 Gorbachev's decision was a matter of both political principle and reasoned pragmatism, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: "This was a case of political principle, reasoned pragmism"
 The Soviet leader initially naively believed that there should be perestroika in the satellite countries, as well as in the Soviet Union . He thought restructuring would only strengthen the system, and that restructuring would help strengthen it .
 He concluded that nothing could be done to save the old order . But once the system began unravelling, he concluded that it would be impossible .
 Only tanks could block change in eastern Europe, which would have violated Gorbachev's often stated opposition to foreign military intervention in the internal politics of sovereign nations . In any case, he understood that tanks could not be used forever .
 1989 witnessed the collapse of communism in Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria, and, of course, East Germany . East Germany was to disappear entirely through absorption into the Federal Republic .
 The once-formidable Berlin Wall acquiring souvenir status as it was disassembled piece by piece . Masses of refugees crossing newly opened frontiers, the corpses of Ceausescu and his wife, executed immediately after the overturn in Romania, and so many other episodes .
 Each national case had its own peculiarities, such as the importance of West Germany for what happened in and to East Germany . But there were also common characteristics, including Solidarity and the Catholic Church in Poland .
 Communist regimes proved unable to survive intellectual and political freedom . The election in Poland on June 4, 1989 marked the end of the Soviet-era Soviet Union era .
 Much of the establishment survived the fall of communism in Romania and Bulgaria . The issues were the continuation of privilege and the brakes that old personnel might put on the democratic development of these countries, not the fear of a return to Ceausescu and Zhivkov .
 Instead of mounting any kind of rearguard action, Gorbachev fully accepted the unification of Germany . The unification earned German gratitude, as well as advantageous financial provisions for the withdrawal and relocation of Soviet troops .
 The solution of the German problem and the Soviet abandonment of troublesome eastern Europe meshed well with Gorbachev's policy of peace and international cooperation . Moreover, the solution of Germany's problem and abandonment of eastern Europe was well-received .
 Gorbachev's foreign policy shifted in a more liberal direction after 1987 . He and his foreign minister Eduard Shevardnadze pushed for more liberal policies .
 Soviet world power in the future would be based not mainly on military might but on cooperation with other world powers in developing solutions to international problems and respecting national sovereignty . Doctrinally, he began to argue .
 In 1989, Soviet army troops finally left Afghanistan, although the Soviet Union continued to provide massive military aid to the government forces in the seemingly endless civil war .
 Negotiations with the United States resulted in an agreement to reduce certain kinds of armaments . Agreement was reached at the end of July 1991 .
 Commentators noted at the time that the new spirit of cooperation was even more significant than the particular provisions of the treaty . Commentators said that the treaty was more important than the specific provisions .
 Gorbachev and his country were rapidly becoming respected supporters of world order . Some disagreements and tensions remained, for example, in connection with the Japanese determination to regain some small islands in the Kurile chain seized by the Soviet Union .
 The Soviet Union played a key role in 1990 in the crisis and war following the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait, although the Soviet Union did not intervene militarily . They played that role in the aftermath of that war in 1991 when international attention shifted to the continuous Arab-Israeli conflict .
 In October 1990, Gorbachev was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for peace .
 Gorbachev's foreign policy could be considered a catastrophe, a great success, or both, depending largely on the point of view . The former Soviet Union leader's policy could have been a catastrophe or a success .
 Gorbachev was certainly more popular outside Russia than within it . In any case, he was popular outside of Russia .
 Gorbachev had hoped glasnost would unleash popular enthusiasm for his efforts at reform . He hoped it would help cure the “spiritual crisis” in the country, he said .
 The flood of open discussion about the evils of the past seemed to produce not new optimism about reform but derision for all the ideals of the socialist project . "The flood of openness produced not new enthusiasm about reform," says Julian Zelizer .
 The present was filled with high idealism and greater opportunities to make one’s voice heard, but only decline in everyday material life seemed part of the same long and tragic story of Soviet history . The present seemed to be filled with idealism but decline in material life .
 By 1990, gross domestic product and industrial growth rates were declining while retail prices were on the rise . In 1990, the economy was on the verge of recession .
 Industrial decline and inflation were beginning to spin out of control in 1991 . In 1991, industrial decline was beginning to be in full control .
 Shortages of consumer goods were more severe than in recent memory, producing long lines at stores, and there was even fear of famine .
 Crime, prostitution, and other social problems are on the rise in the U.S. Meanwhile crime, prostitution and other issues are rising in the country .
 A growing budget deficit and intensive printing of new money (one of the few things not in short supply) only made matters worse . A growing debt and a growing deficit of more than $1.4 billion have led to the collapse of the economy .
 The decree failed to check inflation or limit crime, while it hit hard the average working citizens and pensioners . Very poorly managed, that decree . It hit hard .
 In fact, proliferating decrees and directives only led to utter confusion, says President Obama . "In fact, proliferation of decrees, directives only lead to confusion"
 With the new self-assertion of the union republics and of lesser jurisdictions, it was not at all clear who owned or managed what . With the union . republics, it is not at any clear who owns or manages what .
 The same piece of property or sphere of economic activity could be claimed by the central government, a union republic, a regional administration, or a municipality .
 Reforming measures by all kinds of authorities were at best partial, haphazard, and difficult, if not impossible, to implement . Reforms measures by government authorities are often partial, but difficult to implement, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Major general economic reform, while repeatedly promised, kept being postponed . Major general reform was repeatedly promised but kept being delayed .
 Armenia earthquake in 1988 killed 25,000 people and left another half a million homeless . Train collision and gas explosion near Asha in the Urals in June 1989 killed more than 100,000 . Soviet system underlined deficiencies, including incompetence, of the Soviet system .
 Ecological issues loomed ever larger as the nature and extent of the ecological damage in the country became better known . The country's ecological damage became more and more visible in recent years .
 Glasnost provided information about all these matters and contributed to the rehabilitation of many Communists executed in the purges of the 1930s as well as of Russian cultural figures abroad .
 Gorbachev and his policies were attacked from the right, from the left, and from every direction, says historian . "Gorbachev" was attacked from right, left and right, but attacked from all sides, he says .
 Gorbachev was leader of both the party and the state in the Soviet Union . The novelty of the new arrangement consisted in the fact that the state position could now be used against the party .
 Gorbachev succeeded Gromyko to the title of president in October 1988 . He was elected by the Congress of People’s Deputies on April 25, 1989, and was elected to the post of president of USSR in 1990 .
 As sway of the Politburo and the party declined, close advisory bodies to the president became more important . The eight-member Security Council of the USSR, which succeeded it, acquired greater significance . The Presidential Council lasted from March to December 1990 .
 Gorbachev was granted greater powers to appoint ministers, conduct international negotiations, and control executive organs . He was granted more powers in order to control the government .
 He was given special authority to deal with economic problems and strengthen ‘law and order’ in the country, including by decree .
 Speculation was rife that Gorbachev might abandon the party altogether and stake everything on the state administration and reform . In the summer of 1991, speculation was rife about the state of reform .
 President Obama won more than enough party support to carry it with him on his wayward way . But he turned in the opposite direction, winning more party support .
 Often it seems impossible to distinguish his own projects, plans, and aims from the political and other tactical concessions and compromises he had to make, and even from extraneous elements imposed on him by other political forces in the Soviet Union .
 The net result was a tortuous course most notable for its meandering between reform and restraint . "The net result of this is the result of the tortuous process of reform," the author says .
 Gorbachev retreated, moderating plan by borrowing from less radical market-reform proposals . He soon gutting it of all its key measures, while relying ever more strongly on the old administrative system and his own powers .
 Gorbachev was seen to be retreating from radical reform and making common cause with party conservatives . He was also seen to have retreated from radical reforms .
 In December 1990, he purged from his government many liberals and centrists, placing conservatives in some of the most powerful government positions . He also granted new powers to the police and the army acting as police .
 Many democrats became convinced that cooperation with Gorbachev was no longer possible . The Soviet-Russian alliance collapsed in 1986 after a series of years of tension .
 Shevardnadze, one of Gorbachev’s closest allies, resigned as foreign minister in protest and warning . It was at just this time she resigned as Foreign Minister .
 Gorbachev more enthusiastic than ever in the cause of economic and general reform, although still without specifics or a timetable . Yet spring and summer brought another turning, with another turning . Still, there are still no specifics or timetable for reform .
 Gregory Grossman's testimony to congressional committees on June 25, 1991 . Grossman gave a compelling presentation of the nature and the problem of the Soviet economic collapse in 1991 .
 Less than a decade ago, serious Western observers could still seriously consider whether the global economic competition would eventually be ‘won’ by the East, with all that implied for the world’s future . The East is now the dominant region in the world, but the West is
 The Soviet economy fell even deeper into destitution and disorder, with all that that would imply for the world’s future . Today, equally serious people . advocate Marshall-like assistance from the West in the hundreds of billions of dollars .
 Although the present economic condition is indeed catastrophic, it has not been quite as unexpected as one might have assumed from appearances alone . The present economic conditions are indeed catastrophic but are not quite unexpected, says David Cameron .
 And consequent steady retardation of economic growth, and actual decline, he says . And therefore, he adds .
 One could extend this dismal list of the underlying economic factors (not tomention the political, social, and ethnic ones) that have been propelling the Soviet economy for decades .
 It is difficult to imagine another communist leader, and it would have to be one, who could have discredited the shams of the past . That moment arrived under Gorbachev, not because Gorbachachev is the most skilled economic reformer the USSR could have sooner or later produced
 This situation of economic, social, and political crisis and uncertainty was the setting for the final drama, which brought down the whole Soviet system . The Soviet system was brought down by the collapse of the Soviet Union, writes CNN's John Defterios .
 The Soviet Union was the focus of the Soviet Union in the 1980s . But it was the specific question of preserving Soviet Union that provoked this last act, he says .
 Referendum in March 1991 showed majority support for keeping Soviet Union together but on new terms in which the “sovereignty” of each republic is guaranteed . Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, Armenia, Georgia, and Moldavia refused to participate in the voting .
 The Congress of People’s Deputies approved a plan to create a Union of Soviet Sovereign States . A great deal of economic and administrative authority devolved to the constituent states .
 On August 19, one day before the treaty was to be signed, a State Committee for the State of Emergency arrested Gorbachev at his vacation house . They placed tanks and soldiers in the center of Moscow, vowed to protect the Soviet Union against “political adventurers” who were
 The coup collapsed within three days in the face of mass demonstrations in the streets, resistance by republic governments . Yeltsin’s daring speech from the top of a tank in front of the Moscow parliament building led to the collapse of the coup .
 In the wake of the coup, Gorbachev returned to his post, but little remained of his power . In the 1980s, he was forced to step down as a result of a coup .
 Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia declared immediate independence, which received international recognition . Lithuanians, Latvians, Estonia, and Latvia declared independence from Soviet-held countries .
 On December 9, the leaders of the Russian, Ukrainian, and Belorussian republics met to declare the USSR abolished . The Commonwealth of Independent States was formed from a loose association of states to be called the Commonwealth .
 Within a couple of weeks, the remaining republics declared their independence as well . Within the next few weeks, they will declare their independence . The other republics will also declare independence .
 On December 25, 1991, Gorbachev went on television to announce his resignation as president of a country that, in reality, no longer existed . In reality, the Soviet Union had never existed . Gorbaugh announced his resignation on television .
 A triumphant Boris Yeltsin stood out as the central figure in a new and highly unsettled situation . A triumphant Yeltsins stood out in a triumphant moment in the Soviet Union . The Russian president was assassinated in March 1989 .
 The disappearance of the Soviet Union proved to be as unexpected and sudden as its appearance, and as controversial . Concluding Remarks: The disappearance proved as unexpected as the appearance of Soviet Union .
 USSR seemed to receive a universal recognition of its might and its durability after the victory over Germany in the Second World War and attaining the position of one of only two superpowers in the world . Bitterly hated as well as enthusiastically admired during three-quarters of a century of its
 Observers interpreted Soviet history in terms of continuity and stabilization bringing it closer to Western nations . The death of Stalin, the death of Khrushchev, or the ascendancy of Khrrushchev .
 The Soviet Union would join democratic states as a major partner, perhaps even with much to offer . Soviet Union joined democratic states in the 1980s, perhaps with much more to offer.
 There were plenty of signs that the Soviet system was failing, however . The Soviet system failed, however, in the early 1980s .
 Gorbachev admitted as much himself when he spoke of a “spiritual crisis” in Soviet society . The Soviet Union was suffering from a ‘spiritual . crisis’ in the 1980s .
 Social problems such as alcoholism and crime were among many signs that the Soviet Union was a mammoth power with clay feet . Widespread pessimism and cynicism, disillusionment with the promises of Marxist rhetoric, and the rise of cultural values and tastes at odds with socialist norms .
 Gorbachev's reforms were premised on the optimistic faith that the Soviet people could be inspired again by the humanistic ideals of socialism . The system itself needed only to be improved not scrapped, says the former leader .
 One can admire Gorbachev for his idealism and recognize him as one in a long line of Communist visionaries . One of the world's longest-serving Communist leaders, he was an idealist and a Communist .
 As early as the first years of the Soviet regime, certain economists pointed to the flaws of the economic system . Janos Kornai, Gregory Grossman and Vladimir Trem] studied the second, unofficial, Soviet economy from the vantage point of American universities .
 Soviet Union did well in terms of a traditional industrialization based on coal and iron . But it could not keep up with the West in cybernetics, computers, and in general the new communication technology .
 Soviet citizens were better acquainted with the rest of the world . Modern technology made isolation always more difficult, and isolation more difficult .
 The arms race continued to cost the Soviet Union twice the percentage of its much smaller productive capacity than was the case for the U.S. It cost the United States twice as much as it did for the Soviets . The United States won the arms race in the early 1950s .
 Possibly the worst was the inability to see reality through the prism of ideology . Possibly the best was the lack of understanding of the reality of the world .
 Gorbachev apparently believed that he could go to Vilnius and persuade the Lithuanians not to secede . Indeed he believed he could persuade them not to do so .
 As to Gorbachev's contribution, it was extremely important from any point of view, he says . But it was not what he had planned, he adds . The former Soviet leader's contribution was 'extremely important' to the West .
 It was most impressive for those who believe in the great power of totalitarianism and the inability of a fragmented society to challenge it successfully .
 In any case, there glasnost and other measures meant to strengthen the system led to a complete collapse . The system collapsed in any way, and there was no need for a complete overhaul of the system .
 Our country has not been lucky...it was decided to carry out this Marxist experiment on us, he says . "Fate pushed us in precisely this direction. Fate pushed us," he writes .
 "It has simply pushed us off the road that the world’s civilized countries have taken," he says . "We are not going to go on the road," he adds .
 Firm and economically supported state stability is a good thing for Russia and its people . It is long overdue that we learn to live according to this normal human logic. Firm and economic stability is good for Russia .
 Many Russians have hoped for the same. From the perspective of the U.S. and western Europe, the idea of transition usually has been assumed to mean market capitalism and liberal democracy .
 The passage of time is still too brief to be able confidently to define the political, social, and cultural shape of Russia after communism . Russia is still a nation that has a long history of political and social change .
 The pervasiveness of “posts” in speaking of Russia since 1991 reminds us of the uncertainty of the present and the weight of the past . Russia's post-communist, post-socialist and post-totalitarian tendencies in the country's history remind us of uncertainty
 Russians have been divided and uncertain about where they are as a country and often even where they want to go . Most have spoken of a desire for Russia to become a "normal" society, though even that category has meant different things to different people .
 This may partly explain the deep contradictions in both politics and economics in these years, says Simon Tisdall .
 Boris Nikolaevich Yeltsin was a construction engineer by profession and a party administrator by occupation . He rose by dint of hard and diligent work to the top ranks of the party . He was one of Russia's most successful presidents .
 Like Gorbachev, he evidently believed in the system and made it work . He was skilled at making it work.
 He fell out with both Gorbachev and the party over the slowness of reform . But then, he fell out . He fell . out with Gorbama over the slowess of reforms .
 Yeltsin’s career, as well as his pronouncements and writings, depict an extremely high-strung individual, a courageous fighter, and a very poor loser, on occasion volatile and unpredictable . The two autobiographical books he produced with his friend the young journalist Valentin
 Frequent and at times very serious illnesses and heavy drinking complicate evaluations of his actions and aims . Frequent illness and drinking also complicate evaluations, he says .
 Yeltsin surged past Gorbachev as a radical, i.e. favoring the breakup of the Soviet Union and major reform of Russia . Still, it is worth remembering that Yeltsins' rise in Russia was a radical .
 Yeltsin broke with that system more sharply and decisively than Gorbachev . He came from a still poorer, indeed semi-starving, background, and had no cultural baggage except that provided by the Soviet system .
 Yeltsin's ideological reorientation did not change his career-long political manner of an authoritarian communist boss . On the other hand, Yeltsins continued to be an authoritarian Communist Party leader .
 Both sides acted illegally, says President Obama . "Time and again both sides act illegally," he says .
 Among Russian leaders of the past, Peter the Great had long been his favorite . It is telling that among Russian leaders, Peter was his favorite, he says .
 Yeltsin came to power with a program for changing Russia in which negative goals were much clearer than positive aims . Yeltsins' program for change was a program that focused on negative goals, rather than positive goals .
 He was not an ideological militant, but a disillusioned communist, he said . Indeed, he was not ideological militant . He said: "He was not a militant but a ... disillusioned Communist"
 It was, therefore, a practical necessity to introduce a market economy, multiparty democracy, and the freedoms of press and speech that these required . It was therefore, therefore the need to introduce the market economy and multiparty democracies .
 He wished to see Russia become a “normal” and “civilized” nation, respected in the world . Russia is integrated into the global capitalist economy, he said .
 He opposed Gorbachev’s efforts as too hesitant . These new convictions made him oppose Gorbavachev's efforts to reform the USSR .
 He became impatient for change and willing to personally challenge the establishment . Indeed, he became intensely impatient and became impatient with change .
 He was convinced, especially after his election as president of the Russian republic in a contested election on June 12, 1991 (defeating Gorbachev's preferred candidate), that he embodied popular opinion .
 His heroic defiance of the August 1991 coup, standing on a tank in front of the Russian parliament, cemented his popularity as a figure leading Russians in their effort to break with the Soviet system .
 August 1991 to October 1993 (sometimes referred to as the “first Russian republic) began with radical reform from above and ended with growing polarization and open conflict . October 1993 to August 1998, marked by Yeltsin's growing power but also by deepening problems, even crisis, in the
 Yeltsin put economic change at the top of his agenda, but had little understanding of economics . He repeatedly put his confidence in such economic reformers as Anatolii Chubais, Yegor Gaidar, or Sergei Kiriyenko .
 The enormous difficulties of the reform process and the opposition of the increasingly powerful interests that did not want economic reform, made the president retreat repeatedly and try something else . The president retreats repeatedly and tries something else, including a new economic policy .
 Yeltsin, like Gorbachev before him, was vilified from all sides . In this tortuous process, Yeltsins, like his predecessors, were vilified by all sides of the party .
 Yeltsin’s support in opinion polls would drop to as low as 2 or even 1 percent . Once the most acclaimed politician in Russia, Yeltsins' support in polls would fall to 1 percent or 2 percent .
 Yeltsin refused to die either physically, in spite of a very dangerous bypass operation and constant illness, or politically, but actively reemerged, greatly assisted by the extremely strong position of the president in the Russian constitution .
 The Russian president's ability to survive and even to remain, at least in a sense, on top of Russian politics, has baffled many observers . Some observers have been despairing at the lack of stability in Russia's politics .
 The year 1992 began with a radical economic program of “shock therapy” developed by Gaidar, Chubais, and other young Russian economists brought into the government, and influenced by Western economic advisors .
 Shock therapy was intended to “cure’t the Russian economy of its attachments to central state planning and Russian citizens of their passivity as economic individuals . Russian citizens were encouraged to become more aware of the importance of the economy and its passivity .
 Shock therapy was as much a political and cultural as an economic program . It has been argued that like Stalin’s economic revolution from above, shock therapy was about destroying the communist economy as much as building the foundations for a capitalist one .
 Yeltsin was attracted to this breakthrough strategy and to promises of rapid success . In any case, Yeltsins was attracted by promises of rapidly success .
 He repeatedly assured the population that the pain from shock therapy would last no more than six months to a year . He repeatedly told the public that it would be no longer painful than a year to shock .
 The chief economist of the World Bank would later observe that Yeltsin’s reforms were inspired by a nearly mystical faith in the market, which underplayed the role of the state in economic transition . The need first to create institutional frameworks for effective markets is to create effective markets,
 In practice, reform was uneven, protracted, and created much suffering . Some economists argued that it was the incompleteness of reform that was the main source of problems . Others proposed a still more gradual course to allow social institutions and attitudes to adapt .
 Yeltsin often modified the radical proposals for reform he was given . In any case, faced with opposition in parliament by communists and nationalists, the powerful interests of vested elites .
 The pace of change was slowed, plans to cut subsidies to some industries were lessened or scrapped . Most agricultural property remained nationalized and most agricultural property was nationalized .
 Price controls lifted on almost all goods as were many subsidies for industry . Price controls were lifted on most of the country's goods .
 Starting in 1992, state firms were turned into joint-stock companies . Citizens were given vouchers to help buy shares, though it was mainly insider managers .
 In practice, directors continued to control most enterprises . Ownership began to accumulate in a smaller number of hands as shares were re-sold . Organized criminal “mafias” gained growing influence in economy .
 Huge industries were sold by the government to influential wealthy individuals at a fraction of their value . Banks and individuals to the government were not paid back . The government sold the industries to influential individuals, often through “loans” by banks and individuals .
 Private enterprise spread rapidly in Russia, ranging from the activities of leading international companies to those of the uncounted and often miserably poor local entrepreneurs . On the one hand, private enterprise has spread rapidly, including from international companies .
 Commercial banks and stock exchanges were established and foreign investment grew . Foreign investment grew in the 1950s and 1960s .
 St. Petersburg and other cities acquired a great variety of consumer goods of every kind, mostly imported, impossible even to imagine in Soviet times . In Soviet times, the Russians were able to import a wide range of goods .
 A new class of prosperous Russians, mocked for their crass materialism as ‘new Russians, appeared. A new Russian class of wealthy Russians appeared. The new Russians were mocked for being materialistic .
 Because Russians now faced no restrictions on travel abroad, tourism grew, as did new colonies of rich Russians abroad . Russia's rich Russians now face no restrictions abroad, and tourists grew .
 Agriculture was in shambles, with the old structure in disarray and no effective substitute in place . Agriculture is in a state of disarray, and there is no effective replacement in place for the old system . Agriculture has been in a long line of problems since the 1970s .
 As Russian manufacturing declined, imports grew, though the majority of the population could not afford them . The majority of Russian manufacturing grew, but many Russians were unable to afford imports .
 In Moscow, whole streets were lined with people selling off personal goods . In fact, in cities like Moscow, people were lining up to sell personal items .
 Citizens complained that reform was all shock and no therapy . Citizens complained about the lack of therapy in the country's new government .
 Critics argue gradual reform would have been less disruptive . Many critics argue that gradual reform was not only possible but would have led to less disruptive reforms .
 Other scholars blame the disruptions and chaos on the difficult circumstances under which the reforms were enacted, not least being an economy already in rapid decline . Others see these actions as a “de-monopolizing revolution” that aligned Russia with the rest of the world .
 Yeltsin’s very low approval ratings by the late 1990s indicate that the critical view was predominant . The same arguments can be seen in the Russian population, though Yeltsins' approval ratings were very low .
 In the early 1990s, discontented citizens took to the streets, especially in the early 90s, to protest .
 In 1992 and the years following to hear Russians talk of impending catastrophe, an anti-reform coup d'état, and possibly civil war . Indeed, it was common in 1992 to hear Russian talk of an impending catastrophe . In 1992, Russia was in the throes of a
 The declining economy hurt tax revenues, but the disorder in the country meant that taxes were often left uncollected or deliberately unpaid . In any case, the disorder meant that tax was often left unpaid .
 The government kept borrowing money to stay afloat and sought large foreign loans . The government has sought foreign loans to keep afloat .
 Short of funds, the government fell months behind in paying wages and salaries, and this lack of payments and lack of money spread throughout the economy . The government has been unable to pay salaries and wages .
 The situation was made worse by the fact that the Soviet Union had never had a strong social security system, especially if we exclude the social services of the very enterprises that were collapsing . The situation is made worse .
 Because of a drastic shortage of funds, such state institutions as the prison system and the armed forces themselves reached a desperate state . The prison system is in a state of crisis because of a lack of funds .
 Prisoners' conditions, political persecution and punishment aside, declined compared to the Soviet period . Prisoners’ conditions, including political persecution, have declined compared with the Soviet era .
 Soldiers and officers were “advised” by their superiors to fish, hunt, farm, and gather mushrooms in order to survive . The federal government accumulated enough cash to pay military wage arrears .
 As usual, the situation is more complicated than a brief summary can indicate . The situation was more complicated, as usual, but it's more complicated .
 The penury of the army resulted partly because the high command and certain other elements were blocking its effective reduction in size . The high command was blocking the effective reduction of size in the army .
 Other interests kept hanging on to the heavy and largely obsolete defense industry .
 It proved very difficult to close mines, even when they operated at a loss or became superfluous . And it proved very hard to close Mines, even if they operated in a loss .
 Entrenched administrators on top had a common cause with workers who were losing their jobs, often with nothing to replace them . Administrators on top were on top with workers losing jobs often with no replacement .
 With all the variations and qualifications, the financial catastrophe loomed ever larger . Yet with all the . variations and . qualifications, financial . problems loomed . larger .
 The central Russian government found it very difficult or impossible to control and sometimes simply to influence the component parts of the huge Russian state even after the 14 non-Russian republics had separated themselves .
 Only Chechnya has fought a major war for independence . Eventually eighty-nine distinct autonomous units claimed often far-reaching rights and privileges .
 As regional interests and electoral democracy gained ground, local officials had all the less reason to obey Moscow . Local officials now have less reason than to obey Russia .
 Some people quickly became enormously rich from the unhinged economy . Exploiting privatization or exporting oil, gas, metals and other valuable materials abroad, often with the aid of special permissions or even illegally .
 In fact, very much more capital left Russia than came in the form of loans, aid, and investments put together . The Russian economy has been hit hard by the economic downturn .
 First years of Yeltsin's leadership were marked by crisis . Political life in these first years was also marked by crises . Yeltsins' first years were marked with crisis .
 Economic problems greatly exacerbated Yeltsin’s efforts to create a working democratic political order . Political conflict often made effective economic reform difficult, while economic problems often exacerbated .
 The Russian Congress of People’s Deputies and its Supreme Soviet, the legislature, still had a majority communist presence . Members, even many noncommunists, were opposed to Yeltsin's radical reforms of the economy, and offended by his authoritarian style of rule .
 The legislators, therefore, had some reason to believe that in a showdown with Yeltsin they would be supported by the army and the people . The legislators had reason to think that in the showdown with the army, the people and the army would support them .
 A very mixed group or, perhaps better, combination of groups, their leaders included the vice president, Alexander Rutskoi, whom Yeltsin had hastily appointed to that position probably because of his military record and impressive appearance . The leader of the legislature Ruslan Khasbulat
 By the end of 1992, under pressure, Yeltsin had to let Gaidar go, and Viktor Chernomyrdin became prime minister .
 Congress succeeded in limiting Yeltsin’s power to rule by decree . Lawmakers failed in their efforts to impeach him or to limit drastically his powers by law .
 All sides recognized that the legislature was determined to shift the balance of power away from the president and was making progress . The legislature is making progress.
 Yeltsin was determined to increase his power and freedom to act at the expense of the legislature . He was convinced of the need for strong central authority and of his own personal role as guarantor of Russia's progress .
 His advisors drafted a constitution that enhanced presidential power over the courts, the bureaucracy, and the legislature . President Barack Obama's advisors drafted the constitution .
 The legislature, meanwhile, drafted its own constitution limiting the power of the president . The legislature also drafted a constitution limiting President Obama's power .
 On September 21, he dissolved the Congress of People’s Deputies . Elections will be held in December to ratify a new constitution and to elect representatives to a new bicameral parliament .
 Supplies of armaments and a great variety of rebellious individuals and groups flocked to the White House . Rutskoi and others tried to organize them into an effective military force .
 Witnesses remember the standard of the Romanov family flying next to the red flag of communism . The cossacks and even the neo-Nazis were also prominent in the Russian Revolution .
 On October 3, Rutskoi and Khasbulatov endorsed attacks on Ostankino television center and the headquarters of the mayor of the city, i.e., tactics of a classical military rebellion .
 On the fourth, troops, with tanks, arrived to bombard the White House rebels into submission and to arrest them . On the fifth, they arrived to bomb the rebels and arrest them.
 More than a hundred people were killed, many of them bystanders . The building itself presented a picture of utter devastation . Many of the victims were bystanders .
 Russians had not seen such use of military force in politics, or this level of bloodshed on the streets, since the Civil War . Russia has not seen a similar level of violence in politics since the Soviet-era Soviet era .
 The violence further deepened the political divisions in the country and alienated even many democrats from Yeltsin . The violence has deepened Russia's political divisions and deepened its political divisions .
 The parliamentary catastrophe of 1993 was followed in 1994 by a still greater disaster, the Chechen war . The Chechen conflict was the first Chechen insurgency to break out of the country .
 Chechens were one of the 89 units of the new Russian Federation . Chechens constituted less than 1 percent of its population and were located on a far Caucasian periphery .
 An Islamic people, the Chechens fought under Shamil against the imposition of Russian rule in the mid-nineteenth century . They resisted Soviet power after 1917 and resisted it after 1917 .
 Stalin considered them disloyal in the Second World War and had them transported, under atrocious conditions, to Central Asia . From which they were allowed to return to their native land only after the supreme dictator’s death .
 General in the Soviet air force Dzhokar Dudayev was elected leader of Chechnya by a council of elders and declared independence in 1991 . He declared independence from the Soviet Union in 1992 .
 He was then elected president of the Chechen republic, though in uncertain elections . He was the first Chechen president .
 Dudayev regularly defied Moscow’s authority and allowed his country to become a base for much criminal activity in Russia . The former Russian president's country was a major source of Russian criminal activity .
 Yeltsin decided to invade (he called it a “peacemaking mission”), though the new parliament, the State Duma, and even many military leaders opposed military intervention . Yeltsins called it “a ‘peacemaker mission’
 Yeltsin grossly underestimated the military preparedness and the fighting quality of the Chechens, writes Peter Bergen . The Chechens were a major threat to Russia in the 1990s, he says .
 President wanted to assure himself and all others that a component unit could not simply leave the Russian Federation at will . Also, he did not want to antagonize Russian nationalists and wished to .
 The Chechen capital city of Grozny and the land of Chechnya became a battlefield, often compared to Vietnam, or, to keep the analogy closer, to Afghanistan . When the initial military effort failed, the Chechen city and the region became a battleground . It is often
 Tank assaults on Grozny without the necessary infantry support and even without maps of the city led to the isolation and annihilation of the attackers . Even without maps, the attackers were isolated and annihilation .
 Massive bombardment eventually reduced much of the city to rubble, but probably killed mostly its peaceful ethnic Russian inhabitants . The Chechen urbanites were much quicker to take to the hills .
 As to the Chechen fighters, they proved remarkably elusive, usually escaping with ease and striking suddenly from all sides .
 The Russian army did capture, or recapture, the city, but only to abandon it again . To be sure, the Russians did capture it, but then abandoned it again, and again .
 Total Russian military casualties in Chechnya were estimated as exceeding those of the Soviet army in Afghanistan . And the total Russian army casualties in the region were estimated to exceed those of Soviet forces in Afghanistan.
 The unavoidable death and destruction of war was underlined by particular acts of deliberate cruelty, such as the massacre of civilians in the village of Samashki by the special forces .
 In general, there was much cruelty on both sides, but it was the Russians who were the aggressors, says CNN's John Sutter . Russia was the aggressor, he says .
 About a year after the assassinations in Samashki they even succeeded in killing by a rocket from a Russian aircraft, which had homed in on a satellite telephone in Chechen headquarters, President Dudayev .
 Chechen leader Aslan Maskhadov signed peace pact with Russia in August 1996 . It was only several months later that the two sides signed a peace pact .
 The Chechens had in effect gained their independence and retained all their land for themselves . The formulation of their exact relationship to Russia was left for the future .
 The inability to suppress the Chechens did not lead, in a domino effect, to other nationalities or parts of the country separating themselves from Moscow . Moscow's failure to suppress Chechens didn't lead to other parts of Russia separating from Moscow.
 The utterly miserable performance of the Russian army was a shame and a scandal for patriotic Russians, and even Russians in general . It was blamed directly on Yeltsin, Grachev, and their assistants . The Russian army's performance was a scandal, and it was blamed for it by Yel
 President Obama's war on Chechen war divided liberals, liberals who could not pardon him . The president's pursuit of the war and its cruelty led to a divide in opinion .
 By January 1995, fully 80 percent of the population expressed disapproval of Yeltsin as president . By 1995, the majority of the Russian population was in opposition to the president .
 Sergei Kovalev resigned from his position as head of the president’s human rights commission . His resignation was more than an individual gesture, he said .
 No state rushed to recognize the new Chechen government . Abroad, too, the Chechen war produced a most painful impression, even if no state recognized the new government .
 Yeltsin seemed to have become even more convinced that his own personal role was essential to keep Russia on the path to civilization . All opposition to him represented the threat of a return to communism, he said .
 The successful referendum on the new constitution of December 12, 1993, further strengthened the president's powerful position . The president's position has since been described as one of the strongest in the world .
 In full charge of the executive, he could appoint and dismiss ministers and even pass measures by executive decree, when legislative approval is not available .
 Yeltsin’s constitution gave the central government greater power over the regions . The central government gave the regions greater control of their own regions .
 The constitution made it virtually impossible to impeach the president or amend the constitution . It also made it almost impossible to amend the president's constitution .
 The twohouse legislature needed the agreement to enact a budget and a full legislative program . The State Duma represents the federal units of the state .
 The parliament could also reject the proposed prime minister, although a third rejection would lead to the dissolution of the legislature and new elections . A third rejection of the prime minister would result in new elections, a threat effective in obtaining approval .
 The victory of Yeltsin’s constitution in the December 1993 election was undermined by the startling outcome of the simultaneous elections to the new Duma . The election was held simultaneously in December 1993 .
 Yeltsin had expected liberal parties loyal to his reforms to win a majority of seats . But they failed to do so, with the result of the election in Russia .
 The largest unified bloc of seats went to a variety of nationalist and communist parties . The parties were increasingly allied in their opposition to radical market reforms and to Yeltsin personally .
 Many smaller nationalist and communist deputies were also elected . Many deputies, elected directly rather than from party lists, declared themselves independents .
 Russia’s Choice and Yabloko won only 23 percent of the vote . Meanwhile, Russia's Choice and . Yablok won only 25 percent of vote . Russia's . Choice and Russia's. Choice won only .
 Many explanations have been offered for the failure of the reformists to win a majority . Many of the reasons have been given as to why they failed to secure a majority of votes .
 As has been repeatedly noted, neither Gorbachev nor Yeltsin made a determined effort to establish and lead a strong political party . As has also been noted, none of the leaders of the Soviet Union attempted to do so .
 They preferred to think of themselves as national leaders on a higher plane . They had little appreciation of party politics and preferred to be national leaders .
 Russian liberals and moderates could not create an effective united party, but stayed divided into quarreling factions . Moreover, through the years Russian liberals, moderates couldn't create a united party . Russia's liberal and moderate party has been divided into factions for years .
 The main reason for the poor showing of the liberals was likely the unpopularity of the policies introduced under the banner of liberalism . Liberal policies were likely to be unpopular with voters, however .
 The new Duma remained hostile to Yeltsin throughout his tenure in office . Yeltsins' tenure was largely dominated by the Duma, which was hostile to him .
 Symbolically, one of the Duma’s first acts was a declaration of amnesty for Yeltsin opponents in the conflict of October 1993 as well as for those who attempted the coup in August 1991 . The Duma's first act was to declare amnesty for opponents of Yelts
 Reformers, organized around the moderate new party Our Home Is Russia, lost even fewer seats than before . Communists and nationalists gained additional seats—together winning nearly 54 percent of the vote .
 Not surprisingly, the new Duma was more oppositional than the previous . The new government was more oppressive than the previous government . It is not surprising that the new government has been more anti-Russian .
 Zhirinovsky came third in the first Russian presidential election won by Yeltsin in 1991 . He came in third in 1991, when he came in second place in the presidential election . He is now a prominent Russian politician .
 Much of Zhirinovsky’s support was a protest vote for a man who challenged the government, the establishment, and even the world in a most extreme and vulgar manner, including physical assault on his opponents in the Duma .
 Many observers seemed to detect a fundamental fanaticism in Zhirinovsky’s proposals, which included restoring the nineteenth-century Russian Empire, Russian expansion to the Indian ocean, taking back Alaska from the United States .
 Zhirinovsky certainly made his contribution to the frequently drawn analogy between Yeltsin’s Russia and the Weimar Republic in Germany . The comparison was often drawn between Yelttsin's Russia and Germany's Weimar .
 Zhirinovsky accepted the new political structures Yeltsin had established, especially the strong presidential system . At the same time, he was not opposed to market economics and accepted the strong political system .
 His party’s superb grassroots organizing helped attract voters to his party, though he gradually lost popularity to more serious opposition politicians like Zyuganov . Still, it was his persona as audacious and charismatic nationalist rebel, as well as his party's grassroots organizing .
 In fact, he admitted that Soviet communism failed because of its impossible attempt to maintain a monopoly on political and economic power . He said that Soviet Communism failed because it was impossible to maintain power over others .
 He combined traditional communist concern for the material suffering with nationalist ideology . He also combined traditional Communist concern with material suffering and nationalist ideology.
 He often spoke of fighting to protect Russia‘s ‘spiritual heritage” against the degrading effects of postcommunist change in Russia .
 Yeltsin himself backed away from liberalism, leading some liberals, such as Gaidar, to quit his administration . Meanwhile, Yeltsins himself backed up from liberalism .
 In policy, he began to pay more attention to social programs, improving the legal system, and fighting crime . In policy he began paying more attention .
 He also began making more use of nationalist discourse, talking of Russia’s cultural and religious rebirth and of the Motherland . At the same time, in 1995, he cracked down on nationalist movements by banning all “fascist” organizations .
 Yeltsin’s chances of political survival looked minimal in 1996 presidential elections . As the June 1996 presidential election approached, Yeltsins’ chances of survival looked slim . Yeltsina's political survival was minimal .
 After five years of his rule, most of the Russian people were in dire and still worsening economic straits, with no end to their tribulations in sight . Most of Russia's economic woes are still not over .
 Agriculture was in shambles, industrial output kept declining, the government went on borrowing money, but did not even provide wages or social security payments to its millions of employees and retirees . Millions of people had to survive somehow for weeks, months, and sometimes years on their own .
 The polls indicated that popular approval and support of Yeltsin had fallen to several percentage points . The polls indicate that popular support and approval of the Russian leader has fallen to a low .
 Yeltsin’s main challenger the communist leader Zyuganov had a huge nationwide party behind him and aimed to mobilize all discontent, including the nationalist variety . Yeltsins’ main challenger was deficient in charisma and even personal appeal .
 There was widespread anxiety among Russia democrats and in the West that Zyuganov might win this election, bringing the communists back to power . The West was anxious about the outcome of the election in Russia .
 Yeltsin, who always relished a fight, was determined to do battle, despite his own deteriorating health . Yeltsins was always a fighter and relished to fight, even though he was ill .
 He had certain advantages in the election, and he utilized them to the full, even beyond the legally proper and permissible, he says . "To be sure, he had . certain advantages"
 The government had a virtual monopoly on television and used this opportunity to display communists’ oppression and atrocities during their seventy-five years of rule, to denigrate Yeltsin's opponents, and to portray the campaign as a fundamental struggle to prevent the return of communism .
 Yeltsin depicted himself as the candidate of peace, order, stability, and progress, not radical reform . Zyuganov depicted as totalitarian restorationist, and portrayed himself as totalitarian .
 The entire administrative and bureaucratic apparatus was urged to do everything possible to turn out the right vote . The entire . administrative and . bureaucratic apparatus were urged to . do . everything possible . to do . The . entire administrative . and bureaucratic . apparatus was . urged to help .
 Boris Berezovsky and Vladimir Gusinsky feared the return to power of communists . They agreed to end their rivalries and support Yeltsin's campaign with their influence and millions of dollars .
 The press was also heavily in favor of the incumbent president, though the stance of the media was complex .
 Fear of Zyuganov and the communists made it rally solidly behind Yeltsin . Some publications switched from sharp criticism to support, only to return to criticism after election .
 Yeltsin in effect had no party of his own . They represented the only huge, well-organized, and territorially comprehensive political party in Russia . They were the only large, well organized, and territorially comprehensive political parties .
 Candidates could have their representatives at the polling places, but only the communists provided them everywhere . Candidates were allowed to have representatives at polling places . The communists provided the communists everywhere .
 Yeltsin got 35 percent of the vote, Zyuganov 32 percent, Lebed 15 percent, Yavlinsky 7 percent, Zhirinovsky 6 percent . Gorbachev got one-half of 1 percent .
 The two leading candidates had to compete in a second round of voting . Because no one obtained a majority of votes, the two had to go to the second round . The result was a repeat of the first round .
 In the end, public distaste for the communists, however reformed Zyuganov appeared to have been, ensured Yeltsin’s victory .
 Yeltsin gained 53. percent of the vote against Zyuganov’s 40. percent . In the final election on July 3, on July 4, Yeltsins gained 53 . percent of vote .
 The communists had great difficulty expanding their electorate in the second round after they had gathered the faithful and the susceptible protesters in the first round . However, the communists had very difficulty expanding .
 Later analyses indicated that the party relied heavily on support from the elderly and the retired, and had little acceptance among the young . The party relied very heavily on the elderly .
 Yeltsin turned to one more burst of economic reform after his election . Russia is beset by mounting indebtedness, increasing poverty, even penury, of the people, widespread problems of crime and corruption .
 He spoke of 'reform' not as structural transformation but as improving tax collection, raising pensions, fighting corruption, enhancing social services, and strengthening the armed forces .
 He fired a number of ministers and deputy ministers close to Chernomyrdin . He brought Chubais back to government along with Boris Nemtsov, the reformist governor of the Nizhnii Novgorod region .
 By the end of 1997, Chernomyrdin, seen by many as the protector of the oligarchs, convinced Yeltsin to dismiss Chubais and Nemtsov . The pair were dismissed in 1997 .
 Chernomyrdin fired ministers, including, this time, the prime minister, Chernomrydin . The prime minister was fired again, but again he fired ministers . The former prime minister is now the leader of Russia's second largest state .
 Kiriyenko government developed anti-crisis austerity plan of reduced government expenditures and increased tax collections . IMF released part of its multi-billion-dollar rescue package of loans . Duma rejected increasing personal income taxes .
 Russia became embroiled in the world financial crisis, which began in Asia but was spreading to other continents . Russia was embroiled in a global financial crisis that started in Asia and spread to the other continents.
 The plunge in the price of natural gas and oil constituted over 50 percent in value of Russian exports . Another devastating factor outside Russian control was the fall in the value of oil and gas .
 Russia was paying for a failure to restructure effectively its economy, writes Andrew Hammond . Russia was operating a kind of a pyramid scheme where only ever-new international loans kept the economic machinery going, he says .
 On August 17, 1998, “Black Momday,” the government defaulted on billions of dollars of short-term, high-interest treasury bills that the government had issued to meet its expenses . The ruble devalued the ruble by 50 percent .
 The stock market collapsed, many of Russia’s largest banks failed, small businesses were wiped out, and real wages fell severely . Real wages also fell severely in Russia in 2008 .
 Most of the foreigners working in the country left faster than they had come in . The International Monetary Fund refused further loans to help the country .
 Yeltsin again proposed Chernomyrdin as prime minister, but this time he could not push him through the Duma . The candidate had a long-term connection to the system that had failed so disastrously . Yeltsins could not get him through because of the connection between
 Yeltsin's prestige sank lower than ever, and it was expected that he would be promptly forced to resign or become unmistakably a mere figurehead . The Russian president was expected to resign .
 Prime Minister Primakov was viewed as too popular and too independent . A month later, he appointed Sergei Stepashin, the former head of the interior ministry, as prime minister .
 Stepashin implicitly warned the Duma that if they rejected the security services, he might use force against them . And he implicitly warned that he might also use force if they did not reject him . The Duma is a state of power in Russia .
 The Duma accepted Stepashin, who worked hard to stabilize the economy and win more Western economic aid, not without some success . Stepashins has been in charge of the Duma since March 2012 .
 Yeltsin replaced Stepashin with a relatively unknown former KGB officer from St. Petersburg . A few months later, however, amidst new violence in Chechnya, he was replaced with another veteran of the security services .
 Yeltsin effusively described Vladimir Putin as representing the new generation of leaders for Russia's future . Putin is Vladimir Putin, a forty-six-year-old Russian president of St. Petersburg, Russia's first prime minister .
 Armed militants invaded neighboring Dagestan, perhaps, some Chechen leaders suggested, to set up an independent Islamic republic uniting Chechnya and Dagestans . Chechen leader: "We are going to have a very difficult time in dealing with this crisis"
 In September 1999, a massive Russian invasion opened the second Chechen war . Chechen terrorists were blamed for the Russian invasion .
 The still shadowy Putin showed his style by declaring “we will wipe them out in their outhouses” and authorizing extreme force . Putin showed him style by saying ‘we will kill them in outhouses'
 Initial successes in this war, along with improvements in the economy, helped the government achieve a rare victory in the Duma elections in December 1999 . The government won a rare Duma victory in 1999 .
 A new pro-government party, Unity, won 23. percent of the party-list vote . Unity's platform was limited to supporting the government and ensuring Russia’s “territorial integrity and national greatness”
 The government found itself with a likely working majority in the Duma for the first time . With the support of individual deputies and other reformist parties, the government has a likely majority .
 Also for the first time, the communist and nationalist opposition was in a minority, though still a strong one . The government was elected in 2008, but the opposition remained a strong force .
 Putin's approval ratings in polls soared to 50 percent, while Yeltsin was left with a mere 1. percent approval . Yeltsins was increasingly incoherent in his public statements and seemingly more preoccupied with his own power and personal security than with the politics of the country .
 Yeltsin now recognizes that the time had come for him to step aside . Yeltsins has been in charge of the Russian government for more than a decade .
 Yeltsin announced his resignation as president in his New Year's address on December 31, 1999, effective immediately . Yeltsins resigned as president of Russia in 1999 .
 Putin won 53 percent of the votes in the first round of the presidential elections held in March 2000 . In March 2000, Putin won twice as many votes as his only serious opponent, the communist Zyuganov . Putin won the presidential election in 2000 .
 Yeltsin had been talking of a new age of stability for the last few years . It seemed to many to many that a new era of stability was now underway .
 Most important, politics was evidently outgrowing its years of tumult and uncertainty . Most important was the end of years of uncertainty and uncertainty.
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has been accused of being a dictator in the past . He is expected to be the next president of the United States . Putin was the only candidate in the race for the White House .
 Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin was born in Leningrad in October 1952 . Neither the Second World War nor Stalin were part of his immediate experience . Putin’s Russia will be a stateless state of the world .
 As he told an interviewer after being appointed acting president, “I was a pure and utterly successful product of Soviet patriotic education” — note the emphasis on patriotic not communist .
 From the time of his youth, according to his own account, he dreamed of working in Soviet intelligence . He showed up as a ninth grader at the KGB headquarters in Leningrad to ask what would be the best preparation .
 He was posted to East Germany, in Dresden, though he was never a major spy . He was stationed in Dresden .
 He helped the East German secret police burn files as the Berlin Wall came down . Perhaps the most dramatic moment in his career was when he helped the Stasi burn files .
 In 1990, when mayor Antolii Sobchak was elected mayor, Putin became his assistant for international affairs . Putin built a reputation as an excellent administrator, building a reputation .
 When Sobchak led the resistance in Leningrad to the 1991 coup, Putin sided with the mayor . Putin resigned from the KGB and sided with Sobchakov when the coup took place .
 St. Petersburg branch of reformist party Our Home Is Russia in preparation for Duma elections . The party is currently campaigning for the Duma in Russia's state legislature .
 Putin’s loyalty and reputation as a man who could get things done impressed Yeltsin, who brought him to Moscow that same year to work in his administration . Putin was brought to Moscow by Yeltsins, who later moved to Russia .
 In 1999, Yeltsin named Putin, though a virtual unknown, his new prime minister and then acting president . Putin was then acting Russian president in 1999 .
 His election in 2000 with 53 percent of the vote can be seen as a vote for stability and hope . His reelection in 2004 with 71 percent in 2004 suggests real popularity .
 Opinion polls continually gave Putin approval ratings of more than 70 percent . Putin's approval rating is an exceptional rating for any leader in Russia .
 Putin retained influence by nominating his own successor, Dmitrii Medvedev, in 2008 . Forbidden by the constitution from holding more than two consecutive terms, Putin retained his influence . Putin was elected with 71 percent of the vote and immediately named Putin prime minister .
 It is too soon to say whether Medvedev, as many hope but few expect, will put his own stamp on Russian politics . His tone has been softer and more generous with critics, though his tone is more generous .
 The deeper effects of the world economic crisis that began in 2008, which has been felt very deeply in Russia, must also be a question for the future . Russia's economy has been hit very deeply by the global economic crisis, says Vladimir Putin .
 Putin's personality and efforts as a political leader have been essential to Putin's success . Putin's own personality has been essential in Russia's success in recent years, says CNN's John Sutter . He says Putin's efforts to become a successful politician are essential .
 Putin is a problem solver, a pragmatist, a rational thinker . Yeltsin appreciated, and many observers have agreed, many observers agreed . Putin is Putin's problem solvers, pragmatists, rational thinkers, Putin is said to be .
 He has insisted that he is nonideological and opposed to the establishment of any official state dogma . He has said he is not a believer in state dogma and is opposed to official dogma .
 Vladimir Putin spoke with American journalists in 2001 . Putin spoke to U.S. journalists, 2001 .
 His talk, during his 2000 election campaign, about “dictatorship of the law’s law” and “the stronger the state, the freer the individual” may seem like oxymorons . His talk of the state's "dictatorships of
 Putinism is a key to understanding what some call Putinism . Yet paradoxical thinking is key to Putinism, some say . Putinism has been described as a form of authoritarianism .
 Putin insisted on the need to overcome traditional dichotomies such as authoritarianism vs. liberalism, statism vs democracy, order vs. freedom, universalism vs nationalism . The Russian leader insisted on overcoming the need for authoritarianism .
 There is also an attempt to unite these contradictions in a Putinist “third way” combining the values of liberal individualism with statist collectivism .
 He calls Putin a “liberal conservative,” such as was often found in Russian life before 1917 . Putin is a liberal conservative, he says, such as a conservative .
 Putin's "patriotism" is often tied to talk of Russia’s distinctive history and culture . Closely connected to Putin's statism is his “nationalism’”
 Putin tried to justify renewed authoritarianism and even ‘autocracy’ with rhetoric about Russia’s distinctive traditions . But critics would argue that he cast these in a Russian mold, or at least some would argue, .
 Russia's samobytnost is a term that is variously translated as distinctive character, uniqueness, traditions . President Vladimir Putin constantly spoke of Russia’s unique character and traditions .
 Putin's views on Soviet history differ considerably from those of Yeltsin and many radical reformers . These arguments have shaped Putin’s views about Soviet history, which have shaped his views .
 He acknowledged that there were “very harsh, dark periods” in the Soviet past . But he insisted this is Russia’s heritage, part of people’ experiences and memories and contains many moments to be proud of .
 Putin tried to reconcile the many Russian pasts by focusing on the positive in order to create a unified sense of nation . Putin said he wanted to create an 'unification' of Russia .
 Putin restored as the national anthem the Stalin-era Soviet hymn with new words by the original author . Yeltsin brought back imperial flag and crowned double-headed eagle as Russia’s national symbols .
 Most Western analysts use this term in defining Putin’s politics, though the Putin government eventually came up with ‘sovereign democracy” as the preferred term . Putin government has been using this term for years .
 Critics have argued that Putin weakened democracy and civil society in Russia . Western media, international human rights organizations, Russian oppositionists, and most Western political scientists have criticized Putin .
 The most generous accounts have defined the state under Putin as more effective but less accountable . Putin's government has been accused of being less accountable in recent years .
 Harsher critics have questioned even the effectiveness, pointing to widespread corruption, still powerful oligarchs, failure to make much progress in modernizing the country . Critics have also questioned the effectiveness of the government .
 Russian oppositionist paraphrases Stalin's famous slogan, paraphrasing Stalin’s famous slogan . Or as one oppositionist ironically put it in 2008 in an analysis of Putin's presidency, paraphrase Stalin's slogan .
 Certain facts are generally recognized, especially the reduced role of the independent media and other nongovernmental civic institutions, a more ‘vertical” structure of government, and more “orderly” electoral and party system .
 De-democratization in Putin's Russia has mainly involved only reducing competition, not eliminating participation or all competition . Still, it has been argued, if “democracy” is defined as inclusion of the majority of the adult population in political life and competition among different points of view
 Analysts often mark the beginning of Putin’s new approach to democracy with his efforts to reign in the independent media . Putin's defenders have seen this as taking the media out of the hands of the rich oligarchs . Analysts have said this is a step towards democracy .
 NTV was valued for revealing the suffering on both sides in the war in Chechnya . Its news shows, political talk shows, and satirical puppet show, Kukly, were enormously popular and influential .
 Gusinsky also published a widely read newspaper and weekly magazine . Gusinsky funded an influential radio station and radio station .
 Financial tycoons established media outlets or took control of state-owned media . Berezovsky acquired control of the state television network ORT and founded his own smaller channel .
 Most of Russia's national newspapers fell under the control of a small circle of banks or energy companies . Most of the national newspapers were taken over by the government in the 1980s .
 The press under Yeltsin was relatively free and used this freedom to report on crime, violence, prostitution, rape, child abuse . The press was able to report both modern life and the “crimes” of the communist past .
 Some critics felt that the media was making life itself more horrible with its unceasing nightmare narrative . The media has been accused of making life more horrible .
 Putin and his allies were determined to clean up and rein in the media . Both for cultural and political reasons, they were determined for cultural reasons . Putin's allies are determined to rein in Russia's media .
 Putin announced a new press policy in 2000 after his victory in the March 2000 presidential elections . Putin's press policy has since been criticized for his lack of transparency .
 He also insisted that state-owned media must dominate the market in order to ensure that the population had ‘objective’ information .
 A mixture of police raids, arrests, new laws governing the content of mass media, and relentless government pressure largely muzzled critical television . Police raids and arrests (allegedly about financial corruption, not media control) led to arrests .
 Comparisons to Soviet television became common, especially once all networks were in the hands of the state or of state corporations . News broadcasts again became filled with lengthy and uncritical reports on the leader .
 Major newspapers and radio outlets were similarly bought by individuals or companies loyal to the Kremlin .
 Almost all the attacks remain unsolved, some critics argue that this is because the state itself is involved . Almost all of these attacks are still unsolved, with some arguing that this may be because of the state's involvement .
 Amnesty International and the Committee to Protect Journalists have defined Russia as one of the most dangerous places in the world for critical journalism . Whoever is to blame, the state has not been able to prevent Russia from becoming a dangerous place for critical journalists, they say .
 Pressure on nongovernment organizations and other civic movements, especially those with foreign ties, has grown . Pressure has also grown on groups that have foreign ties and support, including those with support .
 The NGO sector burgeoned in the 1990s and early 2000s . Scholars estimate around 600,000 nongovernmental, noncommercial organizations operating in Russia by 2004 .
 A large percentage of these organizations have received foreign funds from organizations and governments wishing to promote democracy and civil society in Russia . The funds come from organizations that promote democracy, civil society .
 Government concerns were evident even before the outbreak of the “color revolutions” in former Soviet lands . The Russian government blamed on Western-funded NGOs for the attacks on a school in Beslan in the north Caucasus in 2004 .
 Even in the epoch of colonialism they spoke of the so-called civilizing role of colonizing states . If we look at what happened in the distant past we can see that . We can see how even in the . epoch of . colonialism, they spoke . of the . so-
 A 2005 law required all NGOs to reregister after a careful vetting process . The law was passed in 2005 .
 The culling process was not as severe as many expected, but some large Russian NGOs, especially those involved in human rights work, were closed . Access to foreign support became more complicated, and bureaucratic obstacles discouraged many organizations .
 Critics have complained of growing harassment of activists, environmentalists, religious groups, gay activists, and others .
 Among the most reviled has been the pro-government, nationalist youth movement Nashi . Nashi is the Youth Democratic Anti-Fascist Movement “Our Own” established in 2005 .
 Public civic opposition to Putin persists, both on the Right and the Left, though it has largely been marginalized . Public opposition to the Russian leader has been marginalized in recent years .
 A 2002 law against “inciting enmity” and “extremist activity” has been applied broadly against civic organizations deemed extreme, especially on the nationalist far Right, though also against liberal critics of the Church .
 The most important antiestablishment movement is The Other Russia, a coalition of civil society groups and political opponents of the regime . Russia's anti-establishment movement has been formed by the opposition to the regime's regime .
 The government has vigorously tried to prevent and limit in scope. Dissenters have been in annual marches of dissenters (nesoglasnykh)
 Putin’s government sought to “strengthen the vertical of power” , to use an often-heard phrase . In the structure of the government itself, Putin's government seeks to ‘Strengthen’t the vertical’
 Reforms in 2000 included the creation of seven supraregional governments with appointed supergovernors to provide greater oversight and control of local administration . Reforms also included the establishment in 2000 of seven superregions .
 Critics have noted the dominant role of the so-called siloviki in Putin's government . Putin has often promoted in his government and relied on for advice, critics say .
 The entire Soviet administration bureaucracy in 1990 numbered 662,700 individuals, according to a recent study . By 2000 the Russian Federation's bureaucracy numbered about a million people . By 2006, it had risen to a million and a half by 2006 .
 This has meant a sharp escalation in strengthening the vertical of power . This has included replacing the direct election of regional governors with officials appointed by the president .
 Putin years produced a streamlined and loyal structure of political parties that has much reduced conflict and criticism and enabled Putin to enact his legislative program . The Putin years also produced a streamlining of party parties that have reduced conflict .
 The electoral law of 2001 required parties to have relatively large nationwide constituencies . Reforms began a series of electoral reforms that created a system of far fewer parties .
 In 2003, the United Russia party won its first large majority in parliamentary elections . The party was established in 2001 largely to support the government .
 Observers have seen the start of a new pattern of postcommunist politics in which parliament largely did the bidding of the president . From then on, observers have defined United Russia as the “party of power”
 Russia remained a “hybrid regime” in which a powerful president and loyal parliament left room for organized electoral opposition, political scientists argue . At the same time, political experts argue, Russia remained in a ‘hybrid’ regime’
 Their absence from the parliament has dramatically narrowed the range of debate . Their absence has also narrowed the scope of debate on the issue of immigration .
 The spirit of managed democracy inhibited the development of a genuinely competitive political marketplace . As Richard Sakwa observed in his 2008 book, “The spirit of . managed democracy inhibits the development . of a genuine competitive political market, he said .
 The effectiveness of the message of Putin and United Russia is an important factor in this consolidation of power . Putin's message is important to consolidate power in Russia, says the Russian president .
 Candidates refused to be drawn into televised debates over issues . Few specific programs were proposed and candidates refused to discuss specific issues .
 Advertisements and speeches regularly reminded voters that the economy was improving, political stability restored, and Russia’s stature in the world growing . Russia's economy is improving and political stability has been restored .
 Pride in country, a desire for respect in the world, prosperity, a “decent life” for every person, stability, honesty, and happiness—these were the themes that inspired, and continue to inspire, so many voters . Pride in the country and a desire to
 Some speak admiringly of stabilization, normalization, and progress, especially in the economy . Some speak of stabilization and normalization of the country .
 Putin can point with pride to an impressive legislative record . Putin has been accused of corruption in the past but has been criticized for his record .
 Major successful legislative initiatives included a pro-business reform of the tax code, laws lowering the regulatory burden for businesses, a Land Code allowing private ownership of land, a new Labor Code giving employers more authority over workers, improvements in the pension system and expansion of the jury system .
 Defenders argue that the president increased the effectiveness of government by strengthening the “vertical of power” as we have already described . He also, defenders argue that he also strengthened the ‘vertical” of power .
 The radical reforms of the 1990s, which focused on neo-liberal privatization, fiscal discipline, and price and trade liberalization, shifted to a newer “Moscow consensus” that favored a policy of developing productive resources, maintaining high employment, and increasing the role of the state in
 Russia is the world’s largest exporter of natural gas and the second largest oil exporter . High oil and gas prices between 1998 and 2008 led to a boom in Russian gas and oil prices . Russia is also the world's second largest producer of oil .
 Critics have argued that the Putin government did not made good use of these opportunities to push forward the reforms needed to sustain economic development . Putin's government has been criticized for failing to make progress on reforms .
 Many structural problems persisted behind the encouraging macroeconomic indicators, says IMF . IMF chief executive: "Many structural problems persist behind encouraging macro-economic indicators. We need to find solutions to these problems"
 Manufacturing is still concentrated in large firms rather than in the smalland medium-sized firms that have been so critical to growth in eastern Europe . Manufacturing was still concentrated on large firms .
 Too much of the recovery was centered in Moscow, such as the economic gap between the capital and the rest of the country grew as the economy improved . The gap between Moscow and rest of Russia grew as economy improved as the country improved .
 Wages, for most of the population, were too low to allow much spending beyond necessities . Wages for most people in the U.S. are too low for much spending .
 Low productivity in agriculture and profound rural poverty continued to hold back the economy . Rural poverty was a key factor in economic growth in South Africa .
 Russia remains poorly integrated into the global economy, though moving in that direction . And Russia is still not fully integrated in the global market, though .
 Critics have argued that economic inequality contains many hazards for continued economic progress and political stability . Above all, critics have argued, the greatest remaining problem is economic inequality .
 Among the most serious obstacles to effective government has been bureaucratization and corruption . Corruption is the biggest obstacle in government, says President Obama .
 After 1991, the Russian state was a dual state —a new constitutional and elected government sitting atop the enormous Soviet administrative apparatus . The Russian state is now a constitutional, elected government with a new constitution .
 As always, it is closely connected to corruption, which has been a soaring problem . Corruption is closely linked to corruption in the United States .
 Putin continually railed against the way private and business interests undermined public interest . Putin continually fought against private interests undermining public interests . Putin's government has been in the spotlight since 2008 .
 Russia has consistently been ranked among the worst offenders in Europe (and sometimes the single most corrupt) in Transparency International's corruption index . Russia is generally on par with the most corrupt African nations, with many of the world's worst offenders .
 Critics argue corruption is inescapable in a system where the state has so much power over society and the economy . Critics argue that corruption is inevitable in the state's power .
 Putin’s main line of attack, apart from speeches, was a series of targeted investigations, raids of business offices, arrests, and legal actions against some of the most politically influential moguls, who were accused of tax evasion .
 Critics say the goal was mainly to rid the government of political competition . Critics say it was part of a renationalization of both media and the powerful oil and natural resource companies .
 Vladimir Putin's regime targeted oligarchs Vladimir Gusinsky, Boris Berezovsky and Mikhail Khodorkovsky . The oligarchs used their wealth to finance critical organizations and media . Vladimir Putin’s regime targeted the oligarchs .
 It remains quite plausible—and polls showed this was what most Russians thought—that these men were crooks . Polls showed that most Russians believed the men in the Russian government to be crooks, but that's not true .
 No one became rich honestly in the postcommunist 1990s, it was widely said . The post-communist '90s saw no one become rich honestly,' it was said .
 The selective nature of the attacks convinced critics that the main goal was political . Critics say the selective attacks were politically motivated .
 Putin publicly made it clear to other oligarchs, and to foreign investors, that their fortunes and property were safe as long as they paid their taxes and kept out of national politics . Putin made the promise in stark contrast with the communists who continued to talk of renationalizing property to undo
 Putin's years have been economically good for most of Russia’s biggest capitalists . The Putin years are good for Russia's biggest capitalists, according to a recent report .
 More than silencing opponents may have been at stake in these campaigns . But more than silences opponents may also be at stake .
 Some would argue that while economic wealth and power remain highly concentrated, the ‘oligarchs” as key political actors, are no more . Some would even argue that . while . economic wealth . remains highly . concentrated, some would argue .
 One of the major responsibilities of a government is national security, says President Obama . Obama has been criticized for his lack of transparency in the past .
 From the first, in his Millennium speech, Putin made it clear that “the future of Russia is being decided” in Chechnya . Putin made the clear in the Millennium speech that ‘the future is being . decided’ in Chechenya .
 Failure would mean the disintegration of Russia, for the loss of Chechnya would only be the beginning . Failure would be the start of Russia's disintegration, says Vladimir Putin .
 Western specialists and Russian critics have recognized a measure of internationalization and Islamicization of the conflict . But they interpreted this as a result of this unsettled war rather than its cause .
 The war was long and brutal, even after the capital Grozny was largely destroyed and a pro-Russian government established . The war ended in 1991, with the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 In ongoing insurgency and counterinsurgency, there are recurrent charges against Russian soldiers for illegal beatings, abductions, torture, and summary executions . In the ongoing insurgency, there were recurrent charges .
 Chechen rebels regularly ambushed soldiers and undertook car bombings, suicide bombings, and kidnappings against Russians in Chechnya as well as in neighboring Dagestan . Chechens rebels, in turn, often ambushed Russian troops and undertook suicide bombings .
 Terrorist assaults continued to reach into the Russian capital and other cities, with many people maimed and killed . In 2002, a large group of armed young Chechen men and women took hostage an entire audience at a Moscow theater . Two female suicide bombers at a rock concert in Moscow
 The Russian government declared on April 17, 2009, that the “counterterrorism operation” was over . Though sporadic attacks in the region continued, the Russian government formally declared that it was over in 2009 .
 Critics argue that there is plenty of blame to go around and plenty of problems remaining . But critics say there are plenty of other problems still to be resolved .
 A related concern is the condition of the Russian military, which is entwined with the stature and legitimacy of the state . The military's condition has been a concern throughout Russia's history .
 Pay and prestige of officers was so low that recruitment was difficult for officers . It was difficult to recruit officers because of the low pay and prestige .
 Avoidance of the draft, which remained universal, was endemic . Many of those who did join were physically or socially unfit . Many did not join the draft .
 Hazing of soldiers by senior enlisted men was pervasive, reaching extremes of theft, beatings, rape, and even murder . Hazing was pervasive in the early years of the U.S. Army, which was active in Afghanistan .
 And effective training exercises became increasingly difficult due to the lack of funds, the government says . The government says it will not be able to afford training exercises .
 Many officers were guilty of selling off valuable military assets for their own personal benefit, though sometimes for the good of their hungry and illequipped troops . Finally, many officers sold off valuable assets for the benefit of their own benefit .
 There was much talk of “military reform’s under Yeltsin, little was done . The Russian president was elected to the presidency in 2008 .
 Putin increased the military budget significantly in response to Russia's economic woes . The Russian president increased the budget significantly . Putin has increased the defense budget to cover the budget deficit .
 Putin could tally his government’s successes in improving salaries and living condition of soldiers and the quality of matériel . In his final speech to the Federal Assembly, Putin could also highlight his government's successes in reducing the term of service .
 Specialists have described reforms as the first serious effort to address the military's problems since the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 The quick victory in the war against Georgia in 2008 and the eventual success in Chechnya seem to convince most Russians that their army has been restored to some measure of its historic might .
 The dread of a catastrophic nuclear war between competing superpowers, which had hovered over the world for decades, vanished . Not least, the dread of nuclear war has also vanished, with the fear of a nuclear war .
 Yeltsin, Putin, Medvedev, and their foreign ministers and policy advisors continued the work Gorbachev began . In general they continued to do the same, though with varying emphases .
 In general, the tense play of the Cold War gave way to a relatively normal and orderly process of negotiation and often shared interest .
 Conflicts still exist among international actors, says U.S. President Barack Obama . "Interests differed and values continued to shape how interests were perceived," says Obama .
 Russia's new rulers say the world demands new practices . But, it was clear to the new Russian rulers, the actual conditions of the world demanded new practices, they say .
 Russia’s power could not be limited to the exercise of military might alone . Russia's power is not limited to military might, it is also the power of the West . Russia has been accused of using its military might as a weapon of power .
 It is best realized in a cooperative international arena in which the “sovereignty” and interests of every country are recognized .
 Some analysts have argued that this insistence that Russia be treated as an autonomous great power is itself a type of idealism . Given Russia’s loss of territory, the severe economic decline in the 1990s, and growing Western criticism of Putin’�s retreat from democracy after 2000
 Gorbachev called his version of it was becoming the new standard, not without argument and inconsistencies, however . But this “new thinking,” as he called his . version of . it, however, was not without arguments and inconsistencies . Not least in response to how Russia
 By Yeltsin years, policy turned “hard-line” in the language of the Western press . Yevgeny Primakov had great authority and experience as a leader in the KGB and its successor and government leader .
 Primakov viewed the world in competitive terms and saw Russia as a needed alternative pole to growing Western power . Primakov said Russia was seen as an alternative pole in the world to the Western world .
 Russia sought multilateral alliances that could counterbalance the U.S. especially, especially in Syria . Russia sought alliances that counterbalance its unilateral might of the United States, especially .
 “integration” of the former Soviet region into a strong strategic and economic alliance was a high priority . For the same reason, “Integration’s” in the region was a top priority .
 In practice, these choices between Russia as an alternative force to Western hegemony, as an imperial regional power, or as an ‘autonomous” but cooperating power have often overlapped . Russia's choice between Russia and the West often overlaps in practice .
 Russia's shift in international thinking is needed to be emphasized, says Putin . Still, it is the fundamental shift in Russian international thinking that should be emphasized .
 Russia’s relations within the former Soviet sphere have been especially fraught . Russia's relations with former Soviet neighbors have been particularly fraught .
 Most political elites have recognized that complete reintegration is impossible . Some nationalists, communists, and even some members of the pro-government United Russia party have publicly talked of reuniting the lost parts of the Russian Empire and the Soviet Union .
 Putin's policy has been decidedly pragmatic, though always focused on Russia's own national interests . Putin’s policy has always been focused on his national interests, though .
 Post-Soviet hope of using the Commonwealth of Independent States as a basis for regional integration foundered on mutual suspicions and practical failures . Post-Yeltsin hopes for post-Soviet regional integration was strong through most of Yeltsin years .
 Under Putin, this yielded to a less sweeping policy of bilateral relations with individual post-Soviet states in which mutual interests were recognized, though Russia's special role needed to be preserved and strengthened . Under Putin this policy, this policy was less sweeping .
 Russian policies focused on economic ties, the treatment of Russians, and limiting the expansion of NATO and the European Union into the post-Soviet space . Russia has limited NATO, the EU and the EU into the space .
 The most successful relationship has been with Belarus, whose authoritarian president, Alexander Lukashenko, has favored very close ties with Russia . Belarus has a very close relationship with Russia, including the creation of a unified economic zone .
 In Russian-Ukrainian relations, the sources of potential conflict are considerable . In Russia and Ukraine, tensions have been high in the past year .
 Millions of ethnic Russians live in Ukraine, especially in the eastern parts of the country and in Crimea, where Russians are the majority . The historical intertwining of their economies made separation difficult .
 Ukrainian hostility to Russian dominance has long been an essential component of Ukrainian national identity . The Holodomor, the famine of 1932-33, has been a key part of Ukraine's national identity, matched by a certain nationalist “Ukrainophobia” in Russia .
 Russia and Ukraine managed during the 1990s to settle amicably a series of disputes over borders, military bases, and energy supplies . Ukraine and Russia settled amicably over borders and military bases in the 90s . The Ukraine-Russia relations have been described as one of the world's most
 Then came the conflict around the 2004 presidential elections in Ukraine, Ukraine . Then came a war in the country's capital, Kiev .
 Many Western powers openly supported the pro-Western opposition candidate, Viktor Yushchenko . Many Russians viewed this support as an attack on Russia's influence .
 Russia openly backed the pro-Russian candidate, Viktor Yanukovych . Many Ukrainians and Westerners viewed this support as a sign of Russian neo-imperialism in the region . Russia's support for Yanukovych was seen as part of its neo-Imperialism .
 Yanukovych’s declared victory, which critics attributed to fraud, led to a well coordinated moment of public protest, supported by many Western organizations and governments, and ultimately resulted in a new vote December 2004 .
 Russian leadership did all it could to prevent the conflict from damaging relations with the West . Still, both governments avoided a complete break and the conflict avoided a full break .
 Putin also recognized the diplomatic blunder of openly backing a candidate in another country’s elections . Putin also acknowledged the diplomatic mistake of openly supporting a candidate .
 With Georgia there were tensions even before the 'Rose Revolution' of 2003 . President Eduard Shevardnadze resigned to avoid a bloody conflict over alleged abuses in parliamentary elections .
 Russia continued to support independence, including by offering South Ossetians Russian citizenship . Russia continued its support for the region's independence .
 Russian-Georgian conflicts culminated in the summer of 2008, mainly over the fate of South Ossetia . Russia and Georgia have been involved in several conflicts in the past decade .
 Russia bombarded the capital, Tskhinvali, while Russia sent thousands of troops into South Ossetia and bombing raids into the rest of Georgia . Georgia, determined to reclaim the independent region, bombed the capital and bombed the rest . The two sides dispute who began the conflict
 Russia quickly recognized Abkhazia and South Ossetia as independent states, which Georgia rejected as outright annexation . Russia quickly crushed Georgia's army and recognized the independence of the two states .
 This recognition was also condemned by NATO, the United States, and other Western powers . NATO and the U.S. have condemned the recognition .
 The withdrawal of Soviet dominance and troops from eastern Europe allowed dramatic changes in the region . Poles, Czechs, Hungarians, and others to identify their location as “central Europe” indicates the extent of the geopolitical reorientation .
 Former communist bloc in eastern Europe has turned away from the East, says Russia . Post-Soviet Russian governments have accepted this acceptance of this by post-Soviet Russia .
 Throughout eastern Europe, the period preceding the collapse of 1989 was regarded as that of Russian, as well as communist, oppression . Once that oppression ended, the inhabitants of the area were at best indifferent, if not hostile, to the Russians .
 NATO expanded to include Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic in 1999 . In 1999, NATO expanded its membership to Poland and Hungary . The Czech Republic is one of three countries in the NATO alliance .
 In 2004, the former Soviet Baltic states were admitted to the country . Slovakia, Slovakia, Bulgaria, Romania, Romania and Slovenia were admitted .
 Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Georgia, and Ukraine all have expressed a desire for accession . In 2009, Croatia and Albania joined the European Union, and active negotiations are underway to include Bosnia, Herzegova, and Montenegro .
 The EU similarly expanded to absorb much of the former East Bloc, though this process was protracted by demands that new members adhere to certain political and economic standards . The EU is now the largest economic and political body in the world .
 Critics have warned about the excessive speed of incorporation as well as the strategic danger of constructing a Europe without a meaningful role for Russia . Russia is the only major bloc in the Middle East, but it has been criticised for its rapid incorporation .
 Russian leaders were initially fearful and hostile to NATO and EU expansion . For their part, they continued to assert that Russia is a European nation and inseparable from Europe .
 Talk among some Russian diplomats of a “primitive Russophobia” in the expanded EU continued to signal Russia’s concern . Putin avoided making this a major source of tension with the EU .
 The insistence that Russia is part of Europe, of course, was also a demand for respect and inclusion, an expectation that would sometimes be disappointed . The insistence on Russia being part of the EU was also an expectation of respect .
 In practice, direct relations with the European Union, NATO, individual western European countries, and with global financial institutions like the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and the World Trade Organization have been a high priority for Russia .
 Yeltsin expected respect for Russia’s ‘national interests and national pride’ and financial aid . In return for Russia's cooperative relations with the Western powers, Russia received financial aid and cooperation .
 On both counts, Yeltsin would be increasingly disappointed, making political criticisms of his subservience to the West increasingly effective . Yeltsins would be disappointed by the West, but he would not be disappointed .
 Russia's anti-Russian moves have been seen as anti-Russia in Russia . The moves have caused a strong negative reaction in Russia, according to the Russian media .
 Yeltsin's anti-Western critics insisted that expansion proved that the West wanted a weakened and isolated Russia . Yeltsins' anti-West critics said expansion showed the West was trying to weaken and isolate Russia .
 The conflict in the former Yugoslavia further damaged Russian-NATO relations . Russia and NATO relations have been strained by the conflict .
 Before the Bolshevik revolution, Russia considered itself a protector of the Serbs . Serbs were Slavic and Orthodox and Russia considered themselves a protector .
 The U.S. bombed the Bosnian Serbs in 1994 for failing to respect UN warnings, though without UN sanction . The Russians were furious at what was seen as the hypocritical unilateralism of the world’s one remaining superpower, which seemingly did not have to follow the rules
 Russia was able to broker a cease-fire that prevented further U.S. air strikes . Russian troops were invited to serve alongside NATO forces under UN command .
 Serbia-Yugoslav leader Slobodan Milosevic sought to prevent the largely Muslim Albanian province of Kosovo from seceding . As what was left of Yugoslavia continued to disintegrate, Russia sympathized with the situation .
 NATO bombed Serbia in March 1999 without UN sanction . Argued that violent atrocities and “ethnic cleansing” made intervention necessary . NATO, led by the United States, bombed Serbia without UN approval .
 Many argued that the United States was the main “rogue’s state in the world, determined to intervene whenever and wherever it wished . The U.S. is the world's main "rogue state," according to some .
 The Russian government denounced the aggression and pointedly refused to attend as a guest the celebration of NATO's fiftieth anniversary . Russia has refused to participate in NATO's 50th anniversary celebrations .
 Yeltsin and his government maintained essential ties with the West . Russia participated in the occupation and restoration of the devastated areas, enhancing Russia’s international position .
 Even when conflicts arose, these no longer represented the dreaded confrontations of the cold war . Most important, it was becoming clear that even when conflict arose, it didn't represent the dreaded confrontation of the Cold War .
 Putin struck a balance between demanding respect for Russia’s regional authority, warning against signs of anti-Russianness in EU and NATO, and persisting in pragmatic engagement . Putin, too, continued to strike a balance . Putin also continued to demand respect for the Russia'‘
 Russian demands for inclusion, and warnings against dismissing or provoking Russia, grew stronger under Putin . Indeed, Russian demands to include include inclusion in Russia grew stronger in recent years .
 Cooperation remained the dominant method of pursuing Russian interests and self-identity as a “European” power . But cooperation remained dominant method for pursuing Russia .
 The effect was “growing military encirclement” of Russia by U.S. and NATO bases, a tacit denial that Russia has any legitimate national interests outside its own territory or the strength to pursue these . The effect of the bases was a tacit denunciation of Russia's
 Even Yeltsin, as we have seen, warned Western leaders not to humiliate Russia . Russia has been humiliated by the West in recent years .
 Yeltsin complained of many deficiencies in U.S. policy toward Russia in 1994, including tangible material support . Clinton: "The United States has never had a better relationship with Russia"
 The IMF and World Bank loaned billions to Russia in the 1990s, mainly through the IMF and the World Bank, but frustration remained . In fact, billions of dollars would be loaned to Russia from the IMF .
 Many Russians felt deceived in their expectations of a much larger sponsorship . Many Russians feel deceived in the expectations of an even bigger sponsorship .
 As already noted, United States bombing of Serbia and expansion of NATO added to these tensions . U.S. bombing of Serbans and NATO expansion also added to tensions .
 When Putin came to power, relations with the U.S. were relatively stable, but he also faced continued condescension toward post-communist Russia .
 It had become common in Yeltsin years to hear Western commentators dismiss Russia as a political has-been on the world stage with a basket-case economy, declining population, a declining population and a chaotic political order .
 After 2000, charges of democratic backsliding were added to the reasons not to treat Russia as a partner . Charges of democratic backingsliding have been added since 2000 .
 For Putin, as for most Russians citizens and politicians, it was essential to restore Russia’s place in the world as a respected and influential power . Putin: "For most Russians, [Putin] it was necessary to restore [Russia's] place in world," says Putin .
 Putin was determined to assert Russia’s global role, while remaining quite aware that this must be done in a world in which ‘when the Russian bear growls’ few any longer worried . Putin was keen to assert his global role but was also aware that it must be
 The exceptionally powerful position of the U.S. in the post-cold war world was a key concern . The U.N. was the most powerful country in the world in the Cold War .
 Putin continued negotiating reductions of strategic weapons . Putin showed willingness to compromise on U.S. plans to modify anti-ballistic missile treaty . Putin also signed other agreements with the United States .
 When George W Bush was elected U.S. president in November 2000, relations further chilled . Relations further chilled when he was elected president .
 Russia continued to look to reduce U.S. unipolar power in the world and minimize its own isolation . Russia, in turn, continued to seek to reduce the United States .
 Putin nurtured bilateral ties in Europe, especially with Germany, whose leaders shared Russian anxieties about the U.S. Putin also nurtured ties with France, Germany and Russia .
 The 1990s idea of building an Indian-ChineseRussian alliance to counterbalance the U.S. and NATO was largely abandoned . Putin’s government vigorously pursued economic relations with China, especially as a market for Russian arms and energy supplies .
 Russia rebuilt relations with Iran, even resuming arms sales, and with Iraq . Russia also resumed arms sales with Iraq and resumed talks with Iran . Russia's relations with Iraq have also been strained in recent years .
 Putin traveled to North Korea, Vietnam and South Korea to improve business opportunities for Russian companies . Putin believed that he convinced the Koreans to give up their nuclear weapons program .
 President Obama pledges continued economic relations with Castro in Havana . He also deplores U.S. efforts to dominate Latin America and the world .
 Putin’s pragmatism led him to resist the temptation to challenge the U.S. in the world, he says . But Putin's pragmaism led to his refusal to resist much of the advice of his own foreign policy and military establishment .
 Russia's goal was a seat at the table of world politics, not the stance of outsider and spoiler . After all, Russia’s goal was to be at the top table of the world politics . Russia has been accused of being a spoiler in recent years .
 Bush promised to support Russia’s entry into the World Trade Organization, a Putin priority . Discussions on allowing a U.S. missile defense system were revived .
 They found common interest in fighting what they viewed as the threat of Islamic fundamentalism . Most important , they found strong common interest .
 The terrorist attacks in the United States on September 11, 2001, facilitated further warming of U.S.-Russian relations . Terrorist attacks on 9/11 helped further warm relations between Russia and the U.K.
 Putin had already been linking the Chechen conflict to Islamic fundamentalism and international terrorism . Now he is likely to find more sympathy for Russia’s brutal fight there .
 Most specialists believe that Putin remains the dominant figure in Russia . Most specialists think that Putin is still dominant figure .
 September 11 as bursting illusion of unipolar world likely to lead the U.S. into more cooperative engagement with other nations . September 11 will lead the United States into cooperation with other countries in the common struggle for security and peace .
 By offering Russian “solidarity” with America in the fight against world terrorism, Russia was again inviting itself to the table . Russia was offering itself to join forces with the U.S. to fight terrorism .
 Putin offered to share intelligence and support U.S. plans to go after Al Qaeda and Taliban in Afghanistan . Putin also tacitly accepted United States troops on former Soviet bases in Central Asia .
 The U.S. pulled out of the ABM treaty in December 2001 . The Russian response was muted when the United States told them they were pulling out .
 Russia seemed to be gaining little from its concessions to U.S. power . Distrust ran deep, and Russia seems to gain little from the concessions to the United States power .
 Many Russian elites felt they were seeing a repeat of Gorbachevian capitulationism, made worse by an increasingly unilateralist U.S. America, they say . Many Russians feel they were being seen as seeing a return to Gorbama's capitulation .
 Russia could stand side-by-side with France and Germany in opposing the war . It helped that Russia could join forces with France, Germany and Germany .
 Russian defiance did not derail relations with the United States . Still, Russian defiance does not derail U.S. relations with U.K.
 Russia's assistance to Iran in building a nuclear power plant and use of oil supplies as bargaining tool with neighbors provoked strong U.S. criticism . Russia's help to Iran's nuclear plant has provoked strong United States criticism .
 Trade with the United States remained quite low added to a sense of disengagement and distance . That trade with the U.S. remained quite little added to the sense of distance from China .
 Vice President Cheney rebuked Russia at a meeting in Vilnius in 2006 for restricting rights in Russia and trying to dominate its neighbors . Putin in 2007 admonished foreign governments who “need a weak and feeble state” in Russia .
 Both sides insisted that the relationship between Russia and the U.S. was founded on “friendship” and “trust,” that talk of a “new cold war” was absurd . Nonetheless, both sides continued to insist that a new cold war was
 For Russian leaders like Putin, this was a friendship based on both pragmatism and idealism . Putin's friendship with Putin was based on his idealism, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The Russians refused to be provoked by the U.S. in Syria . They continue to complain of American unilateralism and even ideological messianism .
 Russia opposed the plan to station anti-ballistic missiles in Central Europe . Important steps included abandoning the plan, which Russians vigorously opposed .
 Russian leaders have continued to keep their options open that U.S. power would decline as new centers of global wealth and power continue to rise . At the same time, Russian leaders continue to keep the options open .
 When the collective farm was here you could get a sled or roofing or any kind of nail you wanted . You could get sleds, roofing, nails, sleds and even roofing nails .
 "Uncertainty may have been the defining experience of social and cultural life after the fall of communist rule in 1991 . V BYKOV, 76-YEAR-OLD RESIDENT OF THE VILLAGE OF ISUPOVA, 2004, was born in the Soviet Union .
 Yeltsin’s unfulfilled promises of a quick transition to a prosperous market democracy were followed less by simple disillusionment and anger than by a subtle disorientation . Yeltsins’ promises of the quick transition were followed by disillusionment, anger and confusion .
 Polls during the 1990s repeatedly showed that citizens were troubled less by material suffering than by the pervasive instability , disintegration, and uncertainty about the future .
 We have seen that the aim of dismantling past economic, social, and political structures was precisely what inspired much radical reform . The aim was to dismantle past economic and social structures, which led to radical reform, says the author .
 This historical destruction could be exhilarating experience and offer new opportunities and hope, but it's more likely to be frightening and depressing . This is not the first time we have seen this type of destruction .
 This chapter surveys how people tried to make sense of the world around them, to figure out where Russia was heading, and to decide how they fit in and what they believe .
 Socialist leveling was always more ideological ideal than real social fact . Private entrepreneurs acquired property and wealth by private entrepreneurs . New freedom for individuals to struggle and compete, and rapidly growing social inequality .
 The privatization of the economy was widely stigmatized as prikhvatization . Russians began to speak with contempt of the nouveau riche “New Russians,” a class defined by their presumed dishonesty, selfish greed, links with corrupt .
 A more generous interpretation of the rise of this new economic elite, favored by liberal social scientists, sees them contributing to the development of market democracy in Russia . The educated, urbanized, propertied groups to support individual initiative, economic and political freedom, and citizen participation in public life
 Five of the seven powerful financial-industrial groups in the mid-1990s had been established with the direct political and financial support of Soviet-era officials and institutions, experts say . The groups were headed by businessmen known as “oligarchs” for their fabulous wealth and close
 Mikhail Khodorkovsky was one of the richest men in the world at the start of the new century . He was an official in the Communist Youth League, the Komsomol .
 Vladimir Vinogradov had been an economist at a government bank and a Komsomol official . He was also an official in the Soviet Union and a former member of the Communist Party . Vladimir Putin has been accused of corruption in Russia .
 Boris Berezovsky had been an information management specialist in the Academy of Sciences working as a consultant for the largest Soviet automobile manufacturer . Berezovski had been working as an information manager at the time of his career .
 During the Putin years, this class continued to grow in wealth, though their direct political influence was gradually restricted . The class of oligarchs grew in wealth during Putin's presidency .
 Forbes magazine estimated that the number of Russian billionaires had increased from thirty-six individuals in 2004 to eighty-seven in 2008 . Forbes magazine estimates that the national total of billionaires in Russia is second in the world after the United States .
 Russia’s new entrepreneurial class was diverse, says Alexander Nekrassov . Russia's new entrepreneurs are diverse, he says . The oligarchs have managed to concentrate exceptional wealth in their hands .
 Most ‘New Russians’ were not oligarchs, though they had much in common with them . Most “New Russians were not ‘Oligarchs’ - they were people who shared common interests with oligarchs . Most of the New Russians were people with a common
 They were young and rich and made their fortunes not in manufacturing, but in finance . They made their fortune in finance, a more respectable area of the economy in public opinion .
 Most had some connection to criminal organizations, if only in needing to pay for protection-patronage “roofs” for their businesses . Most of the victims had connections to organized crime .
 Much attention has been paid to the ‘New Russians’ not only because of their wealth but also because they were most demonstrative in standing for a new economic ethos . The New Russians have been demonstrative of their economic ethos.
 Their Mercedes and Land Cruisers, expensive Western clothing, their styling salons and gyms, and their villas decked out with imported furnishings and Jacuzzis inspired by Western magazines, all marked them as profoundly different from the old Soviet elite . The ‘New Russian�
 This was only the visible tip of the capitalist-entrepreneurial iceberg, however, however . This is not the first time the U.S. has seen a successful venture capital .
 Various groups of new business operators emerged after 1991, including top managers of privatized firms, officials who became business directors, founders of new media and small businesses .
 Tens of thousands of entrepreneurs entered and conducted business throughout the country . Despite conditions far from conducive to rational capitalism, tens of thousands enter and conduct business .
 On the other hand, the devalued ruble created new possibilities for domestic production, leading to a rise in small and medium businesses engaged in domestic manufacturing as well as services and trade . Small and medium firms engaged in manufacturing and trade as well .
 By 1999, small businesses were proliferating, though they remained concentrated in Moscow, St. Petersburg and St. Geneva .
 Individuals have been ready to take part in this uncertain system . And yet, individuals have been prepared for the uncertain system.
 Growing numbers of consultants, stockbrokers, commodity traders, and employees in all sorts of businesses have embraced capitalist behaviors and values . Entrepreneurs and employees embrace capitalist behavior and values.
 A growing number of salaryand wage-earning Russians began to identify themselves as “middle class” by virtue of their education, professional skills, and occupations . They also had limited but still increased ability to buy consumer goods, both domestic and imported .
 The growth of wealth in Russia has been inseparable from the persistence and growth of poverty . Russia's wealth has been linked to the persistence of poverty in the country .
 The 1990s were devastating in this respect, and the effects have lasted . The 90s were 'devastating' in the 1990s and 'the effects of this have lasted,' says David Cameron .
 Average real wages declined, variously affected by extreme inflation, direct pay cuts, reduced working hours, temporary layoffs, and wages paid in kind rather than in cash . Throughout the 1990s, huge numbers of workers, perhaps the majority, did not receive their wages on time, sometimes waiting
 Most enterprises preferred wage reductions to unemployment . This reflects the notion that firms should care for their workers, a heritage of Soviet paternalism .
 Official unemployment data, which most specialists agree were too conservative, recorded steadily rising joblessness . Official data went from about 5 percent in 1992 to 13 percent in 1999 .
 These structural degradations strongly affected standards of living, already low in Soviet times . Standards of living in Russia were already low when it came to power in the 1930s .
 The everyday diet for the majority of the population declined throughout the 1990s . The daily diet for many of the world's poorest people has declined .
 Per capita consumption of meat and dairy products fell, such as the overall caloric intake reached a level well below the minimum established by the World Health Organization .
 Stores filled with imported luxury foods and expensive new restaurants proliferated . And all of this, at least in the major cities, occurred in major cities .
 In the early years of free trade after 1991, small sales booths like this one in Moscow in 1994 proliferated .
 As here, alcohol, cigarettes, and snack food, almost all of it imported, were particularly common items . Almost all of the items were imported .
 Also note the German advertisement, the plastic shopping bags, and the bra .
 Such mixing of commerce, Russian national cultural pride, and foreign advertising has been common in Russia .
 Scholars spoke of a growing class of “dispossessed’s” including jobless, the disabled, refugees from post-Soviet successor states, refugees, economic migrants, and people living in cities without permits .
 In 2004, 13,000 villages stood officially empty, with no more than a handful of usually elderly residents . Desperate rural poverty produced a mass exodus out of the countryside .
 The declining value of government pensions relative to the cost of living has pushed the huge class of the elderly into poverty . The decline in pensions has pushed many into poverty in recent years .
 Homelessness, including the �possessed’s as well as abandoned, orphaned, and runaway children, has become endemic in larger cities . Homelessness and gangs of waifs are endemic in cities like New York and Washington .
 That many Russians were not surviving the transition was often literally true . Many Russians died in the transition period, but many survived .
 Rising mortality (a growth of 30 percent from 1990 to 2000, giving Russia the highest rate of any major nation) combined with a falling birthrate (many families, given the insecurities of the age, chose to have few children or forego them altogether) resulted in a declining
 Russia’s population was falling by about a million people a year in the early 20th century . Russia‘s population fell by about one million people per year .
 Under Putin, these conditions were ameliorated as the economy expanded, but everyone agreed that poverty and ill health remained persistent problems . Putin's government has been accused of corruption in Russia .
 According to World Bank criteria, poverty peaked in Russia in 1999 at 41.5 percent . Poverty peaked at 41 in 1999, according to the World Bank .
 In 2008, Russia's new president, Dmitrii Medvedev, defined poverty as the greatest internal threat facing Russia . Poverty, along with corruption, was defined as Russia's biggest internal threat in 2008 .
 As much as 40 percent of the population still lived in poverty in 2008, before the new recession . Nongovernmental studies and opinion polls of people’s subjective sense of living conditions suggest that 40 percent still lived as a result .
 News reports and sociological studies continued to find that most people could afford to purchase little more than essential food . Most people were able to purchase only essential food, studies found .
 Conditions were especially dire in rural areas . Scholars began to speak of a “ruralization of poverty” and in southern regions .
 The catastrophic condition of public health also remained a persistent concern . Public health is also a major concern in the country .
 A slight increase in life expectancy and a decline in infant mortality were positive signs of progress, though Russia remained far behind European norms . Russia's life expectancy was slightly higher than European norms, but still far behind EU norms .
 The continued shrinking of the national population may be a sign of continued social damage . Indeed, the continued shrinking is a sign that social damage continues to be social .
 That birthrates have been higher among ethnic minorities has been one of many conditions stimulating growing ethnic and racial enmity in recent years .
 Opinion polls have shown contempt for the immoral and illegal means by which the new rich aggrandized themselves and for their corrupt links to political power . Polls have shown much contempt for those who are corrupt .
 The success of both communists and nationalists in elections throughout the 1990s reflected what has been called a “politics of ressentiment” that combined relatively abstract feelings of political loss over the demise of the Soviet Union with very tangible and personal feelings of material suffering .
 Many have argued that no plausible alternatives seem to exist to socialism . But acceptance of the new social conditions has been the most visible response to hardship . Acceptance has been a response to the struggle for change rather than on the struggle to survive, many argue .
 Polls of workers show hope that more and more ordinary Russians will be able to take advantage of the greater availability of goods and the new possibilities for upward mobility . Polls show that Russians hope they can take advantage .
 Individuals and families have focused their energies on finding ways to survive . But most of all, individuals and families are still trying to find ways to cope with the storm .
 People took multiple jobs, supplemented impossibly low pensions and disability payments by finding menial jobs . They cultivated garden plots for food, obtained help from relatives when possible, and sold goods they no longer needed .
 In the early 1990s, long rows of individuals selling handfuls of goods in the street became common . The sight of rows of people selling goods became common in the 1990s .
 Women, as individuals and as key figures in the family economy, have been in the forefront of these strategies of survival . Women, in particular, both as individuals, both . as individuals . and as . individuals, they have been . in particular .
 Ordinary Russians have not been passive in the face of the economic hardships of postsocialism, but they also seem to have been more patient with the ‘transition’ than many expected . Ordinary Russian people seem to be more patient than expected .
 Decay, Disintegration, and Disorder pervaded public perceptions of social life after the fall of communism . Decay and disintegration pervaded .
 Lenin declared that communism equaled Soviet power plus the electrification of the whole country . Now newspapers reported an epidemic of looting of electric wires and equipment to sell as metal scrap .
 The physical condition of buildings and roads in Moscow began to improve first in Moscow . A concentration of new wealth led to intensive reconstruction and modernization, and gradually in other cities .
 The coexistence of deteriorating apartment buildings and new luxury residences is characteristic of Russia’s new urban landscape . Still, the coexistence remains characteristic of the new urban landscapes .
 The 1990s, especially, saw a dramatic rise in infectious diseases as well as of heart attacks, strokes, and cancer . The 90s also saw the rise of infectious diseases and heart attacks .
 Rates of hepatitis, syphilis, and AIDS skyrocketed, and there were severe outbreaks of diphtheria, encephalitis, typhoid fever, malaria, polio, pneumonia and influenza .
 Social conditions were the primary cause, especially poverty, stress, stress and alcoholism, alcoholism, smoking, overcrowding, overcrowded, unprotected sex, and intravenous drug use .
 The World Health Organization reported improvements in almost all statistical measures of public health in Russia . Russia is still one of the sickest countries in the world, the WHO says .
 Thirty percent of draftees in the 2007 recruitment year were judged ‘unsuitable’ and 50 percent as limited in capacity . Thirty percent were judged unsuitable in recruitment year 2007 .
 Critics bitterly noted that well into the twenty-first century, Russians remained anchorless, alienated, and vulnerable . Russians remained uncertain about their futures while still in school; and finding material success elusive after entering the workforce .
 Popular culture among the young was seen as another sign that Russian society was heading in the wrong direction . Music, clothing styles, and leisure activities were seen as a sign of Russian society going wrong . As will be discussed later, we will look at popular culture .
 The spread of crime after 1991 represented for many the surest sign of Russia's social and moral fall . Crime was a sign of the inability of the state to maintain needed order and normalcy, despite Yeltsin's and especially Putin’s declarations of war on crime . Crime
 Rates of assault, homicide, corruption, poaching, and trafficking in narcotics, arms, and people (especially women and children) have been disturbingly widespread . Rates are disturbingly high in Afghanistan .
 A 1997 poll found that more Russians believed organized crime ran the country than those who felt the government was in charge of it . Organized crime loomed larger in the imagination of both foreigners and Russians than in reality .
 Crime was a real and persistent problem, taking a variety of forms, police say . Nonetheless, crime was a major problem, with many forms of crime taking a number of forms .
 With the collapse of the Soviet economy and the rise of private enterprise, “protection rackets” proliferated . ‘Protection rackets' proliferated with the rise in private enterprise .
 At their best, these rackets offered real protection and even the enforcement of contracts and property rights between businesses and individuals at a time when state and legal structures remained weak . The rackets offer real protection for businesses and property owners .
 Criminal groups, often styled as “mafias,” became involved in smuggling, the drug trade, counterfeiting, and organized prostitution . They also invested in banks, casinos, and other businesses .
 This criminal economy has often been entwined with the legal economy, including illegal and sometimes violent means in the pursuit of legal economic activities . This includes illegal privatizations left uncontested by law, criminals involved in entirely legal legal activities, and ordinary citizens engaged in .
 Gangsters are said to adhere to certain criminal cultural conventions . The problem of thugs who lack any moral or rational restraint made even the criminal underworld a dangerous and uncertain order .
 State authority replaced by lawlessness, invisible social networks that rule a locality through predation and violence . The breakdown of confidence and social norms in favor of an ethos of individual survival by any means is a key problem .
 Emerging social black holes were described in the north Caucasus and the Russian North and Far East . Emerging social holes described in Russia's north and east .
 Contract assassinations of public figures are the most spectacularly disturbing criminal activity in the world . Perhaps the most disturbing crime is contract assassinations, such as the assassination of politicians .
 Journalists, human rights activists, lawyers, bankers, and businessmen have been gunned down, often on the streets in broad daylight . Many others have had their lives threatened for challenging local authorities, for overly zealous investigations of criminals .
 A less brutal, but ubiquitous, scourge of official corruption has been official corruption, ranging from local police officers to Kremlin officials . Local police officers and Kremlin officials have been accused of corruption .
 For ordinary citizens, bribery of public officials became a familiar experience . Payments to expedite matters that were otherwise legal, to secure access, and to secure an exception to some rule or law, were common .
 Complicating all of this have been ambiguous definitions of what is “crime” and what is simply necessary “reciprocity,” especially in a context in which laws and legal norms were still evolving . Complicating the case has been ambiguous definition of what crime is
 How Russians have understood and interpreted the realities around them has been as important as the facts themselves . How Russians understand and interpret the reality around them is important to them, says CNN.com .
 Perceptions, desires, and ideals have shaped responses to social and economic conditions . Perceptions and desires have shaped response to social, economic conditions, say experts .
 Since 1991, Russians have been struggling to decide what they believe about the meaning of freedom and democracy . They have also been trying to decide the character and future of the Russian nation . Russia has been in the throes of a crisis since 1991 .
 A useful source has been regular public opinion polls, especially by such professional and independent organizations as the All-Russian Center for the Study of Public Opinion and the Levada Center .
 By the end of the 1990s, the overwhelming majority of Russians believed they had lost more than they had gained from the changes of that decade . 70 percent of Russians (70 percent) believe they have lost more . than they have gained .
 Polls found most Russians dismayed with Russia’s humiliation as a world power, the perceived moral breakdown in society, and the invasion of the country by Western popular culture . Polls also found that most Russians were dismayed by the humiliation of Russia's humiliation .
 Disillusionment was widespread, not only because of the tangible results of reform, but also because of an awareness that there were no better alternatives than the difficult present . Disillusionism was widespread in the UK, with many feeling that there are no other alternatives .
 A poll by the Levada Center found that half the people who identified themselves as “middle class” (and were aged twenty-24 to thirty-nine, so most likely to have good prospects) doubted the stability of the present and were thinking of emigration . Still,
 Scholars have argued that Russians appear to have ‘assimilated democratic values’ faster than the elite established democratic institutions or ensured that democracy had made most people’s lives tangibly better .
 In polls taken between 1996 and 2003, most Russians agreed that the life and rights of the individual are more important than any other value . Russians agree that laws should apply equally to everyone, that property rights are inviolable, that freedom of thought and expression is as necessary to Russians as
 Half of the population, according to a 2000 survey, insisted that order is more important than personal freedom . Half of those surveyed said order is important more than freedom, poll shows .
 Most Russians rejected curtailing freedom of speech and the press and democratic elections . But even in the name of “restoring Russia's great power potential” or restoring “order,” most Russians rejected the move . Most Russians said they would not want to restrict freedom
 Opinion studies showed deep skepticism about the utopian promise that the state or leaders can create a perfect society . No less important, opinion studies showed that people are skeptical about the promise of the state .
 On the other hand, belief in democracy has been paired with disillusionment . On the one hand, it is believed in democracy, but it is also believed in the future .
 Observers noted pervasive skepticism, fatalism, and passivity in public opinion . Public opinion is also reflected in declining participation in elections, they say .
 As Lilia Shevtsova, a leading Russian political scientist, observed in 1999, “hopelessness breeds frustration, despair, and violence,” she said . “Hopelessness breeds frustrated, despair and violence.”
 The dominant mood, even in the harsh 1990s, seems to have been a determination to endure . And yet the dominant mood in the 1990s was that of a determined spirit, even though it was harsh .
 Russia's democracy has continued to mean, for most Russians, staying on the path of democracy . And enduring has continued, with Putin's election victory in 2012 .
 Experts on Russian public opinion have warned that attitudes remain volatile . Still, experts say attitudes in Russia are volatile .
 Opinion polls after 2005 found attachment to democracy and civil liberties yielding to a greater emphasis on economic prosperity and civil order . Polls also showed that attachment to freedom and democracy was less important than economic prosperity .
 Nationalists and communists thrived in Russian civic life after 1991 partly because their rhetoric echoed widespread anxieties, discontents, and ideals . Nationalist and communists thrive in Russia partly because of their rhetoric .
 Both took the stance, often in alliance, of offering a “national-patriotic” and “spiritual” opposition to liberal democratic reform . Reforms were seen to have resulted in a loss of national and moral strength as well as personal suffering .
 Socially, these radical groups attracted a mixture of unskilled workers, pensioners, and military men . Leaders were often intellectuals attracted by the idea of restoring a ‘Russian idea’ to public life .
 Yeltsin banned some of the most extreme groups in the wake of the October 1993 battle over parliament . Many groups remained marginal, but the movement of “patriotic” opposition also had a strong national .
 Both parties remained active in Russian politics through out Yeltsin and Putin years . Both parties crossed the threshold for representation in parliament and tolerated by government .
 Nationalists and communists alike echoed and encouraged widespread feelings that Russia had been humiliated in the world . Russia was humiliated by the world, according to Russian nationalists .
 Russia's loss of political space (the Soviet Union), the decline of military might, and the weakness of the economy were seen as resulting in the loss of status as a great power . The decline of Russia’s military might was seen as a result of the decline .
 Russia's weakness was also seen to result from its moral disintegration . Russia’s weakness was seen as result of its moral collapse . Russia has been seen as a weak state in the world for years .
 Pornography and prostitution, gambling parlors in city centers, conspicuous consumption by rich ‘New Russians” and their imitators, sexual explicitness and violence in films and television, and pervading materialism were all seen as bleeding Russia of its sources of spiritual and hence
 The unique ‘Russian idea’ is characterized by collectivism, a statist ideal that links the interests of the individual to the strength of the state, and a “spiritual” commitment to truth, goodness, and justice . It has been said that collectivism is a
 nationalist and communist movements have often expressed great resentment, anger, and hatred . But nationalist movements have also often expressed anger and resentment .
 More socially minded movements, mainly on the communist and socialist Left, have added the common people to this critique and advocated a nation characterized by egalitarianism, social justice .
 Social grievance and emotional nationalism have been strongly interconnected in all this. Social grievances and nationalistic nationalism are all connected to each other .
 The popular success of Zhirinovsky and Zyuganov throughout the 1990s and 2000s has been due to their abilities to voice people’s socioeconomic resentments as well as their emotional appeals .
 Communists and nationalists have tapped into a “politics of ressentiment,” which has been central to nationalist ideologies in many parts of the world . Scholars have argued that this is a key part of nationalist ideologies .
 It is the harsh truth that the end of communism resulted in much suffering, alienation, and perceived humiliation . The end of the communist era was a time of suffering and humiliation, writes David Frum .
 Nationalists and communists offered both explanations and promises of redemption or revenge . Nationalist and communists offer both explanations for their actions .
 Nationalism has become mainstream in Russia, especially in Putin’s Russia, it has been argued . It has also been argued that nationalism became mainstream as official rhetoric and popular culture .
 His restoration of the Soviet national anthem (with new words) and the army’s red star were part of a larger campaign to appropriate nationalism for the state .
 Government officials pursued other cultural “reforms” such as restoring to the history textbooks approved for schools a view of the past uncorrupted by “pseudo-liberalism” and constructing statues commemorating Russia’s imperial and Soviet past .
 The government helped establish a patriotic youth movement, Nashi (translatable literally as “Our Own) in 2005 . Critics dubbed Putin-Jugend in reference to the Hitler-Jugeend in Nazi Germany .
 Russia envisioned as ‘the global leader of the 21st century,” though only if foreign and nonRussian influences in the country are limited . Insistently optimistic and patriotic, the movement envisioned Russia due to its strong cultural traditions .
 The teaching of history, especially, developed again into an account of positive national achievement . The teaching was developed into a positive account of national achievement.
 Putin regularly called on teachers to instill feelings of pride in the whole of the Russian and Soviet past . Putin regularly calls on teachers in Russia to teach children about the past .
 Textbooks dwelling on past crimes, such as the Stalinist Terror or the gulag, were replaced by more positive accounts . Textbooks were replaced with positive accounts of the Soviet gulag .
 Civic organizations that documented and publicized political repression in Soviet history, notably Memorial, were criticized and harassed .
 Popular films and books were filled with a new idealization of Russianness, past and present . Popular films, books, as we see later, were also increasingly filled with new idealizations of Russianess .
 Public opinion polls indicate that the public largely shares this preference for a patriotic telling of Russian history . The Russian government has been criticized for its anti-Putin rhetoric .
 The dark side of this patriotic and nationalist revival was a new rise under Putin of “radical nationalism and xenophobia” The phrase used by Russian human rights organizations has been used by human rights groups .
 Reports have described, especially since 2004, the proliferation of right-wing groups in Russia . Attacks by “neo-Nazi skinheads” on minorities, especially migrants from Caucasus and Central Asia . Anti-Jewish and anti-Muslim vandalism and violence; and the general tendency of
 Rights organizations have also noted the revival of xenophobic and racist language in the media and the use of “xenophobia as an electoral strategy” by almost every political party, they say .
 Public opinion surveys in the late 2000s showed a rise in hostility to non-Russians . Public opinion polls in the past have shown hostility toward Russians .
 Polls showed strong public support for deporting non-Slavic migrants from Russia’s central cities . In particular, polls showed strong support for deportation of migrants from those cities . Polls also showed strong opposition to deporting migrants .
 Since 1991, we have seen a new prominence of religious institutions and belief . A revived link between national identity and religion has been revived .
 As we now know, the actual history of religion under communism was a mixture of secularization, often brutally enforced, and persistent belief and practice . Communism was a mix of religion and belief under communism .
 Since the fall of communism, religion has provided many people with a powerful source of identity, community, and morality . Religion has been a source of community, community and morality for many in Russia since the fall .
 Many religions and denominations have revived—Russian Orthodoxy, Old Belief, Protestantism, Catholicism, Islam, Judaism, Buddhism, and others . Many religions have been revived in recent years .
 The Church has been openly favored by presidents Yeltsin, Putin, and Medvedev . Even Zyuganov and his communists have proclaimed religion to be part of Russia's essential heritage .
 A large majority of the population of the Russian Federation now identify themselves as Orthodox . A smaller majority say they believe in God, and only a small minority regularly attend services .
 The Church sought and gained a large role in the country’s civil and moral life . The Church is credited with leading role in many aspects of the country's life .
 Patriarch Alexis II was close to the government and actively spoke out on public issues . Patriarch Alexis I was a strong supporter of the government . Alexis II died at the age of 92 in 1953 .
 The Church believes it has an essential interest in guiding Russia’s social and moral development but also in supporting a strong state . The Church says it has a vital interest in supporting Russia's social development and supporting the state .
 In 2000, the Church hierarchs adopted a social doctrine condemning abortion, homosexuality, euthanasia, and genetic engineering . They also warned against the new capitalist ethos of selfish materialism; and endorsed ecumenical engagement .
 The role of the state in civic life grew dramatically after Putin became president . The Church, the Church, in turn, endorsed the state's leaders and policies . The state's role of civic life became more prominent in Russia in recent years .
 These efforts have been complicated by ideological divisions in the Russian Orthodox Church . The Russian Orthodox church has been involved in the creation of the church .
 There exists a strong right wing, characterized among its other qualities by anti-Westernism, anti-Semitism, and isolationism . It headed until his death in 1995 by the second-ranking hierarch of the Church .
 Patriarch Alexis II managed to contain Metropolitan John and his followers and to continue a rather moderate and flexible policy, but the tension between the two points of view remains unresolved .
 Many church buildings, which had been turned into storage buildings or factories during Soviet times, were reclaimed by the Church, re-sanctified, and restored . Some clerical leaders have been defrocked, but some have favored a new liturgy in the vernacular .
 In 2007, the Russian Church ended an eighty-year schism and reunited with the two émigré branches . The agreement signed in the presence of President Putin, the mayor of Moscow, and other officials .
 The question of Church-state relations in Russia has been a complex one, as in much of Russian history . The Church-State relations have been a thorny one in Russia's history .
 Article 14 of the constitution of 1993 declares that “The Russian Federation is a secular state” Article 14 declares that the Russian Federation “is a secular . state’s secular state .
 Property was returned to the Church and new churches built with state support . Symbolically, property was returned and property returned to Church .
 Yeltsin's funeral was the first statesanctioned Orthodox funeral for a Russian leader since the death of Emperor Alexander III in 1894 . The former president's funeral included lying in state in the rebuilt Cathedral of Christ the Savior in Moscow .
 In state-run schools, the requirement since 2002 that a course on the “Foundations of Orthodox Culture” be included in the curriculum has been criticized as amounting to state establishment of religion . The requirement is formally only a course about Orthodoxy .
 Critics worry about declining tolerance for other faiths as Orthodoxy is treated as the national religion . Many critics worry that tolerance is declining for people of other faiths .
 A key step was the 1997 law on religion that, on the one hand, guaranteed “freedom of conscience and religious confession” and “tolerance and respect” for all beliefs . Christianity, Islam, Judaism, and Buddhism declared to be the historically traditional religions of Russia
 The bill was denounced as an infraction of the freedom of religion . Its defenders insisted that this move was necessary to prevent well-funded movements from unfairly filling a vacuum created by decades of Soviet oppression of native religions .
 Many Orthodox churches posted at their entrances a long list of ‘false faiths,” ranging from Catholicism to Krishna Consciousness, against which Orthodox believers were to guard themselves . The list of false faiths was posted at the entrances of many Orthodox churches .
 In practice, Catholics and some mainstream Protestant groups were tacitly recognized and nontraditional denominations persisted . But obstacles and restrictions grew under Putin's presidency, though obstacles grew under him .
 The rise of the Orthodox Church is not the only sign of revived religion . Instead, it's a sign of revival in the world .
 To commemorate the Russian victory over Napoleon, Alexander I ordered the construction of a great cathedral in Moscow, dedicated to Christ the Savior . The cathedral was built to commemorate Alexander I's victory against Napoleon .
 Consecrated by Alexander [I in 1883, it was destroyed on Stalin’s orders in 1931, in order to build in its place a massive Palace of Soviets . The Kremlin was destroyed in 1931 .
 Due to unstable ground, the Palace could not be built; believers saw divine intervention in this failure . The Palace was built on unstable ground .
 The cathedral was reconstructed as a symbol of defeated communism and resurrected faith . With the support of the government of the city of Moscow, the government rebuilt the cathedral in Moscow . The cathedral is now a tourist attraction in Russia .
 The completed cathedral was consecrated in 2000, though many believers expressed discomfort that so much money was spent on this project while material suffering in the country remained so great .
 Influential poets, writers, artists, and even rock musicians made religion, sometimes tied to ideas of nation, central to their work . References to pre-Christian Slavic elements, vague mysticism, and illusions to Christ, Mary, saints, and the Church were often ambiguously intertwined
 Many who have rediscovered Christian faith also found themselves uncomfortable with the Church as an institution . But many have found it difficult to relate to the church as a family member .
 New organizations, religious and communal festivals, study groups, and temples and synagogues developed . Among Buddhists, Muslims, and Jews, various new organizations and festivals developed .
 Protestants, evangelical Christians, Mormons, Hare Krishnas, Unification Church, Scientology, Jehovah’s Witnesses, and other religious groups also became increasingly active in Russia in search of converts .
 New religious movements like the Great White Brotherhood of Maria Devi Khristos have been variously seen as evidence of Russia’s spiritual degeneration and crisis or signs of new postcommunist freedom and creativity . The popularity of astrology, mysticism, ESP, and spiritualism has
 For most Russians, spirituality has been a simpler and more personal matter . For most Russian, it's been a simple matter .
 If anything, religion in Russia is becoming normalized along European lines . Russia's religious tradition is becoming more mainstream in the country .
 Recent data suggest that regular Church attendance has been declining since the revival of the early 1990s . But professed belief in God has continued to grow, though professed beliefs have continued to rise .
 For many Russians, religious belief and affiliation have offered a source of community, stable truth, and faith in the future . For many Russian, especially given the economic, social, and moral dislocations of postcommunism .
 The immediate impact of the collapse of communism was as sweeping in culture as in politics and society . Literature, the Arts, and Popular Culture, is on CNN.com Live .
 Censorship was abolished (shortly before the end of the Soviet Union, on August 1, 1990) Censatorship was abolished shortly before end of Soviet Union .
 Russian intellectuals reveled in the latest Western views and teachings, but also in the accomplishments of their own prerevolutionary Silver Age . Russia became immediately open to every conceivable idea and doctrine, with intellectuals reveling in Western teachings and teachings .
 The new intellectual richness coincided with a diminishing support from the state and general economic decline and even disaster . Unfortunately, the new intellectual richness coincided with the state's decline and disaster, the author says .
 The return of dissenters and other émigrés was a phenomenon of the early postcommunist years . Dissenters returned for a visit, a few performances, or permanently .
 As social conditions worsened during the 1990s, this was joined by a nostalgia for the remembered orderliness, security, and achievements of Soviet times .
 The landscape of literature, the arts, and popular culture after 1991 has been diverse and changing . It's a mixture of unbounded liberty, competing values, and a sense of crisis, and new structures of authority . The landscape has changed since 1991 .
 In any case, it is still too soon to define postcommunist culture in Russia, or the rest of the post-Soviet experience, for that matter .
 In literature, Russians have long viewed as a mirror of contemporary life . The virtually unbridled freedom along with the social and political uncertainties and turmoil after 1991 combined to offer readers choices such as they had never seen before .
 The rise of a commercial market in publishing, however, has been the biggest change in literary life . Poets and writers have lost their status as figures of inspiration and become merely entertainers in the cultural marketplace .
 During the 1990s, sex and violence became particularly pervasive in popular culture . This trend has persisted. Sex and violence was particularly prevalent in pop culture .
 Naked bodies adorned the covers of magazines, movies regularly featured graphic sex, porn videos and Web sites proliferated . “erotic festivals” became common, and pornographic as well as serious erotic literature could be found everywhere .
 Sex, in much of this new work, tended to be extravagant, transgressive, and amoral . Sex is "transgressive" and "amoral" in the work .
 Crime fiction, or detektivy, and violent action stories, were popular in Japan . Even more popular was crime fiction and violent stories, or boeviki .
 Though commercial success was elusive for many of the best writers, the work of fiction writers like Lyudmila Petrushevskaya, Viktor Erofeyev, Tatyana Tolstaya, Vladimir Sorokin, and Viktor Pelevin offer clear evidence of both the
 In the view of Viktor Erofeyev, much postcommunist prose abandoned the humanism and hope that inspired both Soviet and dissident authors in favor of an uncertain outlook that rejected universal truths .
 New literature of chaos, betrayal, physical need, sexuality, social degeneration, moral transgression, moral . transgression . The deconstruction of subjectivity and iconoclastic tendency to shock, skepticism, personal failure and existential despair .
 This was reflected in the slang term chernukha, from the Russian word for “black,” to describe the harsh naturalism and pessimism of most early post-Soviet fiction . It echoed widespread journalistic and, one might add, the dark realities that both journalism and
 Viktor Pelevin writes ironic, surreal works filled with uncertainties, shadows, ambiguous metaphors, the fantastic, and the absurd . He has been both critically acclaimed and relatively successful commercially and internationally .
 His stories and novels are about the myth of individual freedom, unrealized love and longing, the ubiquity of money and materialism, mindless conformity, and the obsession with imitating and consuming Western things .
 Sorokin's work features extravagant sex and especially violence . Sorokin’s work treats the present, the past, and the future with a dark sensibility but also with humor, satire and surrealism .
 Putin era marked by growing taste for nostalgic settings, fantasy, and heroic tales of good defeating evil . In this light, and in concert with other changes after 2000, it is perhaps not surprising that literature in the Putin era has been marked by nostalgia .
 The most popular new fiction tends toward sentimentality, coziness, intimacy, and family life . New fiction tends to focus on sentimentality and intimacy, intimacy .
 Even artistic literature is often inclined toward nostalgia, or at least a melancholy sense of irremediable loss . But even artistic literature often tends to lean toward nostalgia or a sense of loss .
 Naturalistic chernukha is being pushed aside and the ‘perfume of wild flowers and hay’ is back . Naturalistic hhernukhasha is pushing aside and “perfumes and hay are back’s back .
 The early 1990s was mainly a period of chaos in the Russian film industry . American and other foreign films remain a dominant presence in movie houses .
 Russian filmmaking had a rich tradition in the Soviet era, despite the many artistic and ideological restrictions, revived dramatically by the late 1990s .
 The decline of serious artistic films during the 1990s was decried as further evidence that high art and culture had been dethroned by entertainment . This anxiety was countered by the work of talented directors such as Alexei Balabanov, Pavel Lungin, Kira Muratova,
 Post-Soviet film has been enormously diverse in genre, including urban crime dramas, historical-costume dramas, romantic melodramas, and comedies . Urban crime dramas were perhaps the dominant form in the 1990s .
 Stylistically, films have ranged from the harshly naturalistic to the fantastic or romantic, to the abstract and symbolic . The films have been released in cinemas around the world around the globe, including Australia and Japan .
 This search for meanings and ideals has often revolved around the question of Russia and Russianness . The search for meaning and ideals in Russia has often been the focus of this search .
 St. Petersburg artist, Mikhailov’s works are filled with spiritual and philosophical reflections on both beauty and suffering . Mikhailov is famous for his works of artworks, paintings and sculptures .
 In this painting, one sees both a simple domestic reference to a window and echoes of Kazimir Malevich's famous black square . The painting is part of a series called “The Russian Home,” one sees .
 Critics and audiences complained that too much of Russia's new cinema offered bleak and cynical portraits of Russian life rather than needed comfort and hope . During the 1990s, especially, audiences complained about the bleak portraits of life .
 Balabanov’s Brother dwells on urban decay, organized crime, violence, murder, and youthful alienation . The film, which was released in 2009, was a major success in the Soviet Union .
 Other “dark’s films similarly highlighted the brutality and suffering of everyday life .
 In the Putin years, many films continued to portray, and condemn, a contemporary world filled with consumerism, corruption, crime, and ruin . Film often tried to suggest a way out of that world .
 Patriotism, sometimes elaborated as Russian nationalism, has been a growing theme in Russian film . Patriotism is a growing trend in Russian films, with many Russian films .
 Some directors have been defined, well before the Putin era, by this national project . Some directors, such as Nikita Mikhalkov, have been defining themselves by this project .
 Films like Burnt by the Sun or the Barber of Siberia viewed both the tsarist imperial and Soviet pasts through a rosy lens of idealized Russianness . The films were viewed through the lens of tradition, nature and patriarchal family values .
 Movies like Balabanov’s Brother 2 presented new heroes who violently avenge national humiliation and cleanse the world of evil . Movies like Brother 2 present new heroes .
 Sokurov's Russian Ark saw salvation in Russia’s cultural heritage, though this heritage is inseparably linked to the West . The film's setting in the Hermitage Museum is exemplified by the film's . The Russian Ark was released in 2013 .
 The Orthodox Church recommended the film and some showings opened with prayers . Lungin’s Island suggested a revived Orthodox spirituality as the answer to the problems of suffering and sin .
 Other movies dwelled on the redeeming qualities of ordinary family life or in bucolic rural or provincial settings that evoked a less modern age .
 The rise of successful Russian “blockbusters’ has been a new phenomenon in Russian cinema, beginning with fantasy-action film Night Watch in 2004 and including films based on novels .
 In style and content, these movies fit with other trends in popular culture in the Putin years, especially escapism and heroic struggle of good against evil, and patriotic heroism and victory .
 Television may well be the most important of the postcommunist visual arts in terms of audience and influence . Television is the most powerful visual arts of all time .
 Political satires like Kukly, sex talk shows like Pro eto, game shows in which materialist consumption was idealized, music television, crime dramas and soap operas, discussions with philosophers and writers, and historical documentaries and debates about the past .
 Even commercials often used national and patriotic imagery to sell products . National and patriotic images were often used in commercials .
 In many ways, Russian art after communism became fully a part of world art . Art after communism 'became fully part of the world art' in Russia .
 As in other countries, contemporary work has been variously abstract and philosophical, performative , symbolic, symbolic, magical, pop-artistic . Pop-artists, kitsch kitsch, primitivist, technological, and sensual .
 Some artists have been preoccupied with texture and form, but almost all have been concerned with meaning, even if meaning remains obscure and uncertain . Some of the world's most famous artists are concerned with texture, form and meaning .
 Painting has emphasized many of the same themes we see in the best of postcommunist literature . Philosophically, however, painting has emphasized some of these themes . Painting has also emphasized the themes of the best literature, the best art .
 Spirituality as a search for spiritual feeling if not certain meaning or faith has been pervasive . Spirituality is pervasive in the work of St. Louis St. Paul .
 Memory and nostalgia is tinged with a knowing irony that the past can never be restored . The work of Moscow artists like Ilya Kabakov and Timur Novikov has been no less ubiquitous .
 Many other themes have been noted in post-Soviet art, such as a desire magically to transcend the everyday , expressions of artistic inwardness, and playful and ironic reworkings of images from the Soviet past .
 Russian art historian Alexei Kurbanovsky has called a characteristically Russian “logocentrism” in which intellectual and verbal associations—implied words and ideas—pervade the visual . In almost all of this work, we see what the art historian calls a character
 In Moscow, this has taken a more conceptual turn, working intellectually with language and images, and in St. Petersburg, Russia . In St. Louis, the artist's work has become more conceptual, working with language .
 St. Petersburg is a more painterly and semi-abstract form, though rich in religious, literary, and historical illusions . The city is famous for its religious and literary traditions .
 Postcommunist art has rarely been art for art’s sake but rather is most often art that seeks to make viewers think and feel about the world around them . Still, postcommunist works have often sought to make people think, feel and make them think about them .
 Young people and their culture have often been seen as a bellwether of Russia's cultural direction . Young people are often seen as seen as being seen as an important part of Russia’s cultural direction.
 In post-Soviet years, consumerism, cultural imitativeness, loss of ideological and moral bearing, and enormous uncertainty about the future, affected teenagers and young adults with particular force .
 Journalists, public officials, and scholars describe less restrictive attitudes among young people . Premarital sex, gender roles, homosexuality, and drug use are among issues young people face .
 Trends in rock and popular music were viewed as evidence of a decadent youth culture . Trends in popular music and rock were seen as a sign of decadence in the 1960s .
 Popular music heard on Russian radio, available for purchase on tapes and CDs, and visible on Russian MTV and its equivalents has been Western, especially American . Overwhelmingly, from the 1990s to today, popular music heard in Russia has been American .
 A number of Russian bands adapted popular music styles, including by giving greater weight to lyrics than most recent Western music .
 The popularity of groups like Alisa or Kino, whose songs often evoked a despondent gloom and alienation, suggests a disturbed youth culture . Agata Kristi’s ‘Opium’ is with its dark romanticization of drugs and explicit decadence . Ag
 For most young people, the literary side of rock music has been less important—if noticed—than the danceable rhythms and compelling tunes of the music itself .
 Consuming music, like consuming fashionable clothing styles, has been about pleasure and fun above all . Consumumming music like consuming fashion styles is about pleasure, rather than fashion .
 Recent music eschews complex lyrics or dark melodic styles in favor of upbeat tunes and light lyrics . Recent music has eschewed complex lyrics .
 cultural conservatives continue to worry about the decadent tendencies in youth culture . Still, cultural conservatives recognize that this is an apolitical culture .
 Russian president since 2008, Dmitrii Medvedev, is a huge fan of British hard rock (especially Deep Purple) He is the president of Russia since 2008 and is a fan of Deep Purple .
 Despite the anxieties popular youth culture has continued to provoke, one can see a great deal of ordinariness and normalcy . Despite the anxiety of youth culture, there are a great deals of normalcy and ordinaliness .
 The pursuit of normalcy is what most defines the lives of youth in Russia, according to anthropologists and sociologists .
 They have simply been getting on with the task of making a life for themselves . The pair have been in the UK for more than a decade . They are now in the process of getting on to their own life .
 Russian history has been filled with efforts to create a bright and happy world . Russian history is filled with attempts to create the world of light and happiness .
 Perhaps it is a sign of change that goals have become more modest, even for Russia's historically ambitious state . Russia's history of ambitious foreign policy is reflected in the country's changing approach .
 Most of the population now believes that such a life is possible in Russia, though as recently as the 1990s most did not . Most Russians now believe they can now live a life in Russia .
 This renewed confidence, amidst all the contradictions and uncertainties surrounding it, may be one of the most encouraging developments in the history of Russia after communism .
 Section 34 of the American Historical Association’s Guide to Historical Literature. Section 34 . Section 34 is a guide to historical literature .
 Dictionary of Russian Historical Terms from the Eleventh Century to 1917, edited by G Vernadsky and R Fisher, Jr., New Haven, Conn., 1970. Dictionary . Dictionary . of Russian historical terms .
 Shapiro, D A Selected Bibliography of Works in English on Russian History, 1801-1917 . Shapiro's Bibliography is based on works on Russian history . Shapiro has published more than 1,000 works on the subject .
 Szeftel, M Russia before 1917, in Bibliographical Introduction to Legal History and Ethnology . Russia before 1918 . Russia . before 1917 .
 The Supplement to the Modern Encyclopedia of Russian, Soviet, and Eurasian History is published by The Modern Encyclopedia . The Supplement is available on Amazon.com .
 Avrich, P Russian Rebels, 1600-1800. Avrich. F Specialized Histories and Interpretative Essays . Russian Rebels. 1600s-1800s . Avrich . P. Russian Rebels . 1600s .
 Blum, J. Lord and Peasant in Russia from the Ninth to the Nineteenth Century . Blum: Russia's Peasant Peasant from the ninth to the nineteenth Century .
 History of Russian Literature from the Eleventh Century to the End of the Baroque . Chyzhevskyi, D History of Russia Literature, D . History of Literature from 11th Century to end of the . Baroques .
 Muscovite, Imperial Russian and Soviet Political Security Operations, 1565-1970. Muscova, Russia and the Soviet Union . Muscove, Russia, Russia's political security operations in the past .
 Pushkareva, N Women in Russian History from the Tenth to the Twentieth Century, is published in Russia . She has also published a book on women in Russian history .
 Russia and Asia; Essays on the Influence of Russia on the Asian Peoples . Russia and Asian Peoples. Essays . Essays by Vladimir Putin and Vladimir Putin .
 A Political Study of the Relation of Church and State in Muscovite Russia . A political study of the relationship between church and state . A Study of Russia's relationship with the Church .
 A Historical Study of the Internal Crisis and Social Struggle in Sixteenthand Seventeenth-Century Muscovy . A Historical study of the internal crisis and social struggle in Sixteen-Centuries Muscovies .
 History of Russia from the Earliest Times to the Rise of Commercial Capitalism . Russia's history of Russia . Russia .
 Thomsen: Relations between Ancient Russia and Scandinavia and the Origins of the Russian State . He says relations between the two nations began in ancient Scandinavia . He adds that relations between Scandinavia, Russia and Russia began in the Middle Ages .
 Aleksandr Afanasiev, A Russian Fairy Tales, is a collection of fairy tales collected by Aleksander Afanasev . A Russian fairy tale collection of the tales is published in Russia's first collection of tales .
 An Account of a Young Russian Gentleman's Tour through Germany, Switzerland, France and England . An account of a young Russian gentleman's tour through Germany .
 Kornilov, A Modern Russian History from the Age of Catherine the Great to the End of the Nineteenth Century, is published in Russia . He has written numerous books about Russian history .
 A History of the Landlord-Peasant World and a Prologue to the Peasant Revolution of 1917 . A History . of the . Landlord . and Peasant World . A Prologue . to the . Peasant revolution of 1917. The Peasant . Revolution . of 1917
 Russia in Russia in the Age of Modernization and Revolution, 1881-1917 . Russia in modernization and revolution in Russia .
 Alexander, J Emperor of the Cossacks: Pugachev and the Frontier Jacquerie of 1773-1775 . Pugachev was Pugachev's first Cossack Emperor of Russia and his second Cessessian Empire .
 Internal Migration during Modernization in Late Nineteenth Century Russia . Anderson, B. Anderson: Internal migration during modernization of Russia .
 The Russian state of the Russian Empire is Russia's most secretive, secretive state of society . The state of Russia was Russia's first state of independent Russia in the early 1900s .
 The Old Believers and the World of the Anti-Christ; The Vyg Community and the Russian State, 1864-1855. The Old . Believers . and the world of the anti-Christ . The Old. Believers. and the . Vyg . Community and
 Emmons, T The Russian Landed Gentry and the Peasant Emancipation of 1861 . Emmons: The Russian landed gentry were part of Russia's landed aristocracy .
 A Study of the Social-Democratic Parly and the Russian Constitutional Experiment. Russia's Constitutional Experiment . Russia's Social Democratic Parly is a study of the Russian constitution .
 Russian Conservative Thought and Politics in the Reign of Alexander I DeKalb, Ill., 1997. Alexander I was the head of the Russian Empire . Alexander I died in 1881 .
 Russian Society from the Seventeenth to the Twentieth Century. The Bureaucratization of Russian Society . From the Seventeen to the Twentyth Century.
 Social and Institutional Change through Law in the Germantes and Russia, 1600-1800. Russia . Russia . The Germantes . and Russia . Social and institutional change through Law .
 Government and Peasant in Resettlement from Emanmancipation to the First World War. Government . Peasant In Resettlement . Government . Inventor of Peasant . in . Resettlement of the Peasant from 18th century to WWI .
 Social Evolution tn the Domestic Administration of Imperial Russia, 1711-1905 . Imperial Russia was the home of the Russian Empire .
 Nationalist Imagination and Geographical Expansion in the Russian Far East, 1840-1865 . Nationalist imagination and Geography Expansion in Russia .
 Jelavich, B Russia and Greece During the Regency of King Otton, 1832-1835. During the . Regency . During the reign of King . Otton's reign, the . Russian and Greek colonies were established in Greece .
 Russian Influence in the Internal Affairs of Bulgaria and Serbia, 1879-1886 . Russian influence in the internal affairs of the two countries . 1879 to 1886 .
 Russian Diplomacy and the Opening of the Eastern Question in 1838 and 1839 . Mosely, P. Moseley, P Russian Diplomates and the opening of the . Question in Russia in Russia .
 The Trans-Siberian Railroad and the Colonization of Asian Russia, 1850-1917, is published by the Smithsonian Institution . It is the largest railroad company in the world .
 Rozman, G Urban Networks in Russia, 1750-1800, and Premodern Periodization. Rozman . Rozman: Urban networks in Russia in Russia were in Russia between 1750 and 1800s . He says Rozman is the author of Rozman's book, "
 The career of Aleksei Suvorin was documented in a book published by the Russian National Institute of Russian Journalism and Politics 1861-1881: The Career of Aleksandr Suvorina . Suvorins was a leading Russian journalist in the early 1900s .
 Galai, S The Liberation Movement in Russia, 1900-1905 . Galai: The Liberation of Russia in Russia was a Russian revolution in the early 1900s. Galai wrote a book about the movement in Russia .
 Hare, R Portraits of Russian Personalities between Reform and Revolution, published by the British Museum of Russia . Hare's portrait of Russian personalities between reform and revolution is published in Russia's first major portrait of the revolution . Hare was the author of the first Russian portrait of a Russian Revolution
 Alexander Herzen and the Birth of Russian Socialism, 1812-1855. Malia, Russia . Herzen . Malia . Alexander Shezen . The birth of Russian Socialistism .
 An Intellectual History of Peter Chaadaev and His Russian Contemporaries . An Intellectual history of Peter Chadadev and his Contemorators . Peter Chaadev is a Russian historian .
 Christian Socialism and Idealistic Liberalism in Twentieth-Century Russia . Christian socialism and Idealism in Russia in the 1920s and 1930s .
 Read, C Religion, Revolution and the Russian Intelligentsia, 1900-1912 . Read, Read, read, C. C. Read .
 Schapiro: Rationalism and Nationalism in Russian Nineteenth Century Political Thought . Schapro: "Rationalism and nationalism" was a key part of Russian political thought in the 19th century .
 A History of the Populist and Socialist Movements in Nineteenth Century Russia . A history of Populists and Socialists in Nineteen Century Russia. A History .
 Walicki, A A A History of Russian Thought from the Enlightenment to Marxism, Walicky says . Walickie: A A history of Russian thought from the enlightenment to Marxism. A A Historian of the Enlightenment: The Enlightenment and the Enlightenment . The Enlightenment was the Enlightenment
 History of a Conservative Utopia in Nineteenth Century Russian Thought . History of Conservative U.topia in Russian Thought.
 The Promise and Default of the Russian Socialist Revolutionaries, February to October, 1917, 1917. Promise and default of the Russians . The promise and default was the promise of the revolution .
 The Russian Socialist Revolutionaries in the early months of Soviet Rule. The Russian Revolutionaries. in the Soviet Union .
 An Ethnographic Study of a Russian Village from before the Revolution to the Present. An Ethnomatic Study of the Russian Village . An ethnographic study of the village .
 A Collection of Materials on the Case of Galanskov, Ginzberg, Dobrovolsky and Lashkova, 1967-68. A Collection . of Materials . on the . Case of the . case . A collection of . materials .
 The Collectivization of Soviet Agriculture, 1929-30, Cambridge, Mass., 1980, 1980. The collectivization was a model of Soviet agriculture .
 In Essays in Socialism and Planning in Honor of Carl Landauer, edited by G Grossman. Carl Landau was a member of the Communist Party in Germany .
 Privatization, Business Networks, and Economic Transformation in Russia in Russia, edited by Stephen S Cohen, Andrew Schwartz, and John Zysman .
 Borzecky, J The Soviet-Polish Peace of 1921 and the Creation of Interwar Europe. The Peace of the 1920s and 'Interwar Europe' was created in 1921 . The Peace was created during the Second World War .
 The book is published by Gregory L Freeze; with a foreword by Adam B Ulam . It was translated by Gregory Freeze and Gregory Freeze .
 Paul Zinner, Paul E Communist Strategy and Tactics in Czechoslovakia, 1918-1948 . Zinner: Communist strategy and tactics in . Czechoslovakia, 1918/1948. Zinner .
 Moslem Women and Revolutionary Strategies in Soviet Central Asia, 1919-29 . Moslem women and revolutionary strategies in . Central Asia . Soviet Central . Asia .
 An Essay on the Social Structure and Roles of Soviet Intellectuals during the 1960's. An Essays on the social structure and ROLs of Soviet intellectuals during the . 1960's . An essay on the . social structure . of Soviet intellectuals .
 S. Fitzpatrick, S Education and Social Mobility in the Soviet Union, 1921-1934 . Fitzpatrick: Education and social mobility in Soviet Union was 1921-34 .
 Pospielovsky, D The Russian Church Under the Soviet Regime, 1917-1982. 2 vols. The Russian church under the Soviet regime. The Church in Russia was banned in the Soviet Union .
 Stroyen, W Communist Russia and the Russian Orthodox Church, 1943-1962, was a major influence in the Soviet Union .
 Ethnicity, Nationalism, and Politics in the Commonwealth of Independent States . Ethnicity and Nationalism in the C.I.A.C. Independent States.