 Few events have been as studied and analyzed as the Cuban missile crisis . U.S. Institute of Peace offers special report on the crisis in Cuba .
 Dobbs argues that the real danger of war arose not from the actions and wishes of Kennedy Crisis and Khrushchev, but unpredictable events that neither leader was fully able to control . Dobbs: The real danger arose from the events of the Kennedy crisis and the Castro-Krushchev
 Dobbs researched the Cuban missile crisis at the National Archives, the Naval Historical Center, and the Library of Congress . Dobbs also concluded research in Russia and Cuba; and wrote the book .
 Dobbs distills the key findings of his book, including ten lessons for a modern-day president . Dobbs' book, "The President of the United States," was published in 2007 . He says the lessons of a modern president can be learned from the book .
 The Cuban missile crisis remains the best-documented study of presiSaboteurs: The Nazi Raid on America . dential decision making at a time of supreme national danger . A Twentieth Century Odyssey, and A Twenty Century Odyssey .
 It offers policymakers and students of history unique insights into the interplay between the debates in the Oval Office and fast-moving events in the rest of the world .
 It is better understood as an example of the limits of presidential power and the haphazard returns of crisis management . The limits of the president's power and crisis management can be seen as a good example of American exceptionalism .
 Cohen argued that the hubris engendered among the small circle of aides About the Institute around Presidents John Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson led to disastrous foreign policy decisions . The Institute of Peace is a nonpartisan nonpartisan institution established and funded by Congress .
 The world had its closest-ever brush with nuclear destruction in October 1962 . Cohen’s management tools, capacity, and intellectual capital world concernss about the misinterpretation of history .
 The Institute does this by empowering others with that the “best and the brightest” fell victim to their own propaganda about their skill at knowledge, skills, and resources, as well as by its direct “crisis management” and “calibrated” message
 The circumstances of involvement in conflict zones around the globe were unique . The Cuban missile crisis was unique, the author says .
 Transcribed and dissected by rival groups of scholars, the tapes are exceptionally important historical documents . They represent just one slice of a much larger story . The tapes are extremely rare and important documents .
 Director, Primparous Productions, Inc. President Kennedy was at the center of this film .
 The problem with all models is that they offer a rational, government-centric view of the world, leaving out all the unpredictable, unforeseen incidents that played . The views expressed in this report do not necessarily havoc with the careful calculations of both Kennedy and Khrushchev .
 History is determined by which does not advocate specific policy positions, the so-called rational actors, the men in suits, the bureaucrats, and the top military brass . As we have belatreflect the views of the United States Institute of Peace, edly come to understand with the war
 At other times, history can be yanked from its normal path by a combination of chance events, such as an airplane going astray, a soldier losing his temper, or a spy misidentifying a piece of weaponry .
 Statesmen try to bend the chaotic forces of history to their will, with varying degrees of success . Statesmen bend the chaos of history into their will .
 The likelihood of an unpredictable event occurring that can change the course of history is always greater at times of war and crisis, when everything is in flux, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 In Cuban missile crisis, I tried to integrate the debates in the White House with a minute-by-minute narrative of events in the rest of the world . In his study of the Cuban crisis, he tried to . integrate the debate in the . White House . with a . minute
 Information flowed into ExComm (the executive committee of 13 “wise men” established by President Kennedy to manage the crisis) that was often incomplete, misleading, or simply wrong . ExComm was established by Kennedy .
 The tapes offer a wonderful fly-on-thewall perspective on what the president said and did, but they cannot be taken as an accurate account of everything that transpired during the crisis . The tapes are not a complete account of the crisis, but a detailed account of what happened .
 The president's most confidential and intimate exchanges with his brother Robert went unrecorded for the most part . The president’s most confidential exchanges with Robert went unrerecorded .
 The author triangulates information from a wide variety of sources, including the White House tapes, interviews with Soviet military officers deployed to Cuba, previously undiscovered documents in the National Archives, and raw U.S. intelligence film .
 I was stunned by the amount of documentary material ignored or unappreciated by other historians . I was shocked to discover that many of the documentary material had been overlooked by historians .
 Soviet plans to attack Guantanamo naval base with tactical nuclear weapons . First detailed description of handling and movement of Soviet nuclear warheads around Cuba . Previously unknown details about CIA activities inside Cuba .
 The confrontation at sea on October 24 between U.S. warships and Soviet freighters carrying missile parts to Cuba never actually happened . The episode has become part of the mythology of the missile crisis .
 The Soviet leader did not want to risk a confrontation with the U.S. Navy on the high seas . The Soviet Union wanted to avoid a confrontation .
 The imagery of the “eyeball-to-eball” showdown was easily understandable by journalists, historians, and political scientists . But it lent itself naturally to dramatic re-creation in movies like Thirteen Days . The imagery was easily recognizable by journalists and historians .
 It has become a staple part of the popular understanding of the missile crisis . The missile crisis was in the early 1950s and early 1960s .
 The unauthorized ninetyminute overflight of the Soviet Union by a U.S. spy plane at the height of the crisis has received scant attention from historians . By contrast, a much more dangerous moment, the unauthorized ninety minutes overflight by a United States spy plane has been given scant attention
 When Kennedy found out that a U-2 had gone missing over the Soviet Far East, he gave vent to his frustration . Kennedy was angered by the loss of the U.2 .
 Such episodes were—and remain—infinitely more dangerous than the wishes and decisions of more or less rational policymakers . Such episodes remain, and remain, as well as the wishes of some rational policymakers.
 As Iraq war has amply demonstrated, the important role played by mistakes and misjudged calculations should never be underestimated in world affairs . The Iraq war is amply proof of the importance of calculations and mistakes .
 For all his failings, Kennedy mistakes and miscalculations understood from personal experience that there can be a huge gulf between the orders and wishes of the man in the Oval Office .
 His experiences commanding a patrol boat in the Pacific during World War in world affairs . His experiences with the Navy in World War II in the Philippines .
 The Bay of Pigs fiasco in April 1961 taught him to mistrust the assurances of military leaders. II, reinforced by the lessons from the lessons of the Bay of . 1961, he said .
 For many years, the Cuban missile crisis was presented to the public as a case study in courage, wisdom, and fine-tuned signal sending on the part of Kennedy and his aides . The crisis was portrayed as an example of courage and wisdom .
 Cohen draws a tight connection between “the success in Cuba” and the subsequent failure of U.S. policy in Indochina . Cohen: The success of Cuba in Cuba led to the failure of United States policy in the Vietnam War .
 White House whiz kids settled on a policy of “signal sending” through the “tightly controlled escalation of the air war over North Vietnam,” including the personal selection of bombing targets by President Johnson .
 The objective was not to defeat the North, but to use U.S. air power to send signals of intent to Hanoi . President Kennedy had used the quarantine of Cuba to send a signal of determination to Khrushchev .
 North Vietnamese communists failed, or refused, to read the signals Washington was sending . Unfortunately, the North Vietnamese failed to read, or not, the U.S. failed to .
 Instead of backing down, they matched the Americans escalation for escalation . The U.S. has not backed down, but it has stepped up .
 Support for Cohen’s argument comes from former defense secretary Clark Clifford, who eventually took over from McNamara .
 Modern-day neoconservatives drew a somewhat different—but equally flawed—lesson from the Cuban missile crisis . The U.S. has been in the throes of a major crisis in the Middle East .
 In planning for the war in Iraq, the U.S. shared the conceit that the political will of the president of the United States trumps all other considerations . The president's political will trumps other considerations, they say .
 They were fervent believers in the “eyeball-to-eyebal’s version of history, but they took the argument one step further . They took it to the streets of New York .
 George W Bush praised President Kennedy for being willing to resort to force to eliminate a new kind of peril to the American homeland .
 In effect, Bush was crediting President Kennedy as the authority for junking the cold war strategy of containment that had been in effect for more than half a century . Bush credited Kennedy with giving him the authority to junk the Cold War strategy .
 He omitted that his predecessor resisted calls from some of his closest advisers for a military strike during the crisis . What he omitted was that he resisted calls for military strike .
 U.S. leaders drew the wrong lessons from the Cuban missile crisis in the case of both Vietnam and Iraq, writes CNN's John Sutter . Vietnam, Iraq are two greatest military disasters in modern American history .
 We have every reason to be exceptionally cautious in drawing sweeping foreign policy conclusions from the events of October 1962 . With a track record like that, we should be wary of both Vietnam and Iraq, the U.S. should be cautious .
 President Bush referred to the lessons of the Cuban missile crisis in Cincinnati . Bush was not engaged in a detached academic analysis of a historical event, he was not .
 He was using history to lay the political groundwork for justifying a war with Iraq . He used history to create the basis for a war, he says .
 History rarely offers a clear guide for how political leaders should respond to international crises . History rarely provides clear guide to how leaders should deal with crises such as Syria .
 U.S. invasion of Iraq has parallels between then and now, says CNN.com's John Sutter . He says the crisis in Iraq was similar to that in the aftermath of the Iraq War .
 There are many lessons to be derived from the missile crisis and other similar historical episodes . There are not simplistic guides to action, but cautionary reminders of the pitfalls and opportunities that have confronted previous presidents at moments of extreme national danger .
 A list of ten lessons from the Cuban missile crisis, nearly half a century after the event . In that, more modest spirit, here is a list of 10 lessons from that crisis .
 I have addressed the lessons to a hypothetical future president facing a grave international crisis . But they could equally well be addressed to any student of history, he says .
 If you're going to draw lessons from history, wait until you can get the full story, say CNN.com . CNN's John Sutter says he is disappointed with the outcome of the election .
 Russian and Cuban perspectives were largely ignored in October 1962 . The Kennedy administration was largely focused on what was happening in the U.S.
 Robert F Kennedy’s posthumous account, Thirteen Days, first appeared in 1969 . Over the next few years, these early accounts were supplemented by memoirs written by the key participants .
 All the early versions of the crisis were heavily influenced by the Kennedys and their immediate aides and told the story from their point of view . The early version of this week's crisis was based on the story of the Kennedy family .
 National Security Archive fought a landmark court battle for access to records of State Department historian . Documentary evidence about the crisis did not begin to become available to scholars until the late 1980s .
 The Soviet and Cuban versions of events only emerged in the 1990s following the collapse of communism in the Soviet Union and landmark conferences in Havana in 1992 .
 Official Soviet and Cuban records are largely inaccessible to western historians . Even today, official Soviet records are still inaccessible to the west .
 By my estimate, less than 50 percent of U.S. records on the crisis are publicly . The Air Force, Strategic Air Command, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Defense Department, are publicly available .
 The official Air Force history of Maultsby’s unit describes his air sampling mission as “100 percent successful” and makes no mention of his 1,000-mile detour .
 President Kennedy and his aides fed stories to the press putting themselves in the best possible light . President Kennedy's aides fed the press in the aftermath of the missile crisis . The president's aides say the president's actions were to protect himself .
 President Kennedy gave a long off-the-record interview to one of his closest friends, Charles Bartlett . The interview became the basis for a laudatory account of the president’s handling of the crisis in the Saturday Evening Post .
 Bartlett depicted President Kennedy as the steely-minded leader who “never lost his nerve” despite going “eyeball to eyeball” with Khrushchev . Bartlett and his co-author, Stuart Alsop, depicted Kennedy as a steely
 The article suggested that the Kennedy brothers had stood up not only to Khrushchev, but also to U.S. ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson . Stevenson wanted to trade away United States missile sites in Turkey, Italy and Britain for Soviet missile sites on Cuba .
 The official version of history, as relayed to Bartlett and Alsop, omitted some inconvenient facts . Bartlett: "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm sure I'm glad I'm not afraid to say that."
 The tapes of the ExComm meetings make clear that Robert Kennedy’s position was more ambiguous and contradictory than the early accounts suggest . The tapes show that Kennedy's position on the issue is more ambiguous than the accounts suggest, the author says .
 Robert Kennedy was hardly “a dove from the start,” as Schlesinger claimed in his 1978 biography, Robert Kennedy    and His Times . Kennedy was not a dove from start, as Kennedy biographer claimed in 1978 biography .
 On the first day of the crisis, he was one of the leading advocates for invading Cuba . He even ruminated aloud about staging a “Sink the Maine” type incident as a pretext for getting rid of Castro .
 He veered from one camp to another depending on the signals he was getting from his brother and from Moscow . "He veered between the two camps to one, depending on signals he got from brother and Moscow," he said .
 President Kennedy was willing to go to great lengths on Black Saturday to avoid a showdown with Khrushchev . The historical record shows that he was prepared to go great lengths .
 He authorized his brother to tell Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin that he was prepared to dismantle U.S. missiles in Turkey . The move would come within four to five months of a Soviet pullback from Cuba, he said .
 The main difference between Kennedy and Stevenson was that the president wanted to keep the missile swap idea as a last-minute gambit to avoid war while the ambassador was willing to put it onto the negotiating table . The president wanted the idea of a missile swap to avoid a war .
 Presidential decision making under any administration is a lot more chaotic than the memoir writers would have you believe . Presidential decision-making is more chaotic on the negotiating table from the White House than on memoir writers .
 Kennedy aides came up with the idea of the “Trollope ploy” to describe the U.S. diplomatic strategy on Black Saturday .
 The gambit was named after a scene from a novel by Anthony Trollope in which a lovesick Victorian maiden chooses to interpret an innocent squeeze on the hand as an offer of marriage .
 Khrushchev called for a Turkey-Cuba missile swap in return for a U.S. guarantee not to invade Cuba . He suggested that his brother simply ignore his brother’s call on Saturday morning for a missile swap .
 Robert Kennedy did rewrite the reply to Khrushchev to focus more on the conciliatory-sounding parts of his first letter . With the help of Special Counsel Theodore Sorensen, Robert Kennedy wrote the reply .
 President Kennedy ordered Robert to tell Dobrynin that the U.S. would withdraw its missiles from Turkey . Khrushchev letter was ignored by President Kennedy, who ordered to withdraw missiles .
 He also laid the diplomatic groundwork for a public Turkey-Cuba swap should one become necessary . Turkey and Cuba have long been allies in the past .
 In general, the “Trollope ploy’s version of history ascribes greater coherence and logic to the tense ExComm debate of Saturday afternoon than anybody felt at the time . The "Trollopes ploy" version of the debate is more coherent and logical than anybody
 The meeting was a case study of government by exhaustion, in which frazzled policymakers weighed down by heavy responsibility argued and stumbled toward a mutually acceptable compromise .
 The “best and the brightest” around Kennedy, and later around Johnson, made the fatal mistake of believing their own laudatory press clippings . The ‘best and brightest’ around Kennedy and Johnson made the mistake of thinking their own press clipsings .
 The seeds of the hubris were already on display on the afternoon of Sunday, October 28, in the immediate aftermath of Khrushchev’s climbdown .
 To many of the men, who had spent the last thirteen days in the Cabinet Room agonizing over the threat posed by Soviet missiles, it suddenly seemed as if the president was a missile miracle worker .
 According to the Kennedy version, long accepted by missile crisis historians, the first place . The Kennedy version is that the missile crisis was in place in the 1960s . The first place. According to Kennedy .
 Khrushchev wanted to correct the nuclear imbalance between the Soviet Union and the U.S. The Soviet Union wanted to avoid a nuclear war with the United States . The U.N. went through a series of nuclear tests in the 1950s and 1960s .
 He was worried about Soviet strategic inferiority, but also he wanted to protect the world’s newest socialist state from U.S. attack . He was also worried about the Soviet Union's inferiority .
 Recent revelations show that Khrushchev had real reason for concern . Operation Mongoose, the Kennedy brothers’ secret war against Fidel Castro, was revealed . The Kennedy brothers were involved in the secret operation Mongoose .
 Cuban and Soviet fears of U.S. intervention were not simply the result of communist paranoia . They were not just a result of paranoia, they were also the reason for fears of Soviet intervention .
 In return for withdrawing the missiles, the Soviets extracted a promise from the Kennedy administration not to invade Cuba . The Soviets withdrew the missiles in return for a promise that the U.S. never invaded Cuba .
 The missile crisis helped ensure a humiliating climbdown for Khrushchev but helped ensure that Castro would remain in power for more than four decades . Castro would stay in power power for over four decades.
 The president of the United States may be the most powerful, and best-informed, person in the world . But there is still much that he does not know, CNN's John Sutter says .
 In fact, there were 43,000 Soviet troops on Cuba, including heavily armed combat troops . The Cuban government was heavily armed with Soviet troops .
 Soviet troops moved nuclear cruise missiles to within 15 miles of the naval base at the height of the crisis, according to Soviet soldiers who took part in the deployment .
 CIA officials correctly concluded that Grozny was carrying ammonia for a nickel plant . CIA officials had already concluded that the gas was carrying an ammonia for the plant .
 McNamara and his deputy complained about the lack of timely information from Navy brass during the implementation of the quarantine . McNamara said the quarantine was due to a lack of time from the Navy .
 Neither man saw the messages that went back and forth between the Pentagon and the ships enforcing the blockade .
 U.S. admirals also were in the dark much of the time about what was going on during the war .
 The overloading of communications circuits caused a four-hour delay in ‘emergency’ message traffic . A sixto seven-hours delay was also delayed in “operational immediate” traffic .
 Admiral George Anderson was ‘amazed’ at the lack of information from air reconnaissance about the movements of Soviet ships in the Atlantic .
 America’s enemies are driven by beliefs and motivations that are difficult for Americans to understand . Sometimes, the enemy acts in ways that U.S. leaders consider “rational,” but often, they act irrational . Sometimes the enemy does not act rational .
 He was horrified by the prospect of a nuclear war and felt an obligation to rein in the dark, destructive forces that he had unleashed . He said he was horrified at the prospect .
 He understood that he had no real option but to back down once confronted with America’s overwhelming nuclear superiority . For all his bluster and bravado, he understood that .
 His entire political strategy was based on convincing the U.S. that he was a “madman,” ready to risk the destruction of his country in order to defend its sovereignty and independence . His entire strategy was to convince the United States that he is a ‘mad
 At the height of the crisis, Castro urged Khrushchev to consider using nuclear weapons to “liquidate” the imperialist menace “once and for all” if the Americans invaded Cuba . Castro called for the use of nuclear weapons if the U.S. invaded Cuba
 He ordered his forces to open fire on U.S. reconnaissance planes flying over Cuba . He persuaded his Soviet allies to do the same . The Cuban president ordered his troops to shoot down the American reconnaissance planes .
 Under the heading of “irrational actors,” one should also include people who stumble onto the stage by chance but can change the course of history . Under the head of ‘irrational” actors, one should include those who can change history .
 People who stumble onto the and ended up over the Soviet Union during the most dangerous moments of the Cold War . Neither Kennedy nor any of his advisers had any idea that the Strategic Air Command was still conducting air sampling missions .
 The news that a U-2 had strayed off course came as a surprise even to the commander of Maultsby’s regiment, Colonel John Des Portes, who was too busy supervising operations over Cuba during the crisis to think about seemingly routine missions .
 It took SAC commanders an hour and a half to report Maultsby’s penetration of Soviet air space to McNamara . According to my reconstruction of the incident, it took an hour .
 Both Kennedy and McNamara were unaware until after the event that the Soviets had sent up MiG fighters to try to shoot Maultsby . The Alaska Defense Command had scrambled nuclear-armed F-102s over the Bering Strait in response .
 The corrosive power of conventional wisdom was fully on display during the missile crisis, particularly in intelligence gathering, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: "The worst of the worst is that conventional wisdom is now being used in the world"
 The first medium-range R-12 missiles to arrive in the Cuban port of Mariel on board the Soviet freighter Poltava on September 16 .
 The missiles were unloaded on the night of September 19 under the gaze of a CIA informant . The CIA informant somehow managed to gain access to the docks .
 He described “large intercontinental rockets more than 20 meters long” being unloaded from a Soviet ship . He promptly reported what he had seen to the CIA, describing the rockets . The rockets were unloaded from the ship .
 An R-12 rocket packaged for transport without the nose cone measures 67 feet in length . It is double the length of a V-75 surface-to-air missile . The rocket can be transported without a nose cone .
 The NIE was written largely on the basis of past Soviet behavior . But lower-level analysts were reluctant to challenge the conclusions of an NIE .
 U-2 took pictures of missiles being deployed nearly a month later on October 14 . CIA revised its initial estimate of the missile deployment . It was not until October 14 that the CIA revised it down estimate .
 This intelligence failure is almost the mirror image of the one that occurred during the run-up to the Iraq war in March 2003 . The failure is similar to the failure of intelligence failures in the run up to the 2003 Iraq war .
 October 2002 NIE on Iraq’s WMD programs was played down or dismissed . Reporting and analysis that was at variance with the October 2002 . NIE . played down, dismissed or dismissed reporting .
 Another example of erroneous conventional wisdom in the missile crisis was the search for the nuclear warheads . The search for nuclear warheads was also mistaken, the author says .
 CIA had its eye on underground storage facilities near Cuban towns of Bejucal and Managua . Declassified CIA records and raw intelligence film show that the agency was looking at underground storage sites .
 The CIA deputy director, Marshall Carter, told ExComm that the Bejucal bunker was the “best candidate” for a nuclear storage site . ExComm: The Bejucaal bunker is the best candidate’s for nuclear storage . Marshall Carter: Bej
 Both bunkers were dismissed from serious consideration because they were protected by a single security fence, in contrast to the multiple fences and guard posts visible at similar installations in the Soviet Union .
 The Bejucal and Managua bunkers served as the principal hiding places for the Soviet nuclear warheads . The Beagua bunker was used to hide nuclear warheads from the Soviet Union .
 In the immediate aftermath of the crisis, most people would have singled out Kennedy as the big winner . Kennedy was a big winner in the wake of the Kennedy administration .
 President Obama removed Soviet missiles from Cuba without plunging the world into a catastrophic war . He achieved his basic objective, removing the Soviet missiles without risking war .
 He learned of Khrushchev’s decision to withdraw missiles over the radio and was so furious that he smashed a mirror . ‘I was so angry that I had to smash a mirror.’
 Missile crisis guaranteed Castro’s hold on power in Cuba for more than four decades . Missile crisis guarantee Castro's hold on to power for decades . Cuban missile crisis guarantees Castro's grip on power .
 A little over a year after his greatest foreign policy triumph, Kennedy was killed . Kennedy was murdered by a Fair Play for Cuba Committee activist .
 Khrushchev was forced to retire by his colleagues in the Soviet leadership in part because of his Cuban adventure . A year later, the Soviet leader was forced by colleagues to retire .
 Kennedy’s missile crisis victory had produced many unintended consequences . Kennedy won’t have the missile crisis crisis victory without unintended consequences, he says .
 Soviet leaders sought to erase the memory of the Cuban humiliation . One result was an escalation in the Cold War arms race had produced many unintended .
 Russian minister Vasily Kuznetsov told a senior U.S. official about an escalation in the Cold War missiles .
 The Soviet Union would never again allow itself to be in a position of strategic inferiority again, says Soviet leader Mikhail Gorchkov . Gorchov: "The Soviet Union never again allowed itself to ... be in ... inferiority"
 Khrushchev’s succesarms race in order to achieve military parity with the U.S. sors embarked on a vast intercontinental ballistic missile program . In order to gain parity with U.K. s. s., the Soviet Union began a massive program in the
 In yet another twist to history, this huge military buildup was one of the principal reasons for the Soviet Union’s demise .
 Even a fabulously rich country, with huge natural resources, could not sustain the burden of ever-increasing military budgets . Even a rich country with huge . resources, such as Russia could not be sustained by ever-rising military costs .
 The free world led by the U.S. eventually won a victory over the totalitarian world of Soviet communism . But it came about in a different manner than many people expected .
 The missile crisis marked a turning point in the debate over whether a nuclear war could be wonnable .
 An influential group of generals headed by Curtis LeMay had favored a first strike against the Soviet Union in October 1962 .
 After the missile crisis, even those generals had to rethink the notion of a military victory over the Soviet Union . The U.S. has never been able to win a major victory over Russia .
 Killing all the communists was obviously impossible without millions of Americans being killed as well . Millions of Americans were killed as also as well as the communists .
 The United States and the Soviet Union would never again become involved in a direct military confrontation of the scale and intensity of the Cuban conflict . The U.S. and Soviet Union never again became involved in such a confrontation .
 There would be many proxy wars, but no wars, or even near wars, pitting U.S. troops directly against Soviet troops . The United States would not be involved in any such wars .
 The impossibility of military victory had the salutary effect of shifting the superpower competition to other areas, in most of which America enjoyed a comparative advantage . U.S. enjoyed comparative advantage in many of the world's most important areas .
 Countries that resisted the military might of the U.S. ended up adopting free market economic systems and opening up to the outside world . Countries that successfully resisted the United States' military might ended up opening up .
 In his own mind, Castro won a great victory over the yanqui enemy merely by remaining in power for so long . Castro won his own victory by staying in power, he says .
 He transformed the most prosperous island in the Caribbean into a defeated, impoverished country stuck in a 1950s time warp . In reality, he transformed the country into a hopelessly impoverished country .
 Havana is a place to watch the U.S. President Barack Obama's victory in Cuba . Cuba has been a source of controversy in recent years . The Cuban government has been accused of corruption in the past .
 Communism was not defeated militarily, but it was defeated economically, culturally, and ideologically . Communism was defeated politically, culturally and economically, politically . Communism is not defeated, it is defeated economically and culturally .
 Khrushchev’s successors were unable to provide their own people with a militarily . It was defeated economibasic level of material prosperity and spiritual fulfillment . The Soviet Union was defeated economically .
 The Cuban missile crisis demonstrates the sometimes pivotal role of personality in politics . The crisis in Cuba was a pivotal moment for the Cuban government .
 Had someone else been president in October 1962, the outcome could have been very different . The outcome could be very different if someone else was president .
 Even with the benefit of hindsight, it is impossible to know what would have happened had President Kennedy followed the advice of the hawks . President Kennedy's decision to take action in Vietnam was a mistake .
 It is conceivable that Khrushchev would have swallowed the humiliation . It was conceivable that he would have accepted the humiliation of his government .
 It is also conceivable that Soviet commanders on Cuba would have used tactical nuclear weapons to defend themselves, whatever their instructions .
 A breakdown in military communications would have devolved effective control over such weapons to the officers who commanded each individual battery . A breakdown of communications would devolve effective control of such weapons .
 The nuclear-tipped cruise missiles aimed at Guantanamo were under the command of a major, a major . The nuclear missiles were aimed at the U.S. base in Cuba .
 Had the base been destroyed by a nuclear weapon, Kennedy would have been under enormous pressure to order a nuclear response . Kennedy was under pressure to respond to the threat .
 Knowing what we know now, it is hard to quarrel with President Kennedy’s decision to go with a blockade of Cuba rather than an air strike leading to a possible invasion .
 We can only be grateful for his restraint on a possible invasion of Cuba . We are only grateful for a blockade of Cuba rather than an air strike .
 For decades, the Cuban missile crisis has been studied and analyzed as a case study in presidential power and crisis management . Conclusion for decades has been analyzed and analyzed .
 The great drama during the missile crisis was not whether Kennedy and Khrushchev wanted to control events, it was whether they could . Kennedy and the Soviet Union could have controlled events in the 1960s and '60s . The crisis was the first time the two leaders could control events in
 By authorizing the Bay of Pigs invasion, Kennedy had given the Soviets every reason to believe that he was determined to get rid of Castro once and for all . Kennedy gave the Soviets a reason to think he was going to kill Castro .
 Khrushchev made the reckless decision to deploy nuclear missiles nearly ten thousand miles from Soviet shores, right on America’s doorstep . The missiles were deployed to protect his Caribbean ally .
 The Cuban missile crisis is the story of two chastened leaders struggling to contain the specter of nuclear destruction that they themselves had unleashed . The story of the Cuban missile . crisis is a story of a chastened leader .
 Kennedy had studied history and absorbed some of its lessons . Fortunately, Kennedy had some of those lessons .
 He viewed struggling to contain the specter history not as a rationale to justify his political decisions, but as a cautionary tale of nuclear destruction . Earlier in 1962, he had read a best-selling book about the origins of World War I .
 President Kennedy was so taken by themselves had unleashed the book that he insisted his aides read it and had it distributed to every U.S. military base in the world . The book was so popular that it was distributed to the world's military bases .
 Kennedy’s favorite passage was a scene in which two German statesmen are analyzing the reasons for the most destructive military confrontation up until that time . One of Kennedy's favorite passages was in a scene where two statesmen analyze the reasons behind the war .
 Kennedy tried to imagine a war with the Soviet Union over the missiles in Cuba, one thought kept troubling him . Kennedy: "I'm not sure what I'm going to do with the missiles," he said .
 The world had its closest-ever brush with nuclear destruction on John Kennedy’s watch in October 1962 . John Kennedy was president of the United States .
 To prevent such a moment from ever happening again is reason enough to continue to study the Cuban missile crisis . "To prevent such an incident from happening again, we need to learn how to prevent it happening again"
 President Kennedy and Robert Kennedy express fear that the president “would have been impeached” had he failed to take strong action over Cuba . An exception is a private meeting between the two brothers on October 23, 1962 .
 For the precise coordinates of the Soviet and U.S. ships, see Dobbs, One Minute to Midnight, 91.91 .
 Air Force Historical Research Agency, History of 4080th Strategic Wing, October 1962 . Air Force History of the Air Force Air Force .
 Stuart Alsop and Charles Bartlett, “In Time of Crisis,” Saturday Evening Post, Dec. 8, 1962 . Stuart Alop, Charles Bartlet and Charles Alopop: ‘In Time Of Crisis’