 In 1959, Fidel Castro took control of the island nation of Cuba, some 90 miles from the State of Florida . The island nation is 90 miles away from the state of Florida.
 He established Cuba as a communist nation and began forging a close relationship with the Soviet Union . The U.S. became Cuba's most powerful ally in the 1950s .
 In April of 1961, the United States made an attempt to remove Castro from power . The U.S. tried to take Castro out of Cuba in April 1961 .
 The United States trained Cuban exiles who had escaped Castro by moving to Florida and supported them in an invasion of Cuba . The U.S. supported the invasion in Cuba and trained them in Cuba .
 The invasion failed, and Castro continued to tighten his grip over Cuba . Castro was still in control of Cuba in the 1950s .
 In August of 1962, the Cubans and Soviets began secretly establishing sites to launch nuclear missiles from Cuba . Cuba and the Soviet Union secretly established sites for nuclear missiles .
 With the use of these missile bases, the Soviet Union could have first strike capability against the U.S. The bases could be used to launch first strike strikes against the United States .
 On October 15th, the United States discovered the existence of these missiles . The missiles were discovered by the U.S. government .
 President John F Kennedy and his advisers considered several different strategies ranging from diplomacy, to a blockade, or even a full scale invasion of Cuba .
 The United States Navy placed ships in the Caribbean Sea, surrounding Cuba, and would not allow any Soviet ships to reach Cuba . The U.S. Navy would not let Soviet ships into Cuba .
 On October 22nd, Kennedy announced the threat to the nation, causing panic and turmoil across the country . Kennedy's announcement caused panic across the nation .
 Throughout the next several days, the crisis continued to escalate as both sides refused to back down .
 The United States insisted that the missile bases be removed, while the Soviet Union and Cuba refused to admit that the bases even existed . The U.S. insisted the bases were removed, but the Soviet Russia and Cuba did not admit they existed .
 The Kennedy administration began preparing the early stages of an invasion plan . As the days continued, the Soviet Union remained diligent, and the Kennedy administration continued preparing the plans .
 Soviet ships approached the quarantine zone, but American ships held their ground . The quarantine zone was set up by the U.S. Navy in 1941 .
 The Soviet vessels were forced to turn back, and the blockade continued . The blockade continued until the end of the war .
 The United States Ambassador to the United Nations, Adlai Stevenson, confronted the Soviets in the UN assembly, revealing photographic evidence that forced the Soviet Union to admit the missile bases existed . On that same day, the United States ambassador to the U.N. revealed photographic evidence .
 President Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev reached a secret agreement in October 1962 . The crisis finally ended on October 28, 1962, when President Kennedy reached secret deal with Soviet leader . Kennedy was assassinated in September 1963 .
 The event was one of the most intense moments in the relationship between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . It was a defining moment of the Cold War . The event is one of America's defining moments in history .