 Every man, woman and child lives under a nuclear sword of Damocles, hanging by the slenderest of threads . The sword is capable of being cut at any moment by accident or miscalculation or madness . Every man and woman lives under the nuclear sword .
 The weapons of war must be abolished before they abolish us, he says . To halt the spread of these terrible weapons, to halt the contamination of the air, we remain ready to seek new avenues of agreement .
 Test ban negotiations need not and should not await general disarmament, says David Cameron . Test ban talks should not be held until general disarmance is complete, he says .
 Just three months later, Kennedy was negotiating with British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan to use Christmas Island for a new series of U.S. nuclear tests . The tests took place on Christmas Island in 1962 .
 In the early 1960s, renewed diplomatic tensions between the U.S. and Soviet Union meant the 1958 nuclear testing moratorium could not hold . In the 1950s, the United States and the Soviet Union tested nuclear weapons .
 In March 1961, Harold Macmillan diverted from a Caribbean tour, flying from Trinidad to Key West in Florida to meet with John F Kennedy . The British Prime Minister was in Florida meeting with Kennedy in Florida .
 The two leaders debated strategic cooperation, including the possibility of joint action in the brewing political crisis in Laos . The crisis was the precursor to the Vietnam War, which ended in Vietnam War .
 Kennedy administration saw the U.S. as the leader of the Western alliance and ‘the free world’ – attitudes that sparked interventions in the Congo, Cuba and Indochina .
 Macmillan hoped for an Anglo-American partnership, where Washington would recognise the United Kingdom’s role on the UN Security Council . Washington would also recognise the UK's role in the Security Council, he said .
 With France losing the Algerian War, it tried to improve its crumbling imperial power by commencing a nuclear testing program in its North African colony . France lost the war in Algeria, but wanted to improve the crumbling empire .
 Macmillan hoped to encourage the United States to quickly negotiate a total ban on atmospheric testing, but believed that US nuclear superiority over Russia would best be maintained by another round of US nuclear weapons tests before any ban .
 Despite his disarmament rhetoric, Kennedy had won the presidency with talk of a fictitious missile gap with the Soviet Union . The new administration sought to bolster its nuclear forces, and sought to do so .
 The United States offered the United Kingdom use of the Nevada test site for further British nuclear experimentation, but sought something in return . For this reason, the United States .
 In December 1961, the two Western leaders held a meeting in Bermuda, this time to discuss the use of Britain’s Christmas Island facilities for U.S. nuclear testing .
 If you’re talking about Britain, it would take five or six, but to be on the safe side, let’s say seven or eight, and I’ll have another gin and tonic, if you would be so kind . If you're talking about
 Kennedy, Macmillan and the Cold War: The irony of interdependence (Palgrave MacMillan, London, 2002), 154. He says Kennedy and his family have been together since 1964 .
 Kahn advocated first strike attacks to decapitate the Soviet leadership . In earlier work at RAND Corporation, Kahn had critiqued the notion of Mutually Assured Destruction .
 Kahn’s personality was used as a model for Doctor Strangelove, the scientist at the heart of Stanley Kubrick's astounding satire of the nuclear era . Kahn's personality was combined with traits from Nazi rocket scientist Werner Von Braun .
 A Thousand Days: John F Kennedy in the White House (HoughtonMifflin, Boston, 2002 reprint), 491. Kennedy's White House legacy: "A Thousand Days" Kennedy died in 1968 .
 As leaders debated the test moratorium, the airstrip and infrastructure on Christmas Island were maintained, under a joint arrangement between London and Washington . The airstrip was maintained under the arrangement .
 He then acceded to proposals from the United States military for the further series of nuclear tests at Christmas Island and Johnston Atoll . Operation Dominic is codenamed Operation Dominic .
 It is the joint view of the United States and UK governments that the existing state of nuclear development would justify the West in making such further series of nuclear tests as may be necessary for purely military reasons .
 The agreement between the UK and U.S. governments allowed the US military to carry out nuclear weapons testing no more than 25 miles and no less than 5 miles from Christmas Island . The agreement was agreed between the US and UK governments .
 Britain traded the use of facilities at the Christmas Island base in return for access to the United States testing ground in the Nevada desert in order to test British nuclear weapons underground .
 The first phase of the U.S. program was conducted in a rush, says John F. Kennedy . The president of the United States says the program is not a failure .
 24 atmospheric nuclear tests were conducted at Christmas Island between 25 April to 11 July, with weapons dropped from US aircraft .
 The tests ranged in yield from the appropriately named ‘Petit’ at 2. kilotons to the massive ‘Pamlico” at 3. megatons . The tests range in yield between 2.kilotons and 3 megatonons .
 A week later, in Operation Swordfish, the submarine fired a rocket-launched antisubmarine ASROC nuclear depth charge . A week after the attack, the sub fired a missile at a depth charge into the ocean .
 In October, five more airdrops were detonated in the vicinity of Johnston Island, a United States possession . Johnston Island is located between the Marshall Islands and Hawai‘i .
 Johnston claimed for the Kingdom of Hawai‘i in July 1858, with the support of King Kamehameha . Johnston was claimed by the King of Hawai'i .
 Johnston effectively became a United States possession in 1898 . Territory of Hawai‘i continued to claim jurisdiction over both Kalama Island and neighbouring Sand Island well into the 20th century .
 Johnston Atoll had first been used for two U.S. nuclear tests during Operation Hardtack in 1958 . Johnston atoll was first used by the United States for two nuclear tests .
 This testing program involved nuclear tests on Bikini and Enewetak atolls in the Marshall Islands . Full details of all 24 tests are available in ‘Operation Dominic 1’, United States Defense Threat Reduction Agency Fact Sheet .
 Today, the Royal Navy relies on the United States Trident missiles aboard its basllistic missile submarines .
 Two rocket launches from Johnston codenamed Teak and Orange both involved 3.8-megaton explosions from nuclear warheads on rockets launched from Johnston Atoll . Two of the launches involved nuclear warheads .
 After the tests were completed, the island reverted back to the command of the U.S. Air Force .
 Rocket-launched tests, collectively designated Operation Fishbowl, were designed to study the effects of nuclear detonations as defensive weapons against incoming ballistic missiles . The tests were intended to study effects of detonations on incoming ballistic missile launches .
 The 1.4-megaton highlevel explosion from Starfish Prime lit the sky from Australia to Hawai‘i, causing an enormous electromagnetic pulse that put out streetlights in Honolulu, 1,300 kilometres away . The explosion was caused by an explosion from Australia’s Star
 The blast pumped radiation into the Van Allen belts, capable of destroying or seriously degrading the orbit of seven satellites . The blast could have seriously damaged or destroyed seven satellites, according to NASA .
 A number of aborted nuclear missile launches from Johnston caused plutonium contamination on the island that still lingers today . These operations were preceded by a series of aborted missile launches .
 The first failed test ‘Bluegill’ on 2 June 1962 was aborted when radar lost track of the Thor missile carrying the nuclear warhead . The first . failed test was aborted .
 The next 'Starfish' test on 19 June led to massive contamination of Johnston Atoll . The next ‘Starfish’ test on June 19 led to contamination of the atoll .
 The launch of a Thor missile carrying a nuclear warhead was aborted a minute into its flight . The self-destruct order blew the missile apart at about 30,000 feet .
 Large pieces of radioactive debris (including pieces of the booster rocket, engine, re-entry vehicle and missile parts) fell back to the island . The island was hit by a rocket launch in 2009 .
 More debris landed in the surrounding waters and on adjacent Sand Island, where residual plutonium from the test device was found .
 The test codenamed Bluegill Prime in July caused the most serious contamination . It is however also likely that residual plutonium fell into the waters of JA.14 .
 After a malfunction on the launch pad, officials destroyed the rocket by remote control after ignition but before the rocket had lifted off . The rocket had been launched by a malfunctioning rocket launch pad .
 Plutonium material, mixed with the flaming fuel, drained into trench cables and carried away in the smoke from several fires . The material was carried away from the fires .
 This resulted in a deposition of alpha contamination on the launch pad complex that represented a major contamination problem . The problem was caused by alpha contamination of the launchpad complex .
 Contaminated debris was scattered throughout the wire-enclosed pad area and neighbouring areas . Contamination was reported to have been caused by contaminated debris .
 Metal revetment buildings were highly contaminated with alpha activity . Metal reverment buildings in the U.S. are highly contaminated by alpha .
 Burning fuel flowing through cable trenches caused contamination on the interior of the revetments and all equipment contained therein . Burning fuel flowed through the cable trenches causing contamination .
 Fuel spilled and flowed over the compacted coral surrounding the launch mount and revetments, resulting in highly contaminated areas . Fuel spilled over the coral and flowed into the launch area .
 Prevailing winds at the time of the destruction caused general contamination of all areas around the launch mount .
 In an effort to continue with the testing program, United States troops were sent in to do a rapid clean-up . U.S. troops were deployed to help maintain the test program .
 The troops scrubbed down the revetments and launch pad, carted away debris and removed the top layer of coral around the launch pad .
 The plutonium-contaminated rubbish was dumped in the lagoon, polluting the surrounding marine environment . The waste was dumped into the surrounding lagoon after being contaminated .
 At the time of the Bluegill Prime disaster, the top-fill around the launch pad was scraped by a bulldozer and grader . The launch pad has been closed since the disaster .
 It was then dumped into the lagoon to make a ramp, so the rest of the debris could be loaded onto landing craft to be dumped out into the ocean . The debris was then loaded into landing craft before being dumped out of the ocean by landing craft .
 An estimated 10 per cent of the plutonium from the test device was used in the fill used to make the ramp .
 Much of the plutonium contamination from Bluegill Prime may have been redeposited on the island . Much of these sediments were incorporated back into the islands in the 1964 dredging and filling work .
 Any contamination not redeposited on the island through dredge and fill still contaminates the lagoon . The contamination is still contaminating the island's lagoon.
 The major Bluegill Prime disaster seriously affected the health of U.S. Naval Air Force personnel who were present at Johnston Island . The disaster was a major health hazard .
 Crewmember Michael Thomas notes that the flight crew and ground support staff were trapped on the island following the destruction of the nuclear warhead . Thomas: The flight crew was trapped in the island after the warhead destroyed .
 Nearly 30 per cent of the crew experienced reproductive problems, with their wives suffering stillbirth and deformities in babies .
 In the Bluegill Double Prime test, the rocket was destroyed at a height of 109,000 feet after it malfunctioned 90 seconds into the flight . The test was the first of its kind .
 U.S. Defence Department officials confirm that when the rocket was destroyed, it contributed to the radioactive pollution on the island .
 Thomas served at Johnston Atoll in 1962 as a member of U.S. Naval Air Force, Navy Patrol Squadron Six, Flight Crew One . Thomas served in the Navy's Pacific Fleet .
 With the completion of Operation Dominic at Christmas Island and two series of atmospheric and underground tests at the Nevada test site, the U.S. revived negotiations with the Soviet Union for a test ban treaty . The United States revived negotiations .
 The end of nuclear testing has not ended the nuclear hazard for the peoples of the Pacific . As with all Pacific nuclear test sites, the end of the nuclear test site is still a nuclear hazard .
 U.S. defence authorities have surveyed the island in a series of studies . They have collected 45,000 tonnes of soil contaminated with radioactive isotopes .
 Plutonium pollution was heaviest near the old rocket launching site, in the lagoon offshore the launch pad and near Sand Island . Plutonium was also found in a lagoon off the launch site .
 Contaminated soil was dug up and collected on the north of the island . The contaminated soil was collected in a fenced area covering 24 acres of land .
 Plans for a permanent U.S. satellite tracking base on the island failed to materialise and, in September 1963, the last United States forces left the island .
 British forces did an initial clean-up, dumped unwanted material into the ocean and packed their bags . British forces then packed up their bags and packed them into the sea .
 Tons of rusting vehicles, batteries, drums of unused asphalt and other toxic wastes were simply abandoned on the island . The island was abandoned by the government of Puerto Rico .
 On 29 June 1964, the Royal Navy owered its flag at the HMS Resolution base at Port London .
 Johnston was used by the U.S. military until 2000 . The island was expanded many times in size through dredging and reconstruction .
 Johnston Atoll was used to store chemical weapons from Okinawa after 1970 and drums of Agent Orange defoliant from the Vietnam War in 1972 . The base was used for nuclear weapons from 1962 nuclear tests, including the 1962 nuclear test .
 It is seen as critical to have Kiritimati Island reassessed for radioactive contamination in light of increasing evidence based on cancer levels in the Marshall Islands .
 A team from Safety and Ecology Corporation Ltd was deployed in 2005 for a clean-up operation on Christmas Island . Funded by a £9.1-million contract from the UK Ministry of Defence . The operation was funded by a team funded by the UK government .
 SEC sought to remove more than 23,000 cubic metres of military material . But this focused on rusting equipment, oil drums, waste asphalt, asbestos and toxic chemicals left behind .
 Toxic or otherwise hazardous waste, including radioactive material, was transported back to the United Kingdom for disposal . Hazardous waste was transported to the UK to be disposed of .
 Christmas Island has been subject to radiological surveillance for more than a decade . The island island is home to the largest island in the world .
 Kiribati country report for United Nations Conference of Environment and Development , South Pacific Regional Environment Program , Apia, June 1992, 56. Kiribatis country report was published by U.N. Conference on Environment .
 Radioactive Waste’, Under-Secretary of State for Defence Andrew Robathan, UK House of Commons, Hansard Written Answers for 17 February 2011 . Robathan: ‘Radioactive waste’ is a waste of money .
 The operation involved extensive negotiation with local communities, given some equipment had been repurposed for housing and pig pens . The operation took place in a bid to save the lives of local residents .
 Despite this attempted clean-up, comprehensive surveys of possible radiological contamination on the south-east corner of the island were not conducted . Radiological contamination was not found in the area .
 In Kiribati, when the tests ended, much of the equipment used for the testing were dumped in the ocean or left behind .
 An offer was quickly made for a clean-up of the island, more than 30 years after the tests, by one of the testing countries . In seeking to have a study done on assessing the safety of Kiritimati from radiation, an offer was made .
 "With this history in mind, our region collectively has been most vocal about nuclear issues. With this history, we have to be mindful of our region's history of nuclear issues," she said .
 The establishment of the Pacific Islands Forum, the annual gathering of our Pacific leaders, emanated from the frustration of not being able to discuss nuclear issues, deemed political by the metropolitan powers who were members of the South Pacific Commission .
 Operation Dominic highlighted the hypocrisy of Britain’s refusal to acknowledge the health problems faced by military personnel after their service on Christmas Island during Operation Grapple .
 The United States would provide compensation to its troops from Operation Dominic for the same illnesses found amongst British veterans that would not be compensated by the UK Government . The U.S. would not compensate for the illnesses found among British veterans .
 Safety and Ecology Corporation Ltd. to WM 2006 conference, 26 February–2 March 2006, Tucson Arizona .
 UK MoD refused compensation, arguing that there was no proof his cancer was caused by exposure to ionising radiation . However, earlier that very year, the MoD had refused compensation . The MoD said there was 'no proof' that radiation exposure caused the cancer .
 I am a casualty of the Cold War and I am pleased that I am receiving compensation and recognition from the United States government . It really galls me lying here—a critically ill man—that the British Government continues to fail in its duty of care towards me .
 In light of the overwhelming evidence and research in the U.S. which led to this compensation payment, I call on the Prime Minister to admit that mistakes have been made .
 I would like to see the automatic award of War Pensions to any nuclear test veteran suffering from one of the 19 recognised diseases under the United States Radiation Exposure Compensation Act . I would also want to see a permanent pension for any test veterans suffering from a disease under the act .
 Spackman was one of the 15 aircrew of Canberra bombers who participated in the 1954 Aconite program . He collected samples of radioactivity after U.S. nuclear tests in the Marshall Islands .
 U.S. legislation recognises lung cancer as one of many diseases that can be caused by radiation released in the tests . For this hazardous duty, Spackman was 27 when he was 27 .
 President John Kennedy awarded a Queen’s Commendation for Distinguished Service in 1957 .
 He was diagnosed with aggressive cancer of the pharynx in 2000 and, despite treatment, died five months later . Despite treatment, he died just five months after being diagnosed .
 Survivors of U.S. and British nuclear testing in the Pacific are survivors of nuclear testing . The debate over the economic, social and environmental impact of the testing has not ended .
 The story of Christmas Island continues into the 21st century . From medical research to court battles, from NGO activity to parliamentary debates, the story continues .