 On October 14, 1962, a U2 spy plane captured photographs that sparked the beginning of the crisis . The U2 plane captured photos of the U.S. invasion of Cuba .
 More than 40 U.S. warships headed to Vieques, off the coast of Puerto Rico, for training exercises . Three days later, on October 17, 1962, more than 40 United States warships headed for Vieques .
 The Joint Chiefs had been planning scenarios for an amphibious assault on Cuba for months . President Kennedy, still smarting from placing his trust in the military leaders during the failed Bay of Pigs invasion, was reticent .
 Bill Ober Dobbs is also the author of One Minute to Midnight, a tick-tock history of the crisis . Dobbs: "I'm not going to be able to go back and forth with my colleagues"
 Almost a week into the events, shortly after Kennedy addressed the country in a televised speech, the President cancelled the training on Vieques as the military advanced to DEFCON 2 .
 The plan was for the Marines to attack east of Havana, at Tarara , while the 1st Armored Division landed through the port of Mariel to the west .
 The 101st and 82nd Airborne divisions would conduct a paratroop assault behind enemy lines . In the meantime, the 101st, 82nd and 101st Airborne would conduct an assault .
 In its initial sweep, the invading force would skirt Havana and head directly for the missile sites . The invasion force would then head directly to missile sites in Havana .
 The Marines were prepared for five hundred dead the first day alone –mainly on Tarara beach – and a further two thousand injured . A further 2,000 injured were expected to be injured in the first two days .
 Total casualties during the first ten days of fighting were estimated at over eighteen thousand . Four thousand dead, including four thousand dead . Total casualties estimated at 18,000 .
 The naval quarantine of Cuba was successful and Kennedy and Khrushchev negotiated a gradual stand-down . The Soviet Union pulled their missiles out of Cuba and the U.S. eventually removed theirs from Turkey .
 JFK Library’s stunning “Clouds Over Cuba” package is available at the JFK Library . The Kennedy administration avoided nuclear war in Cuba .
 It has more video and primary source materials than any history buff could ever want . It has been available for more than 100 years .