 Soviet-U.S. relations at a critical point following disagreements over contested Berlin . Great fear that a third, even more devastating, world war was around the corner .
 The threat of nuclear war escalated during those uneasy times with Russia and the U.S. arming themselves to the teeth, preparing for full-on open conflict . The threat was heightened during those times .
 History's most significant moment was the birth of the first World War II . It was a time when the world was shaking over the fate of the country .
 The Cuban Missile crisis was arguably the most significant political event that occurred during the second half of the twentieth century . The Cuban missile crisis was a major political event in the United States .
 Even before the Second World War, the U.S. was hostile to Soviet Russia and its communistic ideologies that directly conflicted with western ideas of a free market and capitalism .
 The United States even orchestrated a series of covert actions against the Bolsheviks during the Revolution of 1917 . The U.S. funded the Bolshevik enemies the Whites, and later on interfered with military operations by sending in thousands of troops to Vladivostok and Archangelsk .
 The United States provided Russia with huge quantities of weapons, ships, aircraft, rolling stock, strategic materials and other humanitarian supplies . The Lend-Lease Program was signed by F.D Roosevelt .
 The United States feared that the growing power of the Soviet Union might cause a shift in global power, leaving the United States and many democratic countries of Europe vulnerable to its ideological influence . The U.S. feared that it would be vulnerable to the growing influence of the Soviets .
 This became a real possibility after the creation of the Eastern Bloc and Russia’s development of the atomic bomb in 1949 which resulted with the United States organizing NATO to “contain communism” from spreading over the whole world .
 After the success of the Cuban Revolution of 1959 Fidel Alejandro Castro took power . The Cuban Revolution was the result of the revolution in 1959 .
 The U.S. feared that Castro, a communist, would ally with the Soviet Union . The United States feared he would ally against Castro . Castro was the Cuban leader .
 A potential ally to the enemy near the coast was a sizable threat to U.S. security . Clearly, having a potential ally in the region was a significant threat to security . The United States decided to take action .
 The United States tried using military force to assassinate Fidel Castro in the Bay of Pigs Invasion which, ultimately, was a failure . The U.S. tried to assassinate Castro in a failed attempt to do so .
 Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev promised to defend Cuba with Soviet arms if any military action was taken by the United States following the failed invasion . The Soviet Union promised to protect Cuba if any U.S. military action by the U.K. was taken .
 At this point in the Cold War Russia was secretly losing the arms race . At this time in the 1950s, Russia was losing its arms race with the Soviet Union .
 The United States already had “Jupiter” ballistic missiles positioned in Turkey and Italy aimed at every major city of the Soviet Union . The U.S. already had . ‘Jupiter missiles’ aimed at . every major Soviet Union city of Soviet Union.
 Khrushchev understood that the U.S. would perish if it didn't find an equally strategic advantage . He understood that he had to find a strategic advantage to survive .
 With Cuba as U.S.R.’s new valuable ally, the opportunity was obvious . Cuba is now a valuable ally of the United States. President Barack Obama has been criticized for his policies .
 The Soviets ferried launch equipment and personnel necessary for the preparation of missiles to Cuba . Throughout the late-summer and early-fall of 1962, the Soviet Union ferried the launch equipment .
 Because they feared being discovered they could not use military ships . Because of their fears, they feared not using military ships. They used military ships to avoid detection .
 Soviet leadership started the deployment of nuclear missiles in the belief that Washington would not detect the missile sites until it was too late . Soviet leadership thought the U.S. would not be able to detect the sites until they were detected .
 GRU colonel Oleg Penkovsky leaked information to the CIA from a Soviet defector . The information was leaked to the U.S. by a GRU defector, a Russian colonel .
 With his information the U.S. were able to quickly identify the missile launching sites that were being erected in Cuba . The United States was able to find the missile launch sites .
 GRU Colonel Oleg Penkovsky is a former Russian officer of the GRU . He was assassinated by the Soviet Union in 1941 . He died in a Soviet Union raid in 1944 .
 The Cuban crisis was not transformed into the last World War. Thanks to his priceless information the Cuban crisis wasn't transformed into a World War .
 The National Photographic Interpretation Center found what they they thought to be surface-to-air missiles . They found the missiles in a photo series .
 President John F Kennedy heard the words while having breakfast, still wearing pajamas . The words were the words that he heard early in the morning on the 16 October . President Kennedy was wearing a pair of shorts when he heard the news .
 Later that day President Kennedy and his advisors scheduled two meetings . President Kennedy was in the midst of a meeting with his advisors .
 Kennedy was informed that even though the missiles do not currently have nuclear warheads armed, it is only a matter of time before the Russians ship the main weaponry . From such a great vantage point, the SS-4 missiles could target any city in the 1100 miles radius which left the whole eastern
 He hand-picked a group of trusted government officials in total secrecy to advise him on the crisis . For this meeting he hand-picked a team of trusted officials .
 This assembly was later on referred to as the Executive Committee of the National Security Council or the Ex-Comm . This assembly later on became known as the "Ex-Comm" or "ExComm"
 Robert McNamara outlined many different courses of action the U.S. could take to settle the crisis . McNamara, then Secretary of Defense, outlined many of the options .
 Mr President, in this list there are a series of alternative plans ranging from Roman numeral N°1 with a minimum of about 50 sorties directed solely against the known MRBMs as of last night, to alternative N°5 . Mr President .
 If there is any possibility the enemy is equipped with operational nuclear weapons, I am certain the plans would have to change .
 Most extreme course of action was a full-on invasion of Cuba in order to seize or destroy the nuclear warheads before the Soviet Union had a chance to react . The most extreme course would be to seize the warheads and destroy them .
 In order to maintain secrecy, Kennedy followed his pre-crisis schedule . Kennedy followed the schedule of the day .
 As of this point the Soviets didn’t know that the U.S. knew of the missiles in Cuba . The Soviets didn't know of the United States .
 Officials feared that if the Russian’s found out then they might hide the missiles or simply launch them if they were ready . Officials feared they might launch the missiles if they found out .
 The U.S. did not want to take any chances . The United States is unlikely to win the World Cup in 2016 .
 JFK understood that if the nation found out about the critical situation in Cuba, uncontrollable panic would follow . John F Kennedy understood that . If the nation . found out that if . the . nation found . out of Cuba, ‘uncontrollable panic’ would follow,
 Kennedy did not break any public engagements for the next four days . Kennedy was not expected to make public appearances again until Friday .
 JFK entered his car and focused his whole attention on the crisis . However, as soon as JFK entered he became serious and focused on his car . JFK became serious soon after he entered the car .
 Ex-Comm did not know if Gromyko personally knew about the missiles or if he was informed that the U.S. knew about it .
 Kennedy shifted the topic to Cuba after a polite exchange of minor world events . After a brief exchange of pleasant world events, he shifted the conversation to Cuba .
 Gromyko read a statement saying that Soviet aid was solely for the purpose of contributing to the defense capabilities of Cuba and to the development of its peaceful democracy . The Soviet aid to Cuba was only intended to contribute to its defense capabilities .
 A majority opinion had been reached on recommending a blockade of Cuba . During another Ex-Comm meeting a majority opinion was reached on a blockade .
 Kennedy liked the idea of the blockade because it provided the Soviets a way out of the crisis . The blockade provided the Soviet Union with a way to escape the crisis, Kennedy says .
 Kennedy asked his brother to continue the Ex-Comm meetings to draw up full plans for both scenarios . Kennedy, who was already late for the meeting, asked him to continue to continue .
 He chose not to cancel this trip because he wanted to maintain secrecy . He chose to go on the trip because of the secrecy surrounding the trip . The trip is scheduled to take place in the U.S.
 Robert Kennedy called the President to say that he had to come back to Washington and cancel his trip to finalize his decision . On Saturday, October 20, the President called Robert Kennedy to cancel his visit to Washington . Robert Kennedy was the last man to make a decision on whether to leave
 President needed to make final decision wether to air strike missile sites or hold a military quarantine . It was necessary for the President to make a final decision on the issue .
 He wanted to know the percentage of success if a surgical air strike of Cuba was to take place . He asked the question: "What do you think the chances are of success?"
 General Walter Sweeney, the head of Strategic Air Command replied that all the missiles sites that were known would be taken out . General Sweeney: All the sites that are known will be removed from the airbase .
 Kennedy asked the general the estimated casualties, civilian and military . Kennedy asked him what he thought the casualties would be . Kennedy: "It's a disaster. It's a terrible thing to see"
 Military alert was raised to DEFCON 3 and instructions were given to be ready to launch missiles on Russian cities within minutes of the President’s speech . Russian President Vladimir Putin was speaking at the time of the speech .
 Twenty planes with nuclear bombs were ready to strike the U.S.R. on command . Twenty planes had nuclear bombs ready for strike on command. Twenty planes were ready for attack .
 On October 22, President John F Kennedy gave his famous speech on television . Kennedy gave the speech on October 22 .
 In his reknown speech he described the situation in Cuba and gave a detailed explanation of America’s decision .
 He was enraged at his military for not successfully hiding the missiles . He was angered by the American ‘quarantine’, which was an act of war, no matter what it was .
 Khrushchev sent a response to Kennedy stating that the missiles in Cuba are purely defensive and that Kennedy’s statement poses a serious threat towards world peace and the security of nations . Khrushchell responded by saying that the statement posed a threat to world peace .
 Fidel Castro mobilized all of Cuba’s military forces in response to Kennedy's speech . Castro mobilized Cuba's military forces to respond to the Kennedy speech . Fidel Castro was Cuban president of Cuba in 1961 .
 He had anticipated invasion from the U.S. ever since the Bay of Pigs invasion . He had been in the war against the United States ever since .
 The British press questioned the authenticity of the existence of Soviet bases in Cuba and linked his actions to his re-election in Cuba .
 Germany and France sympathized with Kennedy's decision and speech . However, most other countries in Europe sympathized Kennedy’s decision to speak out .
 On the following day, Kennedy ordered six jets to fly over the missile sites . On the next day, six jets were flown over the sites .
 The photographs showed that the Soviets were testing the missiles for launch . The photographs were taken during the tests of Soviet missiles .
 Organization of American States unanimously approved of the quarantine, realizing that they were also threatened by the missiles in Cuba . On the same day, the OAS voted to quarantine the Cuban missiles .
 United States ships were ordered to communicate with Russian vessels . If those did not stop, the U.S. were to disable any incoming ships .
 Ex-Comm received a message that the Soviet Ships had stopped and were turning back . Ex-comm received a . message that . the Soviet ships had stopped . and turned back . The Soviet ships were turned back and were turned away .
 Khrushchev was not ready to challenge the military blockade and bring the crisis to a whole new level . The crisis was not going to reach a new level, says historian Peter Bergen .
 The notification, sent round the world from Strategic Air Command HQ, was purposely left uncoded to let the Soviet Union know just how serious the U.S. were . The notification was sent from the Strategic Air command HQ .
 The crisis had not been avoided by Russia, but no action was taken from the Kremlin . Russia did not take action to prevent the crisis from occurring .
 Kennedy had U.S. Ambassador Adlai Stevenson confront Russia at the United Nations . Kennedy had ambassador to Russia confront him at the UN .
 The United States would not lose a strategic position if this was to take place, says President Obama . The U.S. is not likely to lose strategic position, he says .
 By this time United States had submarines with nuclear warheads capable of targeting Moscow and other major centers around Russia’s borders . U.S. had submarines capable of . targeting Moscow .
 The U.S. let it through because there was no reason to believe it carried contraband cargo . The United States let it though because there were no reasons to believe cargo was contraband .
 The letter stated that the U.S. and Russia were “pulling on ends of a rope in which there is a knot.” The letter said that the United States and Russia are pulling on the ends of the rope . The letter also said that Russia and the U
 Dobrynin claimed that the missiles in Cuba were justified because of American missiles in Turkey . He said the missiles were launched in Cuba because of the U.S. missile threat to Turkey . Dobrynins said that the Cuban missiles were fired in response to the threat posed by U.
 A U-2 reconnaissance plane was shot down over Cuba and another had, supposedly, gone off course and mistakenly flew into Russian air space . The U.2 had, apparently, been flying into Russia air space. The plane was later shot down in Cuba .
 Officials feared Russia might think that the U-2 was on a reconnaissance mission precluding a nuclear strike . Officials feared that Russia might have thought that the mission was a pre-emptive strike .
 Ex-Comm had previously decided that if a scout plane was to be shot down over Cuba, the Air Force would retaliate by bombing . The decision was made in response to the threat posed by the Cuban government .
 Joint Chiefs pushed even harder for a strike on Cuba after the downing of the U-2 . The Joint Chiefs pressed even harder to strike Cuba .
 Khrushchev stated that if the U.S. remove the missiles from Turkey Russia would, in turn, remove their missiles from Cuba . Russia would also remove their missile from Cuba if the United States removed them from Turkey .
 Robert Kennedy proposed to ignore Khrushchev’s second letter and answer, publicly, to the first . Kennedy: ‘I propose to ignore the second letter, and answer the first.’ Robert Kennedy .
 He had stayed up most of the night and received statements from diplomats in the U.S. so he was aware that the crisis was at a very extreme point . The crisis is at an extreme point, he said .
 Nikita Khrushchev feared the worst that the U.S. was going to declare war on the Soviet Union . Nikita feared that the United States would be going to war with the USSR .
 Esteemed Mr President: "I have received your message of October 27, 1962" President of the United States: "Your message is a message of hope"
 This message, received early in the morning by Eastern Standard Time, effectively ended the crisis . This message was received by the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 Kennedy understood that Khrushchev’s response was genuine and that he would stay true to his word . Kennedy, however, understood that . He said, “Krushchev,” was genuine .
 Castro did not like the fact that Cuba had not got what it wanted out of the crisis mainly Guantanamo Bay, which the Russian’s guaranteed would fall back under Cuban control .
 The withdrawal of the ‘Jupiter’ missiles from Turkey and Italy wasn’t made public . The compromise was an embarrassment for Nikita Khrushchev and the Soviet Union because the withdrawal wasn't made public.
 The relations of many Soviet states greatly deteriorated namely with China as China also saw Russia’s decision as cowardice . Many Soviet states also saw the decision as cowardly .
 Moscow-Washington hotline is a direct communications link from the Oval Office to the Kremlin . Following the crisis the Hotline Agreement was made .
 Leonid Brezhnev for the U.S.R. and Gerald Ford for the United States. The most important events that came later on were the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks . The talks were held under the rule of the two countries .
 The Talks ended with Russia and the U.S.A. signing an anti-nuclear pact that limited the amount of nuclear warheads each country was allowed to hold . The talks ended with the agreement limiting nuclear warheads to each other .
 The U.S.A. had many more nuclear warheads than Russia could ever dream of producing . Unknown at the time, Russia was losing the arms race . The United States had more nukes than Russia was able to produce .
 By creating such a tense situation, Khrushchev provoked the United States into signing a disarming treaty, thereby guaranteeing safety to his country and his people . The treaty was signed by the U.S. to guarantee the safety of his country .
 "Every living person has to be forever in debt to the brave men that were afflicted with the Ex-Comm and to Mr Nikita Khrushchev," writes Peter Bergen .
 Stuart Murray, Atlas of American Military History, published by H Holt, 1994 . Stuart Murray and Michael J Carley, edited by Michael Carley . Carley's book is published by Carley and Carley.