 The Oleg Penkovsky Story and the Important of Human Intelligence in Cold War Crises . Christoffer J Henriksen Senior Capstone History.9 Professor: Dr. Dr. Henriksens . The important of human intelligence in cold war .
 While technology provides insight into what one’s opponents are doing, it lacks the distinctly human factor necessary for a full assessment of a given situation . While technology can provide insight into one's opponents' actions, it can also be used to assess the situation .
 Brush Pass is a method of exchanging information in which two parties exchange information while seeming to accidentally brush past each other in public . Brush pass is a way to exchange information without appearing to brush past people .
 Main focus was military, especially nuclear, but would gather any information . Main focus would be gathering any information about military or nuclear weapons .
 Main focus was political, especially nuclear, but would gather any information available . Main focus would be nuclear, especially in nuclear power .
 Persona non gratasomeone being told to leave a country, and not return . Persona non-grathesomeone is told not to return and not to leave the country .
 This is usually due to the person doing something illegal or worsening relations between the two countries . This usually occurs when the person does something illegal . This is often due to an incident involving the United States .
 Rezident is a Soviet or Russian Chief of Station in the intelligence services . Rezident was a Russian or Soviet chief of station in the Intelligence Services .
 Spy satellites do not feel, spy planes do not need food, and drones do not drink water . Spy satellites don't feel and spy planes don't need food . Spy drones don't drink water.
 Technology does not generally have the failings and frailties that humans do . Technology is not generally more resilient than humans do. It's a sign that technology is not just as resilient as humans are, it's also human .
 HumInt provides insights into the minds of the enemy, and provides necessary context for the full analysis on information gathered by technology . HumInt is a tool that can provide the most accurate analysis of the world's enemies .
 By examining the information Oleg Penkovsky passed during debriefing sessions more closely, we can see just how important his position was and the absolute necessity of human intelligence in the Nuclear Age .
 Penkovsky is one of the most important spies of the Twentieth Century, according to Peter Deriabin and Jerrold Schechter’s The Spy Who Saved the World . Author: Authors tend to overlook the uses of his information .
 Most authors focus on other more colorful personalities, or the operational aspects of Penkovsky . Most authors of this article focus on the operational aspect .
 "They do not give the information he passed the full attention it deserves," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm not surprised that he passed on the right path"
 Russian intelligence officer approached the West offering information in 1960 . In 1960, the West was offered information by the Russian government .
 Penkovsky became heavily dissatisfied with the Soviet system, and considered defecting on the spot . In this time, he considered leaving the country to defect .
 It was to the West’s benefit that he did not. However, as we shall, see it was for the West to have done so .
 He passed much of this information when he exited the Soviet Union in 1961 as part of his cover position in a different Soviet bureau .
 He debriefed the team on a wide variety of internal workings of the Soviet Union .
 The Berlin Crisis began in 1958 with Khrushchev threatening to sign a peace treaty with East Germany . The crisis lasted until the construction of the Berlin Wall in 1961 . The Berlin Wall was built in 1961 after the Berlin Crisis .
 Both sides were readying for war in on this issue, and even the slightest edge could mean the difference between victory and defeat .
 The information Penkovsky passed allowed for the identification of the missiles the Soviets installed in Cuba . The information was used to identify the missiles installed in the country .
 The Executive Committee of the National Security Council to make rational decisions by knowing the stakes . With a precise knowledge of the limits and capabilities of the weapons the Executive Committee can make rational decision .
 The nature of this study requires working in multiple areas; the first is the field of CIA history . This study will focus on the CIA .
 One of the most recent books on the history of the CIA is Legacy of Ashes by Tim Weiner . Tim Weiner has written a book on the CIA .
 Weiner argues that the CIA has been a failure from the start . Weiner argues in his new book that the agency has failed from the beginning . Weiner: The CIA is a failure in the CIA .
 HumInt against the Soviet Union was a major failure that machines, such as the U2 spyplane or corona satellite, could not mitigate . HumInt vs. USSR was the first time HumInt failed against Soviet Union against the Soviets .
 Weiner's argument is that reform is necessary to maintain national security of the U.S. He says it's necessary to reform the CIA so the nation’s leaders can know what those who threaten America are plotting .
 He wrote nothing outright and there is no direct evidence given . However, he wrote nothing out of the book .
 Trento ventures to the edges of the history of the Penkovsky operation . Trento: "It's a good time for the Italian city of Trento to get involved in history."
 Penkovsky was a hardline conservative who believed Khrushchev was going to destroy the Soviet Union and possibly the World in nuclear war . He describes Penkovsksky as a hard-line conservative .
 Penkovsky did believe that Khrushchev could lead to nuclear war . His professional frustrations also played an important role in his decision to defect .
 Trento represents an outlier in the history of the Italian city of Trento . Trento is considered a historical outlier by the historians .
 Corera dedicated approximately 50 pages to the operation in his book The Art of Betrayal . Corera's main focus was a larger history of MI6, the British secret intelligence service .
 It is accepted that Penkovsky was a walk-in who genuinely wanted to work for the West . He was accepted that he was a 'walk-in' who wanted to be a Wester .
 The debriefing transcripts provide the basis for any study on Penkovsky, this one included .
 There was some debate over the authenticity of the document, but the CIA accepted it as legitimate .
 The Spy Who Saved the World was the first work on Penkovsky . It provides an outline for most later works on the Russian spy .
 The newest point this work brings to the literature is a different theory on Penkovsky’s arrest, which is addressed later in this article . The new theory is addressed in the article .
 It is a subject which has been covered by academics and non-academics alike . It has been a subject of interest in academics and not academics alike .
 There is a changing historiography as new documents have become available . However, there has been a changing history of the Roman Empire .
 Kennedy recorded an hour-by-hour analysis of the Crisis as it unfolded . Kennedy's analysis was a chronicle of the crisis .
 The Doves, according to this book, were Robert Kennedy, President John F Kennedy, and Secretary of Defense, Robert McNamara . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . President Kennedy was killed by a single gunshot wound .
 War Hawks were everyone else, largely the top commanders of the military . The War Hawks are everyone else . The war Hawks were the most successful military leaders .
 Kennedy is breaking down what/how the Cuba Crisis happened . Essentially, Kennedy was breaking down the Cuba crisis .
 The October Crisis White House tapes are the second main line of the literature of the Crisis . The tapes record the conversations held by the ExComm .
 The role of Robert Kennedy is one of the subjects that has changed over the course of the history of the Kennedy family .
 Kennedy placed himself firmly next to his brother, in favor of the blockade . Kennedy: "The blockade is not going away, but it is going nowhere"
 Former President George W. Bush exhorted the CIA to give the U.S. a more direct reason for invading Cuba . However he is now known for exhorting the CIA for giving the United States a reason to invade Cuba .
 Hershberg is able to more accurately trace the effects of the resolution of the crisis due to the time that has passed . Hershberger is also able to better trace the effect of the conflict from the time .
 A Hard and Bitter Peace by Edward H Judge and John W Langdon traces the entirety of the Cold War from its origins to conclusion with the dissolution of the Soviet Union . A Hard And Bitter War traces the entire Cold War .
 The authors incorporate many of the changes, which Hershberg points out . The authors of the new book include many changes to the original version .
 American Diplomacy in the Berlin Crisis, 1958-1963 by Richard D Williamson . Richard D. Williamson. Richard Williamson .
 The origin of the Berlin Crisis goes back to the division of Germany in World War II . This was a very tense issue in the Early Cold War .
 The new works have a distinct advantage because they are able to place the Berlin Crisis in its full context . The Berlin Crisis is set to be re-imagined as a modern Berlin Crisis .
 Russia's Vladimir Penkovsky passed large amounts of information related to this event, it is necessary to include him, it has been claimed .
 MI6 is still highly secretive, and has not declassified its documents yet . MI6 has not been declassified yet .
 Soviet-American Relations and the Struggle for Power in the Kremlin, June-November 1961, 1-2. Soviet-U.S. relations and the struggle for power in the . Kremlin, Russia and the United States .
 Biographies are highly important in situations such as the West saw with Penkovsky . Biography is highly important, especially in situations like that of the West, such as in the Ukraine .
 It reveals how a potential defector or double agent gained access to the information they did as well as their motivations . It also reveals how the defector and double agent got access to their information .
 By looking at Penkovsky’s early life and career one sees how he got to be in a position to gather as much sensitive information as he did .
 Penkovsky was born in 1919 in the Caucus region of Russia . His father left when he was four months old, leaving him to be raised by his mother alone .
 He went on to finish his classes and attend the Second Kiev Artillery School, graduating in 1939 . He graduated from the school in Kiev, Ukraine .
 He participated in these as a Political Commissar, a position he held for four years . He was a member of the Democratic Party, which he served as a political officer .
 Following this, he went to Finland as part of the Winter War with the 91st Rifle Division . He was also in Finland during the war with Finland .
 Only 10% of the original strength survived the action, and all the regimental commanders were killed . The battle was fought in the Battle of Gettysburg .
 Penkovsky stated that the only reason he survived was because he was an artilleryman and they were somewhat behind the lines . He said that he only survived because of the fact he was artilleryman .
 With the destruction of his unit, he was transferred to the Moscow Military District . Ultimately he was accepted in 1940, and was accepted into the Soviet Union .
 April 1961” FOIA/EDSN 0000012392, 3-4. 11 point he was twenty-three years old. April 1961 . April 1961 “’s” is FOIAed .
 Penkovsky joined the Military Council of the Moscow Military District, Extraordinary Missions Section . He is now serving in the Moscow military district, the Russian Military District .
 Through this, he met his future father-in-law, Dmitri Afanasyevich Gapanovich . He also met his mother-to-be .
 Gapanovich mentored Penkovsky, though not as much as his patron, Varentsov, whom he met shortly afterwards . Varentkovsky was a member of the Soviet Union's most successful political party .
 All he had received for his service in Finland was a commendation and a silver cigarette case . He was seeking glory and recognition because the war was almost over and all he'd received was a medal .
 Penkovsky received assignment to a subdivision under Sergei Sergeyevich Varentsov, the Chief of Artillery of the Ukrainian Front, and a future patron of the future patron . Penkovsky received assignment under Sergei Serbovich Varentov .
 Penkovsky worked under him for three months as the commander of a training reception center for anti-tank artillery regiments . He worked with him as a commander of an anti-air artillery unit .
 Penkovsky’s desire to go to the front was realized, and he was transferred to 323rd Anti-Tank Regiment of the 8th Anti-tank Brigade under General Tikvich . Ultimately, his orders transferred him to the 323rd anti-tank Regiment . He died in
 Tikvich was a drunkard and a womanizer, so he was removed and replaced with Penkovsky . However, he was replaced with a womaniser and drunkard .
 Penkovsky received wounds and doctors sent him to Moscow for treatment and recovery in 1944 . Doctors sent him back to Russia for treatment .
 This was fortunate for him because he met many friends during his period of recuperation . He met many of them during his recovery from his illness .
 Varentsov promised Penkovsky his old regiment back and named him his front line liaison . The former KGB officer became the new commander of the Russian army .
 For his work, Varentsov also rewarded him with a recommendation to the military academy .
 Varentsov was clearly taking Penkovsky under his wing and assisted his rise . The former KGB officer is now a prominent figure in Russia .
 Penkovsky also assisted Varentsov by making arrangements for the funeral of his daughter after her suicide . Penkovsksky also helped arrange the funeral for his daughter .
 The military police arrested and executed her husband, a prominent military man, for his role in a black market ring while occupying Poland . Her husband was executed for his involvement in the black market .
 One day, while working in a military hospital as a nurse, she grabbed the pistol of a passing officer, and shot herself in the head . She was a nurse at the time .
 When Penkovsky heard this, he sold his watch to buy her a dress and coffin, and made all the necessary arrangements . When he heard she was dying, he bought her dress, coffin and made arrangements .
 The Central Committee made him the Marshal of Rocket Artillery after the War, and then later Chief Marshal of Artillery . He was made the Chief Marshal after the war .
 Penkovsky went back to the front in time for the end of the war, and Varentsov requested that he remain for a year with the occupation forces .
 Penkovsky desired to return home as his wife had just graduated from her ten year classes . However, he wanted to return to his native Russia as he wanted his wife to be happy .
 Penkovsky entered the Frunze Military Academy in 1948 after passing the entrance exams . Varentsov made arrangements for him to attend the academy, which he did .
 His classes took three years, and then he worked for a year based on 23 ‘Meeting 1 April 1961’, 7.30 April 1961 . His classes were three years and he took a year to complete .
 In 1949, Penkovsky then entered the Military Diplomatic Academy, MDA, which he attended until 1953 . In 1949 he entered the MDA and went on to become a diplomat . In 1953, he attended the Academy, where he was a member of the Soviet Union .
 Penkovsky received a promotion to the rank of Colonel . It was during his time at the MDA that he was promoted to Colonel .
 Penkovsky was the chief of class due to his experience and rank, yet another award for the ambitious Russian politician . He was awarded the top rank of class .
 Upon graduation, Penkovsky went into the 4th Directorate of the GRU . This Directorate was interested in Asia and the Middle East, and because of this Penkovski went to Turkey .
 This was largely due to the favoritism which was prevalent in the Soviet system . This was due to a lack of respect for the people involved in Soviet politics .
 Through this system, Penkovsky gained access to many military secrets that would have been otherwise unavailable . The system was designed to allow him access to military secrets .
 This rise shows the origins of his dissatisfaction with the Soviet system, which ultimately pushed him to defect . This rise also shows the roots of his discontent with the system .
 In the previous section one clearly sees how Penkovsky rose to the position he did . The decision to defect from the Russian team was made to help him rise to the top .
 To understand his motivations to defect, one must fully explore his background, specifically his time in Turkey . However, to fully understand Penkovsky’s motivations, one needs to understand his background .
 Through inherent flaws in the Soviet System, its mishandling of Penkovsky, and his personal arrogance, his defection becomes not a possibility, but rather a certainty . The defection of the former KGB officer becomes a certainty, writes the author .
 Savchenko was an old man, and the two worked together for three months . Savchenko worked with Savchenko, who is now retired, for the first time in his life .
 GRU officer stationed in Ankara, Lieutenant Colonel Nikolay Ionchenko, was the GRU's most senior commander in the country . The two officers clashed over the actions of the other GRU commander in Ankara . However, after this period many problems began arising between them .
 IONCHENKO was attempting to purchase military manuals from Turks in this crude manner . Ionchenko was trying to buy military manuals for Turks in Turkey .
 The Turkish Counterintelligence was efficient and they noticed this. Naturally, the Turkish Counter Intelligence was efficient . They noticed this .
 Savchenko worked to ensure that Ionchenko appeared to be a better officer than Penkovsky . Savchenko wanted Ionchenko to appear to have been a better police officer .
 Ionchenko was bitter that Penkovsky was above him because Ionchenko had learned Turkish . Also bitter that he had learned English . Ionchenko learned Turkish from his native language .
 This conflict of interests and personalities was creating maelstrom which none of the parties involved could survive unscathed . None of the political parties involved in the conflict of interest and personalities were spared unscathed.
 As time wore on and frustrated, Penkovsky became more frustrated, he decided to transfer to a different station . He decided it would be best to move out of the station .
 This greatly displeased Penkovsky and helped push him towards his decision . The decision was made by the Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 A rezident is a Soviet or Russian Chief of Station for the Intelligence services . Penkovsky shows his 28-year-old image of himself as a Russian spy .
 When the Shah of Iran visited Turkey, orders went out from Moscow that all intelligence operations in Turkey were to be suspended . The Shah was in Turkey when he visited Turkey .
 Turkish Counterintelligence was aware of Ionchenko being an intelligence officer . Turkish police arrested him and declared him persona non grata . This event caused the storm brewing Penkovsky and Savchenko to break .
 Before Ionchenko was png-ed, Savchenko ordered Penkovsky to go and pay Ionchenko’s bail . Savchenko had to pay for Ionchenko's bail .
 Penkovsky was not happy about this because the operation should not have happened in the first place . The operation should have been prevented from taking place .
 To have received official operational funds would have meant going through Penkovsky, who would have rejected the request . The request would have been rejected by the Russian president .
 Penkovsky accused Savchenko of lying about his Communist beliefs . This act of deception led to a large fight between the two men, which culminated in a fight between them .
 Penkovsky was accusing Savchenko of the ultimate betrayal in the Soviet Union . The former KGB officer said Savchenko was a traitor to the West .
 Penkovsky, unable to report Savchenko via GRU lines, was forced to report him via the KGB rezident . Savchenko was found dead in a helicopter crash in September .
 This report made all the way up the chain to the head of the KGB, Ivan Serov . This report was published by the KGB in the 1980s .
 The term “persona non grata” refers to someone being told to leave a country, and not return . The term is used to refer to someone who is not allowed to return to a country .
 The head of the GRU brought in a report on Penkovsky from Savchenko . Savchenko has been accused of being a Russian spy in Ukraine .
 Marshal of the Armed Forces and World War II Hero, Zhukov reprimanded Savchenko for incompetence in duty, on the other hand . Savchenko was a member of the Russian army in the Soviet Union in the 1990s .
 Shortly after Penkovsky’s recall, the Soviet's also recalled Savchenko . Savchenko was a member of the Soviet Union .
 Penkovsky won the first round of this fight, but the second round was yet to begin . The fight was stopped in the first of two rounds .
 Penkovsky did not escape unscathed from Savchenko's bout with Savchenko . Even though he won his bout, he was knocked out of the ring by Savchenko in the first .
 When he arrived at the train station in Moscow two of Savchenko’s powerful friends, both of whom were generals in the GRU, confronted him . Savchenko says he was confronted by two of his powerful friends .
 Penkovsky believed he could have done a better job as attaché, but he did not desire the position . Penkovski did not want to be military attaché .
 Shtemenko claimed to not know Penkovsky, and that he could do nothing for him . He said he did not know him, and could not help him .
 Savchenko's friend was preparing to retire, so things were expected to blow over . Savchenko’s other friend was about to retire . The other friend is expected to retire soon after .
 As Penkovsky’s frustration and disappointment with the Soviet system grew, so did his access to sensitive information . To make it more likely that he would be sent abroad, he entered the Dzerzhinsky Academy to learn about the rocket program .
 During this time, Khrushchev removed Shtemenko as head of the GRU due to tension between Khrushchchev and Zhukov . Part of the school was part of a sabotage school run by the two men .
 Serov succeeded Shtemenko as head of the GRU.39 This change of leadership alleviated some of Penkovsky's frustration .
 The GRU considered Penkovsky for a post in India because of his background in rockets . It was then that the GRU higher-ups considered him for a position in India .
 Russia's new head of the GRU considered India a good place for operations . It is possible that India would receive rockets from Russia, he said .
 Penkovsky began preparing for the station by studying the codes, and other necessary information . The station will be the first station to be built in Russia .
 The KGB denied him, however, much to his dissatisfaction due to a problem with his family history . He was denied by the KGB because of a family history issue .
 It was the rejection of his exit visa that sounded the death knell of his Soviet/Communist loyalties . It was rejected by the Kremlin for not allowing him to leave Russia .
 The problem with his family history, which led to the rejection of his visa, goes back to his father and grandfather . The visa was rejected because of his family's history .
 Vladimir Florianovich Penkovsky’s father, was a mining engineer, and joined the White Army when the Revolution came . He achieved the rank 38 “Meeting 1 April 1961”, 2.2. Penkovski .
 Penkovsky and his mother developed a myth that his father had died in 1919 . Penkovsksky's mother and father were convinced that he had died at the age of 18 .
 It was possible to overlook Penkovsky’s father being a White Army Officer due to the circumstances . The circumstances were circumstances of his father being an officer .
 Most of the controversy seems to have focused around his father . Both of these were major problems .
 Penkovsky began looking for an opportunity to defect after being rejected an exit visa due to his family history . He was unhappy with the rejection of the visa because of his family's history .
 He was on a train with his wife and daughter coming back from a vacation in Odessa, Texas . He spotted a group of American students on the train . He said he was shocked to see the group of students in the United States .
 There was an Armenian with the group, who Penkovsky knew as a KGB spy . However, there was also an Armenian spy, who he knew to be .
 He began watching the U.S. Embassy carefully, but impatiently, waiting for his chance . He began to watch the American Embassy carefully and impatiently .
 "They delivered everything properly and you can see here your original letter," she wrote . "I'm happy to see that the letter was delivered properly," she said .
 I had noticed them in the railroad car and remembered their appearance . I had been in the train car when I saw them again .
 I arrived in Moscow on the tenth of August and on the twelfth I spotted them as they were walking down to the river from Red Square . The pair were walking in Moscow's Red Square on August 12 .
 'At first they were frightened, but I spoke to them at length and told them what a coincidence it was to see them again'
 I was so interested in the conversation, that, as an intelligence man, I made an error, he made it out of an intelligence officer, he said . I was actually a spy, not a spy. I was trying to make a point of interest, he says .
 I had already given them two envelopes, and it was high time to end the conversation . "I was already giving them envelopes," she said. "It's high time for us to end this conversation," she added .
 I told the Americans to go with me to an entrance way so at least we could say farewell and I could shake their hands, but they were frightened and started to walk away . I told them to go to the entrance way to say farewell, but the Americans were frightened . They were
 In a dangle operation a Soviet operative approached Western personnel offering to provide information or defect . In this case, a Western personnel was offered information or offered to defect .
 If the Westerner accepted, they were immediately arrested and declared png png . If they accepted they would be immediately arrested .
 The Soviets used these as propaganda victories, and acted as if they uncovered a Western provocation attempt . The Soviet Union acted as though they uncovered Western provocation attempts .
 John Abidian, CIA’s man in Moscow, managed to get the document . It made its way into the hands of John Abdi, the CIA's man in Russia .
 He immediately took it up to a secure room at the top of the American Embassy . The embassy is located in the U.S. Embassy in Washington .
 This room, known as ‘the Bubble, was made of Plexiglas, and was suspended within a larger room . This room was suspended from a larger space suspended in the Bubble . The Bubble was suspended in a room made of glass .
 There was no way the KGB could bug this room, as they commonly did to foreign embassies . "No way" would have been able to bug the room, he says .
 If the KGB found out about Penkovsky at this point, the operation could be over before it began . This is important because if the KGB finds out about the operation, it will be over . The operation is likely to be stopped before it begins .
 Abidian came to the conclusion that Penkovsky was a genuine defector, and passed the information on to CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia .
 At Langley, the information ended up in the hands of Jack Maury, the head of the Soviet Division in the Directorate for Plans .
 Maury passed the information to Joe Bulik, the head of Operations inside the Soviet Union . Maury also passed on information to Bulik's head of operations in the USSR .
 Bulik faced the task of discovering who wrote the letter and deciding if the author was genuine or a provocation . Bulik had to decide whether the letter was a genuine or provocation .
 Bulik did not circulate the letters himself, but passed around the basic facts . The unanimous consensus was that the author was genuine, Bulik said .
 Bulik then set up a meeting with Maury, Paul Garbler, the Moscow Station Chief, and Richard Helms, the director in charge of covert operations, to determine the author’s motivations . Bulik set up the meeting to determine whether the author was motivated .
 Both the Soviets and the CIA were smarting from the CIA’s first big operation, Pyotr Popov . At this time, such a process of acceptance was necessary because of the Soviets .
 Popov held the rank of Major, and fed the information on the GRU’s structure and information . Popov was a Major in the Russian Army and served in the Soviet Union .
 This operation lasted until 1958, when the KGB forced him to become a triple agent, and pass false information . He was forced to be a double agent and passed false information to pass information to the KGB .
 When he alerted his CIA handlers of the new state of affairs, he was arrested . The Soviets arrested him and his handler . He was later arrested by the Soviets in Moscow .
 One story says he was cremated alive before an audience of other GRU officers . The story is believed to have been true .
 Penkovsky knew what the stakes were, and what terrors awaited in failure . He knew what to do and what to prepare for failure .
 Oleg Penkovsky, “Letter to be Passed to Appropriate Authorities of the United States of America”, FOIA/EDSN 0000012268. This operation caused 47 Olegpenkovsky to write a letter to the US authorities .
 Chicken feed is information which the other side already knows, but the subject does not know this . Chicken feed will be known to the subject of the subject, but not the subject .
 By providing truthful and accurate information, the subject builds trust from those he talking to . The subject builds his own credibility with those he talks to .
 The CIA dispatched an officer meant to contact Penkovsky . Despite these fears, the CIA dispatched the officer to contact the Russian spy .
 COMPASS, as he was codenamed, was a miserable failure, and has never allowed his name to be de-classified . COMPASS was never allowed to be classified again .
 COMPASS, a single man, grew paranoid and depressed during under his time in Moscow, and took to drinking heavily . COMPASS grew paranoid during his time there, and became depressed .
 He was tasked with developing an operational plan, and contact Penkovsky. He was assigned to develop a plan for the operation .
 Penkovsky's suggestions were to toss information over the walls of the America House, housing for bachelors in the American Embassy, at a specified time, on a specified day .
 I did not understand a damn thing and he called at the wrong time, and I did realize the call was from you, but I understood nothing that the man rattled off. "I did realize I was getting a call from you," she said. "He called at a wrong time
 "I was not in the best of shape myself but I was not drunk because I never drink too much, but I could not understand a thing. He said something about waiting and then “bye-bye” I was "not drunk"
 Penkovsky was hungover from a drinking session the night before, and COMPASS did not have very good Russian language skills .
 All of the others Penkovsky approached were too afraid to take his information . All the others were afraid to do so .
 Penkovsky pressed the information on Wynne as she boarded a plane to leave the country . She said she was "absolutely sure" that she was not involved in the investigation .
 MI6 were suspicious of Penkovsky due to the directness of his approach . MI6 wrote him off as a standard provocation attempt . However, MI6 believed him to be a Russian spy .
 The CIA had enough of COMPASS, and decided to bring the British in on the operation . The U.S. Embassy in Moscow refused to allow a qualified CIA officer into Russia .
 CIA and MI6 put together a team of two CIA officers and two MI6 officers . CIA officers were CIA officers, MI6 agents . MI6 members were MI6 operatives .
 The CIA portion of the team consisted of George Kisevalter, from the Popov operation, and Joe Bulik . The CIA part of the operation was George Kisesvalter .
 The team debriefed Penkovsky over everything he knew during his trips outside the Soviet Union in 1961 . They discussed the organization and procedures of the Soviet intelligence agencies and the Soviet missile program .
 This occurred three times in 1961, twice to London and once to Paris for trade fairs and exhibitions . This occurred on three occasions in 1961 .
 Penkovsky believes that the KGB would not have allowed him out if it had not been for Wynne . He believes that Wynne saved his life in the KGB .
 The Soviet Union was one of the largest intelligence and security organizations in the world . It was also one of many of the world's largest intelligence agencies .
 The other, and vastly more important, two topics were the Soviet stances on Berlin, and the Soviet missile program . The Soviet stance on Berlin was the most important topic of discussion .
 While much of this information was already known thanks to the Popov Operation, it was still helpful .
 This updated information allowed the Western Intelligence services to more accurately seek out potential weaknesses in these organizations or disrupt operations . The updated information has been used to identify potential weaknesses and disrupt operations, the authors say .
 GRU’s members mostly had military backgrounds, being the military intelligence department, which gives the West an idea on how many of its members think . The GRU's members were mostly military backgrounds .
 Penkovsky was skilled at developing relationships being friends with many generals, and even having a patron in Varentsov, who became the Chief Marshal of Artillery . He was skilled in developing relationships with generals .
 The system itself made Penkovsky’s defection possible, he says . It becomes apparent that the system itself helped make the move possible . The system also made it possible to defect from Russia .
 According to Penkovsky, the primary purpose and basic task of both the KGB and the GRU was early warning of an impending nuclear attack . The GRU's primary task was to warn of an imminent nuclear attack, he says .
 The KGB and GRU had different focuses on the KGB, GRU . While the basic task of the KGB and the GRU was the same, the two organizations had different goals .
 GRU focused on military and scientific, especially nuclear, advancements of the West . KGB focused on the political aspects of the political aspect of the Soviet Union . GRU and KGB focused more on the military, scientific and political aspects .
 Serov backed Beria in the ensuing power struggle . Serov was a former KGB man, and backed Stalin's successor when he died .
 He was a distant relation of Khrushchev's, and was spared from being shot . However, he was a relative of the former leader and not a political figure .
 According to Penkovsky, he knew how to interrogate and shoot people, and left the executive functions to his deputies . According to the former KGB chief, he left his duties to deputies .
 He also had troubles with another GRU official, who had many failures in Turkey . He was also involved in the failed coup attempt to oust him from Russia .
 They could then predict what actions the GRU was most likely to make, and then take the appropriate countermeasures . The U.S. could then take countermeasures against the actions of the Russian state .
 They are sent to live in a country using illegal papers making them appear as if they are citizens of the country . The illegal papers are used to make them appear to be citizens of a country .
 The term “illegal” stems from the fact that they are living in the country illegally, as opposed to ‘legals”, who were under diplomatic cover . The term "illegal’s" refers to illegal immigrants living illegally in the U.S.
 Second Directorate dealt with Europe, and specialized in radio intelligence . The Second Directorate was the Second Directorate .
 Penkovsky reported that the only GRU agents in this directorate were old and not very good . He said the only agents who worked for the GRU were not good enough to work for him .
 Fourth Directorate was known as the “Eastern Directorate’s Eastern Directorate . It dealt with all the Asian parts of the world, from Egypt and Turkey to Japan . The Fourth Directorate dealt with Egypt, Turkey, and Japan .
 “Meeting 5 Leeds April 1961” FOIA/EDSN 0000012395, 25. April 1961 . Coding was handled by a separate section called the “Coding Section”
 Even when I have to go to the Tenth Directorate, either I am met by the officer I am to see, after a phone call, or am told to . go to a specific room or they may issue me a temporary one-day pass . The officer is met by an officer
 There was one case where an officer was court-martialed for losing his work folio . There was also a case where a soldier was found guilty of losing his folio.
 Actually, two officers were enemies and one burned the working folio of the other . One whose folio could not be produced was tried . One of the officers was tried for not being able to produce the folio .
 Gathering information or infiltration is highly dangerous and no easy task . Gathering information is not an easy task for the U.S. intelligence services .
 Presidium resolution passed by Presidium points out flaws of intelligence services . Despite strength of these security measures, there was still a resolution pointing out other flaws .
 The West simply had to find them to exploit them, the West . Flaws clearly existed, intra-office rivalry for example, for example . The West was able to exploit the weaknesses of the West in the Middle East .
 GRU officers on the fifth floor of the GRU’s headquarters in Moscow handled all the Illegals . Some of the sites were permanent and others were mobile, but some of them were mobile .
 Every RP has its own radio station, but their equipment is nowhere near the capacity of the GRU OSNAZ stations near Moscow . The GRU's radio stations are located in Russia .
 Often they act as relay stations and when they get an incoming message say from the direction of Iran, the entire coded message is transmitted to Moscow . When they receive a message from Iran, it is sent to Moscow.
 Commander of intelligence operations in a military district is responsible for conducting intelligence against the country to which the district is adjacent . This commander of intelligence . operations in military districts is responsible .
 The GRU communicated within the USSR, and the necessity of infiltrating the communications network to advance signals intelligence goals . What this lets the West know is that the GRU must infiltrate the communications system to advance its intelligence goals, it says .
 KGB and GRU had separate radio technology shops, but the two readily shared information . The KGB and the GRU shared information about radio technology .
 There were two similarities between the KGB and the GRU radio communications as well . The KGB and GRU's radio communications were also similar to each other . The GRU and KGB's radio communication was also similar .
 A sub-organization handled all normal communications, and the Eighth Section handled transmitting mechanics .
 The KGB had no formal academy of its own, so it stole recruits from the GRU’s Military Diplomatic Academy . There are many other unnamed similarities stemming from the fact that the KGB had a formal academy .
 The two organizations had similar operations procedures . Even more importantly, it also means that the two organizations have similar procedures .
 This made counterintelligence much easier because once the procedures for one organization were compromised, the other one’s were as well . The procedures for both organizations were compromised; the other ones were also compromised . Counterintelligence was easier for counterintelligence in the U.S.
 The KGB was unscrupulous over who they recruited adding to the size of the organization . The KGB recruited many of the world's top secret agents to join them .
 All Russians reported to the KGB, and informers reported on everything while they were in Russia . The KGB was in charge of the KGB .
 The KGB was an unscrupulous organization, and would do anything to gather more information, says author . "The KGB was ... unscrupulous," author says of the KGB . "It was an effort to gather information," he says .
 "They did not like sending unmarried people out, because they had no reason to return if they decided to defect," says the queen . They did not want unmarried people to be sent out of the country .
 Two months ago we sent a GNTK Delegation to the German Federal Republic . Two months later we sent an official delegation to Germany . We are happy to welcome the visit to the country .
 He put the notebook in the pocket of his overcoat and forgot it in the car when he got out of the car . He put it in a pocket, then put it back in the overcoat when he left it .
 He became so upset that when his comrades went shopping he hanged himself . He hanged himself after being upset that his comrades were shopping .
 He used the cord of an electric iron which he attached to the electric fixture on the ceiling . The cord was attached to an electric fixture in the ceiling of the room .
 While this example is extreme, it is clear that intelligence organizations expected their proper execution of their instructions, and mistakes not tolerated .
 Penkovsky’s arrogance comes out with his giving permission to the West to use the information he provided . The West is using the information that he provided to them .
 This rough sketch of the Soviet intelligence organizations shows how someone on the inside can gather information that an eye in the sky cannot gather .
 It also shows the necessity of chicken feed in determining a potential agent’s credentials, it also shows .
 Penkovsky also provided updated information on the GRU after any re-organization due to Popov's re-election .
 After World War II the victorious powers, Britain, France, the US, and the Soviet Union divided Germany . The victorious powers divided Germany after the war .
 Berlin quickly became a contentious issue as the Cold War quickly began . As Berlin lay in the heart of the Soviet Zone, it quickly became an issue of interest . Berlin was one of the most important cities in the Soviet-zone .
 Khrushchev threatened to turn control over to the East German government in 1961 . The issue of Berlin came to a head between 1958 and 1961 with Khrushche threatening to turn it over to Berlin .
 Penkovsky’s information on the Soviet intelligence agencies, especially the GRU, was essential to establish his credentials . It was only with his help that the West knew what was occurring in the Soviet camp as the Berlin Crisis reached its peak .
 Nikita Khrushchev became the head of the Soviet Union after a power struggle between himself and Lavrenti Beria . Stalin, the successor to Lenin, died in 1953, and died in Stalin's death .
 The West had built up its own impressions of Khrushchev since 1953 . Penkovsky felt the need to pass along his own . The West has its own opinions of the Soviet leader .
 Khrushchev rose up through the ranks and became Minister of Agriculture . He was a rising star in the Soviet Union and later became Prime Minister .
 While not a powerful position, he was able to build a basis of support for his bid to the leadership . While not powerful, he built a basis for support for himself .
 Putin showed his energy and resourcefulness, as Penkovsky points out . Here he showed his resourcefulness .
 He gathered those he had appointed to positions, who were also members of the Central Committee . He gathered the new members of his party .
 This gave him a quorum, and allowed him to be seated in his position at the head of the Soviet Union . It gave him the chance to be at the top of his country .
 At the last meeting which took place after the convocation of the plomas of the PROKOMITET, they talked about everyone’s troubles with agriculture .
 KHRUSHCHEV traveled all over the country dealing with his opponents at the conference in accordance with the decisions of the Plenum . After this, he traveled around the country to deal with the opponents .
 He arrived in Tbilisi, Georgia, and then went to the East, to the virgin lands – talking about the great new territories and towns . He arrived at Tbilis, you remember, as well as T.I.
 SUBLOV and MIKOYAN participated in the military council’s plan . The military council were working on their plan – SUBLov and MIkoyan participated .
 BIRYUZOV made his reporting on the questions of how they need more money and how rockets must be tested . He said they need to be given more money to test rockets .
 There were numerous cases where missions were not fulfilled, much new testing was necessary, and the problems must be looked into . There were many cases where the missions were . not fulfilled .
 Khrushchev moved to secure his position in order to make up for his lack of popularity . He was forced to resign from his position as prime minister .
 He gave pensions to the families of those who were tortured and executed, and many of those arrested were rehabilitated . Many of the families were also given pensions .
 'While he was doing this, he was attempting to create a cult of personality,' he said .
 Khrushchev centered his around denouncing Stalin and his cult of personality . Ironically, as Penkovsky pointed out, as well as denouncing Stalin's cult of . personality .
 Khrushchev needed to increase his popularity before he could carry out his will with the impunity of Stalin, Stalin . He tried to accomplish this by pursuing multiple major programs at once, including a series of major programs .
 Originally, when he first came to power, he emphasized long-range aviation, but he later switched to missiles . He later switched focus to missiles, which he later used to be used in missile attacks .
 According to Penkovsky, Khrushchev was testing the waters . However, he said it was simply Khrushchevitch testing the water .
 At the time Khrushchev first proposed a peace treaty, the Warsaw Pact armies were not strong enough to back up his proposed bite . The treaty was proposed in 1964, when the Warsaw pact armies were weak enough .
 Penkovsky alerted the West that Khrushchev was feeling confident enough in his armies by 1961 . The West was wary of the threat posed posed posed by the Soviet Union .
 One of the ideas Penkovsky pushed about Khrushchev is how many lies he told . One of those lies was how many he told, he said . The idea was that he lied to the Soviet leader .
 Penkovsky believed that the West could use this information to knock down any prestige Khrushchev tried to gain from summit meetings . The West believed that this information could knock down the prestige of the Soviet Union .
 Mitrofan Nedelin, Chief Marshal of Artillery, was killed in the U2 Incident . The death of the Chief Marshal is the first since the death of Nedelin . Nedelin's death is the second death of a major military leader to be killed .
 In 1960, the Soviets shot down an American U2 spyplane piloted by Gary Francis Powers while on a reconnaissance mission over the Soviet Union . The U2 was shot down by the Soviets in 1960 .
 When Khrushchev confronted President Eisenhower about this, he was met with a flat denial . Eisenhower denied it, saying it was a cover-up for the CIA .
 The Soviets produced Powers, and the Eisenhower Administration was thoroughly embarrassed . The Eisenhower administration was embarrassed by the incident .
 According to Penkovsky, there was no direct hit as Khrushchev claimed . However, there were no direct hits on the day of the attack .
 It also took more V-75s to take down the plane than Khrushchev let on, not to mention the Soviet fighter jet which was also shot down in the process .
 Khrushchev feared that another incident such as this would lead to war . Penkovsky reported that Khrushvic feared that such an incident such a war would end up leading to war.
 The Soviets were trying to find ways to launch their missiles farther and faster, even including nuclear power . Also in 1960, the Soviets were looking at ways of launching their missiles .
 At one of these tests, many of the top artillery commanders there, including Nedelin, were there . Nedelin: "It's a good time for the world's top artillery commander"
 The waiting period came to a close, and people began leaving the protective observation bunker . People began to leave the observation bunker on Monday morning .
 The second stage of the missile ignited and exploded killing all those outside the bunker, including Nedelin . Nedelin was killed by the explosion .
 To cover this, the Soviets announced that Nedelin died in a plane crash . The Soviets then claimed he was killed in a Soviet plane crash.
 Penkovsky argued that if the West exposed this lie, it would embarrass Khrushchev . He argued that exposing this lie would embarrass the Soviet leader .
 While Penkovsky was meeting with his handlers, the Berlin Crisis was reaching its peak . The Berlin Crisis in the early 1950s was the height of the crisis .
 In 1948, Stalin cut-off supplies to the city via rail and road . In an attempt to force the Western Powers out of Berlin, he cut off the supplies . The city was occupied by the Soviet Union in 1948 .
 Western Powers began flying in all the supplies for the city with one plane landing after another . To get around this, without violating any of the treaty rights, the Western Powers .
 Khrushchev even went so far as to refer to the city as the “Testicles of the West” because, when he squeezed, they screamed . Khrushov even called the city the ‘Testicles’ because of its screams .
 Neither side did anything about it until 1958 . It was then that things started to get hot .
 This meant that the treaty rights were moot, and the West would be forced to deal with the East German government . The West was forced to negotiate with East German authorities . This was the first time it had been forced to do so .
 East Germany greatly desired this because it meant they could stem the hemorrhage of Eastern Germans fleeing to West Germany via Berlin via air and land . East Germany had control over access to the city from both land and air . East wanted to stem the flow of Eastern German fleeing to the West Germany
 East Germans fled to West Berlin, there, would claim their West German citizenship . What would happen would be East Berlin, where they would claim to be West Germans .
 Since the East German government still claimed these people as citizens, they were considered criminals . They were considered citizens by the government of East Germany .
 The refugees, therefore, could not take land routes to the larger West Germany . The refugees were forced to leave Germany to join West Germany, but were allowed to return to Germany .
 The West German government did not want the peace treaty because it would force the West to recognize the East German government as legitimate . Khrushchev threatened to sign a peace treaty with the West . The treaty was signed by the West in 1961 .
 This was particularly bad because the West Germans were invoking the Hallstein Doctrine, and would ruin any hopes of re-unification for some time . This would be especially bad because it would be a blow to the West German hopes of unification .
 West German Foreign Minister Walter Hallstein developed this doctrine to isolate East Germany . The doctrine was developed by the West in order to isolate the East . West German foreign minister Hallstein used it as a way to isolate his country .
 In its most basic form the Doctrine was a staunch and rabid refusal of recognition towards the East German government . The Doctrine was the refusal to recognise East German authorities .
 The West German government claimed authority over all of Germany, and demanded to be recognized as the only legitimate government of Germany . The West Germany government demanded recognition of the West as a legitimate government .
 If another country held talks with the East German government, West Germany strongly protested . West Germany would threaten to break off diplomatic ties with said country .
 The West scrambled to find a response, and received a six-month reprieve from the execution of the treaty for their efforts . The West received a response to the treaty .
 This delegation would walk out after a speech by Zhou due to the SinoSoviet split . This delegation walked out after Zhou's speech due to a split from China . Zhou would be the first Chinese delegation to walk out .
 Heads of state from other People’s Democracies planned to attend as well . Heads of states from other countries planned to be at the event .
 The entireties of the various Warsaw Pact militaries were prepared, including the rear services of all the Soviet military districts and even the GRU . This was the largest mobilization of militaries to that point .
 According to the rumors Penkovsky heard, the purposes of the manoeuvers were twofold . The Russian president is believed to be in the shape of the world's most powerful man .
 If it is only a local attack by us then it will be parried, but of course if a larger conflict develops that is why combat readiness is needed . Combat readiness will be needed in the event of a bigger conflict, says MoD .
 KHRUSHCHEV, our General Staff and the GRU know perfectly well that secret preparations in modern times are not possible due to intelligence techniques, he said .
 Under the guise of manoeuvers, the extent and duration can easily be extended . But he will insist that they are only maneuvers . The extent and length of the 'maneauver' can be easily extended, he says .
 If allies swallow the second pill and say “very well since you have signed a treaty with East Germany we will deal with East German” then the strain will be relieved and the manoeuvers will terminate . The result of these will serve as a valuable training exercise for joint
 If not the powder is still dry and military action can still be employed . If not, the powder will still be used in military action against the Taliban .
 Tensions were rising over the divided Germany . This is the dual purpose for which these manoeuvers are planned for the early days of October .
 The speed with which the Wall was erected, it was not possible for the West to receive any information, as there was no operational procedure for Penkovsky to deal with this . However, due to the speed of the Wall, the West was not able to receive information .
 The rapidity of the erection of the Berlin Wall led to a revision of the operational plan, which the team discussed with Penkovsky in his second trip out of the Soviet Union in 1961 . The team discussed the plan in his visit to Moscow in 1961, when he was in the
 In the original plan Penkovsky was to do a sort of modified brush pass with Janet Chisholm, the wife of the MI6 Moscow Station Chief . The original plan was to make a sort-of-pass with her .
 The temporary solution was to use a dead drop, and give a specific person a call . It was a temporary solution to the situation .
 An American representative would then empty the dead drop within the next halfhour . The dead drop would then be empty within half hour .
 The West did not receive the information, but they knew that the Soviets were up to something . Berlin was the most logical place to look for the Soviets, writes Peter Bergen .
 With the changes in place, the operation was in full swing, and things were going well . The operation was going well, says the mayor .
 Khrushchev allowed the ultimatum for the signing of the peace treaty to lapse . Ultimately, the information passed by Penkovsky on the manoeuvers was unnecessary . The information was unnecessary because Khrushche allowed the . ultimumumum to lapse, Khrush
 Knowing that the Soviets and their allies were planning military manoeuvers allowed the West to begin their own preparations to pre-empt any actions by the Soviets . However, with the Cold War warming, the West had to begin its own preparations .
 U2 spy planes or Corona Satellites, the two technological masterpieces of the early CIA, could not gather the information presented by Penkovsky but rather human ears had to listen for it . The CIA had to rely on human intelligence to gather information .
 As Penkovsky had studied the Soviet missile program, the West knew the precise ranges and payloads, among other technical details of the Soviet program . The West knew ranges, payloads and other details, including those of Soviet missiles .
 There were many reasons for Cubo-Soviet decision to install missiles on the island of Cuba . There were also reasons for the decision .
 The most blatant of these was the failed invasion at the Bay of Pigs in mid-April 1961 . The failed invasion was the first attempt to invade the U.S. in Cuba .
 In which a group of American trained Cuban émigrés landed at the Bay of Pigs . In which U.S. trained Cuban  empics landed at the Bay of Pagas .
 In January of 1962, the United States gathered votes to suspend Cuba from the Organization of American States . The U.S. gathered votes in January of that vote to suspend the Cuban government .
 Many of these states also followed the American example and ended diplomatic relations with Cuba . Cuba is one of the most isolated countries in the world .
 The United States also enacted economic aggression against Cuba going back to trade restrictions in 1960 . The U.S. also enacted trade restrictions against Cuba in 1960s .
 These actions were viewed as diplomatic and economic preparations for invasion . The actions were seen as economic and diplomatic preparations for the invasion .
 In 1962, there were two extensive U.S. military exercises in the Caribbean, both appeared to be practice for invading Cuba . The exercises were thought to be preparation for invasion .
 The purpose of Operation Mongoose was to infiltrate Cuba for intelligence, but also for raids, and if possible, assassinating Castro . The operation was launched in Cuba in 1961 .
 These missiles were capable of carrying nuclear warheads, and delivering nuclear payloads into the important cities of the Soviet Union, such as Moscow . The missiles were able to carry nuclear warheads and deliver payloads .
 Khrushchev thought he could get away with installing offensive missiles without the West noticing . Another Soviet motivation was to install offensive missiles in order to avoid detection by the West .
 Khrushchev probably would have gotten away with it if not for the U2 spyplane flights John McCone ordered over the island .
 A line was being drawn in the sand, and crossing this line meant nuclear war . Crossing this line would mean nuclear war, the author says . Crossing the line would be a huge mistake, he says .
 The Kennedy Administration did not believe McCone when he warned the administration of the potential for Soviet missiles . McCone's warning was ignored by the Kennedy Administration .
 It took the observation of semi-trucks carrying missile-like tubes to get the White House to allow the resumption of U2 overflights of Cuba .
 In order to understand the interplay between the TechInt and the HumInt in this situation it is necessary to go to a different time and place. However, in order to do this, it is needed to go back to a previous version of this article .
 RAF flew over the German V-weapons research site at Peenemünde in World War II .
 Buildings were identified, largely incorrectly, but there were other objects which analysts could not identify . Analysts were unable to identify objects which they identified .
 It was only with the inpouring of information from foreign labor, forced to work at the sites, and anti-German Poles and Swedes that the British were able to piece together precisely what the site was doing .
 While this process was much more convoluted, the crateology involved in the crisis provides a striking similarity to the current crisis .
 During the crisis, the U2 spyplanes took many photos of the Soviet ships carrying the missiles to Cuba . The photos were taken during the crisis in Cuba .
 Analysts were set to work to determine the contents of the photographed crates . Analysts are now trying to find out what was inside them .
 Using scaling techniques the size of the contents of the crates could be calculated . The crates were found in crates filled with food and water .
 Using the sizes given by Penkovsky, the exact type of missile contained in the crate could be determined . Then, using the size of the crate, the type of missiles could be used to determine the type .
 The U.S. knew how large the missiles it was facing were . Thanks to Penkovsky the United States knew how big the missiles were .
 According to Penkovsky, the V-75 was the premier Soviet air defense rocket . The V-70 was the first Soviet air missile to be launched in the Soviet Union . The rocket was launched in 1961 .
 This rocket was given to Soviet satellites in order to protect themselves . Considered thus, this rocket was used to protect the Soviet satellites .
 There was no atomic warhead, because those were too expensive to put on anti-aircraft rockets . Thus, there was no nuclear warhead . There was also no atomic weapon .
 The detonation relied upon a proximity fuse, which was set to the calculated distance the rocket would destroy the targeted aircraft . The explosion was triggered by the proximity of the rocket .
 To make the detonation more effective a process of grooving was employed . The detonation was made using a process known as grooving .
 The rocket had a range of 40 km . It was similar to a hand grenade, adjusting the size and direction of shrapnel .
 This information alerted the West to the dangers of the V-75, especially in regards to U2 spyplanes, which was previously thought to fly beyond the range . This information led to the discovery of the danger of the U2 .
 The offensive Soviet missiles installed in Cuba were the R-12 and R-14, both of which Penkovsky learned about in his classes at the Dzerzhinsky Academy .
 The R-14 had a range of 4500 km range when armed with a nuclear warhead . This rocket was in mass production in 1962 . It was included in the rockets given to the various People's Democracies .
 It is being prepared for mass production, which means that it would soon be available to for the People's Democracies . However even more importantly it was being prepared to mass production . The People’s Democracies would be able to use the technology .
 President Kennedy’s advisors knew just how serious the situation was . With this information in hand, the President Kennedy's advisors knew exactly what was going on .
 The KGB arrested Penkovsky during or shortly after the Cuba Crisis, between October 22 and November 2 . The KGB was involved in the Cuban crisis .
 Someone triggered one of the signals given to Penkovsky . Several days later, someone triggered another signal .
 The correct individuals were called, with the proper signals given . There was a mark put on the proper street post, and the correct individuals called . The proper signals were given .
 Scholars believe that Penkovsky was attempting to do as the Biblical Samson did . Scholars believe he was trying to emulate Samson's actions .
 When the Philistines captured Samson, they cut his hair . The way God recognized him to give him his strength is the way God gave him strength .
 Samson prayed to God to give him the strength necessary to bring the temple down upon the heads of his captors, and he was . Samson prayed for the strength needed to bring down the temple . Samson was killed by the Egyptians in the Battle of the Hidid .
 Samson brought the pillars down killing himself and bringing the roof collapsing down on the heads of the Philistines . Samson killed himself and then brought the roof collapse down on Philistine heads .
 The recipients of the signal decided to play it cool, and did not begin a pre-emptive nuclear exchange . Thankfully, the recipients were not involved in a nuclear attack . The signal was a signal of interest from North Korea .
 The U.S. knew what it was dealing with in Cuba with the R-12 and R-14 . Thanks to the information that Penkovsky provided, the United States knew what was going on .
 He also gave information about personalities vital to the Soviet Missile program, as well as the inner workings of the program .
 Intelligence Services went from equal terms with the KGB to being a half step behind . The Intelligence Services are now a half a step behind the KGB . The intelligence services were once equal on equal terms .
 Three theories seem to have come about in the historiography . However, this has not stopped authors from theorizing on this question .
 The leading theory is the KGB caught him on simple chance through the use of normal surveillance . Leading theory is that he was caught by chance by chance through normal surveillance.
 After Popov operated in Moscow right under the KGB’s nose, the KGB began randomly tailing diplomats . Popov's operation was so successful that the KGB started to tail down diplomats . The KGB began tailoring diplomats after Popov was caught .
 The organization also realized that wives could be used, and would randomly tail them as well . The organization would tail women and tail them randomly .
 Some authors believe that it was on one of these random surveillances of Janet Chisholm that the KGB spotted Penkovsky . The KGB worked from there to identify the spy .
 This was the first theory developed, and, with the evidence available, holds the most weight . This is the most accurate theory, and it holds most weight, according to the evidence .
 Second theory developed was that Penkovsky was revealed by a double agent in the American NSA by the name of Jack Dunlap . The second theory developed is that the double agent was a Russian double agent .
 Approximately six months after the KGB arrested Penkovsky, Dunlap had his clearance revoked due to suspicions of being a Soviet agent .
 Some authors take his suicide two months after his suicide as an admission of guilt . Some authors believe his suicide was an admission that he committed suicide .
 Dunlap did have access to documents emanating from Penkovsky, as investigators found some in a search of his apartment . Dunlap had access to some of the documents .
 The third theory comes from the most recent work on Penkovsky, Dead Drop by Jeremy Duns .
 John Wolfenden was a British correspondent in Moscow blackmailed into working for the KGB . He was caught in a revealing situation with another man in Moscow .
 According to Duns, Wolfenden alerted the KGB to Janet Chisholm being involved in an operation . The KGB believed she was involved in a secret operation in the UK .
 This seemingly small piece of information would be enough when combined with the KGB’s constant surveillance of foreign diplomats . The KGB is known to keep tabs on foreign diplomats in Russia .
 Two of those involved in the operation presented on their experiences with the operation . Two of the people involved presented on what they had done .
 One of the purposes of this discussion was to analyze weaknesses inherent in the operation as part of the CIA’s fiftieth anniversary . This discussion was part of a discussion of the operation .
 Lewellyn Thompson was adamant that the CIA could not run operations through diplomatic positions in the U.S. embassy . Thompson: "The CIA can't run operations in diplomatic positions"
 Rauri Chisholm had been a secretary in MI6 before marrying Rauri . She had been an MI6 secretary before marrying an ex-MI6 officer .
 Rauri had worked in Berlin with George Blake, a member of the Cambridge Five . This was a problem because Rauri worked with Blake in Berlin . The Cambridge Five were known for their involvement in the notorious Berlin bombings .
 Rauri Chisholm was, therefore, a known MI6 officer, and would be under constant suspicion . He would be a known spy, and therefore would be constantly under suspicion .
 This suspicion extends to his wife is only natural, giving credence to the first theory of the discovery of Penkovsky . This suspicion extended to the wife of his wife .
 Penkovsky was ambitious by nature, and desired to provide high quality information . He desired to be ambitious and wanted to provide the best possible information .
 Penkovsky craved acknowledgement from handlers on the quality of his contributions, two qualities that drove him to defect . He craved recognition from handlers that he had made a difference in his career .
 It is believed that Penkovsky was attempting to gather too much information too quickly . It was believed that he was gathering too much of the information .
 The second weakness stemming from Penkovsky himself was that he called many of the shots in the operation . The second weaknesses stemming from the second weakness is that he calls the shots himself .
 "His handlers allowed this because he was demonstrably an effective and productive operator," he says . His handlers allow this because of his effectiveness, he says.
 Following the main theory on Penkovsky’s capture these two reasons become more important . The main theory is that the capture of the Russian spy was a success .
 Penkovsky managed to force changes in the Soviet leadership . He was captured in 1962, and tried and executed in 1963 .
 Varentsov, after rising to the heights of Chief Marshal of the Artillery, was demoted to the rank of major general .
 He was expelled from the Central Committee and his seat in the Supreme Soviet was removed . He was also expelled from Russia's Central Committee .
 Many other less important military personnel were also disciplined for their laxity in security .
 The KGB and the GRU would need to change their operational procedures . Depending on how much the KGB forced Penkovsky to talk, the KGB and GRU must change their procedures .
 The military would also need to change many of its procedures, as they are now well known to the West, as well as the West .
 Human Intelligence contributed to the Western success in two early Cold War Crises that could have easily gone nuclear . Clearly, Human Intelligence helped in the success of the Cold War .
 The information passed in regards to the Berlin Crisis alerted the West to Khrushchev’s readiness to go to war on the issue . The information was passed to the West by the Soviets . The West was alerted to the threat of war by the information .
 Penkovsky also alerted the West to the military power the Soviet Union was capable of bringing out in a conflict over Germany . The Soviet Union could use its military power to bring out a military force, he said .
 It is clear that Penkovsky was defecting due to deep professional frustrations, which gave the West a sign to look for in later defectors . It is also clear that the West was looking for signs of future defectors, such as Penkovski .
 The True Story of Oleg Penkovsky and the Cold War’s Most Dangerous Operation is published by Alex Treisman . The book is based on a book written by Russian author Vladimir Putin, a former KGB officer .
 Revised to Include New Revelations From Soviet and Cuban Sources . Second edition of this edition will be published in November 2013 .