 Through negotiations the United States and the U.S.R. successfully achieved diplomacy, which prevented a nuclear war . The United States, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union avoided nuclear war through diplomacy .
 The next year the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty was signed and which led to the start of the end of the Cold War . Consequently, the nuclear test ban treaty was signed .
 In 1947, President Truman declared an anti-communist policy in the United States of America . This policy led to great tensions between the U.S. and all agents of communism .
 Fidel Castro was sworn in as Prime Minister of Cuba in 1959 . He attempted to end the United States’ economic dominance of Cuba . Fidel Castro is the Cuban leader of the Cuban revolution .
 The Bay of Pigs incident was the United States of America’s attempt to overthrow Fidel Castro in 1961 . The U.S. government attempted to overthrow Castro .
 The United States of Soviet Russia took this as an opportunity to put missiles in Cuba . It provided Cuba with protection against the possibility of an invasion from the United States . The U.S. placed missiles in Turkey .
 In 1962, The United States of Soviet Russia’s Premier, Nikita Khrushchev, decided to secretly place missiles in Cuba . The cause to Why the Crisis Happened U2 Plane .
 On October 14th, 1962, an American U2 plane flew over Cuba and discovered several missile sites . The missile sites were discovered in Cuba .
 On October 16th, President Kennedy was made aware of the situation and took action creating EXComm, Executive Committee of the National Security Council, to debate what the United States of America’s response would be . EXComm was created by President Kennedy in response to the situation .
 On October 22, Kennedy gave a speech that addressed the nation informing them that the military was quarantining Cuba . Kennedy gave the nation a speech informing them of the military's quarantines .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev communicated throughout the crisis in an attempt to defuse the situation . Diplomacy that was used in the aftermath of the crisis .
 Khrushchev sent letters explaining why the missiles were placed in Cuba, which was with peaceful intentions . On October 23 and 24, the letters were sent explaining why they were placed there .
 Khrushchev said he would remove missiles and bombers from Cuba if the U.S. would agree not to invade Cuba and remove American missiles from Turkey . Kennedy received another letter from Khruschev on October 26 and 27, 1962 . The letter was sent to Kennedy on October 27 .
 Kennedy agreed with the Soviets as long as they agreed keep it secret that U.S. missiles were removed from Turkey . Kennedy agreed to remove missiles from Turkey in exchange for keeping it secret . Kennedy: "Keep it secret"
 The Soviets agreed and the crisis was solved through diplomacy rather than ending in a nuclear catastrophe . The Soviet Union agreed and it was never a nuclear war .
 The United States succeeded in getting nuclear weapons removed from Cuba, but it failed to remove Cuba’s Communist dictatorship . Immediate Impact Missile Sites in Turkey are located in Turkey .
 The U.S.R. had to promise not to invade Cuba and to remove missiles from Turkey . The United States won't invade Cuba but promised not to do so in Cuba and removed missiles in Turkey .
 Kennedy made the U.S. look bad to the world because they secretly took missiles out of Turkey while the Soviets removed their missiles publicly . However, Kennedy consequently made the US look bad . The Soviets removed missiles from Turkey while Kennedy secretly removed them publicly .
 The U.S. was not the one trying to destroy the world’s peace, it was the threat to global safety . That dichotomy gave the impression that the United States was not trying to kill the world's peace .
 On August 5th, 1963 the United States, along with several other nations, signed the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty . The treaty stated that nuclear testing would not be allowed .
 This gave the world a glimmer of a chance that a nuclear war would be less of a worry in the future .
 The Background that Built Up to the Cause The Cause to Why the Crisis Happened Diplomacy that was used Immediate Impact Long Term Effects .
 According to the ancient Chinese proverb, a journey of 1,000 miles must begin with a single step . Albert Einstein: "It can only be achieved by understanding"
 Let us, if we can, step back from the shadows of war and seek out the way of peace . Let's hope we can find peace in the shadow of war, and seek peace .
 President John F Kennedy: "Let history record that we, in this land, at this time, took the first step. And of that journey is a 1,000 miles or even more"