 At the time of the missile crisis, Cold War tensions between the U.S. and the Soviet Union were extremely high . The missile crisis was the height of the Cold War between the two countries .
 Start your 48-hour free trial to unlock this answer and thousands more . See This Answer Now .
 Nikita Khrushchev believed he could intimidate the young American president, John F Kennedy . The Soviet leader was prone to bluster and threatening rhetoric .
 In August 1961, Khrushchev authorized the construction of a barrier separating the eastern and western halves of the city of Berlin . The barrier effectively closed off the U.S.-protected enclave from the surrounding world .
 The 1959 Cuban revolution inflamed tensions between the two superpowers over the direction in which Fidel Castro was taking his country . The badly bungled U.S.-backed invasion at the Bay of Pigs was seen as having seriously weakened President Kennedy .
 By placing nuclear-armed missiles in Cuba, the Soviet Union could now destroy targets in the United States in a matter of seconds . The Soviets calculated the U.S. could do to it with United States nuclear weapons based in western Europe . The Soviet Union calculated what it could do with
 The ensuing crisis brought U.S. and Soviet naval forces into close contact . Any mistake by a commanding or subordinate officer on a ship or submarine belonging to either side could conceivably have triggered a full-scale war .
 U.S. reconnaissance flights over Cuba, intended to locate and track Soviet nuclear weapons, were a source of great irritation to Castro . In addition, United States reconnaissance flights to Cuba were also a problem for Castro .
 When one of the reconnaissance flights was shot down by a surface-to-air missile, killing the pilot, the situation grew more tense . The American pilot was killed in the attack .
 How much the people in the Soviet Union knew about the missile crisis is uncertain, given total control over sources of information by the government there at that time .
 In the U.S., the entire country held its collective breath until the crisis ended . In the United States, however, the entire nation held their collective breath to the end .
 The fear of nuclear war was real, and the public truly believed it had come too close to annihilation . The public believed the public had come close to annihilating .
 Googletag.push { googletig.display; }); . Ask a tutor Ask a tutor . Choose a reason to choose a reason for choosing a reason . Use this information to help students understand assignments .