 Atlantic national editor Benjamin Schwartz quotes Defense Secretary Robert McNamara . McNamara emphasized that President Kennedy felt allowing missiles would be politically unacceptable .
 The 50th anniversary of the missile crisis was last fall, but it hasn't exactly been in the news much . This week, CNN revisits some of what you think you know about the crisis . It's a reminder of how hard it is to follow your thoughts and questions where they
 The Atlantic piece and book it reviews are based on the complete transcript of the deliberations of the special ExComm of top Kennedy administration officials that met during the famed ‘13 Days” of the crisis .
 Bobby Kennedy’s book, titled “13 Days, was the main source for the lies, but there are many more sources . Bobby Kennedy's book ‘13 Days’ is one of the main sources of lies .
 Sheldon M Stern worked as a historian at the Kennedy Library in Boston from 1977 to 2000 . Stern was the first person not an ExComm member to have access to the full set of tapes made of ExComm meetings .
 The biggest distortion was the role of RFK himself . He had read, and accepted, the fundamental accuracy of ‘13 Days’ before he listened to the tapes .
 The received version of RFK's book relies on RFK’s own book and on testimony of Kennedy loyalists . RFK was a cool-headed voice of reason. RFK is credited with saving his life .
 The Atlantic book review that got me started on this post, written by the magazine’s national editor Benjamin Schwartz, takes a somewhat different tack .
 Schwartz seizes the occasion to work through elements of the heroic version of the tale that clearly have bothered him for years . Schwartz: "It's a great story, but it's not a heroic tale that has bothered me"
 He challenges fundamental elements of the tale, starting with the argument that it was worth risking a nuclear confrontation to keep those missiles out of Cuba in the first place .
 The Soviets had ICBM’s on their own territory that could reach the United States and missiles on submarines that could rise up out of the ocean and nuke us from close range . The Soviets weren’t happy about that and this fact contributed to Nikita Khrushchev
 The Soviets weren't violating any international laws by installing missiles on the territory of a willing ally but the U.S. decision to blockade Cuba actually was an illegal act of war . JFK, RFK and the ExComm generally realized that the Cuban missiles would not have significantly altered the real
 On the tapes, the Kennedy brothers and their advisers make all the same points . But, on the tape, they say, they make the same point . The Kennedy brothers are not the same people who say they are .
 “A missile is a missile,” Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara asserted . From the Schwartz review, he said, “a missile is the missile”
 A U-2 reconnaissance photo shows evidence of missile assembly in Cuba . The U.S. missile program was launched in Cuba in 1961 .
 The Republicans would surely make hay if the Soviets seemed to be stealing some advantage of JFK’s watch . Shown are missile transporters and missile-ready tents .
 The U.S. needs to show resolve and toughness in order to deter future provocations, says President Obama .
 Schwartz says the notion that standing up to aggression will deter future aggression fails to weather historical scrutiny . Schwartz challenges the playground logic of standing up against aggression .
 Thank goodness Khrushchev decided this wasn’t worth blowing up the world over . The world over is safe now, thanks to the Soviet Union .
 The Kennedy brothers and their genius friends handled the crisis, but I realize that I’ve known most of these facts and arguments for years . But as I torture myself with all these misgivings about the way the Kennedy brothers handled it, I realize most of the facts and
 I continue to be impressed with the power of wanting one’s team to be heroic, and able to believe that they are, even when the facts point in a different direction . I'm impressed with this, even though I'm not sure what the facts are .
 MinnPost's in-depth, independent news is free for all to access — no paywall or subscriptions . Minnpost: "I'm glad you can't wait to see what's going to happen next."
 Eric Black writes Eric Black Ink for MinnPost . Eric Black is an award-winning journalist and author of "Eric Black Ink"
 In May 2017, he’d won the national Sigma Delta Chi Award for online column writing . His latest award is from the Society of Professional Journalists .
 CNN iReporters are only able to do their work thanks to support from all levels . Support us on CNN iReport.com .
 Republish the HTML at right, which includes our tracking pixel, all paragraph styles and hyperlinks . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on Facebook .
 The 50th anniversary of the missile crisis was last fall, but it hasn't exactly been in the news much . This week marks the 50 years since the crisis began .
 The Atlantic piece and the book it reviews are based on the complete transcript of the deliberations of the special ExComm of top Kennedy administration officials that met during the "13 Days" of the crisis .
 He had read, and accepted, the fundamental accuracy of ‘13 Days’ before he listened to the tapes and discovered falsehood after omission after distortion . <p> The biggest distortion was the role of RFK himself .
 Stern found that the tapes revealed Bobby Kennedy as “confrontational and hawkish from day one through day thirteen -and even beyond into the November post-crisis .” The Atlantic book review that got me started on this post, written by the magazine’s national
 He challenges fundamental elements of the tale, starting with the argument that it was worth risking a nuclear confrontation to keep those missiles out of Cuba in the first place . The U.S. had nuclear missiles positioned in Turkey, close to the Soviet Union .
 The Soviets weren't happy about that and Schwartz surmises that this fact contributed to Nikita Khrushchev’s decision to put Soviet missiles in Cuba . The Soviets had ICBM's on their own territory that could reach the United States .
 The Soviets weren't violating any international laws by installing missiles on the territory of a willing ally but the United States decision to blockade Cuba actually was an illegal act of war . The tapes indicate that JFK, RFK and the ExComm generally realized that the Cuban missiles would not have significantly altered
 “A missile is a missile,” Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara asserted . From the Schwartz review: “” ‘”” McNamara .
 Republicans would surely make hay if the Soviets seemed to be stealing some advantage of JFK’s watch . Shown are missile transporters and missile-ready tents where fueling and maintenance took place .
 Schwartz says the notion that standing up to aggression will deter future aggression fails to weather historical scrutiny . Schwartz challenges the playground logic of standing up against aggression .
 The 50th anniversary of the missile crisis was last fall, but it hasn't been in the news much . This week, CNN revisits some of what you think you know about the crisis . This is a reminder of how hard it is to follow your thoughts and questions where they lead
 The Atlantic piece and the book it reviews are based on the complete transcript of the deliberations of the special ExComm of top Kennedy administration officials . Maybe we all know just enough about it to be dangerous .
 Bobby Kennedy was the main source for the lies, but there are many more sources . Bobby Kennedy’s book, titled \u201c13 Days,\u201d, was the book .
 The biggest distortion was the role of RFK himself . He had read, and accepted, the fundamental accuracy of the tapes before he listened to the tapes .
 RFK was a cool-headed voice of reason . RFK's own book and testimony of Kennedy loyalists have been cited in his book .
 The Atlantic book review that got me started on this post, written by the magazine's national editor Benjamin Schwartz, takes a somewhat different tack . Stern found that the tapes revealed Bobby Kennedy as hawkish from day one through day thirteen -and even beyond into the November post-crisis post
 The Soviets weren't happy about that and Schwartz surmises that this fact contributed to Nikita Khrushchev's decision to put Soviet missiles in Cuba . The Soviets had ICBMs on their own territory that could reach the United States .
 The Soviets weren't violating any international laws by installing missiles on the territory of a willing ally but the U.S. decision to blockade Cuba actually was an illegal act of war . JFK, RFK and the ExComm generally realized that the Cuban missiles would not have significantly altered the real
 The Republicans would surely make hay if the Soviets seemed to be stealing some advantage of JFK's watch . Shown are missile transporters and missile-ready tents where fueling and maintenance took place .
 Schwartz: "This notion that standing up to aggression will deter future aggression fails to weather historical scrutiny" Schwartz: Stand-up to aggression won't deter future aggressions .
 The Kennedy brothers handled the way they handled the crisis in New York City, New York, they say . But as I torture myself with all these misgivings, I realize most of these facts are known for years .