 On January 1, 1959, Fidel Castro succeeded in overthrowing the dictator Fulgencia Batista . Fidel Castro overthrew the dictator in Cuba .
 Castro began expropriating lands owned by such companies as United Fruit . Initially the United States had offered support to Castro, but that quickly soured .
 Castro struck a deal in February 1960 to purchase oil from the USSR, and when United States refineries in Cuba refused to process that oil, he expropriated their facilities . Castro struck the deal with the United States .
 U.S. leaders were contemplating the overthrow of Castro by force . Soon, they were contemplating overthrowing the Castro regime .
 Kennedy inherited the plan begun under Eisenhower for a CIA-run invasion using Cuban exiles . Kennedy inherited a plan to invade Cuba from the start of the war .
 In April 1961, the Bay of Pigs operation was launched, and it quickly ended in disaster . It was the first time the operation was ever attempted .
 Operation Mongoose, run out of the White House by the Special Group, managed sabotage and other covert operations . The Special Group also managed sabotage, other covert ops .
 In 1962, the Soviet Union secretly installed nuclear missiles in Cuba . When these were discovered, the two superpowers went "eyeball to eyeball,"" and all-out nuclear war was narrowly averted .
 During all this time, various plots to assassinate Castro were undertaken by CIA-led operatives . During the 1960s, the CIA was involved in the assassination of Castro .
 The Kennedy administration initiated secret contacts with Castro to try to reach an accommodation . Even while these plots were still in the works, the Kennedy administration tried to find a compromise .
 Some experts point to Fidel Castro and his reasons for wanting to do away with Kennedy . Some experts say Fidel Castro was behind the decision to kill Kennedy .
 The war on Cuba inflamed those in the Cuban exile community, the CIA, and in organized crime who were vehement opponents of Castro . JFK's perceived laxity on JFK's part in fighting it also inflamed some in Cuba exile community .
 Groups had already been brought together in plots to eliminate Castro Castro . And these groups had already planned to kill Castro, Castro's widow .
 Discusses the failed Bay of Pigs operation, an invasion plan inherited from the Eisenhower era but implemented by Kennedy, with disastrous results . Discusses plans to invade the U.S. in Cuba and the Soviet Union .
 Operation Mongoose – Discusses the sabotage and subversion campaign directed against Cuba out of the White House following the failure at the Bay of Pigs . The campaign was led by the U.S. after the failure of the failed attempt to topple Cuba .
 Operation Northwoods Presents the plans developed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff to conduct faked and real terrorist incidents to be blamed on Castro as a pretext for a military invasion of Cuba . The Joint Chiefs' plans were to conduct fake and real attacks on Castro .
 Two Tracks on Cuba Contrasts the ongoing anti-Castro operations with the late 1963 Kennedy backdoor channel of negotiation . The Kennedy-led government was negotiating with Castro Castro in the 1960s .
 Cuba Timeline – Displays a chronological listing of major events in Kennedy-era U.S.-Cuba relations . The timeline is based on events in the Kennedy era of Cuba relations .
 JFK & The Cuban Connection: Havana's Spies Spill the Beans at Top-Level Conference, by Dick Russell . JFK & Cuba Connection is a series of essays by Russell and Russell .
 Report"" was CIA's own reporting on the Castro plots, created in response to a request from President Lyndon Johnson . Report."" was CIA report into the Castro plot .
 This volume is the HSCA's writeup on Cuban exile groups and the CIA-Mafia plots to assassinate Fidel Castro . This volume includes the CIA and Mafia plots to kill Castro .