 The American public rate magnetic presidents such as Kennedy and Reagan much higher than the historians who study them in depth . The public is also suckers for presidential charisma .
 The political parties assist in peddling this hype because perpetuating myths of historic ""giants"" helps to win today’s elections . The political party peddles this hype . The myth helps them win today's elections .
 Republicans regularly try to compare themselves to an idealized notion of Reagan that didn't even come close to existing . Reagan's idealized idea of Reagan didn’t exist, but he did .
 The anniversary of Kennedy's death is the one that is upon us, let's concentrate on why he did not exemplify the best characteristics of a liberal and was actually a very bad president .
 Liberals sometimes idealize JFK for his transformational activities in civil rights, the Peace Corps, and committing the country to sending humans to the moon within the decade . JFK was assassinated in 1968, but his legacy is still unknown .
 JFK wanted to compete aggressively with the Soviet Union and saw all of the above issues largely as they related to the Cold War . Yet JFK saw all the issues as a result of his desire to compete with the Soviets .
 He believed bad publicity surrounding segregation and race-related violence in the U.S. was helping to lose the propaganda war against the Soviet Union in the developing world .
 Peace Corps program will win back some of that lost public relations ground in those parts of the globe . He said he hoped the program would win back public relations in those areas .
 Kennedy didn't care about space exploration, but instead viewed the moon program through the lens U.S.-Soviet competition during the Cold War . Kennedy didn’t want to focus on space exploration but instead focused on the U.K. vs. the Soviet Union .
 JFK and Reagan were the most hawkish and caused unnecessary crises with the USSR that almost resulted in nuclear war . Of all Cold War presidents, JFK was the most hawkish, Reagan was most cautious .
 JFK’s dangerous policy toward Cuba caused the crisis in the first place . His rash actions once Soviet missiles in Cuba were suspected almost resulted in nuclear Armageddon . Yet JFK's dangerous policy towards Cuba led to the crisis .
 JFK approved an idiotic CIA plan to train and launch an invasion force of Cuban exiles that was intended to result in Fidel Castro’s overthrow . JFK was obsessed with eliminating the communist government .
 The Soviets installed nuclear missiles in Cuba to deter another U.S. invasion . After the invasion’s ignominious failure and exposure and Soviet detection of unbelievable further attempts by the Kennedy administration to topple Castro, the Soviets decided to install nuclear missiles .
 The Soviets wanted to give the United States ""a taste of its own medicine,"" since U.S. nuclear missiles had been installed near the Soviet Union in Turkey and Italy . Also, the Soviets wanted a taste of "its own medicine" since United States nuclear missiles were installed near
 Kennedy and his defense secretary, Robert McNamara, later admitted that Soviet missiles in Cuba would not have altered the strategic nuclear balance . JFK confessed that if he had not made the prior public promise, he would not've had to do anything in response to the Soviet missiles .
 He could have ignored the entire matter – after all, the Soviet missiles in Cuba did not alter the substantial U.S. nuclear advantage – or he could have handled the matter through private diplomatic channels, avoiding the provocative naval blockade .
 Khrushchev had gotten the better of Kennedy in the crisis, says Kennedy . One could even argue that after all the facts had been uncovered, he had won the war . Kennedy had been wronged by the facts of the crisis .
 JFK traded the elimination of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba in return for a pledge by the U.S. not to invade Cuba . Publicly, JFK had traded the . elimination of the Soviet nuclear missile in Cuba for a promise by the United States not to . invade Cuba.
 Kennedy only secretly agreed to withdraw U.S. missiles from Turkey as not to embarrass Turkey . Kennedy only agreed to pull missiles from that country in order to avoid embarrassment .
 The moderate Khrushchev was a major factor in his later ouster and replacement by Soviet hardliners . To avoid future humiliation at the hands of America, the Soviets conducted a massive military build up and arms race with the United States .
 JFK signed a partial nuclear test ban, which only permitted future underground testing of nuclear weapons . Unnerved by the crisis, JFK did sign a partial test ban . This limited treaty paled in comparison to the reckless Kennedy’s almost stumbling into a nuclear World War III for no
 The potential needless destruction of much of human civilization should alone qualify JFK as being one of the worst presidents in U.S. history . JFK should be one of America's worst presidents .
 Kennedy acolytes argue that he had decided Vietnam was a quagmire and, before his death, had ordered that 1,000 U.S. soldiers be withdrawn . He also says he had ordered the troops to be withdrawn from Vietnam .
 JFK lost the war before his successor, Lyndon B Johnson, ever escalated it – by tacitly approving the ouster of South Vietnamese President Ngo Dinh Diem, which left a political leadership vacuum . The U.S. combat forces could provide only an inadequate substitute .
 JFK had no skills to get his stalled legislative program through Congress, including his reluctantly put forth Civil Rights Act . Domestically, unlike his successor, he had no skill to get through Congress . JFK had failed to pass his stalled program through .
 Kennedy tried to discourage Martin Luther King from his now-famous ""March on Washington and ""I have a dream" speech in August 1963 . Kennedy was always fearful of losing support from the conservative southern wing of his party .
 The less charismatic LBJ, JFK’s vice president and successor, should really be the hero of the civil rights movement, not JFK . LBJ advised Kennedy to make civil rights a moral cause and then enacted the Civil Rights Act and Voting Rights Act of 1965 .
 In short, JFK hardly represented the best aspects of liberalism . He unnecessarily endangered not only the American people but the entire world with nuclear war, he says .
 Ivan Eland is a senior fellow at the Independent Institute . He is author of Recarving Rushmore: Ranking the Presidents on Peace, Prosperity, and Liberty . Eland: The U.S. has a long history of peace and prosperity .