 It's the kind of conduct that’s such that one might expect of the Soviet Union, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "It's . . . It's such . . such a conduct that's such that . one might expected of the . Soviet Union
 T his article analyzes the role of the Pearl Harbor moral analogy in the 1962 Cuban missile crisis . The article also analyzes how the moral analogy was used by the Cuban government in the 1960s .
 People draw moral analogies when they judge the rights and wrongs of an act on the basis of parallels with previous actions deemed to be moral or immoral . People use analogies to judge the moral or moral value of a person's actions .
 Historical analogies use past cases to discern what is at stake in a situation and whether certain policies will be effective . Moral historical analogies focus on the ethics of a decision .
 Recent proponents of humanitarian intervention in Darfur regularly invoke the failure to halt genocide during World War II or in Rwanda in 1994 .
 Bush told the audience, “Each of us bears responsibility for our actions and for our failure to act.” Bush said . Bush: “Here we will learn that each of us bore responsibility for . our actions’s responsibility,’
 President John F Kennedy decided not to launch immediate air strikes against Cuba and to proceed instead with a naval blockade of the island .
 The Pearl Harbor moral analogy was a sufªcient condition for Kennedy to reject the option of an air strike without prior warning to Moscow . Kennedy rejected the option to strike without warning to Russia .
 By eliminating the surprise attack option, the Pearl Harbor moral analogy removed the most attractive air strike option in strategic terms and thereby pushed the administration toward choosing the blockade . Furthermore, the moral analogy made the U.S. choose the blockade rather than a surprise attack .
 Historians of the Cuban missile crisis have noted the use of the Pearl Harbor analogy . No previous studies have examined its role in any detail .
 A major source has recently become available that sheds light on this role . Fortunately, a major source of information has been made available to shed light on it .
 President Kennedy secretly taped many of the key meetings during the crisis, enabling us to hear and assess the impact of the analogy on the discussion and actors' policy preferences .
 Many studies of the missile crisis weave references to the Pearl Harbor analogy into the narrative but provide little reºection on its role in decision-making . Many studies have failed to re-examine the impact of Pearl Harbor .
 Paul Anderson brieºy discussed the analogy in a 1981 article, although at the time only limited sources of information were available .
 In reality, Robert Kennedy was extremely hawkish at the start of the crisis . Kennedy was very hawkish when he was at the beginning of his presidency .
 The ofªcials who discussed the moral analogy were Central Intelligence Agency Director John McCone and Under Secretary of State George Ball .
 Robert Kennedy, far from having been the first to champion the normative parallel, was himself deeply inºuenced by it as he changed from being a hawk to a dove . Robert Kennedy was not the first person to champion such a parallel, but he was himself himself himself .
 The use of ethical parallels in the Cuban missile crisis offers insights into wider foreign policymaking . Fourth, the use of parallels in this crisis offers insight into wider policymaking.
 Scholars previously have explored how decision-makers employ historical analogies . But they have not focused speciªcally on moral analogies, they say . Scholars previously explored how decisions were made by historical analogists .
 Moral analogies have unique characteristics and can enable ethical concerns to feature unexpectedly in decision-making . This neglect is unwarranted because moral analogies are unique characteristics, such as ethical concerns, it says .
 Moral analogies tend to be employed by leaders with a propensity for moral rhetoric in regard to formative experiences . Leaders tend to use moral rhetoric to refer to the experiences of their youth .
 "The analogies have the greatest impact when referring to conspicuously immoral behavior," he says . The analogies are the same thing when talking about immoral behavior .
 The fact that moral analogies prospered in the unfertile soil of the Cuban missile crisis deliberations provides signiªcant evidence for their wider potential impact . The fact .
 Fifth, four decades after the Cuban missile crisis ended, analogies with important errors . The U.S. has been in the grip of the Cold War for four decades .
 I listened to all the relevant material from the Kennedy tapes, but I cite from the above works where I consider the published version to be an accurate rendition of what was said . I consider this to be the most accurate version of what happened .
 In several cases I found errors in the published transcript, as indicated in the relevant footnotes . The transcript is published in this article . In some cases, the transcript has been published in the wrong way .
 The phrase “Pearl Harbor in reverse” was invoked to discredit air strikes during the Cuban missile crisis . The phrase was used to question the morality of a U.S. attack on Iraq .
 The varying power of this moral analogy over time highlights the circumstances in which ethical parallels tend to be effective and ineffective . The differing power of the moral analogy can be seen over time .
 Soviet missile installations in Cuba were discovered on 15 October 1962 . President Kennedy was briefed the following morning by President Kennedy .
 The White House perceived the deployment as a major threat to national security and the United States position in the region . An executive committee was assembled to deal with the crisis .
 Kennedy publicly announced the discovery of the missiles in Cuba on Monday, 22 October . Washington imposed a ‘quarantine’ or blockade on shipments of offensive weapons to the island .
 Nikita Khrushchev ordered the weapons dismantled and returned to the Soviet Union . After a period of great tension, the crisis ended on 28 October when Khrushche announced that he had ordered them dismantled .
 The United States in return pledged not to invade Cuba and secretly told Moscow that United States missiles in Turkey would be removed within a few months . The U.S. also pledged to remove missiles from Turkey in return .
 This article begins with a theoretical examination of the role of morality, analogies and moral analogies, in foreign policymaking . The author concludes that morality is relevant to foreign policy making .
 Many theorists of international relations relegate moral concerns to a peripheral role in the formation of foreign policy . Morality in foreign policy is a peripheral issue in the form of international diplomacy .
 The realist tradition has focused on the importance of anarchy in international politics, which necessitates the pursuit of national interest deªned narrowly in terms of power . Realist tradition focuses on the need for anarchy in world politics .
 Other scholars have argued that politics is inherently goal-oriented and that moral principles can shape an actor’s objectives .
 The bombing of Dresden in World War II indicates that ethical concerns can erode over time . The bombing in Dresden in WWII indicates that ethics can also erode .
 In contrast, the clear-cut nature of the norm against chemical warfare has allowed for relatively few violations . In contrast to the norm, there have been relatively few chemical warfare violations .
 Richard Betts has deªned a surprise attack as an assault against a target that is not prepared for it because of mistaken estimates of whether, when, where, or where, 7.7.
 Robert Art and Kenneth Waltz argue that “states in anarchy cannot afford to be moral” Art and Waltz say states in anarchy can’t afford to “be moral.”
 Participants in the ExComm discussions used the phrase “Pearl Harbor in reverse,” they were at least implicitly subscribing to the view that surprise attacks are inherently wrong .
 The supposed immorality of surprise attacks implies that states typically issue a warning before starting hostilities, but after World War II countries largely abandoned the practice of declaring war on each other .
 Surprise attacks are not necessarily more likely than other attacks to violate the norm against targeting civilians or the laws of war . The U.S. should not be surprised by surprise attacks, the authors say .
 Such assaults often use the beneªts of surprise to target military or other directly threatening objectives rather than civilians . Such assaults are often used to target directly threatening targets .
 'Surprise attacks rarely can be clearly distinguished from non-surprise attacks,' says author . Further ambiguity arises from the fact that surprise attacks rarely are clearly distinguished .
 Fidel Castro and Khrushchev considered a United States attack quite likely given Washington’s earlier backing for the 1961 invasion of Cuba by Cuban expatriates at the Bay of Pigs .
 A norm against surprise attacks raises a number of moral and policy dilemmas . Furthermore, it raises questions about the morality of the nation's foreign policy .
 President Kennedy would have considered the overthrow of the Castro regime to be a moral good . The overthrow of Castro regime would have been a good moral good, Kennedy said .
 Lessons for Defense Planning (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 1982), 11.5.2.3.4.6.7. The author of the book, "Learnings for Defense planning," was published in 1982 .
 In 1989, former Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara argued that the Kennedy administration had not intended to invade Cuba .
 Even McNamara acknowledged that for an outside observer the evidence at the time, including United States military exercises in the region, pointed strongly toward such an invasion . Many scholars have contested this claim, and many scholars have disputed this claim .
 Ethical concerns had featured only to a limited extent in the administration’s previous policies toward Cuba . Ethic concerns had been only limited to a few extent in previous policies .
 The administration also carried out subversion, psychological warfare, and assassination in Cuba—effectively state terrorism—in Cuba . The administration's subversion and psychological warfare in Cuba was also state terrorism .
 In U.S. policy toward Cuba, the ends usually justiªed the means . In Cuba, it's not always the means for the United States, but the ends are the ends .
 The Cuban missile crisis is the type of foreign policy situation in which we would expect morality to be relatively unimportant . Furthermore, this is the kind of situation where morality is not important enough to consider morality .
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy called for a stepped-up program of sabotage on the island . The Cuban missile crisis began in October 1962 .
 President Kennedy approved a series of subversive actions in Cuba, including a grenade attack on the Chinese embassy in Havana . The next day, President Kennedy OK'd a number of subversive attacks in Cuba .
 Some scholars have argued that analogies are mostly used as post-hoc rationalizations . Some have argued analogies have been mostly used to rationalize things .
 Khong claims leaders use analogies not only to justify policies but also to perform speciªc cognitive and information-processing tasks essential to political decision-making . Khong, by contrast, claims that leaders use .
 Analogies enable an actor to deªne problems, to understand the political stakes involved, to contemplate possible solutions, to gauge the odds of success, to weigh moral concerns, and to grasp potential dangers . Analogies, in his view, enable actors to understand possible solutions and to
 Even when an analogy is being employed purely as a rhetorical device, the rhetoric can encourage other policymakers to internalize the analogy and alter their preferences accordingly . Even though an analogy can be used purely as rhetorical devices, it can be internalized by other policymakers .
 A wide range of historical analogies were used during the Cuban missile crisis . The crisis was triggered by the threat of a nuclear missile attack .
 General Curtis LeMay described President Kennedy’s blockade policy as analogous to appeasement at Munich in 1938, a reference that played on Kennedy's sensitivity to the fact that his father, Joseph P Kennedy, had suffered political disgrace for his pro-appeasement stance in the 1930
 President Kennedy noted that a U.S. attack on Cuba might give the Soviet Union an opportunity to take military action in Berlin . The West’s attention was focused on the Suez Crisis while the USSR invaded Hungary in 1956 .
 Kennedy brothers discussed how World War I had broken out through a series of actions with unintended consequences . The Kennedy brothers wished to avoid a similar parallel to the World War One .
 The attack shattered the U.S. isolationist movement and provided the impetus for a global national security policy . At the same time, the attack also shattered the American isolationist .
 Pearl Harbor was the watershed event for the Kennedy generation . It was the day that changed their lives. Pearl Harbor changed their entire lives .
 John F Kennedy entered the United States Navy despite poor health, and his subsequent heroism in the Paciªc War (together with the public relations efforts of his father) made Kennedy famous .
 "He developed a lifelong revulsion toward the death and destruction he had seen," he says . He says he developed a "lifelong revulsion" toward the destruction he saw .
 Robert Kennedy, who was 16 at the time of Pearl Harbor, was among the many policymakers who never forgot the Japanese attack .
 May and Zelikow, The Kennedy Tapes, 4; Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., Jr., Robert Kennedy and his Times, 41 . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . The Kennedy tapes were released in March 1968 .
 The Pearl Harbor analogy was also invoked in October 1962 to argue against a surprise U.S. air strike on Cuba . The analogy was used to argue that a surprise attack on Cuba would be unlikely .
 The ExComm participants did not carefully reºect on the ethics of Japanese actions in 1941 . The Japanese government did not closely examine the actions of the Japanese government .
 Pearl Harbor attack did not target civilians or necessarily violate the laws of war . After all, the attack didn't violate the law of war, it was not a war crime .
 Pearl Harbor did contravene the norm of declaring war before initiating hostilities . It was not intended to be a complete surprise attack . Japan launched a surprise attack against Tsarist Russia in 1904 .
 Tokyo had planned to break off relations with the United States thirty minutes before striking Pearl Harbor . But logistical problems caused the message to be delivered several hours after the attack had begun .
 Pearl Harbor came to be perceived as a clear-cut evil act, with disingenuous Japanese diplomacy followed by a devastating attack against the innocent U.S. Despite a degree of ethical complexity, Pearl Harbor was perceived as an evil act .
 Bartlett told Bolshakov that the President “is very angry about what has happened in Cuba’s Cuba . Bartlett said the President is “very angry” about the situation in Cuba .
 Although the 1904 attack was not widely condemned, it was still remembered . The 1904 attack is still remembered for its brutality and brutality .
 In 1941 the U.S. considered a surprise attack by Japan as a likely way for hostilities to begin . Few thought that the target would be Pearl Harbor would be .
 Leaders may be tempted to reach clear moral judgments about policy options by thinking about past decisions that have been judged to have been right or wrong . Leaders may also be tempted by thinking of past decisions, such as those judged to be wrong .
 Moral analogies are most likely to be invoked in countries that have a tradition of moral rhetoric in foreign policy and of reasoning by historical parallel . moral analogies will be invoked most likely in those countries with a history of using historical parallels .
 Leaders in U.S. readily use moral language in foreign policy statements . Leaders in the United States readily use such language in statements .
 Moral analogies are an intellectual device that gives normative concerns an unusual degree of signiªcance in policymaking . The moral analogies can be used to help shape policymaking, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: "Moral analogies give normative concerns a unique degree
 They bring to center-stage ethical issues that otherwise might not be explicitly present in the policymaking process . They bring . issues that might not . not be openly discussed in policymaking .
 The general behavior becomes associated with memories of the particular case . Surprise attacks and Japanese behavior become fused in the mind as collectively immoral . The Japanese behavior is associated with surprise attacks .
 By invoking an analogy, a policymaker can take an ambiguous moral concept such as “surprise attacks are wrong” and considerably enhance its salience and its impact on decision-making . The analogy can be used to enhance the salience of the concept .
 Recent work in the neurosciences has shown that information received when an individual is emotionally aroused is more likely to be recalled at a later date .
 Such vivid experiences, particularly at a formative period in life, become the basis for many historical analogies . Such vivid memories, such as those of childhood, can be the basis of many analogies, the author says .
 The moral analogy would be much more effective if another regime gassed its population to death in extermination camps, as opposed to killing its population in almost any other way . The Holocaust moral analogy is more effective when a regime gasses its population, rather than killing it in other ways .
 Ofªcials worried in 1962 that air strikes against Cuba would violate the moral norm against surprise attacks had fewer concerns that a U.S.-supported invasion of Cuba by expatriates might also violate this norm .
 References to analogies and moral concerns can be purely rhetorical devices to build support for policies adopted for other reasons, such as using analogies or moral concerns to support policies .
 To distinguish analogies used in rhetorical fashion from analogies that shaped an actor’s policy preferences, we need to consider whether historical parallels were used consistently and coherently both in public and private .
 We need to bear in mind that moral and analogical arguments can sometimes shape policymaking implicitly . We also need to be mindful of the fact that analog arguments can shape government policymaking .
 Decision-makers did not raise the Munich analogy directly in October 1962 . They had internalized the ‘lesson’ that concessions to aggressive dictators would merely invite further aggression .
 The discussion here is not intended to give the false impression that the 1941 attack was the sole factor in the minds of the ExComm participants . The discussion does not give the impression that 1941 attacks were the only factor .
 The dozen or so occasions of Pearl Harbor mentioned were spread out over a week of the crisis . Pearl Harbor was mentioned at least a dozen times during the week of WWII .
 The moral analogy with Pearl Harbor was by no means the only variable at work in 1962 . It was sufªcient to eliminate the option of a surprise attack and push the administration toward enacting a blockade .
 The Kennedy tapes allow us to determine when and for whom the Pearl Harbor analogy mattered, how it shaped the discussion, and in what ways it solidiªed opinion for and against particular policy options .
 The Pearl Harbor analogy was used in three different ways during the crisis . The analogy has been used in the U.S. since 1941 .
 First, it was employed largely as a rhetorical device to warn about the blance to the Japanese attack and therefore suggested the historical parallel, whereas the Bay of Pigs invasion did not . Second, the use of it was used as a warning to warn of the threat of a Japanese attack .
 Failing to intervene to stop genocide is more clearly wrong than any particular intervention to stop it is right . The U.S. should intervene more clearly right than failing to intervene in genocide is wrong, says David Cameron .
 Once we examine ‘moral’ actions in international affairs, the normative clarity starts to blur . We tend to question the motives of the actors involved in the events involved .
 An analogy drawn with historical positive moral behavior has the burden of proposing a series of active measures for decision-makers today . Furthermore, an analogy drawn . with historical . positive moral . behavior has . the burden to propose active measures . today .
 In contrast, analogies with immoral acts tell a decision-maker what to avoid . The analogies tell a person what to do to avoid immoral acts, but not what they should do .
 Moral analogies tend to be more effective at eliminating rather than supporting policy options . Therefore, moral analogies should be used to eliminate rather than support policy options, says David Frum .
 Second, the parallel with 1941 was invoked as a moral analogy, representing both a rhetorical tool to win support in the ExComm and an intellectual device that independently shaped policymakers’ opinions . Third, the parallels with 1941 were invoked as both rhetorical and intellectual devices .
 Moral debate was largely absent during the first meeting of the ExComm . moral debate is largely absent from the meeting .
 Participants agreed that the Soviet missiles in Cuba would have to be removed either by an air strike or by an invasion . Instead of removing them, the participants agreed that they would need to remove the missiles .
 Ofªcials put forth strong arguments for a sudden air strike that would destroy the missiles before they became operational . Air strike would destroy them before they were operational .
 Any warning before an American attack, even to United States allies, would pose major risks . Any warning from U.S. allies, even allies, poses major risks to the United States .
 Secretary of the Treasury C Douglas Dillon averred that a warning might escalate the situation if it induced the Soviet Union to take a tough stand . Dillon averted that a . warning might escalated the situation .
 National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy stressed that a warning would produce divisions among America’s allies . Bundy said the warning would result in divisions among the allies .
 President Kennedy commented that “warning , it seems to me, is warning everybody.” President Kennedy . President Kennedy: “Warning . seems to be warning everybody”
 CNN.com: "Obviously you can’t sort of sort of announce that in four days from now you’re gonna take them out. And obviously you can't sort of . sort of announced that in . four days . from now, they’ll take them
 They may announce within three days that they’re gonna have warheads on ‘em,’ says CNN.com's John Sutter . ‘I’m not sure what’s going to happen,” says Sutter. ‘They may announce
 His hawkish stance re-ected his shock at the Soviet Union’s secret deployment of missiles . It was in keeping with his previous hardline positions on Cuba . It re-committed his shock that the Soviet Russia deployed missiles in Cuba .
 In Robert Kennedy’s mind, any attack was risky, and an immediate invasion would minimize the risks by providing a deªnitive solution to the Cuban problem . Robert Kennedy's mind was that any attack on Cuba was risky . In his mind, an immediate attack would minimize
 The ªrst ExComm meeting ended with a broad consensus in favor of surprise air strikes at least against missile sites . The meeting ends with a unanimous consensus in favour of air strikes .
 President Kennedy noted that the U.S. would “certainly” take out the missiles . The only question was whether to broaden the attack . President Kennedy said the United States would take out missiles .
 At the second ExComm meeting, later that evening, the president considered publicly announcing the discovery of the missiles 24 hours before the strikes began . The president considered a public announcement of the missile discovery 24 hours earlier .
 General Taylor, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, Dillon, Bundy, and Bundy all criticized the efªcacy of a warning . General Taylor said the warning should have been issued .
 Under Secretary of State George Ball thought that a few hours notice would be useful for rela38 .
 Clearly, for him and for the ExComm more generally, moral considerations were at this stage peripheral at best . Clearly, he and for . him and . for him, moral . considerations were . at best at best, he says .
 After the second ExComm meeting had formally ended and the president had left, the discussion continued .
 Deputy CIA Director General Marshall Carter used the analogy with Pearl Harbor in its ªrst sense—as a warning about unintended escalation . Marshall Carter: "Pearl Harbor is a warning of unintended escalation"
 When the Pearl Harbor analogy was initially drawn, it was largely used as a rhetorical device to suggest the escalatory potential of air strikes . The Pearl Harbor comparison was initially used as an example of escalation .
 The Japanese attack had inºamed the United States and led to almost four years of war . The U.S. was devastated by the Japanese attack .
 Carter’s analogy helped establish the growing feeling that military action in Cuba might have unexpected and costly consequences . The analogy helped to establish the feeling that . .
 Carter’s boss at the CIA, John McCone, was the one who used the analogy with Pearl Harbor in its second incarnation—as an ethical parallel— when he met President Kennedy the next morning .
 From this point on, the moral analogy was the dominant reference to Pearl Harbor . The moral analogy became dominant reference .
 The ethics of Pearl Harbor were not discussed in a sophisticated manner, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "It's not a good idea that Pearl Harbor was a war hero"
 The Japanese attack was viewed as the epitome of wrongful behavior, and association with it was a powerful taboo . association with the attack was powerful taboo. Rather than the attack, it was seen as the . epitome .
 The analogy was certainly employed as a rhetorical device, it also inºuenced policymakers’ beliefs, helping them to make sense of a complex situation under great time pressure . Although the analogy was used for rhetorical purposes, it helped them to understand the situation .
 CIA director challenged apparent consensus in favor of sudden air strike . In a memorandum, McCone carried with him at the discussion, he challenged the apparent consensus .
 McCone wanted an ultimatum issued to Moscow threatening air strikes within 24 hours if the missiles were not dismantled . McCone said he wanted air strikes in 24 hours to Moscow .
 The lack of documentary evidence for this conversation means that extreme caution is required . "Extreme caution" is required, says CNN.com .
 The alleged note has never been found, and the exchange reported by Sorensen does not appear in the transcript of the meeting .
 Sorensen’s account of the crisis, published in 1966, is the only source for the anecdote . The book The Missile Crisis was published a year after Soresen's account was published .
 Robert Kennedy initially was vehemently in support of an immediate invasion of Cuba and saw a blockade, by contrast, as “a very slow death . Sorensen in his post-hoc account (written at a time when the administration’s handling of the missile crisis was
 George Ball’s “Pearl Harbor” memorandum, which he wrote Wednesday evening, opposes air strikes and favoring a blockade . Ball opposed air strikes, favored a blockade and favored air strikes . Ball's memo is substantiated by Ball's letter to the White House .
 If a surprise attack were carried out against Cuba, Ball argued, it would alienate a great part of the civilized world . "It would cut directly athwart everything we have stood for during our national history, and condemn us as hypocrites"
 On the second question, the president abandoned his initial view and favored issuing a warning before any air strike began . The president said the analogy with Pearl Harbor was drawn with the analogy .
 At the ExComm meeting that day, Rusk noted the military advantages of a “quick strike” but also suggested that prior notiªcation to Khrushchev would legitimize a U.S. military response and retain the support of allies .
 In response, the president echoed some of his earlier fears about what Khrushchev might do in the period between any warning and the initiation of air strikes .
 Kennedy speculated that the Soviet Union might try to hide the missiles in the Cuban woods . Kennedy speculates that the Soviets may have tried to hide them in Cuba .
 McNamara indicated that the United States could probably keep track of the missiles . He became more interested in a warning when McNamara said the U.S. could probably track missiles .
 "Even though it may be illusory, I think we still have to do it," he says . "I think that the impact on opinion and the reaction would be very much different," he adds .
 President Kennedy had been noncommittal on the issue of a warning . Ball had raised a series of possible objections to this course of action .
 Kennedy favored issuing an announcement to Khrushchev before any air strikes began . Ball spoke to Kennedy, who favored issuing the announcement . Kennedy favored making the announcement after Ball spoke . Ball: "It's a good thing that you can talk to your boss"
 If one listens to the tapes, Kennedy’s sympathy with Ball's argument is obvious . Kennedy's sympathy for Ball is obvious, but it's not surprising that he agreed with Ball .
 Having come to oppose a surprise attack, the president outlined a possible plan . The president outlined the president's possible plan for a possible attack .
 President Kennedy agreed that although the U.S. would lose the advantage of surprise, a warning would give Khrushchev a chance to get Soviet personnel out of the ªring line . President Kennedy said although the United States would lose its advantage, the warning would be a good move
 My transcription of Ball’s speech is slightly different from that in the Naftali, May, and Zelikow volume . Ball's speech was published in the May, May and Zilikow volumes .
 Robert Kennedy “brought up the analogy of Pearl Harbor.” Gilpatric recalled that Robert Kennedy brought up the comparison . Kennedy’s remarks were “similarities to Pearl Harbor,” he said .
 He didn’t want this country to be in the position that Japan had put itself in with that raid, he said . He said: ‘I didn't want it to be the same thing that Japan did in that raid.’ The U.S. has been
 The surprise attack option, which only recently had been the consensus approach, had been eliminated . "Surprise attack option" had been recently eliminated, officials say .
 Air strikes might not destroy all the missiles and could even provoke a crash effort to launch the surviving MRBMs . Ofªcials pointed out that air strikes may not destroy the missiles .
 The United States would achieve global infamy, they warned . They also warned that in the event of a surprise attack the Soviet Union might respond elsewhere, and the United States .
 After the meeting, Acheson met with President Kennedy and urged immediate surgical air strikes . The war broke out in the early 1950s .
 Robert Kennedy paced the room, arguing that he now supports a blockade . In response, with the president absent, Robert Kennedy paces the room . Robert Kennedy: "I support a blockade"
 Earlier that morning, during discussions at the State Department, Robert Kennedy was still toying with the idea of an attack, but now he was against this course of action .
 According to the transcript, Kennedy said, “We have to decide in advance we’d do it,” implying that the decision to offer a warning to Khrushchev had yet to be made . Kennedy said the decision was made in advance, but not yet made .
 Robert Kennedy stressed that the administration had to deal with the Soviet threat right away . He wanted to gain the support of the Organization of American States and to give Khrushchev an opportunity .
 Douglas Dillon later claimed that he had been convinced by Robert Kennedy’s speech . Dillon said he thought the whole ExComm had been persuaded by it, with a couple of exceptions .
 On Saturday, 20 October, the tenor of the discussions initially shifted in a more hawkish direction .
 The president worried that the missile threat would increase each day . He broached the possibility of air strikes with a few hours' notice so that Soviet personnel could leave the vicinity .
 His brother supported a mixture of blockade followed by air strikes to avoid a Pearl Harbor-style attack . His brother wanted to avoid an attack on Japan .
 The president himself swung around in support of the blockade, which despite some difªculties would buy time and keep options open .
 CIA report suggests that eight nuclear missiles in Cuba might already be operational . CIA report also suggested that eight of the missiles might already have been operational . U.S. strike would raise the stakes for any U.K. strike .
 A sudden attack had no support in law or morality and therefore had to be ruled out, Rusk said . Secretary of State Rusk agreed with the president .
 By the time the ExComm met on Monday, 22 October, in the . ªnal hours before President Kennedy publicly announced the . U.S. response, Robert Kennedy was even more strongly opposed to immediate air strikes .
 President Putin indicated on Sunday to the president that such a move “would be a Pearl Harbor type of attack” and would provoke an unpredictable response from Moscow, 54. He indicated that the move would provoke a response from Russia .
 Robert Kennedy said “We’ve got to look at history over its length.” Dillon recalled that Robert Kennedy . Dillon recalled Robert Kennedy’s words about the Kennedy family .
 We never want it said that the U.S. did the very same thing that we so resented when the Japanese did it to us in 1941 . The United States never want to say that the United States did the same thing we resented in 1941. The U.N.
 Robert Kennedy was following the president’s orders to forge a consensus for the blockade while the president was away on a campaign trip . Robert Kennedy is following orders from President Barack Obama .
 These difªculties would include a “nearly fatal shock to the Western alliance’s Western alliance . These would be a ‘narrowly fatal shock’ to Western alliance, says Julian Zelizer .
 Robert Kennedy says the administration could argue that air strikes were “just not considered on the basis of the fact that we couldn’t have the Pearl Harbor kind of operation, rather than go into all the details of why it would not” be practical .
 Adlai Stevenson favored a negotiated settlement from the start but did not base his position on moral concerns about a surprise attack . Stevenson favored negotiated settlement but was not concerned about the possibility of a surprise strike .
 Dean Acheson was harshly critical about the relevance of the moral analogies with Pearl Harbor . Aideson said the moral implications of Pearl Harbor were moral and moral implications .
 In the present situation, the Soviet Union had installed ninety miles from our coast—while denying they were doing so—offensive weapons that were capable of lethal injury to the United States . The Soviet Union was installing ninety miles away from the U.S. coast, he says .
 This they were doing a hundred and forty years after the warning given in 56 . This is 100 years after they were warned to do so in 56. This is not the first time they have been warned .
 The ExComm members came to regard the situation as largely unique and felt less need to search for historical reference points . Having focused intensely on the crisis for more than a week, the ExComm .
 Robert Kennedy later wrote a memoir of the crisis, Thirteen Days, published posthumously in 1968 . Robert Kennedy's memoir, Th13 Days, was published in 1968.
 The book was written with the help of Theodore Sorensen as part of Kennedy’s election campaign . Its depiction of the role of the Pearl Harbor analogy in the Cuban missile crisis is often at stark odds with the record .
 America’s traditions and history would not permit such a course of action . Whatever validity the military and political arguments were for an attack in preference to a blockade, the U.S. would not be willing to attack .
 Whatever military reasons could marshal, they were nevertheless, in the last analysis, it was advocating a surprise attack by a very large nation against a very small one . The U.S. should not be surprised by the surprise attack, they say .
 This, I said, could not be undertaken by the U.S. if we were to maintain our moral position at home and around the globe . This, he said, would not be done by the United States if we had to .
 Our struggle against Communism throughout the world was far more than physical survival . It had as its essence our heritage and our ideals, and these we must not destroy . These we must never destroy, says President Obama .
 In reality, Robert Kennedy at the start of the crisis was bellicose and confrontational . Thirteen Days is a romanticized image of the Kennedy family, but in reality, he says .
 The Pearl Harbor moral analogy was used by critics of the Bush administration to suggest that a preventive attack would be as morally wrong for Washington in 2003 as it had been for Tokyo in 1941 .
 Preventive war, anticipatory self-defense, was the doctrine with which the Japanese justiªed Pearl Harbor . The doctrine was used by the U.S. in the wake of the World War II .
 FDR, an earlier American president, said that it was a date that will live in infamy . FDR said it was an American date of infamy. FDR, a previous American president said it will be infamy for Americans .
 Bush doctrine is a doctrine of preventive war, which makes America the self-appointed world’s judge, jury and executioner . Bush doctrine now means the U.S. is the world's judge and jury, and the world is the judge and joker .
 Preemptive wars are fought against an immediate threat and against distant threats . Premeditated war is fought against immediate threats, not distant threats, it is said .
 See The White House, National Security Strategy of the United States, Washington, DC, 2002, 2002 . See the White House .
 Speech text distributed by The White House. Enterprise on Pearl Harbor Day, 7 December 2001, speech .
 In 1962 the ExComm was concerned about the potential immorality of a surprise attack, whereas in 2002–2003 Arthur Schlesinger and Edward Kennedy focused on what they deemed the immority of preventive wars . In 2003 the two men focused on preventive wars, in contrast with the
 The United States strikes against Iraq in March 2003 obviously were not a surprise . The U.S. strikes on Iraq in 2003 were not surprising, says CNN's John Sutter .
 George Ball, and later Robert Kennedy, were opposed to surprise attacks similar to Pearl Harbor . George Ball was opposed to a surprise attack similar to that .
 Concern also existed that a surprise attack would produce global outrage at the United States, with negative consequences for U.S. foreign policy . Concerns also existed about the possibility of a surprise U.N. attack .
 The main fear at home was that the blockade would be perceived as being too weak a response, the ExComm said . On the contrary, their main fear was that it would be seen as being a weak response, they said .
 By 22 October the air strike option had been branded the “Pearl Harbor” option . The option was branded the "Pearl Pearl Harbor’s option .
 The ethical parallel with Pearl Harbor was repeatedly invoked in a coherent and consistent manner . Each time it tended to frame the subsequent discussion . The ethical parallels with the attack on Japan were repeatedly invoked .
 Every time a surprise air strike was compared to the Japanese actions in 1941 the analogy unsettled the ExComm . The ExComm. was unsettled by the comparison .
 The moral parallel between air strikes and Pearl Harbor was never openly questioned within the ExComm meetings, even by those whose arguments the analogy undermined . The evidence strongly suggests that the analogy’s chief exponents, such as Ball, Robert Kennedy, and John Kennedy, believed in its essential
 The perceived lessons of Pearl Harbor helped policymakers comprehend the moral nature of the air strike option and the likelihood of subsequent global infamy . Pearl Harbor was a major event in the U.S.
 Pearl Harbor analogy tied many of these disparate arguments together into a highly salient formulation . The Pearl Harbour analogy was a key part of the Pearl Harbor argument .
 In doing so, the analogy made an ambiguous moral argument against surprise attacks far more powerful . The analogy made a moral argument for surprise attacks more powerful, he says .
 The Pearl Harbor moral analogy was crucial in spurring the ExComm to reject the option of an air strike without warning . The ExComm used the moral analogy in deciding whether to attack without warning in the wake of Pearl Harbor .
 President Kennedy had been wary of issuing a warning for fear Khrushchev might use the opportunity to outmaneuver him, threaten Berlin, hide the missiles, or prepare them for launch .
 After Ball’s remarks, McNamara said the U.S. could probably keep track of Soviet missiles after any warning . The president's position changed dramatically after the remarks .
 Dean Rusk argued on 18 October that initial consultation with Khrushchev would help convince Americans that military force was a last resort . Rusk did, however, argue that an initial consultation would help to convince Americans .
 Many of the same ªgures were critical of the use of historical analogies in the Vietnam War decision-making process .
 The Pearl Harbor analogy had a far-reaching impact on Robert Kennedy . Kennedy's position underwent a remarkable shift from cynicism of his "sink the Maine" comment to idealistic moralism .
 The tapes suggest that despite his initial bellicosity, he came to accept and internalize the moral parallel between air strikes and Pearl Harbor . The tapes show he accepted and internalized the moral parallels .
 Robert Kennedy was not a dove who latched onto the Pearl Harbor analogy merely as a rhetorical device . Kennedy was a dove, not an opportunist, who used the analogy as a political ploy . He said the analogy was not merely a political statement .
 He was a hawk who altered his position largely because of the Pearl Harbor analogy . He was not a hawk but a hawk, he was a hawk who changed his position after the comparison .
 Robert Kennedy’s speech on Friday, 19 October, played a considerable role in . shaping the blockade position at a time when the JCS, Acheson, Bundy and others were mobilizing for an attack on missile sites .
 McNamara argued that Robert Kennedy’s arguments against a Pearl Harbor–style strike had been important in swinging the president toward the quarantine . McNamara later argued that the president had been swayed by Kennedy's arguments .
 Douglas Dillon also switched his position to a large extent because of the Pearl Harbor analogy . Douglas Dillon said the analogy was an analogy for the attack on Japan .
 McCone, for his part, had been worried about the “Pearl Harbor” implications of a surprise attack from the start . McCone had been concerned about the implications of an attack from start .
 The impact of the Pearl Harbor moral analogy suggests that it was a sufªcient condition to eliminate the option of a surprise air strike . President Kennedy and Robert Kennedy, and later on Dillon, Rusk, McNamara, and others, used the analogy to prevent surprise air strikes
 Even in the absence of other factors, ethical parallels with 1941 would have been enough to prevent a surprise attack . The U.S. should have been able to prevent an attack on Britain in 1941 .
 Even if no one had mentioned Pearl Harbor, the ExComm would have worried about the potential wider political repercussions of air strikes . Air strikes would have been more likely to come after Pearl Harbor .
 Memories of Pearl Harbor were by no means the only factor that favored a blockade . Memories of the attack on Japan were also a factor in the blockade .
 President Kennedy raised doubts about the likely success of air strikes and about possible Soviet responses . President Kennedy was skeptical about the success of the air strikes .
 As he told the JCS on 19 October, the blockade offered a degree of control, helping to avoid escalation to nuclear war . As he said in October, he said that the blockade helped avoid escalating to a nuclear war.
 John Kennedy’s caution and his desire to keep options open, as well as his willingness to examine how things looked from the other side, were personal traits largely independent of historical analogies .
 The Pearl Harbor parallel proved to be an important causal factor in the decision to introduce a blockade . Nevertheless, the Pearl Harbor parallels proved to have a significant impact on the blockade .
 The rejection of a surprise attack placed the next option, an attack preceded by a warning, in the spotlight . The next option is to attack before warning, not before surprise attack .
 The strategic difªculties attending this course of action in turn pushed the administration toward the quarantine, the administration says .
 Any warning to the Soviet Union would have required a much larger-scale assault to counter an expected U.S. air strike . A surprise attack could have been a surgical strike against missile sites .
 President Kennedy was well aware that the larger the attack became, the greater the risk of Soviet retaliation . President Kennedy knew that the attack was likely to lead to a Soviet response .
 One of the major U.S. concerns was whether an air strike would destroy all the missile sites . The United States was concerned about whether a strike could destroy all missile sites, officials say .
 Air strikes after a warning would have offered fewer guarantees in this regard than a surprise attack . Air strikes are less likely to be followed by surprise attacks than surprise strikes .
 The ExComm could only guess what Khrushchev would do in the interim between a warning and the sorties . Moreover, the ExComm couldn't predict what would happen .
 Pearl Harbor analogy played an important causal role in eliminating all air strike options and thereby facilitating the blockade . By eliminating the most effective air strike option in strategic terms, a surgical surprise attack was possible . The analogy played a causal role to eliminate all air strikes options .
 Moral analogies are intellectual devices that can bring ethical concerns into policymaking, even when vital national interests are at stake, says John Sutter . Sutter says moral analogies can be used in policymaking even in the national interest .
 The effectiveness of a moral analogy depends on a range of variables, including the clarity or ambiguity of the moral argument, the nature of the foreign policy issue under question, the similarity between the cases, and the salience of the example .
 In the Cuban missile crisis, the moral norm against surprise attacks was not clear-cut . The high stakes involved in the crisis allowed only a limited role for morality . The parallels between air strikes against Cuba and the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor were only supercialcial .
 Pearl Harbor still matters because of the extraordinary salience of Pearl Harbor . Nonetheless, the analogy still mattered, and it appears that it still mattered .
 The key variable shaping the impact of moral analogies is whether they focus on a striking event such as Pearl Harbor, the Holocaust, or the attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon . This is according to the study .
 Decision-makers applied a moral injunction against surprise attacks in the Cuban missile crisis . Few if any of them regarded such a ban as a compelling wider ethical principle .
 Pearl Harbor in 1962 was a major U.S. policy option that involved exploding an aircraft or targeting a tall building . Today, Pearl Harbor is a reminder of the salience of the Pearl Harbor .
 The action might be abandoned simply because it bore some slight physical resemblance to the attacks of 11 September 2001 . The action may have been abandoned because of its resemblance to 9/11 .
 The event remains iconic but is not as salient for policymakers who were born after 1941 . The event is still relevant to policymakers who are born in 1941 .
 Second, prospective air strikes on Cuba bore some slight physical resemblance to the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, thus making the analogy more striking . The analogy is more striking than the comparison made by comparison .
 The invasion of Iraq bore no physical resemblance to events in 1941, and thus the analogy was purely abstract . Iraq was invaded in 1941 and the invasion of the same country was in 1941 .
 In 1962 the moral analogy referred to the Japanese surprise attack, whereas in 2002–2003 critics of the Bush administration critics referred to Japan’s preventive-war motivation . Third, in 1962 the . moral analogy refers to the . Japanese surprise . attack, rather than the . 2002–
 If the Japanese had offered a clear warning or declaration of war before initiating an explicitly preventive conict in 1941, the attack on Pearl Harbor would probably not have achieved the same degree of notoriety .
 Ernest May, Richard Neustadt, and Yuen Foong Khong all viewed the Cuban missile crisis as a positive instance of learning from the past .
 We need to distinguish between the wisdom of a policy promoted by a particular argument and the strength of the argument itself . However, we need to separate the wisdom and strength of an argument .
 The moral parallel between air strikes against Cuba and Japan’s attack on Pearl Harbor was superªcial at most . President Kennedy made a wise choice in deciding on the quarantine, but the moral parallel was super‪cial .
 Japanese struck in 1941 to provoke a wider war and achieve a dominant imperial position in East Asia . In 1941, the Japanese struck to provoke wider war .
 In 1962, the U.S. could have claimed a moral case for destroying the missiles with a proportionate attack . The missiles were placed in the deceitful manner in which they were placed on the island, and perhaps also invoked the Monroe Doctrine .
 Few international observers would have jumped to make the Pearl Harbor moral analogy, given its relative lack of salience outside the United States . Pearl Harbor is a relatively minor issue outside the U.S.
 The notion that countries had to give a formal warning before engaging in hostilities was not a universally accepted moral norm . Furthermore, the notion that . countries had given a . formal warning was not universally accepted . norm .
 A limited air strike would likely have provoked criticism, including from key allies such as Britain . It seems far-fetched to suggest that this censure would have paralleled Japanese infamy .
 Air strikes against Cuba and Pearl Harbor were to a large extent the surface physical resemblance—in both cases, an attack from the sea with aircraft . What created a sense of moral equivalence between the two was the similarity of the attacks on Cuba and the Pearl Harbor .
 The Kennedy brothers had supported aggressive covert actions against Castro’s regime over the previous eighteen months . These actions did not physically look like the handiwork of Tojo .