 Include role play exercises to review lessons from early 1980s creation of Nuclear Risk Reduction Centers . Review lessons from the creation of nuclear risk reduction centers .
 "Because we don't understand the dangers, we make no attempt, no serious attempt, to repair the hostility between the U.S. and Russia," says Putin . "Because of the dangers" "We make no attempts to repair our hostility," Putin says .
 We are allowing ourselves to sleepwalk into another catastrophe. And so we allow ourselves to ... sleepwalk . And so let's allow ourselves into a catastrophe.
 Former U.S. Secretary of Defense William J Perry: "The nuclear threat is again real. We must wake up" Perry: “The nuclear threats are again real”
 President Obama says US has legal right to put missiles in Cuba like they have in Turkey . US nuclear missiles were based in Turkey, where U.S. nuclear missiles are based, he said .
 Gromyko lied to me and Khrushchev tried to put the missiles in Cuba secretly, says President Obama . Khrushchevitch tried to get the missiles into Cuba secretly . He says he was lied to by Gropropomko, Khrushchchev .
 For the First Time, All Three Sides Were in One Room, All three Sides were in one Room . We developed the ”Critical Oral History” method “Be Soft on the People, Hard on the Problem” Separate personal dynamics from substantive issues --Don
 The result of the meetings was the telling of a new story, which transformed the memory in public consciousness of one of the most traumatic events in history .
 Cuba on the Brink captures the drama and dangers of leaders, countries and ideologies on a collision course with nuclear catastrophe . The film is a look at the world's most dangerous leaders, nations and ideologies .
 “…top-level participants in one room spoke openly, revealed very old secrets, discovered shockingly mistaken assumptions, and came to a new shared understanding that provided inspiration for those striving at the end of the Cold War .”
 Assist each side to gain detached perspective on its own position, beliefs and assumptions, and emotions and emotions .
 Decrease the risk of reflexive thinking, emotional reaction and destructive conflict, says Dr. John Sutter . Decrease risk of developing destructive conflict .
 The Third Side is a way of looking at the conflict not just from one side or the other but from the larger perspective of the surrounding community of stakeholders . As if you ”go to the balcony,” see the players on a stage from a higher perspective .
 You can have natural sympathies for one side or the other and still choose to take the Third Side . You can be sympathetic to one side of either side of the debate .
 Taking the Third Side means seeking to understand both sides of the conflict, encouraging a process of cooperative negotiation . Taking the third side is seeking to support truth and reconciliation, a fair and wise solution to the conflict .
 Empathy is a capacity based on perception, not empathy . Empathy isn't the same as empathy, it's based on a perception . Empathetic is based on the perception of a person's feelings .
 George Kennan, Jack Matlock were against expansion of NATO in 1996 . William Perry had worked closely with Russian colleagues and has extensive knowledge of the country, culture and people .
 Kennedy Administration sought to find an accord with Cuba that would remove Soviet missiles in return for a modus vivendi between Washington and Havana . Kennedy administration sought secretly to find agreement to remove missiles from Cuba .
 Kennedy approved a message to be sent to Castro disguised as a Brazilian peace initiative sent by the government of Joao Goulart, rather than a U.S. peace initiative . The message will be disguised as an initiative by Brazil's president Joao .
 The draft cable instructed the Brazilians to carry the message to Castro that his regime and “the well-being of the Cuban people” were in “great jeopardy” if he did not expel the Russians and their weapons .
 If he did, however, “many changes” in the relations between Cuba and the Organization of American States and the US could follow .
 Kennedy's request for an answer by the next day was likely to provoke in Moscow . This move was a deliberate attempt to defuse as much as possible the hostility that Kennedy's . request for a response by the . next day would provoke hostility in Russia .
 Dobrynin and Kennedy had sometimes been involved in shouting matches . Prior meetings had sometimes degenerated into shouting matches between Dobrynins and Kennedy . Kennedy was assassinated in 1992 .
 Dobrynin: Attorney general kept his emotions in check and took the ambassador into his confidence . He says he was trying to cooperate on the resolution of the crisis . On this occasion, he says, the attorney general was in check .
 This strategy succeeded where an effort to compel Khrushchev to respond through an ultimatum might have failed . The strategy succeeded, but it might not have succeeded in persuading him to respond .
 Khrushchev had incentives to remove Soviet missiles and reduced the emotional and political cost to him of the withdrawal . The withdrawal of Soviet missiles from the Soviet Union was a political and emotional success .
 “Concerned as we all were by the cost of a public bargain struck under pressure at the apparent expense of the Turks, we agreed without hesitation that no one not in the room was to be informed of this additional message . “Even this unilateral private assurance might appear to betray
 We denied in every forum that there was any deal, and in the narrowest sense what we said was usually true, as far as it went . We denied it in the 'narrowest sense' that there had been any deal .
 Ambassador Dobrynin felt that Robert Kennedy's book Thirteen Days did not adequately express that the ""deal"" on the Turkish missiles was part of the resolution of the crisis . Dobrynins felt that the deal was not enough to express that it was a deal with the U.S
 CNN's John Sutter says he has a confession to his colleagues on the American side, as well as others who were present . Sutter: "Here I have a confession I have to make to my colleagues ... and to others"
 Kennedy and Khrushchev made use of a back channel and secret agreements . Kennedy used a back-channel and secret channel to get around the world .
 It widened his circle of compassion, which led to quick agreement on Test Ban Treaty . It led to agreement on test ban Treaty, he said .
 At our conference in 1992, Castro spoke for the first time of his mindset when he called for the preemptive nuclear first strike . He said: "We must seek practical agreements based on our shared interests"
 CASTRO ADDRESSES HIS CABLE TO KHRUSHCHEV FOR THE FIRST TIME . "On that night of the 26th, we saw no possible solution," he says . "We saw no . possible solution"
 Under the threat of an invasion, of an attack, with the enormous propaganda using all the mass media, and an international campaign talking about this very serious problem, we really couldn’t see any solution, says the Russian president .
 I dared to write a letter to Nikita Nikita, a letter aimed at encouraging him. And I dare to write it to him. Nikita. I dared . Nikita wrote a letter .
 The aim was to strengthen him morally, because I knew that he had to be suffering greatly, intensely, intensely . I knew he had been suffering greatly and intensely, and I wanted him to be strengthened morally .
 I thought I knew what he was thinking and that he must have been at the time very anxious over the situation . "I thought I . knew what I knew, that he thought it was a very difficult thing to do," she says of the incident .
 "Everybody here was simply resigned to the fate that we would be forced to pay the price," she says . "We would disappear. That we would disappear," she adds .
 Before having our country occupied — totally occupied — we were ready to die in defense of our country. We were prepared to die, he says . We're ready to defend ourselves, he writes .
 I would have agreed, in the event of an invasion that you are talking about, with the use of tactical nuclear weapons. I would've agreed, if the invasion was to take place, he said .
 You've asked me to speak frankly and, in all frankness, I must say that I would have had that opinion. You’ve asked me, I would say that . I would rather have said that to the public, he would have said it .
 Fidel Castro: "I have learned a great deal at this meeting. I must say with absolute sincerity" Fidel Castro said at end of Havana meeting: “I must say ... with absolutely sincerity”
 Like a new Delphic Oracle, it's a repository of wisdom, to commemorate not Apollo slaying a dragon but real human beings defusing conflict for the sake of the future . "The future is in the future, and there is no need to be a war," says the author
 Initially the idea of a blockade was criticized as inadequate and foolish . The blockade has been described as 'inadequate and foolish' by some .
 Reputation for strength/weakness has consequences for foreign policy . He stood against action that could lead to unprecedented catastrophe for humanity (“Positive No” to defend core values) Reputed for strength or weakness has consequences .
 “We are back to 1983, and I don’t enjoy being thirty-four years younger in this way.” “I'm back in 1983,” says U.S. commander of NATO exercise “Able Archer” (NATO exercise
 "Let us not try to rebuild Russia in our image," says Putin . "We have different histories, political cultures," he says . Putin: Let us not rebuild Russia's image in our own image .
 In the first instance, the deterioration of relations is a result of actions taken by the U.S. In the second instance, it is the result of the United States' actions, he says .
 The United States followed Putin’s lead in modernizing nuclear arsenal . Russia sees as threat to deterrence . Regime change and color revolutions were stimulated by Russian reactions . Both sides see themselves as reacting to each other's provocations .
 There was a broad perception that a U.S.-led liberal world order would continue to set the rules, standards, and norms for international interactions . United States power was unrivaled. United States control of global institutions was strong. There was also a broad belief that a . U
 United States and Russia each now blame the other side for the deterioration in relations . U.S. and Russia now blame each other for the breakdown of relations . Russia and the United States each blame the each other's actions .
 It is easy to choose whatever time frame you want to determine kto vinovat . It's easy to decide when to make sure you have the time frame .
 You interfered in the former Soviet states on you border. You interfere in the newly independent our border. states on your border. States on your . border . You interfered with the newly . independent our borders. states .
 You launched military invasions of sovereign . sovereign states. sovereign states . You launched . military . invasions . of sovereign countries .
 Defensive actions by one state to increase its security can make other side more insecure, trigger a reaction, creating a reaction . This creates a selffulfilling prophecy, an action-reaction dynamic and arms race . Your actions are provoking a new arms race… Your acts are provoking
 When there is uncertainty about the other side’s motives and, even if they are ambiguous, we tend to emphasize danger and exaggerate the hostility of the other . We tend to exaggerate our hostility when we are uncertain about the motives of other sides, says Dr. Andrew Hammond
 Aegis Ashore launch pad is “practically identical” to Aegis Warship system capable of launching Tomahawk cruise missiles . The Aegis system is ‘practically . identical’ to the launch pad used by the U.S. Navy .
 If you cling to the idea that one’s negotiation counterpart is extreme and hostile, you can trigger exactly that behavior . You can trigger the behavior of your negotiation counterpart, says John Sutter .
 Those who saw Russia as a power like the Soviet Union feel vindicated by Russia’s belligerence today . Those who thought Russia was a power that could only be deterred by military force .
 Russia was weak and disoriented after the Soviet collapse after the collapse . NATO and EU think it was the right course of action to absorb Moscow’s former clients into NATO and the EU .
 For those who think independent new Russia was not a threat in 1991, they see it as a classic action-reaction spiral . They say it was a failure to negotiate skillfully, to build a collaborative relationship and realize shared interests .
 You are told that government officials have confirmed that everyone should seek immediate shelter . Government officials have told you to seek shelter in the area .
 January 13, 2018 Nuclear Wake-Up Call for Hawaii . The alert was false but the nuclear threat was real and more terrifying than anything that comes across your newsfeed .
 A Near-Death Experience, They Say Changes You Forever, changes you forever . The fear led us to reach out for help after a near-death experience .
 U.S. and Russia have over 90% of the world’s nuclear weapons . They are encouraging their people to act now to compel their political leaders to take concrete steps to reduce nuclear risk .
 NuclearWakeUpCall.Earth Adopt The Nuclear Playbook Ten Steps We Must Take Immediately to Avert a Nuclear Catastrophe . Ten steps we must take immediately to avert a nuclear catastrophe: Adopt the nuclear Playbook .
 If the U.S. and Russia take their nuclear weapons off launch on warning, this will immediately reduce the time crunch . The time crunch is the impetus toward use of nuclear weapons in moments of crisis . The United States and Russia should take their nukes off launch, CNN.com
 End the sole, unchecked power of any U.S. president to launch a nuclear attack . End the unchecked power to launch an attack on the United States .
 "No one person – in any country – should have the power to launch nuclear weapons. No one should be allowed to launch a nuclear weapon," says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 Support legislation to prohibit a U.S. President from launching a first-use nuclear strike without a declaration of war by Congress that expressly authorizes such strike . Support legislation that would prohibit a . United States President from . launching a . first use nuclear strike .
 A large-scale nuclear exchange would have drastic effects on climate . It would put the lives of billions of people in jeopardy due to crop failure, a “nuclear famine”
 We must at all times keep open channels of communication in US-Russian relations on nuclear risk reduction, as we did during the old Cold War . We need to keep a safe space insulated from our political differences, like we did in the Cold War.
 Restart a dialogue aimed at reducing the nuclear danger, on strengthening strategic stability . Rules of the road for cyberweapons and other emerging technologies should be discussed .
 We had one round of strategic stability talks with the Russians last September . Russia and the U.S. have been involved in a number of rounds of talks with Russia .
 Agree on New START and work out differences on Intermediate Nuclear Forces Treaty . Agree to New START, work out our differences on IFF Treaty . Worked out a deal with Russia and the West .
 The Russians are still angry over the United States pullout from the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty . The U.S. pulled out of the treaty last year .
 Reagan and Gorbachev reached agreement in the 1980s when the divisions were at least as deep . Reagan and Reagan reached agreement at the end of the Reagan-Gorbachev era . The two sides have been at odds for decades .
 There are ways for both sides to protect their interests and reach a new agreement, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Reopen military-to-military channels of communication with nuclear powers . Reopen diplomatic channels of communications with nuclear nations . Re-open military to military channels of talking with nuclear countries .
 "We have managed to talk with the Russians and avoid major incidents in Syria," says Assad . "Even though we are on opposite sides, we have avoided major incidents," he says .
 There is no reason both countries can’t do the same for strategic, global conflict . The U.S. and Russia should be able to work together to prevent future conflict .
 Efforts should include cooperation to reduce the danger of cyber interference in strategic systems, command and control . Efforts must also include reducing the danger from cyber interference, officials say .
 A no-first-use pledge would demonstrate that the U.S. views its weapons as deterrents to nuclear warfare, not as tools of aggression . The pledge would show that the United States views its nuclear weapons as a deterrent, not a tool of aggression.
 Critics argue that this policy will reduce the security of the U.S. allies and that the first use of nuclear weapons is a powerful deterrent against a range of significant nonnuclear threats .
 Others argue that the U.S. has sufficient conventional forces to deter or respond to such attacks . But others argue that such a policy creates more risks than its alleged benefits .
 Cooperate with Russia and other nuclear powers on nuclear nonproproproliferation . Co-operation with Russia is a key to non-nuclear non-prosproprosion .
 We need a multilateral approach to negotiations with emerging nuclear powers which is more likely to succeed – with Iran, North Korea and elsewhere . We need to focus on Iran and North Korea, says David Cameron .
 Former U.S. Secretary of Defense William Perry and others argue that the United States should do away with its land-based intercontinental ballistic missiles .
 They are the weapon system most likely to be fired in response to a false alarm and cause an apocalyptic, accidental nuclear war . The weapon system is the most likely weapon system to be used in a nuclear attack .
 They are no longer needed to deter a nuclear strike from Russia, which can be achieved by the two other elements of the nuclear triad . Submarines and bombers can also be used to deter Russia's nuclear strike, the authors say .
 "We are keeping ICBMs only because of vested interests," says Obama . "We have to keep them in the U.S. because of the vested interests of defense companies, states that get jobs and revenue"
 This can be a first focus in challenging the $1.7 trillion U.S. spending plan to enhance our nuclear arsenal . This is the first focus of challenging the U.K. government's spending plan .
 We should focus on eliminating some types of nuclear weapons, refurbishing the remaining weapons where possible, and making any replacements without enhancing capabilities . Instead, we should focus instead of eliminating some of the nuclear weapons and refurbishing them .
 We need to compel our politicians to adopt The Nuclear Playbook because our lives are at stake . Bernard Lowns and Bernard Howns are IPPNW Nobel-Prize Winners 1985 .
 Build a bipartisan, grassroots coalition to compel our elected political leaders in the U.S. to make major reductions in our nuclear arsenal without reducing our security . NUCLEAR FREE PLAYBOOK Towards a world without nuclear weapons .
 The United States and Russia now have over 90% of the world’s nuclear weapons . 13,000 nuclear warheads and about 8,000 active weapons . The U.S. and Russia have over 9,000 warheads and over 8,00 active weapons.
 Both countries share responsibility to move toward low numbers of nuclear weapons, take them progressively off launch-ready alert, renounce their first use, and renounce first use .
 Nuclear Security expert Bruce Blair argues that the U.S. can reduce its nuclear stockpile by 75% . He says the United States can still maintain a deterrent through 5 new strategic submarines and 40 heavy strategic nuclear bombers .
 A Global Reawakening to the Existential and Escalating Nuclear Threat – through education, media, outreach at all levels – is through education and media . A global reawakening of the nuclear threat will take place in the United States .
 A mass global movement that brings together people of all ages, from all backgrounds and all walks of life to reduce the threat of nuclear war . The movement aims to work to create a more peaceful world and eliminate nuclear weapons .
 A Mobilized Community Acting Systematically Motivated by a New Story . Uses the power of peer pressure and the force of public opinion . The Third SIDE in CITIZEN DIPLOMOMACY, SOCIAL MOVEMENTs and CAMPAIGNS .
 Third Side Coalition brings doctors together to form a coalition of doctors . Dr. Dr. David Perry is a teacher, Bridge Builder, Healer and Healer .
 Teacher, Bridge Builder What Soviet Children Are Saying About Nuclear Weapons IPPNW Project broadcast nationally in both countries . 1983 Third Side Role: Filmmakers as Teachers .