 The problem -which has plagued U.S. foreign policy time and again -is that these lessons are myths, based on sheer lies about how the crisis began and how it ended .
 This article was published 12/10/2012 . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport .
 The Cuban missile crisis broke out 50 years ago this month . Its lessons on weakness, strength and compromise have been recited ever since .
 U.S. president John F Kennedy got Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev to back down and remove his nuclear missiles from Cuba entirely through the threat of force . This is the notion that United States president Kennedy got .
 Khrushchev would take his missiles out of Cuba; Kennedy would take similar missile out of Turkey . Kennedy would also take similar missiles from Turkey, says CNN's John Sutter .
 This is the legend that Kennedy cowered before Khrushchev at a summit in Vienna in the spring of 1961 . The crafty Communist aggressively deployed missiles in Cuba thinking the young president was too weak to respond . This is a myth .
 Khrushchev shipped the missiles out of weakness and insecurity, says author . Much of the evidence was declassified a decade ago from the Kremlin archives, and recounted in a superb new book .
 Khrushchev sent missiles to Cuba a year later as a desperate effort to compensate for what he now saw as U.S. superiority . The abject failure of that ploy, the determined resistance of JFK, riled the Soviet Union, so riled him .
 At the end of the Second World War, Soviet troops occupied eastern Germany . The U.S., British and French armies occupied sectors of the west .
 With the onset of the Cold War, the borders between the two countries hardened into two separate countries . The borders of the Soviet Union and the Czech Republic remain at the border .
 In 1948, Soviet premier Joseph Stalin mounted a blockade to isolate and ultimately take over West Berlin . The U.S. Air Force kept moving in supplies to the Soviet Union .
 In 1959, Khrushchev mounted an effort to take over all of Berlin, but U.S. president Dwight Eisenhower resisted . Eisenhower resisted, and the two reached a provisional truce at Camp David . The two nations reached a temporary truce in 1959 .
 In 1961, Khrushchev announced that if the West didn't sign a treaty turning over all Berlin to East Germany, there would be war . In 1961 the West and East Germany agreed to a treaty that turned Berlin over to East Berlin . The treaty was signed in 1961 .
 The Berlin crisis of August 1961 was nearly as tense as the Cuban crisis of October 1962 . Kennedy resisted, too, and in fact the Berlin crisis was as tense . The Cuban crisis in 1962 was the most tense in history .
 At one point, U.S. and Soviet tanks faced each other, within firing range, across a checkpoint for 25 hours . At one time, United States and Soviet tankers were in firing range . The two countries fought in the Cold War for nearly two decades .
 America was way ahead of the Soviet Union, not the other way around . There was a missile gap, but there was a gap between the two .
 Kennedy wanted to reveal this fact, both to the American public and to the world . Kennedy wanted this fact to be revealed to the public and the world, he said .
 In fact, though, he had nothing; the missile program was in total disarray . "I had nothing," he said. "In fact, I had nothing" The missile program is in disarray.
 The balance of forces with rivals, to the east and west, was palpably shifting against him . He said: "The balance of force with rivals ... was shifting against me"
 Khrushchev believed the U.S. might launch a nuclear first strike against the Soviet Union . He believed the United States would launch a first strike . The U.K. might have launched a nuclear strike against Russia in the 1960s .
 During the Berlin crisis, Kennedy ordered the Pentagon to conduct a study of whether such a strike was possible . Kennedy had ordered the study of possible strikes in Berlin .
 The top secret study -a detailed, 36-page attack plan -concluded it was very feasible . The study was based on a top secret, 36,000-page plan .
 The Joint Chiefs wrote follow-up assessments, Kennedy himself read them and held at least one meeting in the Oval Office to discuss the issue . It's unknown how much Khrushchev knew about this plan .
 Soviet premier had not given up on grabbing West Berlin, but knew he had no leverage . The Soviet premier knew he was going to have no leverage, but he knew it was too late .
 If the U.S. did launch a nuclear strike, he wasn't sure any of his missiles or bombers would be capable of retaliating . If the United States does launch a nuke strike, it wouldn't be able to retaliate, he said .
 Khrushchev did have a fair number of medium-range missiles, so he shipped them to Cuba, to put them within firing range of the United States . The U.S. did not want the missiles to be within range of Cuba .
 If he could install them without notice, then announce another gambit on Berlin, those missiles would give him something to bargain with . He could install the missiles without notice .
 Khrushchev knew he would have to pull them out of the war zone . Kennedy announced that they had, and Khrushchems knew he'd have to .
 Secret tapes reveal that on Oct. 3, Kennedy wondered aloud why Khrushchev had put the missiles in Cuba . Kennedy wonders aloud on Oct., just the third day of the crisis, why the missiles were put there .
 He figured they must have been part of a bargaining gambit and that, to get them out, he might have to give Khrushchev ""some out,"" a way to save face . "Some out" was a way of saving face, he said .
 Khrushchev proposed just such a trade, Kennedy pounced on it eagerly . On the final day of Oct. Oct. 1962, Kennedy was on the verge of a deal .
 The only adviser agreeing with JFK was George Ball, who would later be the Johnson administration's sole dissident on escalation in Vietnam . Ball would be the only dissident to JFK on escalation .
 Kennedy instructed his brother, attorney general Robert Kennedy, to go tell the Soviet ambassador that he would take the deal -but only if it was kept secret . Kennedy ignored the overwhelming majority of his aides and instructed Robert Kennedy to tell him to go .
 A few of JFK's advisers decided to reveal the truth pre-emptively - though even then, they didn't say they opposed the trade . And it was, for the next 25 years, until the tapes were about to come out .
 The resolution of the Cuban crisis may hold some lessons for crises today . Cuban crisis resolution may hold lessons for today .
 There was no telephone contact between Kennedy and Khrushchev in October 1962 . There were no telephone calls between the two men in 1962 .
 Kennedy maintained a back channel through the Soviet embassy through the embassy . Even as ships and submarines confronted one another, troops were mobilized, and a U-2 spy plane was shot down .
 At some point, one side might clearly have the upper hand, in which case it should seek ways to give the other side a way out . Second, at least, the government should try to give it a chance to win back control of the debate .
 The United States was about to station new Polaris submarines in the Mediterranean . Each sub carried 16 nuclear missiles and was less vulnerable to attack . The U.S. Navy was planning to station the new submarines .
 The U.S. gave up nothing in military capability, CNN's John Sutter says . "The United States, in other words, gave up everything," he says .
 Get the day's weather forecast and more from CNN.com's weather updates . Send your photos and videos of the day-to-day events in New York City .
 Third, there is no contradiction between striking a deal and maintaining vigilance . Compromise is not the same as appeasement. Third, it is not a contradiction .
 Fourth, there should be no illusions that the resolution of one crisis will spawn an era of peace . The resolution of the crisis will not bring an end to the crisis, he says .
 Khrushchev's face didn't save his face enough in the end . The Turkish trade saved his face, but it was not enough to save him in the fall .
 Kremlin hard-liners funded a massive ICBM build-up to match what the U.S. had already started to do . Two years later, he was ousted by Kremlin hardliners, who then proceeded to fund the build up of ICBM .
 Cold War was matched, and fuelled, by a nuclear arms race for another 30 years . The Cold War and Cold War were matched by an arms race that lasted another 30 .
 Never again was there an armed confrontation over Berlin or Cuba . Still, there was never again was a confrontation .
 The current standoff with Iran over the state of its nuclear program is hardly as intense as the Cuban crisis, but it bears some of the same patterns . Iran's nuclear standoff with the U.S. has been the subject of much of the world's most intense tension .
 Iran's leaders are offering compromises to ease the crisis . Under tremendous pressure, they are under no financial pressure . Iran's government is under pressure to make a deal with the West .
 Iran's terms to date are unacceptable - they'd require the West to call off the sanctions before Iran stopped enriching uranium - but that doesn't mean the door to talks should be closed .
 "We don't know the Iranians' precise motives or how they assess the balance of forces," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "It's not clear what the Iranians are trying to do or why they're trying to take control of the situation"
 They might simply be trying to keep us dangling, but they might genuinely be looking for ""some out,"" as Kennedy put it . Kennedy: "Some out" might be necessary .
 Unless we want war, it's worth extending and paying close attention to any feelers . The U.S. should extend and pay close attention .
 The Cuban missile crisis -the reality, not the myth -offers some pointers on how to deal with that crisis .
 The Winnipeg Free Press invites you to share your opinion on this story in a letter to the editor . David Petraeus and the Plot to Change the American Way of War . The Free Press is certified by
 Letters must include the writer’s full name, address, and a daytime phone number . Letters must be sent to the editor of each other's weekly Washington Post .