 JFK focused on the Cold War and Cuba presented the first big test . The separation between East and West Berlin had grown increasingly hostile since the Berlin Airlift in 1948 . Nikita Khrushchev, leader of the Soviet Union and John F Kennedy .
 Khrushchev responded by building a wall to separate Communist East Germany and nonCommunist West Germany . The wall was built in August 1961 to separate the Communist East and West German populations .
 U.S. and Soviet Union were competing for allies in the developing world . Alliance for Progress was formed in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Kennedy helped jump-start America’s space program . One of Kennedy's lasting impacts was jump-starting the space program. The Space Program was launched in 1961 .
 The United States was concerned about Cuba since 1959, when Fidel Castro overthrew the U.S.-backed dictator . Fidel Castro was overthrown in 1959, but U.N. had little influence in Cuba .
 JFK was informed that the CIA was planning an overthrow of Cuba . CIA was training a group of Cubans to invade and overthrow Castro .
 On April 17, 1961, the attempted invasion/overthrow was a catastrophe . The Bay of Pigs invasion was a major failure .
 Kennedy faced one of the most difficult decisions a President has had to make . Kennedy Decides to make a decision about the assassination of President Kennedy .
 To everyone's relief, Khrushchev called back ships approaching Cuba . To everyone’s relief, the ships were sent back .
 JFK agreed and the world was relieved that nuclear war had been averted . JFK agreed with JFK and JFK agreed that it was a mistake .
 On November 22, 1963, John and his wife, Jackie rode in an open limousine through Dallas . John and Jackie Kennedy were assassinated in Dallas, Texas .
 News of JFK’s death spread rapidly, and shocked the nation . Lee Harvey Oswald was the leader of the Army's most organized anti-war efforts . Oswald had been involved in the assassination of President Kennedy .
 Two days later, TV cameras showed Oswald being transferred between jails . Oswald shot Oswald in the head after being shot in Dallas, Texas .
 Warren Commission was named after Supreme Court Chief Justice Earl Warren . Warren Commission will investigate the entire incident .
 Lyndon B Johnson assumed the role of President on November 22, 1963 . Lyndon Baines Johnson assumed his post as President in 1963 .
 Consumer and Environmental Protection Water Quality and Clean Air Act supported standards for the quality of air and water . The act is part of the U.S. Consumer and . Environmental . Protection Water . Quality and . Clean Air . Act .
 The Supreme Court Chief Justice at the time was Earl Warren . Earl Warren was the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court . The Warren Court was the first Supreme Court to hold such a high court .