 We trace this failure to the key features of the CIA’s identity and culture . We trace the failure to be successful in the CIA's success .
 The identity and cultural features of the organization create the antecedent conditions that enable these theories to operate . We provide a unified understanding of surprises that does not conflict with prevailing theories, but is logically prior to them .
 No episode in the history of international relations has received such scrutiny from so many historians, political scientists and organizational theorists as this crisis . The crisis is the subject of much of the world's history of diplomacy and international relations .
 Allison’s landmark book, ‘Essence of Decision’, considers nothing else else . Allison's landmark book is “Essence Of Decision”, “The Essence of Decision,” says Allison .
 The crisis began on October 16, 1962 at 8:45 A.M. President Kennedy was informed that hard photographic evidence had been obtained showing Soviet nuclear missiles installed in Cuba .
 Allison and Zelikow observe that even the central questions have eluded satisfactory answers . Despite such interest by scholars, scholars have not been able to find a satisfactory answer .
 The Soviet operation took the U.S. by surprise and developed into a crisis in the first place . Perhaps the most important of these questions is why the United States was surprised by the operation .
 The CIA assured the President that the Soviet would never install nuclear missiles outside its territory . The operation was carried out on the Soviet and Cuban sides, and despite mounting factual evidence, the CIA had assured the president that the Soviets would not install the missiles .
 Scholars studying strategic surprises have developed three main theories . Scholars say strategic surprises are key to uncovering strategic surprises . Scholars have developed theories of how to achieve strategic surprises in advance .
 Signal-to-noise theory advances that surprises result from the inability to pick so-called ‘weak signals’ that foretell surprises . The theory claims that surprises happen because people are unable to pick 'weak signals'
 Theories on bureaucratic politics (Allison & Zelikow, 1999; Allison, 1971, 1971; Zegart, 2005) explain surprises through the lenses of organizational conflicts .
 Although these theories rarely contradict one another, they are unable to explain the phenomenon of strategic surprise as a whole .
 The vast majority assumes that the identities and cultures of intelligence organizations and analysts are unproblematic . A reason for this is that these theories ignore cultural factors, such as cultural factors . The majority of theories are that the specific identities and culture of intelligence officers and analysts in intelligence organizations are un
 Social scientists have recognized that regularities in organizational behavior must be understood in terms of the organization's cultural setting . Max Weber’s seminal work, however, was published in the 1930s . Social scientists recognize that regularity of organizational behavior is important to understand .
 Intelligence analysis is permeated by social facts . It is firmly in the grip of the identity and culture of the analyzing organization . Intelligence analysis can be difficult to understand, but it can be hard to understand .
 By examining these endogenous features of the CIA, one can better understand how strategic surprises occur . We suggest that by examining these . features, one . better understands how strategic surprise occurs .
 We contribute to the research on surprises by providing a unified understanding of surprises that does not conflict with prevailing theories, but is logically prior to them . Identity and cultural features we reveal create create the antecedent conditions at the CIA that enable these theories to operate .
 We identify four key features of the CIA’s identity and culture and show how they distort the intelligence cycle . Then, we show how these features distort the very process of what the CIA does and thus lead to surprises .
 By linking these features to the distortion of the intelligence cycle, we show how strategic surprises are socially constructed . We show that strategic surprises can be socially constructed, and that they are social constructed .
 We then discuss the findings and how they relate to prevailing explanations of surprise . We also discuss how the findings relate to our findings .
 It is therefore important to proceed with a carefully chosen definition . It is important to continue with the definition of the term 'sexist'
 We define strategic surprise as the sudden realization that one has been operating on the basis of an erroneous assessment which results in a failure to anticipate an event that has a significant impact on vital interests . We define it as a sudden realization .
 A strategic surprises, in that sense, corresponds to Weick’s ‘cosmology episodes’, when people ‘suddenly and deeply feel that the universe is no longer a rational, orderly system’ but we place it at the organizational level .
 Our definition marks two important shifts in the theoretical focus. Importantly, our definition of the concept of the theory of evolution is changing dramatically .
 The first is a shift away from the event itself toward the organization experiencing the surprise . The first shift is away from an event itself to the organization itself .
 This helps distinguish the event from its interpretation as a crisis, an opportunity, or catastrophe , and from its effects . This helps . distinguish the events from its . interpretation as an opportunity or catastrophe .
 Even if a surprise has positive consequences, the fact that it is a surprise is inherently problematic from an organizational point of view . The fact that a surprise can be a problem for an organization is problematic, the author says .
 Ascribing the origin of strategic surprises to erroneous assessments is interesting because it allows the adoption of a clear conceptual definition of what dysfunction should mean . Ascribing a strategic surprise to erroneous assessment is interesting .
 A surprise stands in contrast to effective forecasts, and to measures designed to prevent, mitigate, or even exploit future events . A surprise is a surprise, and a surprise is not a good predictor of the future .
 Following Barnett and Finnemore , our vantage point for judging dysfunction is the publicly proclaimed mission of the organization . We are looking at the culture of dysfunction in the workplace .
 In the case of the CIA, dysfunction is not an inability to predict everything accurately, but a inability to provide effective forecasts . The CIA is dysfunctional, but it's not a failure to predict things accurately, it's a failure of forecasts .
 A strategic surprise is conceptually different from several similar concepts, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 A sudden doctors’ strike triggered organizational learning and change in a 5 #14179 hospital . The strike did not affect the hospital’s vital interests, according to the doctor .
 The third concept is ‘rare event’ a term employed to describe events that occur outside the everyday experience of an organization . The term is used to describe 'rare events' which occur outside of the organization's experience .
 The term rare is problematic in our context as it relates to the frequency of the event rather than its inherent uniqueness . However, the term rare should be used to describe rare events such as rare events .
 Some events, such as the Olympic Games, are rare but predictable, but predictable . They can be repeated or recurring, and they can be repeat or recurring . Some events are more predictable than others .
 An example of weak signal, in the case of Cuba, was the unprecedented influx of Soviet bloc personnel and equipment in Cuba, indicating that something new was taking place .
 Winter drew inspiration from biological organisms to explore how organizations can improve the sensing and detection of weak signals . Winter hopes to improve organizations' ability to detect and detect weak signals in the future .
 Wohlstetter put forth the notion that the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor succeeded because of a lack of signals . In her study of the attack, she said the attack succeeded because there were no signals from the Japanese .
 Bar Joseph and Sheaffer follow Wohlstetter and focus on the role of hypotheses in sorting signals from noise .
 The CIA hung to its hypothesis that the Soviets would not install nuclear missiles in Cuba . In the example above, while the unprecedented influx of Soviet bloc personnel and equipment was noted by the CIA, it was dismissed .
 Viewed as an exogenous phenomenon, it is not analyzed in detail and explained away . Viewed in detail, it was explained away and is explained away by the author .
 Cybernetic explanations, hence, fail to recognize that in the analysis of weak signals, hypotheses are the starting point . Cybernetic Explanation fails to recognize the importance of hypothesis .
 This poses the question of how hypotheses are generated, adopted or rejected by analysts, and directs the investigation toward the individual dimension . This poses . The question is how hypotheses generate, adopt or reject by analysts .
 Jervis, Heuer, Kahneman, Slovic, and Tversky have stressed the role of heuristic shortcuts in information processing .
 Individuals meet the information challenge by applying knowledge structures 7 #14179 to their information worlds . According to Walsh, individuals meet the . information challenge using knowledge structures . Walsh: "Individuals meet the. information challenge"
 Such structures facilitate information processing and decision making, but they can also blind individuals to important changes in their environment . Such structures can be used to help people understand changes in the environment, experts say .
 Jervis explored how human needs and emotional states alter information processing through motivational biases . He also explored how motivational biases affect how information processing is processed .
 Janis’s work on group think, which stressed the emotional dynamics and pressures for cooperation in small groups, also largely dealt with mental processes . Janis's work on mental processes was largely based on his work on the psychology of small groups .
 Lampel and Shapira study the surprise switch by a partner from a cooperative to predatory behavior in the context of buyer-supplier relationships . They attribute this surprise to judgmental error when interpreting information gathered from their environment .
 First, they concentrate on the ‘hot’ biases and do not effectively consider long-term processes of cumulative causation in a structured manner .
 Second, their focus is on the moment of information processing, i.e. the analysis step . Second, they focus on the first step of the information processing step .
 Much of the psychologically oriented literature is built around individual analysis and decisions . Third, much of the psychological literature is based on individual analysis .
 As Levine and Resnick observed, cognition is almost always collaborative . It's almost always always collaborative, they say .
 Social processes in the acquisition, retention, and retrieval of information and collective dynamics must be captured at the organizational level . Therefore, the key challenge is to account for the role of social processes in acquiring, retention and retrieving information .
 Allison’s work is essentially ‘after the fact’ and does not explicitly advance a theory of strategic surprise . But his work on the Cuban missile crisis has had a substantial impact on thinking about the topic .
 Allison and Zelikow’s revised Model Two, Organizational Behavior, is especially pertinent because it evolved to account for the role of organizational culture and explored how culture can affect intelligence analysis .
 Allison Allison’s Model Three, Bureaucratic Politics, has also contributed to the topic . She says agencies often fail to cooperate, share or transmit information .
 Allison and Zelikow’s theme of politicization of intelligence is a theme . Allison: Politicians are politicizing intelligence in the U.S.
 Examples of organizational issues playing a part in the generation of surprises abound in the literature . But the reason for such behaviors is rarely investigated .
 Bureaucratic politics models fail to effectively explain strategic surprises . Attempts to reform intelligence structures have repeatedly been found wanting . In addition, and on a practical level, bureaucratic politics models .
 Seliktar compellingly showed how Kuhn’s idea of paradigm improved our understanding of the U.S. foreign policy establishment’�s failure to comprehend events in Iran or the Soviet Union .
 She did not link paradigm failures to a more generalized theory of strategic surprise . However, she did not attempt to link paradigencies to more generalized theories of surprise .
 Kuhn’s approach focused on the discovery of and theorizing about natural facts . In addition, Kuhn also focused on theorizing and discovering natural facts about facts .
 Soviet decision to secretly install nuclear missiles in Cuba was unprecedented and dramatic, says author . "It does not allow us to understand how an organization fails to grasp a paradigm shift such as the Soviets," he says .
 The expression failure of imagination is also used to explain surprises away as unique, aberrant events that nobody could have imagined .
 Betts proposed that strategic surprises are, in fact, inevitable . Some events are labeled as unpredictable ‘wild cards’ and Betts said they are inevitable . Betts: ‘Strategic surprises’ are inevitable.
 He attributed this inevitability to “paradoxes of perception,” which consist of the irresolvable trade-offs and dilemmas inherent in attempts to improve strategic warning .
 Identity and Culture are cultural factors in strategic surprises in the U.S. strategy .
 Allison and Zelikow accounted for the role of organizational culture and explored how it can affect intelligence analysis . But they did not explore this element, thereby leaving the question open . Allison and Zilikow (Allison & Zelikowski, 1999; Allison, 1969) accounted for
 As intelligence analysis is permeated by social facts, social facts are embedded in the identity and culture of the analyzing organization, which affect their cognition . Intelligence analysis is embedded in a culture of analyzing organizations, which affects cognition .
 The case arguably addresses one of the most dramatic and important instances of strategic surprise in the U.S. history . The case could have had catastrophic consequences .
 No episode in the history of international relations has received such microscopic scrutiny from so many historian, political scientists and organizational theorists as this crisis . The crisis has been the subject of much of the world's most intense scrutiny .
 Despite considerable resources, the agency failed spectacularly to live up to its mission . Cuba is the only nation in the world to be able to do so, and despite considerable resources .
 By studying the CIA, we are able to rule out explanations related to the fortuitous appearance of surprises, or a lack of sensitivity or attention to a hostile environment . We can rule out any explanation related to fortuitous appearances of surprises .
 The CIA’s handling of the Soviet attempt to install nuclear missiles in Cuba serves as an extreme case from which much can be learned in organization studies . The CIA handled the Soviet effort to install a nuclear missile in Cuba .
 In this research, we are concerned with the analytical arm of the agency, not its operational arm . We are concerned about the analysis of data, not the operational arm, we say .
 Their information worlds are extremely complex, ambiguous, and munificent . They process huge amounts of information and try to make sense of it and produce recommendations for policy .
 Identity and culture play a key role in explaining how strategic surprises occur . We seek to understand the role played by identity and culture in explaining strategic surprises .
 In developing this understanding, we first study the case to identify persistent features of the CIA’s identity and culture that distorted the work of the organization . We first study to identify fundamental, persistent features that distort the work .
 We show how these features are the key variables in an understanding of strategic surprise . We also show how they are key to understanding the nature of surprise .
 CIA did not speculate about what might have happened had the CIA made a correct assessment and issued a high-quality warning to its “customers” We specifically exclude the ‘warning-warnee’ question .
 In sum, we do not ask how the CIA could have stopped the Soviets from installing missiles in Cuba, but how the Agency could have been surprised by the secret operation in the first place .
 Information from and about the CIA is abundant and easily accessible . Data Sources and Collection are easy to access to .
 The critical document we refer to is Special National Intelligence Estimate Number 85-3-62 “The Military Build-up in Cuba” dated 19 September, 1962 . The document is a critical document that is dated from September 1962 .
 None of the documents used in this study was “leaked,” i.e., all went through the CIA’s declassification process and were, in many cases, partly redacted . None of these documents were "leaked"
 The possibility that the CIA could spin analyses of a case by selectively declassifying certain NIEs while withholding others was considered . The possibility was considered by the CIA .
 Documents are looked at as individual sources in this paper . The possible significance of redactions, declassifications, and the existence of estimates is also considered .
 We draw on unclassified items published by the CIA for other branches of government, such as the CIA Office of Public Affairs’ A Consumer's Guide to Intelligence .
 The CIA’s internal journal, Studies in Intelligence, is published by the CIA . The most important of these is the CIA's internal journal .
 A vast number of Studies articles have been declassified, and we draw upon more than fifty of these spanning from 1955 to 2007 . More than 50 of these have been published since 1955 .
 Some of these articles deal directly with questions of intelligence collection and analysis . Others are employed to open a window into the CIA’s internal culture .
 Fourth type of source consists of scholarly work on the Cuban missile crisis . Allison and Zelikow are considered a reference on the subject . Fursenko and Naftali provide an account of the crisis from the Soviet point of view .
 A homogeneous body of analysts, scientism, a preference for secrets, and a drive for consensus, are the results of the study . The study was published by the U.S. Department of Justice in 1998 .
 The CIA struggles to understand the perspectives and motivations of those it studies, here the Soviet and the Cubans . A striking observation in the case is the fact that the CIA struggles with the perspective and motivation of its analysts .
 The body of analysts is essentially made up of Caucasian, Protestant, graduates of liberal arts colleges . Analysts are largely white, Protestant and liberal arts college graduates .
 Former director Robert Gates speaks of a CIA as unwilling to employ ‘people that are a little different, people who are eccentric” and “people who don’t look good in a suit and tie” The role of homogeneity and insularity – even provincialism
 CIA analysts failed to appreciate how the Soviets assessed their own strategic situation and how they viewed Cuba . CIA analysts fail to appreciate the Soviets assessment of Cuba's strategic situation .
 Arguably, the pervasive scientism at the CIA would have veiled such emotional factors, thus having an effect on intelligence Tasking . Tasking. Tasking would have had a negative effect on the effectiveness of the CIA .
 Langley's cultural attitudes contributed to distorting tasking and collection, discounting human intelligence coming from Cuba dramatically . Such articles and reports provides evidence for deeply seated cultural attitudes at Langley . Langley’s culture and identity linked the case to the surprise of the case .
 The CIA finds it difficult to understand the perspective and motivations of its targets . The CIA has a tendency towards scientism, and the consistent reification of objectivity or reason . Scientism is a strong belief in objectivity and reason .
 This introduces a preference for measurable, quantitative information and for electronic, as opposed to human, collection methods, as the latter are assumed to be biased and fallible . This introduces an emphasis on electronic, rather than human, methods .
 Sherman Kent, the founding father of CIA analysis, exerted a lasting influence on CIA analysis . Truth was approached through research guided by a systematic method inspired by the hard sciences . Kent's influence lasted far beyond his tenure .
 Cooper: CIA’s “Myth of ‘Scientific Methodology’” and its “strong cultural orientation” towards an ‘evidencebased’ scientism” remain deeply ingrained .
 The CIA’s pervading scientism, combined with its homogeneity and insularity, distorted tasking because it precluded the Agency from understanding just how personally and emotionally Soviet Premier Premier Khrushchev perceived strategic issues . The CIA's pervading scientism precluded the
 CIA failed to understand why and how Khrushchev could attempt to make a bold, strategic use of the island’s unique political and geographic situation . CIA culture downplayed emotion in strategic issues and stressed the ‘science’ of intelligence work, the CIA .
 Analysts were less inclined to rely on agents’ and refugees’ reports for conclusions regarding Soviet activities and intentions . This is shown in the over-confidence that arose from the apparent omniscience offered by the U-2 flights .
 Until the missile sites were constructed and the U2 could provide hard data as evidence, the CIA was unwilling to use judgment . The CIA was unable to uncover Soviet intentions, by which time it was almost too late . The U2 provided hard data to the CIA .
 Women Cuban refugees were housed at a separate reception center in Florida . For practical reasons, women were housed in a separate Florida reception center .
 This facility had only a single, Spanish-speaking Army intelligence officer assigned to it to determine if female refugees possessed any knowledge of interest .
 As Cuban refugees were arriving at the rate of 1,700 a week number offered above, a single interrogator was clearly inadequate to elicit information about events on the island from them .
 The third relevant feature of the CIA’s culture is a preference for secrets . A Preference for Secrets is the preference for secrecy, the author says .
 The CIA ignored the thousands of letters sent by Cuban exiles to exiles in the U.S. that contained valuable information about the operation . Similarly, the CIA completely ignored the letters sent to ex-cuba exiles .
 The preference also led the agency to ignore several ‘open secrets’ that, had they been considered, would likely have altered its key assumption that the Soviet would not attempt such a bold and unprecedented move as installing nuclear missiles in Cuba .
 Among open secrets was the USSR’s growing sense of encirclement and vulnerability . Among these open secrets, the USSR was the growing sense that the country was vulnerable .
 Khrushchev stood in awe of nuclear weapons, but knowledge of it would hardly matter in the CIA’s analytical culture of objectivity . Another open secret was that Khrushvic stood in . awe of . nuclear weapons .
 In short, there is generous evidence that the CIA privileged secrets and that this preference, which is a key part of the culture and identity of its members, significantly distorted the intelligence cycle . The CIA's preference for secrecy is key to the organization's identity .
 The fourth and final feature of the CIA’s culture and identity that emerges from the case is its continual drive for consensus . A Drive for Consensus is the drive for the CIA to achieve consensus .
 The CIA's mission is to coordinate the 16 other U.S. intelligence agencies or intelligence consumers . This drive includes a process of winnowing information inside the CIA so that it neither disagrees with precedents .
 The existence of a clear consensus within the CIA that Cuba was not a vital interest for the Soviet Union distorted tasking as the CIA failed to ask whether the Soviets would try to make strategic use of the island .
 This affected tasking, minimizing the attention given to Cuba, as well as collection and analysis, as crucial information was dismissed as a result of this hypothesis . This affected tasks and analysis .
 The CIA was able to estimate that no less than 40,000 soviet troops were present in Cuba in the spring of 1962, far more than the 15,000 previously estimated and indicative of massive operation .
 Because of the hypothesis mentioned above, no conclusion was drawn and the information was dismissed . No conclusion drawn and no conclusion drawn .
 We also see here at work the CIA’s scientism, which leads to the neglect of human sources, and its homogeneity and insularity as the source was Cuban and hence not trusted . The CIA's scientism is at work here, as is the neglecting of human
 CIA feared that undertaking such data collection would embarrass the State Department . As a result, the CIA suspended the flights at a crucial time .
 In effect, it blinded the agency, particularly so because as a result of its . scientism and homogeneity, it had failed to develop adequate human sources or . refused to trust them . The agency failed to have adequate human . sources or trust them, it said .
 The iterative nature of the intelligence cycle reinforced initial errors in tasking . Information filters imposed by identity and culture impeded course correction throughout the rest of the cycle .
 Such corrections were unlikely to occur because the other phases of the intelligence cycle were also distorted by the same features that contributed to the initial error, creating a negative informational feedback loop, which culminates in strategic surprises . Such corrections would not occur because of the other aspects of intelligence cycle also distorted
 Cooper calls ‘the problem of the wrong puzzle’ in intelligence analysis to center stage . Identity and culture-based model of strategic surprise brings what Cooper calls the problem of “the wrong problem” in intelligence .
 This article sought to understand how strategic surprises happen . This article seeks to understand why strategic surprises are possible .
 This research contributes to the establishment of this field of organizational research by proposing a model linking surprises to the identity and culture of the organization experiencing them .
 We have suggested that by examining these features, one can understand how strategic surprises occur . We have also suggested that this could explain why strategic surprises are possible .
 The unified understanding of the antecedent to strategic surprise provided by this model is our main contribution to this model . We hope to use this model to improve our understanding of strategic surprise in the future .
 The idea of a negative informational feedback loop fueled by identity and culture that our model proposes implies that this understanding of strategic surprises is compatible with, but logically prior to prevailing explanations .
 Wohlstetter identified the importance of having hypotheses to lift signals out of a confusion of noise . But she did not address in detail how these hypotheses are formed and sustained .
 After a surprise, hypotheses in such an approach function as dei ex machina in that they close off further research . After a shock, hypothesis in such a theory can close off research, scientists say .
 Identity and culture-based model reopens the exploration of the links among surprises, the origins of the hypotheses that animate analysts, the collection systems that serve them .
 Allison and Zelikow studied political and bureaucratic culture, but in a largely positivist manner . Allison studied political, bureaucratic culture in a mostly positivist way .
 Their models do not provide more than a proximate understanding of why particular political questions are pursued or how specific bureaucratic idiosyncrasies repeatedly lead to surprises . Therefore, their models do little more than that of their models .
 In contrast, we delve into the CIA’s identity and culture, explore those factors’ effects on the intelligence gathering and interpretation of social facts . We then relate these elements to strategic surprises .
 Psychological explanations explain why analysts misperceive and misinterpret certain signals . But they fail to answer two key questions: What do you think analysts are trying to explain?
 Kuhn’s models break down when summoned to explain massive paradigm shifts that are often years in the making, he says . Kuhn: In Kuhn's terms, these models break .
 The 21 #14179 identity and culture model of surprise is rooted in an appreciation for social facts . It offers a promising avenue for future research, says the author .
 Strategic surprises should not be looked at as single events but rather as a process . However, strategic surprises should be considered as a result of a process, rather than a single event, say experts .
 "We have traced the surprise through a series of errors sustained over long periods of time at all steps of the intelligence cycle cumulating into one major erroneous assessment," says President Obama .
 These, and not the surprise itself, constitute the crucial pathologies that our model attempts to explain . The model is based on the fact that surprise itself is the key to the model's success .
 This paper can inform management scholars working on two specific areas . Beyond strategic surprise itself, this paper can also be useful for others .
 The first is competitive strategy and, in particular, responses to competitive moves . The second is a response to competitive strategy .
 Zajac and Bazerman note that strategic decision makers typically do not sufficiently consider the decisions of competitors . This leads to a variety of specific judgmental mistakes, or blind spots, they say .
 Blind spots are a form of tasking failure, a look at the wrong puzzle, and typically originate from the culture and identity of an organization, as the literature suggests . Blind spots often originate from culture and the identity of the organization .
 The second area is the difficulty that incumbent firms have in responding to disruptions in their environment . The challenge is to respond to disruption in the environment, says Mr. Jeff Green .
 Scholars such as Christensen build on the work of Bower to show how such difficulties are often ascribed to the firm’s resources, processes, and values, i.e. to its identity and culture .
 Our results, while largely consistent with the literature, should be confronted to a larger sample in order to mitigate the issue of contingency .
 Another avenue for research would be to explore the sources of the features of identity and culture . This would help create a more complete model of strategic surprise as a social construction .
 Integrating identity and culture helps understand why the problem of the wrong puzzle persists . Problems are not resolved by better analytic process changes focused on signals or biases, or by organizational reforms .
 A model of strategic surprises as a social construction provides a unified understanding of surprise that is not in conflict with prevailing theories but logically prior to them . The identity and culture of the organization establish the conditions under which the latter operate, author says .
 Surprise and its causes in business administration and strategic studies . Surprise and the causes of surprise in strategic studies in business .
 America's Legendary Spy Master on the Fundamentals of Intelligence Gathering for a Free World . America’s Legendary spy master on intelligence gathering for a free world .
 The Ultimate Insider’s Story of Five Presidents and How They Won the Cold War is available on Amazon.com.com .
 Judgement errors, interactive norms, and the difficulty of detecting strategic surprises, are key issues in the game .
 Final Report of the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks upon the U.S. upon the United States. Final Report: Terrorist attacks upon the . United States . Final Report .
 September 11 and the Adaptation Failure of U.S. Intelligence Agencies . September 11 was the worst day of 9/11 attacks in the United States. September 11 is the worst terrorist attack in the world. The United States intelligence agencies failed to adapt to the events of that day
 DISTORT intelligence process LEADS to Strategic 1. Model of strategic surprises a social construction Features of identity . All steps of the and culture are taken in and out of the intelligence process .