 Although the ship’s declared cargo was “technical equipment,” that was presumed to be a deception . The ship was believed to have been carrying technical equipment . It was presumed that it was a deception.
 JFK was informed that the aircraft carrier Essex, carrying anti-submarine helicopters, would handle the interception .
 Soviet ships that actually were carrying nuclear weapons turned away from Cuba . Soviet ships, including the Gagarin and the Kimovsk, that actually carried nuclear weapons, had turned away .
 JFK made the order to stop Soviet ships, not knowing they had already turned back . JFK had made an aggressive and risky step not knowing that the ships had turned back.
 The order to intercept the ships was recalled after new information was revealed .
 It took hours for that information to get to the White House, forcing the president and his aides to make their decisions in virtual darkness .
 Low-flying flights of eight planes flew over Cuba morning and afternoon to supplement the U-2 photography . October 25 is October 25 when the planes were flying over Cuba .
 All six Soviet submarines in the area or moving towards Cuba were followed and harassed by the U.S. All six were forced to surface in the presence of United States military ships . All six submarines were followed by the United States .
 The United States had 25 destroyers, two cruisers, several submarines, and several carriers in Caribbean waters surrounding Cuba . The U.S. had several carriers and several destroyers in the Caribbean .
 A Soviet-chartered freighter was stopped at the quarantine line and searched for contraband military supplies . October 26 a Soviet-chauched freighter stopped at quarantine line .
 Neither Kennedy nor the members of the ExComm had access to the latest information supplied by Navy surveillance planes . A rambling letter from Khrushchev stated that despite ideological differences, he wanted to compete peacefully .
 Khrushchev’s personal reply to Kennedy said that the nuclear weapons were operational and under Soviet control . They were rigged to go off in the event of an attack on Cuba . The nuclear weapons would go off if they were attacked .
 Kennedy's reply to the official letter stated the US’s intent to go ahead with the blockade, and he regretted the deterioration in their relationship . October 25, 1962 .
 Khrushchev recalled personal letter he had addressed to Kennedy, fearing it would make things worse . Khrushche recalled the personal letter to Kennedy .
 In addition, Soviet radar tracked U.S. bombers armed with nuclear weapons as they made repeated approaches to the Soviet border, then abruptly turned away . In addition to this, they also turned away from the Soviet radar .
 By the time Khrushchev met with the Presidium, he had decided to remove the missiles, or at least some of them . October 25, 1962, The Presidium removed some of the missiles .
 He cast the outcome as a victory, having strengthened Cuba and preventing an American attack . He said the outcome was a victory for the Cuban people .
 October 26, 1962 Khrushchev had a letter delivered to the United States embassy in Moscow, at 5 PM local time, telling Kennedy he would remove military specialists from Cuba if the U.S. promised not to invade Cuba .
 Robert Frost proposed a "noble rivalry" in Frost's September 7 meeting . Frost spoke of peaceful competition . He echoed Frost's idea of a peaceful rivalry .
 Castro announced Cuba would fire on American aircraft that violated Cuban airspace . Castro asked Soviet General Pliev to disperse his missiles . Castro said Cuba would shoot at American planes that violated Cuba's airspace .
 Later Pliev reported that he would also use anti-aircraft weapons if Soviet installations were attacked . Pliev said he would use such weapons in an attack on Soviet installations .
 Castro wrote to Khrushchev warning that the U.S. might also use nuclear weapons against the USSR . He reasoned that as a measure of self-defense, he should strike first . Castro wrote that as self-defence, he would strike first if the United States did .
 Khrushchev proposed signing the nuclear test ban treaty that he knew Kennedy wanted, and said the two deals could be negotiated and approved simultaneously . The two nuclear test bans were signed simultaneously .
 Khrushchev feared an invasion of Cuba, rather than wait for translation and telegraph transmission of his proposal to Kennedy, the Presidium decided to broadcast the letter on Soviet radio .
 Kennedy wanted to accept Khrushchev’s idea but the EXComm rejected it . Events were Spiraling Out of Control As Seen by the US October 27, 1962 .
 He considered it the only hope for a peaceful resolution of the crisis . He said it was only hope of a peaceful settlement of the situation .
 Kennedy felt the missiles did not add to U.S. or European security . Kennedy felt they were targets in a confrontation between the East and West . Kennedy: "They were targets"
 The ExComm had previously considered such an exchange, and it had indeed been suggested in the U.S. by a Washington Post columnist, Walter Lippman .
 The proposal would signal the NATO allies that the U.S. would not protect them . But the members of the ExComm, to a man, rejected it .
 Chiefs of Staff were preparing to recommend a massive airstrike on Cuba on October 27th or 28th, to be followed by an invasion . A massive airstrike was set to take place on Cuba, followed by a invasion .
 A U-2 plane strayed over the Soviet Union on a routine 7-hour mission over the North Pole . The mission was to collect air samples to monitor for Soviet nuclear tests . The plane was on a mission to gather air samples from the USSR's nuclear tests.
 The pilot had lost his way, because magnetic compasses were useless near the Pole . He had to rely on a sextant and star charts .
 The U-2 that was now empty of fuel landed safely on a remote airstrip . Despite the appearance of Soviet MiGs as well as nuclear-armed U.S. F-102’s, the plane landed safely .
 Cubans shot at low-flying U.S. reconnaissance planes, forcing some to turn back . Some of the planes were shot at by Cubans, but some turned back .
 McNamara believed that if that continued, they would have to shoot back . McNamara: "If that continued to happen, we will have to defend ourselves"
 A U-2 overflying Cuba was shot down by a surface-to-air missile and the pilot killed . The pilot was killed by the missile .
 Soviet troops had been expecting an invasion that morning, but when it didn’t come after a sleepless night, General Pliev, as well as others, went to sleep . Soviet troops expected an invasion .
 When commanders of the anti-aircraft missile units asked for permission to fire on the U-2, Pliev couldn’t be reached . Pliev said he couldn't be reached for permission .
 Pliev ordered that American planes could not be shot at without his direct orders . Pliev had ordered that U.S. planes couldn't be fired at without direct orders from him . He ordered that planes could be fired back at him .
 General Grechko, Pliev’s deputy in charge of air defense, gave the order to shoot down the plane . The plane was shot down by Russian President Vladimir Putin in Moscow .
 It was dark as the group considered its response, and immediate retaliation was impossible in the dark . The group considered a possible response to the attack .
 Chiefs of Staff rejected the idea of a retaliatory strike against SAM missiles . They believed that some nuclear missiles were already operational in Cuba, and a strike might provoke a nuclear response from the Soviets .
 Robert Kennedy and Ted Sorensen drafted a letter for the president to send to Khrushchev . The letter was sent to the president by the president of the Soviet Union .
 He offered negotiations if the Soviet missiles were removed under UN supervision . In it, he offered negotiations for the removal of Soviet missiles . The Soviet missiles have been removed from the Soviet Union .
 The United States would end the blockade and neither the U.S. nor its Latin American allies would invade Cuba . When that was accomplished, the United States and its allies would stop the blockade .
 Later that evening, Kennedy asked select members of the ExComm to join him in the Oval Office . Kennedy later invited them to the White House to meet with him .
 Among those excluded were Vice President Johnson, General Taylor and John McCone . Among the excluded were vice President Johnson and General Taylor . President Lyndon Johnson and President Richard Nixon were also excluded .
 He wanted Robert Kennedy to secretly and orally negotiate the missile swap . Kennedy wanted to secretly negotiate the deal . He wanted the deal to be done with Robert Kennedy .
 Dean Rusk proposed that Robert tell Dobrynin that if the USSR accepted the President’s proposal, the missiles would be removed from Turkey, but that would not be publicly announced . The proposal was rejected by the USSR .
 When Robert Kennedy met with Dobrynin, he indicated that the deal would be honored only if it remained secret . Robert Kennedy indicated that he would only be honored if the deal was kept secret .
 He asked for Khrushchev’s reply by the next day, and provided a direct number to the White House for him to deliver it . He provided the number to White House, which he delivered it .
 Late in the evening, the USS Cony spotted a Soviet submarine it had been tracking as it surfaced in the Bermuda Triangle to recharge its batteries . The submarine was the first to surface in the area to recharge .
 Navy pilot flew over and dropped several loud incendiary devices to activate his photoelectric camera lenses . While the Cony and other U.S. ships watched the sub, a Navy pilot dropped the devices .
 The sub captain believed he was under attack, and gave the order to prepare the nuclear torpedo . Sub captain thought he was being attacked and ordered the sub to prepare a torpedo .
 The signal officer got stuck with his searchlight in the shaft of the conning tower, delaying the commander . As the signal officer descended from the bridge, he got stuck . The commander was delayed by the incident .
 The Cony's captain signaled an apology for the plane’s aggressive behavior . At the same time, the plane's captain said he was sorry .
 The apology was recognized in that moment of delay, and the order was given to stop preparations for firing . The apology is not the first time an apology has been accepted .
 Soviet Submarine, B-59, Kimovsk 11 PM ET, October 27 . New instructions were issued that nuclear weapons were not to be used if engagement was only with Cuba .
 If the Chinese or Soviets were also involved, nuclear weapons could be used . The Chinese or Soviet Union could also be involved in the crisis .
 Presidium was already meeting to confirm Khrushchev’s decision to dismantle the missile installations in Cuba p282 . Presidium had already met to confirm the decision to remove missile installations .
 Khrushchev ordered his foreign minister to immediately communicate to Dobrynin that Kennedy’s proposal was acceptable . Then a telegram arrived from Castro who said he had reliable information that the U.S. would invade Cuba in a few hours . Castro said the United States would invade
 Castro proposed that the USSR make a first strike on the USA with nuclear weapons . Castro proposed a strike in response to a U.S. strike in Cuba .
 Khrushchev urged patience, announcing the U.S. guaranteed it would not invade Cuba . The U.K. promised not to invade Cuba in return for its promise to stay in Cuba .
 Khrushchev needed to assure Kennedy that the Soviets were accepting his proposal, and was working under the belief that Kennedy would be making an address to the nation at 5 PM – perhaps announcing military action . Kennedy was believed to be making a speech at 5pm .
 Khrushchev took the step of having his letter to Kennedy broadcast via radio . "Once again, once again, Khrushche had to take the step"
 President Kennedy addressed the nation on November 2, 1962 . Aerial photos taken on November 1 showed that Soviet launch sites were being dismantled and missiles crated .
 Aerial surveillance and quarantine will continue until the threat is removed, he said .
 The United States ended its quarantine after the Soviets removed their IL–28 bombers from Cuba . November 20, 1962 The U.S. ended the quarantine . The quarantine was lifted in response to the Soviets' removal of the IL-28 bombers .
 The United States, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union signed the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty in Moscow in 1963 . Jupiter Missiles in Cigli, Turkey August 5, 1963, were fired by Soviet Union's Jupiter missiles .
 The United States and USSR established a hotline to facilitate future communications between the two leaders . The U.S. and USSR set up a hotline in order to communicate with each other .
 Nikita Khrushchev signed the Limited Test Ban Treaty . Foreign ministers sign the treaty in the presence of Soviet Premier Nikita Krushchev . The treaty was signed by Soviet foreign ministers in the early 1950s .
 Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko and Secretary of State Dean Rusk attended the ceremony . Seated are, from left, Secretary Rusk, Foreign Minister Gromko, and Foreign Minister Alec Douglas-Home .
 Standing immediately behind Gromyko are U.N. Secretary General U Thant and Khrushchev . Standing behind them are United Nations secretary general U. Thant .
 To the right of Khrushchev and standing at the wall is Soviet Ambassador to the U.S. Anatoly Dobrynin . The Soviet ambassador to the United States is standing at a wall .
 By secretly installing missiles in Cuba that threatened the United States, the U.S. had secured the sovereignty of a new Communist country in the Western Hemisphere, without the cost of war . Cuba agreed to remove those missiles if the United. agreed not to invade Cuba .
 We actually had our strategic missiles ready to be launched, while the U.S. had surrounded the island of Cuba with naval vessels and had concentrated its infantry and air force .
 We showed that if we were guided by rational aims and the desire not to allow a war to happen, the disputed questions could be resolved by compromise . But we showed that we showed we could resolve the disputed issues with compromise .
 The late president's best recollections remain about the late U.S. president . That’s why in my memory the very best memory remains about him .
 He showed soberness of mind; he didn’t allow himself to be frightened, nor did he become intoxicated with the military might of the U.S. He didn't decide to go for broke, nor to become intoxicated .
 They rely heavily on the stories written by Serhii Plokhy in Nuclear Folly . The stories are based on the work of Serhiy Plokhhy .
 Records from Russia and Ukraine detail the crisis from the Soviet point of view, juxtaposed to the actions the U.S. was taking and the progress of the military build-up in Cuba .
 Fidel Castro led a revolution in Cuba to overthrow Fulgencio Batista, the country’s corrupt dictator . Fidel Castro had led the revolution to overthrow Batista . Castro led the Cuban revolution against the dictator .
 Because of his leftist ideologies, the United States opposed Castro, the U.S. wanted to protect United States investments . Castro's leftist ideologies were opposed by the United State .
 Castro was well aware of the U.S. role in the failed Bay of Pigs invasion, the failed attempt to overthrow his government . Castro knew of the United States' involvement in the invasion of the failed invasion .
 After that, the United States continued clandestine efforts to destabilize the country, the U.S. continued to try and destabilize it .
 Castro sought protection from the Soviet Union, and eventually that resulted in the Soviet’s secret shipments and installation of weapons, including nuclear weapons in Cuba . The Soviet Union was responsible for the installation of nuclear weapons . Castro sought the Soviet's secret shipments of weapons .
 The USSR was in competition with China over leadership of Communist nations . Also, the USSR was competing with the Soviet Union over leadership in China .
 The Soviets knew the United States was far ahead in weaponry and had positioned threatening military bases around their nation . At the same time, the Soviets knew that the U.S. was well ahead of them in weaponry .
 Positioning their missile within striking distance of Washington, D.C., and other major U.S. cities would help to even the nuclear threat, experts say . Positioning a missile near Washington would help even the threat, they say .
 The U.S. feared Communist aggression in Europe, Asia, and now in Latin America, specifically in Cuba . Cuba was only 90 miles from the United States shore .
 United States intelligence failed to recognize the Soviets delivery of aggressive weaponry . They said the equipment was only for the defense of Cuba – to repel a U.S. invasion .
 Kennedy’s September announcement that the presence of offensive weapons in Cuba would not be tolerated forced the U.S. to take whatever action was necessary to remove them . Kennedy: “The United States will take whatever it is necessary”
 The horrifying prospect of nuclear war was overwhelming to the nations’ leaders, more so than to their militaries . The terrifying prospect of a nuclear war would be overwhelming .
 The leaders sought advice – and consent – from their advisors, but in the end, the decisions and negotiations were made by Kennedy and Khrushchev . The leaders of the two Soviet Union-era Soviet Union statesmen made their own decisions .
 If Kennedy had taken the advice of the Joint Chiefs to respond militarily, it is highly likely that Soviet missiles would have been launched at the U.S. It is likely that a nuclear conflict would have occurred if Kennedy hadn't taken the decision .
 Mistakes by those charged with carrying out orders can lead to escalation and conflict that were not intended by the leaders . Mistakes are often made by those who carry out orders, leading to escalation or conflict .
 When military conflict is threatened, mistakes by one side can be misinterpreted by the other, potentially provoking a military response . Mistakes can lead to a military reaction when a military mistake is misinterpreted .
 The members of the military must at times make quick decisions on their own without guidance from their leaders . The decision was made by the military without the guidance of their leaders.
 General Grechko’s order to shoot down the U.S. U-2 could have triggered war . As an example, the order could have sparked war .
 Mistakes related to the use of nuclear forces would result in the destruction of nations, experts say . Mistakes such as nuclear weapons could lead to the collapse of nations .
 If mistakes were to affect decisions related to the use of nuclear forces, there would be no learning period . But if mistakes were made, they would have been made, he says .
 President Kennedy’s efforts to keep pressure on Khrushchev through the quarantine and aerial surveillance were effective . President Kennedy gave him room to honorably .
 Khrushchev’s personal letters to Kennedy revealed his deep concern over the military conflict both sides were preparing for, and the calamity that would come if the conflict escalated to nuclear war . The letters reveal the depth of his concern about the dangers of nuclear weapons .
 President Obama sought to justify providing weapons to Cuba in comparison to the U.S.’s installation of weapons in Europe and military bases elsewhere . He also sought to explain providing the weapons to the Cuban government in comparison with the installation of military installations elsewhere .
 If the presence of weapons the U.S. considered offensive prevented an attack, then they were indeed, defensive, he said . He said that if the weapons the United States considered offensive stopped an attack it were indeed defensive .
 The slow, deliberate decision-making of President Kennedy gave him time and the advice of experts to consider military options as well as diplomatic ones . President Kennedy made the decision in a deliberate, deliberate way . The decision was made by President Kennedy in 1963 .
 His decision to enact a quarantine was the most cautious and was opposed unanimously by the military Chiefs of Staff . The quarantine was opposed by the chiefs of Staff, who opposed it .
 It should be noted that the U.S. delay in making that decision had the downside of allowing the Soviet’s time to complete the installation of several missile sites, thereby increasing the threat . The U.K. should have made the decision sooner .
 On October 16th, the day the missiles in Cuba were revealed by photographic evidence, Kennedy discussed the situation with Adlai Stevenson . The day after the missiles were revealed, Kennedy met with Adr. Stevenson .
 Stevenson rejected Kennedy as his vice-presidential running mate in 1956 . They were not friends and their personalities were distinctly different . Stevenson and Kennedy did not have a close relationship .
 Stevenson recommended pursuing a peaceful solution . Stevenson followed-up on the discussion the next day with a memo . Kennedy and most of his advisors had thought a military strike necessary .
 Stevenson’s analysis appears to have guided Kennedy over the next several days as his inclination turned in that direction . Stevenson's analysis appeared to have helped Kennedy turn his thoughts on the issue .
 Khrushchev proposed they remove the missiles in Cuba if the U.S. removed its missiles from Turkey . Most other countries would consider it a fair deal, and wrong for the United States to reject the offer and undertake military action .
 In contemplating the possibility of military action, Robert Kennedy repeatedly brought up the question of morality . Robert Kennedy: "I don't think we should go to war"
 Castro denied that, but his interpreter remembered and Castro’s telegram to Khrushchev was found . Castro denied it, but the telegram was found, and the interpreter remembered .
 Nikita Khrushchev's memoirs are published in Moscow, Russia, 1964 . They include his memoirs, memoirs and memoirs of his life .
 Khrushchev’s rivals in the Communist party deposed him largely due to his erratic and cantankerous behavior . The party considered his behavior as a tremendous embarrassment on the international stage .