 The Washington Monument is the tallest stone structure in the world . It was visible from many of the places around town we did visit .
 The Washington Monument, also the world’s tallest obelisk at 555+ feet, has been closed to the public since the recent earthquake of August 23, 2011 . The monument, also known as 555-feet-tall obelisks, was closed to public since August 23
 National Park Service announced September 26, 2011, that the Washington Monument would be closed indefinitely due to structural damage . The monument was designed by Robert Mills .
 President John F Kennedy signed the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty of 1963 today in the Treaty Room at the White House . The treaty was signed by the President of the United States .
 JFK Signs the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty October 7, 1963 . The President said: “Today the fear is a little less & the hope a little more.”
 The Democratic & Republican candidates for President in 1960 squared off tonight in the 2nd of 4 face-to-face televised debates . The topics of this debate included Foreign Policy & Civil Rights .
 JFK responded: “If they elect me President, I will do my best to carry the United States through a difficult period.”
 "I would not want people to elect me because I promise them the easy, soft life," he says . "I promise them an easy life. I would never want people elect me," he adds .
 The 1st show in the series aired after the second televised debate between John F Kennedy & Richard Nixon . The show stars Martin Milner as Tod Stiles & George Maharis as Buz Murdock, 2 young men in search of adventure .
 One of the episodes “A Walk with the Serpent” was filmed in Boston . The episodes included scenes at Bunker Hill, Lexington & the Old North Church .
 A second episode, “Kiss the Maiden, All Forlorn” was filmed in downtown Dallas, Texas . The episode aired on April 13, 1962 . The second episode aired in April 1962 .
 President George W Bush announced tonight that ‘Operation Enduring Freedom’ has been launched in Afghanistan . Operation will target the Taliban which supported al-Qaida in the 9-11 terrorists attacks on the United States .
 US Marines Alpha Company Battalion Landing Team Operation El Dorado May 5, 2004 . Cpl Jemssy Alvarez, Jr. Jr. was killed in the attack on the USS Little Rock .
 John Birch killed John Birch Society John Dillinger John F Fitzgerald John Fitzgerald Dies John Glenn died John Glenn John Quincy Adams I . John W Hinckley died from a gunshot wound to the head .