 Kennedy had no idea missile crisis dragged on a month longer . Peril of 1962 stand-off still with us .
 Jack Kennedy had no idea the missile crisis dragged on a month longer . Jack Kennedy was in the middle of the crisis when the crisis began .
 The past is a foreign country, a place where everything was in black-and-white and men still wore hats, so it's just scary stories about a long-gone time . Or so it seems .
 At the start of the 1960s Moscow had gained a new communist ally in Fidel Castro, but the United States kept talking about invading Cuba . There couldn't be a more hair-trigger situation than that, you might think but then things got a lot worse .
 From Cuba the Soviet missiles would be only five minutes away from their American targets . However, from Cuba the missiles would only be five minutes from their U.S. targets .
 The first Soviet SS-4 missiles arrived in Cuba in October 1962 . U-2 spy planes discovered them almost at once . That caused panic in Washington .
 President John F Kennedy knew about the risk of nuclear war by October 16, but he did not go on television and warn the American public of the risk until October 22 . President Kennedy did not speak out about the nuclear risk of war .
 He then declared a naval blockade of Cuba, saying he would stop Soviet ships carrying more missiles from reaching the island by force if necessary . The Cuban leader then declared the blockade of the island .
 The blockade gave the Russians time to think before the shooting started . The Soviet leaders were now desperately looking for a way out of the crisis they had created . That would mean war, and probably nuclear war .
 It was the closest the world ever came to an all-out nuclear war . Even so, they weren't really scared enough . Even though, they were scared enough.
 Two conflicts down, a dozen still to go . Gwynne Dyer: Learn to love your insignificance .
 US intelligence was unaware that along with the SS-4s, the Soviet Union had also sent more than a hundred shorter-range ""tactical"" nuclear missiles to Cuba .
 Khrushchev's deputy, Anastas Mikoyan, was sent to Cuba to tell Castro that he must not have them . He spent a month-long struggle to pry Castro's fingers off hundred tactical nuclear missiles .
 In December, they were finally crated up and sent home . The animals were finally sent home in December .
 Then he said the bit that applies to us. Advertise with NZME.