 JoHfi Sullivan was caught speeding semi-naked down a road on a motorised barstool with his bottom on fire . Sullivan was ordered to do community service in New Zealand last February after he was caught .
 He claimed the stool could reach 50mph and set his arse on fire using a rolled up newspaper . He claimed he could set himself on fire with a rolled-up newspaper .
 A researcher claims he's decoded 10 possible words in the famously unreadable Voynich manuscript . The manuscript has eluded interpretation for a century . It is believed to contain 10 words .
 The medieval text was discovered by an antique book dealer in 1912 . It has been rather stingy in giving up its secrets ever since .
 He says he's also picked out the word for Taurus written beside an illustration of the Pleiades, a star cluster in the constellation Taurus . The word for the word is written beside a picture of a cluster of stars .
 A recent statistical study published in the journal PLOS ONE found that ""Voyni chese"" adheres to linguistic rules . The study was published in PLOS One .
 Bax notes that the manuscript is still a long way from being understood, and that he is coming forward with what he's found . He hopes other linguists will work with him to crack the code .
 Happy 100th birthday to electric traffic light — out of frustration from an early two years ago . Two years ago, Salt Lake C m * _ _ x* * MfflKK m rmi.com .
 The “Municipal Traffic Control System” comprised four pairs of redand-green lights that served as stop-and-go indicators . Based on a design by James Hoge, the device was patented in 1918 . It was based on the design of Hoge's "
 The lights were each mounted on a corner post and operated by a switch inside a control booth . Each light was controlled by a hand-operated switch inside the control booth.
 Today’s system of traffic lights got its start a century ago . It was configured to make giving conflicting signals impossible . The switch was ingenious and the lights were designed to make it impossible .
 This invention brought to an end a growing problem in the early days of automobiles, when pedestrians, bicycles, horses and streetcars all converged on the same roadways . The invention brought an end to the growing problem .
 The inventor died of a cerebral hemorrhage in 1926, just a few years after another Clevelander, Garrett Morgan, patented the three-position traffic signal .
 The honor of being the site of the world’s first traffic light, of course, isn’t without dispute . SALT LAKE CITY also claims to have the honor of the first light, but it's not without dispute.
 Two years ago, Salt Lake City unveiled a replica of the device that was invented by Lester Wire in 1912 . The Utah Department of Transportation unveiled a commemorative replica .
 Indian dentists operate on 1 /-year-dd Ashik Gavai at JJ Hospital in Mumbai . Ashik is one of the world's oldest dentists .
 Ashik Gavai, 17, was in pain and the right side of his jaw swollen when doctors at JJ Hospital in Mumbai diagnosed him with complex odontoma . The rare condition occurs when a small tumor made up of tooth-like tissue grows .
 Medical team expected to find a few chunks of tooth-like pieces in the boy's mouth but were shocked after removing 232 pieces . The medical team removed 232 pieces from the mouth of the boy from his mouth .
 This might be the record number of teeth ever removed from an odontoma patient . The teeth were removed from the patient's mouth after she was diagnosed with a rare condition .
 Gavai’s father, Suresh, was concerned that Hie teen's growth was cancerous . The teen's father was worried that his son's growth could be cancer .
 The turn or is benign and odontoma don't reoccur after removal . Thankfully the turn is benign . The odontomomomontoma is benign, and it doesn't reappear .
 While the boy underwent a major surgery, his jaw remained intact and should heal without any deformities . The boy's jaw is expected to heal without deformity .
 Galliford has had offers for his bovine wonder, but would prefer her to be exhibited at a fair m price in a zoo or ppsfe somewhere sitnilary .
 Allan Galliford's farm near Oneway, Alberta, is 25 miles (4Gkm| northwest of Edmonton, capital of only the start of something much to grow there now . Perhaps the gifted Sirnmi may yet become a horn of plenty for her owner .
 11-year-old girl from southern Indian state of Kerala found to have three lungs . The girl was found to be from Kerala, India .
 Police have set up roadblocks to prevent anyone from entering these zones . Residents have been told that they can't leave the area . Police have also told residents that they are not allowed to enter the zones .
 City officials say they have enough rice, flour, and oil to supply all 30,000 residents for up to a month . Reports haven't yet mentioned how long this situation might last .
 According to Reuters, bubonic plague outbreaks are rare in China . When they do occur, most of them take place in rural areas .
 Since 2009, an estimated 12 people have been diagnosed with the disease . Four people have died from the disease, four have died, since 2009 .
 Modern antibiotics are effective in treating the plague, but doctors have to administer them quickly because death can occur 24 hours after the initial infection . Modern antibiotics can be used to treat the plague .
 Officials in Beijing say that the risk of a spread is minimal . At the moment, officials in Beijing have said the risk is minimal, officials say .
 Third-sex skeleton found outside Prague . 5,000-year-old skeleton believed to be transgender .
 The skeleton is male and was buried in a way reserved only for female burials . It is believed to have been buried in the same way as a male burial .
 Skeleton believed to date from 2900 and 2500BC and is from the Copper Age . Skeleton is believed to be from Copper Age and is thought to date back to 2900 BC .
 During that period, men’s bodies were buried with their heads facing west and with weapons . The bodies of those buried with weapons were also buried with heads facing east and west .
 Its head is facing east and is surrounded with jugs, a manner reserved for women . The head of the head faces east and faces east .
 Archaeologists theorised at a press conference in Prague on Tuesday that the person may have been a third sex or transgender . Archaeologists believe the person was a transgender or third sex person .
 This isn’t the first time a third sex or transgender skeleton has been found buried as a member of the opposite sex . The skeleton was found in the home of a transgender woman .
 In 1978, Soviet geologists prospecting in the wilds of Siberia discovered a family of six, lost in the taiga . The family was unaware of World War II .
 Siberian summers do not last long . Siberian summers don't last long. Siberian summers .
 When the warm days do arrive, though, the taiga blooms, and for a few short months it can seem almost welcoming .
 It is then that man can see most clearly into this hidden world, not on land, for the taiga . The taiga can swallow whole armies of explorers, but from the air . It is not land, it is the air, but the air.
 Siberia is the source of most of Russia's oil and mineral resources . Even its most distant parts have been overflown by oil prospectors and surveyors on their way to camps .
 Karp Lykov and Agafia Lykov were rediscovered by Soviet geologists . Lykov's family was found in the 1970s in the Soviet Union . The Lykov family is now in a museum in Moscow .
 Helicopter was skimming the treeline a hundred or so miles from the Mongolian border when it dropped into the thickly wooded valley of an unnamed tributary of the Abakan . Helicopter sent to find a safe spot to land a party of geologists was sk
 The valley walls were narrow, with sides that were close to vertical in places . The skinny pine and birch trees swaying in the rotors' downdraft were so thickly clustered that there was no chance of finding a spot to set the aircraft down .
 Pilot saw something that should not have been there on his way to landing place . Pilot peered intently through his windscreen in search of landing place, but saw something .
 It was a clearing, 6,000 feet up a mountainside, wedged between the pine and larch and scored with what looked like long, dark furrows . The clearing was wedged in between pine, larch, pine trees and scored in the dark .
 Helicopter crew made several passes before reluctantly concluding that this was evidence of human habitation . From the size and shape of the clearing, the garden must have been there for a long time .
 Soviet authorities had no records of anyone living in the district . The Soviet authorities did not record anyone living there .
 Four scientists sent into the district to prospect for iron ore were told about the pilots' sighting . It perplexed and worried them, and it worried them .
 Blackened by time and rain, the hut was piled up on all sides with taiga rubbish — bark, poles, planks and planks . The hut is piled up by time-blackened by rain, piled up with rubbish .
 If it hadn't been for a window the size of a backpack pocket, it would have been hard to believe that people lived there . If it weren't for the window, it wouldn't have been possible to imagine people living there .
 The low door creaked, and the figure of a very old man emerged into the light of day, straight out of a fairy tale . The figure of an old man emerges from the shadows of the door .
 He wore trousers of the same material, also in patches, and had an uncombed beard . The same material was worn in patches in patches .
 Jerry-built from whatever materials came to hand, the dwelling was not much more than a burrow . The dwelling was a low, soot-blackened log kennel that was as cold as a cellar . A floor consisting of potato peel and pine-nut shells was made
 Looking around in the dim light, the visitors saw that it consisted of a single room . Looking around the dim . light, they saw that they had been in the single room.
 The light from the little window fell on her wide, terrified eyes, and we realized we had to get out of there as quickly as possible . The light fell on the little girl, and she had to be rescued from the room .
 Scientists backed hurriedly out of the hut and retreated to a spot a few yards away, where they took out some provisions and began to eat .
 Karp Lykov was an Old Believer, a member of a fundamentalist Russian Orthodox sect, worshiping in a style unchanged since the 17th century . Lykov's style of worship has been unchanged since 17th Century .
 Old Believers had been persecuted since the days of Peter the Great, and Lykov talked about it as though it had happened only yesterday . Lykov was prone to complain about a merchant who refused to make a gift of 26 poods of potatoes to the Old Believer .
 Things only got worse for the Lykov family when the atheist Bolsheviks took power . The Lykovs family had a history of political turmoil .
 Under the Soviets, isolated Old Believer communities that had fled to Siberia to escape persecution began to retreat ever further from civilization . The Old Believers were forced to retreat even further from society .
 During the purges of the 1930s, with Christianity itself under assault, a Communist patrol had shot Lykov's brother on the outskirts of their village while Lykov knelt working beside him . Lykov had knelt in front of his brother during the attack .
 There were only four Lykovs in the family when Karp died in 1936 . Karp and his wife Akulina were the only four children .
 They had retreated ever deeper into the taiga, building themselves a succession of crude dwelling places, until at last they had fetched up in this desolate spot .
 Two more children had been bom in the wild — Dmitry in 1940 and Agafia in 1943 — and neither of the youngest Lykov children had ever seen a human being who was not a member of their family .
 Agafia and Dmitry learned of their parents' stories from their parents . All that Agafia knew of the outside world they learned entirely from their stories .
 Lykov children knew there were places called cities where humans lived crammed together in tall buildings . The Lykovs knew there was a place where humans live crammed together .
 Their only reading matter was prayer books and an ancient family Bible . The children's parents were forced to rely on prayer books for daily life .
 Akulina had used the gospels to teach her children to read and write . sharpened birch sticks dipped into honeysuckle juice as pen and ink .
 Agafia was shown a picture of a horse, she recognized it from her mother's Bible stories . Agafia recognized the picture from a photo taken from a Bible story . She recognized the horse from a picture taken from the Bible .
 The family's isolation was hard to grasp, the unmitigated harshness of their lives was not . But if the family was isolated, the harshness was not.
 Traveling to the Lykov homestead on foot was astonishingly arduous . Even with the help of a boat along the Abakap, the journey was arduous to reach the homestead . The Lykov family was able to make the journey on foot .
 Peter the Great's attempts to modernize Russia in the early 18th century found a focal point in a campaign to end the wearing of beards . The campaign was part of a campaign against beards in Russia .
 Facial hair was taxed and non-payers were compulsorily shaved — anathema to Karp Lykov and the Old Believers . Facial Hair was taxed in the Soviet era .
 The Lykovs struggled to replace the few things they had brought into the taiga with them . Dependent solely on their own resources, they struggled to find a way to survive .
 Clothes patched and repatched until they fell apart, then replaced with hemp cloth grown from seed . Clothes were patched and re-searched until the fell apart .
 The Lykovs had carried a crude spinning wheel and, incredibly, the components of a loom into the taiga with them . They had no technology for replacing metal, but they had to move from place to place as they went further into the wilderness .
 A couple of kettles served them well for many years, but when rust finally overcame them, the only replacements they could fashion came from birch bark . The only replacements were a couple of birch kettles made from bark .
 Since these could not be placed in a fire, it became far harder to cook . Since these can't be put in fire, they became more difficult to cook.
 By the time the Lykovs were discovered, their staple diet was potato patties mixed with ground rye and hemp seeds . They were the first to be discovered in Russia .
 It was not until the late 1950s, when Dmitry reached manhood, that they first trapped animals for their meat and skins . Dmitry reached maturity when he reached maturity .
 Lacking guns and even bows, they could hunt only by digging traps or pursuing prey across the mountains until the animals collapsed from exhaustion . The animals could hunt without guns or bows, hunting without food or bows .
 Dmitry built up astonishing endurance, and could hunt barefoot in winter . Sometimes returning to the hut after several days, having slept in the open in 40 degrees of frost .
 More often than not, though, there was no meat, and their diet gradually became more monotonous .
 Every year we held a council to decide whether to eat everything up or leave some for seed . Famine was an ever-present danger in these circumstances, and in 1961 it snowed in June . In 1961, the snow in June was the first time it had snowed .
 The hard frost killed everything growing in their garden, and by spring the family had to eat only shoes and bark . The family had been reduced to eating shoes, bark and shoes .
 Akulina chose to see her children fed, and that year she died of starvation . She died that year of starvation in Russia .
 The Lykovs put up a fence around the shoot and guarded it zealously night and day to keep off mice and squirrels . They put up the fence and guarded the shoot zealously to keep it safe .
 The solitary spike yielded 18 grains, and from this they painstakingly rebuilt their rye crop . At harvest time, the solitary spike yield 18 grains .
 The Lykov family is a well-known geologist and geologist . The family's intelligence was underestimated by Soviet geologists, they say .
 Old Karp refused to believe that man had set foot on the moon . He adapted swiftly to the idea of satellites .
 Karp held grimly to his status as head of the family, though he was well into his 80s . And Karp, who is now in his late 80s, was the head of his family .
 His eldest child, Savin, dealt with this by casting himself as the family's unbending arbiter in matters of religion . Savin's eldest child played the role of a religious arbiter for his family .
 Natalia always struggled to replace her mother as cook, seamstress and nurse . The eldest son would have encountered little resistance from Natalia, who always struggled .
 The two younger children, on the other hand, were more approachable and more open to change and innovation . The two youngest children were more open-minded and open to innovation .
 Agafia's unusual speech convinced some of her visitors she was slow-witted . She had a singsong voice and stretched simple words into polysyllables . Agafia took charge of the difficult task, in a family that possessed no calendars, of keeping track of time .
 She thought nothing of hard work, either, excavating a new cellar by hand late in the fall . She worked on by moonlight when the sun had set .
 Of all the Lykovs, the geologists' favorite was Dmitry, a consummate outdoorsman who knew all of the Dmitry and Savin in the Siberian summer . Karp Lykov is a Russian geologist who spent most of his life in Siberia .
 He was the most curious and perhaps the most forward-looking member of the family . He was a curious man who was a forward-thinking person, his family says .
 It was he who had built the family stove, and all the birch-bark buckets that they used to store food . He was also responsible for building the stove and the buckets they used for food .
 Dmitry Lykovs spent days handcutting and hand-planing each log that felled . Dmitry spent days cutting and plucking each log from each log .
 He was the most enraptured by the scientists' technology, and was also the most fascinated by the technology .
 He spent many happy hours in its little sawmill, marveling at how easily a circular saw and lathes could finish wood . Once relations with the Lykovs improved, he spent happy hours at the camp .
 Karp Lykov fought a long and losing battle with himself to keep all this modernity at bay . Lykov: "Karp fought a losing battle" against modernity . He says Lykov is "a great loss to himself"
 When they first got to know the geologists, the family would accept only a single gift — salt . The family would only accept salt as a gift when they first became friends .
 Driller Yerofei Sedov spent much of his spare time helping them to plant and harvest crops . Sedov was a driller among the geologists who helped them to grow crops in Russia .
 They took knives, forks, handles, grain, grain and eventually even pen and paper and an electric torch . They eventually used pen, paper and a torch .
 The Lykovs' family went into decline after they re-established contact with the outside world . Perhaps the saddest aspect of the story was the rapidity with which the family went .
 Three of the four children followed their mother to the grave within a few days of one another . In the fall of 1981, 1981, three of the family members died .
 Peskov: Their deaths were not the result of exposure to diseases to which they had no immunity . Peskov says they died not due to exposure to the diseases they were not immune to . The deaths are not as might have been expected, Peskov said .
 Savin and Natalia suffered from kidney failure, most likely a result of their harsh diet . Savin, Natalia, and Savin suffered kidney failure after eating a strict diet . Natalia was one of the first to die of kidney failure .
 Dmitry died of pneumonia, which might have begun as an infection he acquired from his new friends . Dmitry died from pneumonia, but might have started as a result of the infection he had acquired .
 They offered to call in a helicopter and have him evacuated to a hospital . They offered him a helicopter to be transported to a nearby hospital .
 Dmitry, in extremis, would abandon neither his family nor the religion he had practiced all his life . Dmitry would not abandon either his family or his religion, he says . Dmitry's family and religion are important to him, Dmitry says .
 When all three Lykovs had been buried, the geologists attempted to talk Karp and Agafia into returning to be with relatives who had survived the persecutions of the purge years, and who still lived on in the same old villages .
 Karp Lykov died in his sleep on February 16, 1988, 27 years to the day after his wife, Akulina, died . Lykov's wife died in her sleep in February 1988 .
 Agafia buried him on the mountain slopes with the help of the geologists, then turned and headed back to her home . Agafia then buried him in the mountains .
 The Lord would provide, and she would stay, she said — as indeed she has . She said: "I would stay. The Lord will provide." She said that she would remain .
 A quarter of a century later, now in her seventies herself, this child of the taiga lives on alone, high above the Abakan . Now in the seventies, she now lives on with her family .
 Only Agafia survives of the family of six, living alone in the taiga . Today only Agafia is survived by his wife, Agafia .
 Georg B Michels. Stranniki , 20 February 2009, accessed August 2, 2011; Georg B. Michels . Michels is the author of the book, "Georges Michels"
 One Russian Family's Fifty-year Struggle for Survival and Religious Freedom in the Siberian Wilderness . One Russian family's 50-year struggle for survival and religious freedom in the wilderness .
 Government agency in India has been giving sewing machines and bicycles to women registered as old as 532, it's reported .
 Aggarwal thinks the discrepancies could be just the ""tip of the iceberg" since his request only asked for information about the state capital of Raipur . He thinks it could be the "tip of the iceberg", since the request only asks for information .
 Chhattisgarh's deputy labour commissioner, Savita Mishra, says the errors were caused by a software glitch .
 Mourners in a Malaysian village were flabbergasted when a man they thought they had buried walked into a prayer session after his funeral . The man was believed to have been a dead man .
 Mohamad Shamsul Abdul Rahman, 22, had been missing for 10 days . The decomposed body of a drowned man was found near his village in Selising, Selising .
 The hanged man was mistaken for Ravindran before being handed over to his family for cremation . He was handed over for his cremation at the request of his family .
 Thanom Wongsupheng, 35, had been working in the capital as a security guard . He was killed by a car bomb in the heart of the capital city .
 Identity card was found on the body of the accident victim, leading to the misunderstanding . Identity card had been found on body of accident victim .
 He was missing for two months in November 2001 when his wife identified a dead body as being him . He had been missing for 2 months when he was identified by his wife .
 A year later, he was found wandering in the town’s streets by a family friend and taken home . He was taken home a year later and taken back to his family .
 He had lost his memory and said he had been walking for months trying to find his family . He said he'd been walking in search for months to find them .
 The coffin contained a disfigured road victim, mistaken by police for Mr Vicuna, who had been on a benderforthree days . Police mistaken the victim for Vicuna who had gone on a road trip .
 In the summer of 1904, John Gobbett left Greenwich on a barge bound for Southend . Gobbett was left on the barge at the end of the summer, bound for the Southenian . Gobbet left Greenwich in the summer 1904, bound to Sout
 The next day, a body taken from the Thames was identified as Gobbett by his wife and father . Gobbett was found in the Thames and identified by his family and friends .
 Like Gobbett, the dead man had a long scar on the leg, which had been broken and mended badly . The dead man also had a peculiar birthmark on his birthmark .
 Both Steer and the dead man had a crushed toe, a dent over an eye-brow, and had lost an eye . Steer had crushed a toe and a dent in an eye, and a crushed eye .
 Distinctive scars on John's nose and leg corresponded with scars on the dead man . John's scars on his leg and nose corresponded to those on his dead man's dead body .
 Mr Thompson and his wife agreed it was John, but John's sister was not convinced . John Thompson was found dead in a car crash in 2009 .
 She knew that her brother's “J.T.” tattoo was topped by an anchor, which was missing on the corpse . But she was overruled by her father, who wanted the tattoo topped with an anchor .
 John Thompson returned home to Hamilton to find his family in black and a flower-bedecked coffin in the parlour . Thompson was found by a newspaper in Toronto .
 The dead man was never identified and was interred in Hamilton's Holy Sepulchre cemetery . His body was never found and his remains were buried in the cemetery .
 None of the three, from North RhineWestphalia and Bavaria, had correctly guessed the Super Number and the €4 million jackpot will roll over to Saturday's draw . The €4million jackpot is going into Saturday's final draw .
 A spokesperson for the Saartoto corporation behind the 6/49 draw said 1,165 lotto players will claim approximately €1,050 in the five-number draw win .
 Lotto.de's host Nina Azizi didn't react as she called out the unlikely combination of numbers . Nina's show didn't show any reaction to the unlikely numbers .
 This is not the first time such an unlikely combination has turned up in the German lottery scores . German lottery winners have won the lottery in the past .
 So many winners claimed the five-number win that the prize was a mere €194 .
 Odds of picking six of six numbers in the Lotto 6/49 draw is 1 in 13,983,816 . The odds of picking the six numbers are 1 in the odds of winning the lottery .
 For four years they rented homes in the densely forested area northeast of Colorado Springs . They rented homes before finding a spacious, two-story log home in the thickest part of the woods .
 The former tenant of the house was convinced the property was haunted but did not say anything . What they did not know was that the former tenant was convinced .
 We had all kinds of lights flashing through, and it sounded like people stomping across the roof . "We had all of the lights flashing," says one of the residents .
 Untraceable chemical odors burned family members' eyes and throats . Their sons complained of weird lights and shadows in their rooms, lights and appliances started going on and off by themselves .
 Steve Lee, a 34-year-old professional truck driver, believed someone was trying to scare his family out of their new home . Lee believed the incident was an attempt to scare him out of his new home.
 Louisiana-born man told me that he had ""just enough redneck left"" to fight back no matter what it was .
 State-of-the-art, $70,000 security system installed with video surveillance and motion detectors . System often sounded alarms with no one around to trigger them .
 El Paso County Sheriff's Department simply stopped responding to 'break-ins' over four years . Over the next four years, they would have sixty-two unexplainable ""break-in" break-ins .
 Steve noticed that photographs and videotape taken in certain locations on the property exhibited strange light streaks running through them, and sometimes, translucent faces even appeared on the film .
 No matter what type of camera or film he used, Steve captured evidence of unexplainable light phenomena that included brilliant beams, floating balls of light and glowing outlines of humans and animals .
 Sometimes the mysterious lights could be seen with the naked eye, though most often they lasted just a split second and showed up only on film . Most often, they were captured on film, but most often were captured with the bare eye .
 Steve and Beth finally agreed that something paranormal might be going on in their home . They sent some videotape to the ""Sightings" television show .
 The show investigated the Lee property on three separate occasions . Producers considered it one of their most interesting and welldocumented cases .
 Three months earlier, the Lees had asked State Senator Charles Duke to investigate with his own camera equipment . The Lees asked for the investigation to be carried out with their own equipment .
 Steve believes his own dog who died ten years ago may be the apparition . He said it was "clearly a dog" that had been photographed repeatedly on the property .
 I was also able to capture this ""flying dog"" on film, as well as the frightening face of another ghost, possibly the face of an old woman described by some witnesses .
 Several scientists have stated that the lightforms recorded on film do not behave according to accepted laws of physics . Several of the scientists have said that the . lightforms on film don't behave according . to accepted physics .
 I am continuing my own investigation of the site and have concluded that it qualifies as one of the most ""haunted"" houses in the nation . I am continued to investigate the site .
 Each entry contains a synopsis, address, telephone number, and travel directions . The author of this article includes a photograph of the author's birthplace .
 They were hairy like woolly mammoth — another extinct elephant relative — but had straighter tusks and squatter heads . The woollies mammoth was hairy like a woolly mammoth, another extinct mammoth . It was hairy and squatted heads and hairy like an elephant with squ
 Two years ago, a pair of sixth-graders stumbled on a giant bone in a Shelby Township stream . The bone was found in Shelby Township, Michigan, in 2010 .
 The Detroit Zoo parted ways with two modern-day elephants named Wanda and Winky in 2005 . Staff concerns that the animals shouldn't be kept in a cold-weather zoo without a lot of space to move around .
 A 4-ton circus elephant named Little Jennie dropped dead at what is now Summit Place Mall in Waterford . Four decades ago, the elephant died in a broiling summer day four decades ago .
 She was not just any elephant, but a Hollywood star living out life in the traveling circus . She was an aging Hollywood star . The elephant was a traveling elephant .
 The circumstances of her death required an impromptu burial on mall grounds . She was buried in the mall's parking lot after her death .
 Michigan’s first enclosed mall, Summit Place, is now its own retail graveyard of empty storefronts and weedy parking lot . Summit Place is now Michigan's first enclosed shopping mall .
 Little Jennie’s grave was never marked, and no one can recall where exactly the elephant has been resting since 1972 .
 The elephant's trainer unshackled a larger elephant named Babe to push Jennie’s body into a 9-foot-deep grave dug by a backhoe . Two reporters who were at the scene do remember the grief on the face of the elephant’�s trainer
 Such a tale could be the stuff of urban legend if not for living witnesses and a front-page photograph in a local newspaper . The photograph was taken in the same place as the story was published in the local paper .
 The plot unfolded on a July 21 afternoon when the carnival-circus had setup outside what was then the Pontiac Mall . It was the first time a carnival had been set up in Pontiac .
 By all accounts, she was a gentle and obedient creature when she arrived in town . She was an obedient creature .
 Two reporters for the Oakland Press witnessed the burial of the elephant . They were in the newsroom when calls came in about a dead elephant at the mall .
 Police threatened to close down circus if body wasn’t disposed of . Police said they would close circus if it wasn't disposed of the body .
 Bill Felchand Kingsley Cotton rushed to a scene that the men said last week they’ll never forget . The reporters rushed to the scene last week . The men say they'll never forget.
 Jennie was found slumped to the ground near a freshly dug hole north of the mall . Jennie's body was found in a shallow grave near the mall's parking lot .
 Waterford police said there was no one in Oakland County who could lift the 60-year-old beast . The elephant was wanted carried away, but police said no one could lift it .
 As the obituary states, a “toothless old circus hand” went to retrieve Babe . A ‘circus hand’ was needed to retrieve her .
 Cotton, now 67, took a black-and-white photo for the paper as Babe maneuvered her head and trunk to push the body . Cotton is now 67 and a Southfield-based attorney, and is now an attorney .
 The old circus hand was devastated to lose the animal he had fed and groomed for 14 years . The article described how the old circus man was devastated .
 Dehydration was one suspected cause of death, as was pneumonia and old age . Dehydrators were also suspected causes of death .
 Felch, now 65 and living in Stinson Beach, Calif., recalls how emotional the scene was . In a phone interview last week, Felch recalled how emotional it was . Felch now lives in California with his wife .
 Summit Place closed in 200910 and other witnesses to Little Jennie’s burial have passed on . Summit Place is now closed and the burial site is closed .
 Township resident Betty Seymour said it was her uncle, the late Herb Noskey, who donated the use of his company’s backhoe to dig the grave . Noskey's backhoe was used by his company to dig a grave .
 Now 74, Seymour said she once worked in the mail’s Montgomery Ward and fed popcorn and peanuts to the circus’ baby elephants on lunch breaks and watched them get baths in the evening . Seymour, now 74, said she worked in Montgomery Ward's Montgomery Ward .
 She knew about Jennie’s burial that day in 1972, but couldn’t bring herself to go . Jennie's burial was held in 1972 .
 Forty-two years later, few people can say the precise location of the elephant’s grave . The elephant's grave is still located in the area .
 Felch and Cotton visited the property with the Free Press last week . Neither Felch nor Cotton remember where it all happened .
 Seymour said she and a cousin think the grave was behind a now-vanished billboard on the north end of the mall . Seymour said the grave is behind a billboard near the corner of Telegraph and Pontiac Lake roads .
 In 1989, an elephant researcher offered to excavate Jennie’s remains and mount an exhibit of her skeleton inside Summit Place . Jennie's remains were found in 1989 .
 There's no public record on how the mail’s ownership responded to the plan . No public record of how mail owners responded .
 Summit Place’s current owner, Los Angeles-based SR Capital, did not return a call for comment . The current owner of Summit Place has not returned a call from the company .
 According to the story, the extra face cou id neither Bat nor speak, but it could laugh and cry . The extra face could neither speak nor laugh, but could laugh .
 Edward begged doctors to have his 'devil twin' removed, but no doctor would attempt it . Edward begged for it to be removed because it 'speaked horrible things to him at night' Edward begged to have it removed but doctors refused .
 I'm sure the 'whispering horrible things at night' could have been untrue . But am sure the ‘whisper horrible things’ at night could be untrue .
 MAJA AHLGREN, 38, from Kungsangen, north of Stockholm in Sweden, divorced with a son . She is divorced from her husband and has a son with her hair .
 In 1982 she visit ed Paris and fell in love with a boy of her age, who promised to write but never did, or so she thought . She got his letter in early November 2002, 20 years late .
 It was post' marked 28 October 1982, and was correctly addressed to her parents’ home, where she lived when she was 18 . It was addressed to the address of her parents' home .
 She was a trifle bitter about the love letter’s delay, suggesting that her life might have taken a different turn had it been delivered on time .
 Daniel Sebag said he wished to visit Los Angeles . He said he wanted to visit the city . Sebag died in 2003 .
 The man didn’t remember Maja, nor did he recall writing the letter, although he did not exclude the possibility . However, the man said he didn't know Maja or write the letter .
 He moved to London, where he is married for the second time and has 11 children . He is married again and has a total of 11 children, including 11 grandchildren .
 Maja didn’t recognise him (“perhaps because his hat and beard cover half his face”, but he immediately recognised her. Maja’s hat was too short for Maja to recognise him because he had a beard and hat .
 Maja recognised him but he was not the youth she fell in love with, but his friend . Maja also recognised him as a friend of her .
 After 20 years Maja had forgotten the name of her Paris love, but took for granted he was the lettenwriter . According to this version of the story, Maja . Maja's Paris love was the author of a novel .
 His friend, who had secretly fallen in love with her, wrote the letter that entered postal limbo . Instead, he wrote it to a friend who was secretly falling in love for her .
 The interesting ques^ tion is not who wrote the letter, but how many Sebags it would have been possible to find remembering that they wrote it .
 Michael Alfred Shepherd gave reasons for the calls ranging from nose bleeds to vomiting blood . Shepherd gave the reasons for his calls to the hospital . Shepherd said nose bleeding and vomiting blood were among the reasons .
 Shepherd confessed to ‘eating drugs’ and having an alcohol problem . Shepherd said he made the calls from genuine fears for his health . Shepherd admitted to 'eating drugs' and having a drink problem .
 He was found guilty of persistently using a public communication network to cause annoyance, inconvenience or anxiety following his trial in Furness Magistrates' Court yesterday .
 Shepherd, 35, made 25 calls to the North West Ambulance Service from January 14 to April 6 . Shepherd, of Egerton Court, made a total of 25 calls during that period .
 Shepherd made a drunken call after taking diazepam and told operators he had toothache . Shepherd made the call on February 6 after taking the drug and telling operators he was suffering from toothache.
 Shepherd walked down a stairwell and it was noted he smelled of alcohol . Shepherd smelled alcohol, police said . Shepherd was arrested in connection with the incident .
 He was taken to Furness General Hospital but left before being treated . He was treated for his injuries but left the hospital before being taken there .
 ASBO has been imposed for five years, preventing Shepherd from causing a nuisance at Furness General Hospital or its premises or remaining on hospital property after being asked to leave .
 They were born when nature spirit Vash’Nok cried and his tears fell to the earth . The nature spirit was born when the nature spirit cried and fell to earth .
 The Abatwa are very shy seclusive and can only be seen by children, pregant women and magic prationers . They wield poisionous darts and arrows to protect themselves from harm .
 Isabella “Belle’ Boyd was accused of spying on the Union Army in 1862 . She was freed for lack of evidence .
 The seventeen-year-old girl had been sending information about Union troop movements to Major General “Stonewall” Jackson of the Confederate army .
 After the battle, a warrant was issued for Boyd’s arrest . obtained a safe-conduct pass from Union Brigadier General James Shields, the commander of the First Division, at the time .
 Boyd did not describe her meeting with the general, who was off-duty when she met him . Boyd said she met the general at the time of the incident .
 Shields was recuperating from wounds that he had suffered on March 22, when he had been struck by Confederate shrapnel . Shields was recovering from wounds he suffered from shrapnel wounds in March .
 Shields had no authority to issue passes when Boyd obtained hers because he had given command of his division to another officer, Colonel Nathan Kimball . Shields had given his division command to Kimball, who had been wounded .
 Shields must have been resting at some plade where he was isolated from the headquarters of his former command . When Boyd approached him, Shields was resting in some place where he had been .
 Boyd never explained how she persuaded Shields to give her the pass . She had a knack for convincing men to do whatever she asked . Boyd never said how she convinced Shields to let her pass .
 She was tall, slim, and athletic, with a mane of red hair and a flamboyant personality . The actress was tall and slim, slim and athletic .
 An enthusiastic amateur actress, she loved to sing, to read aloud, and to otherwise make herself a center of attention . She was an avid amateur actress .
 She came from one of the more prosperous families of Martinsburg, Virginia . Her personal possessions included a slave, several horses, and a wardrobe of expensive frocks .
 One young woman of her acquaintance complained frequently in a diary that Boyd was annoyingly loud and pushy, but most men found the young spy delightful . Boyd's face was not especially pretty, and one young woman wrote frequently in her diary that one of her friends complained frequently .
 Boyd went with her slave, Eliza Hopewell, to the Winchester railroad station . General Shields authorized Boyd's pass, and Boyd went to the station with her .
 They tried to board a train bound for Martinsburg but were halted by a Union officer in a captain’s uniform . The men were stopped by a captain's uniform as they boarded the train . The train was stopped by an officer who was in uniform .
 The captain seemed astonished when he examined the pass, but after some reflection, he decided to go ahead and arrest Boyd . Boyd was arrested by the captain after the incident .
 Leaving Hopewell on the train to Martinsburg, the Union officer marched Boyd to another train bound for Baltimore . Boyd was taken to a different train bound to Baltimore .
 At Baltimore, Boyd was kept in confinement for one week, and then freed for lack of evidence . Boyd was freed for a week, then she was kept behind bars .
 She celebrated her eighteenth birthday on May 9 . She went home to Martinsburg, Virginia, to visit relatives who owned a hotel in Front Royal .
 The three women were surprised to find their hosts living in a small cottage on the hotel grounds . Night fell before the three women arrived at the Hotel Strickler, where they stayed .
 General Shields resumed command of his division on April 30, when his surgeons judged that he had sufficiently recovered from his wound . The main hotel building had become the headquarters of General Shields, who had resumed command . General Shields was wounded in April .
 We were glad to find ourselves at our journey’s end, and to sit down to a comfortable dinner . fatigue and a long fast had sharpened our appetite .
 As soon as we had satisfied our hunger I sent in my card to General Shields, who promptly returned my missive in person . General Shields returned his card in person.
 Shields greeted Boyd cheerfully, and acted as if he had no idea that one of his own staff officers had recently arrested Boyd as a spy .
 It is possible that Shields was ignorant of Boyd’s arrest, or perhaps he did not take her seriously as a spy because the charges against her had been dropped, and because of her youth, her sex, and her general air of playful good nature .
 Shields: Confederate army of “Stonewall’s Jackson had Kernstown . He elaborated with a pun, saying the Confederate army . Shields explained with a smirk, that Kernstown was a Confederate town .
 Boyd would be free to travel wherever she pleased as soon as he finished annihilating Jackson’s army, which might take a few days, he said . He added that Boyd would then be able to go wherever she wanted .
 Boyd asked Boyd how he planned to accomplish that and, to her astonishment, he dropped a few hints . Boyd asked him how he had planned to do that . Boyd: "I don't know what I'm going to do, but I'm not sure"
 I am convinced he felt confident of immediate and complete success, or he would not have allowed some expressions to escape him which I turned to account . I'm convinced he . would not allow some expressions . which he would . not have . escaped him, he said .
 In short, he was completely off guard, and forgot that a woman can sometimes listen and remember . He was completely unprepared for his actions and forgot he was off guard .
 General Shields introduced me to the officers of his staff, two of whom were young Irishmen; and to one of these. James Shields. page two .
 Captain K. is indebted for some remarkable effusions, some withered flowers, and last, not least, for a great deal of very important information, which was carefully transmitted to my countrymen . Captain K., I am indebted .
 Shields and his staff continued to occupy the Hotel Strickler for several days . Boyd and her relatives could soon leave the cottage and move back into their hotel . Shields announced that he was about to depart “to whip Jackson”
 Shields held a council of war in the drawing room of the apartment normally occupied by Boyd’s aunt in the hotel . Boyd's aunt was in the apartment . Shields and Boyd's uncle were in the same hotel as Boyd's mother .
 Someone had drilled a hole through the floor of a closet in a bedroom above that drawing room, apparently to spy on activities below . Boyd, who had played in the hotel as a child, was aware of the hole in the closet .
 Boyd learned that Shields had lost track of Jackson’s Confederate army . The Confederate army was maneuvering in a very rapid and confusing way in the Shenandoah Valley . Boyd learned
 Shields mistakenly believed Jackson had left the valley and was marching east to participate in the defense of the Confederate capital of Richmond . Shields mistakenly thought that Jackson was leaving the valley to fight for the Confederacy .
 Shields had decided to leave the valley and take the bulk of his army east, leaving Front Royal very weakly defended . Shields had therefore decided to move east . Front Royal was very weak in the valley .
 The council prolonged their discussion for some hours; but I remained motionless and silent until the proceedings were brought to a conclusion, at one o’clock in the morning . The council was brought to an end at 1:30am .
 As soon as the coast was clear I crossed the courtyard, and made the best of my way to my own room . I took down in cipher everything I had heard which seemed to me of any importance . I went straight to the stables myself, saddled my horse, and gall
 As a member of the Confederate secret courier service, Boyd reported to Colonel Turner Ashby, the leader of Stonewall Jackson’s cavalry . Boyd reported his findings to the head of the cavalry .
 Since her spymaster changed location frequently, she did not know exactly where she would find him . She had no idea exactly where he would be found .
 After a scamper of about 15 miles, I found myself at the door of Mr M. M.’s house . After a scuppering of about fifteen miles, he found himself at the doorstep of the house .
 I did not lose a moment in springing from my horse; and, running up the steps, I knocked at the door with such vehemence that the house reechoed with the sound of the door . The house reeked the sound .
 Colonel Ashby's party was a quarter of a mile farther up the wood, and I turned to depart in search of them, but was in the very act of remounting when a door on my right was thrown open, and revealed Colonel Ashby himself .
 I first convinced him he presence was suDSiantiai anu of the earth— not a visionary emanation from the world of spirits— then, without farther circumlocution, I proceeded to narrate all I had overheard in the closet .
 A few days afterwards General Shields marched south, laying a trap, as he supposed, to catch ‘poor old Jackson and his demoralized army,” leaving behind him . Front Royal, one squadron of cavalry, one field battery, and the 1st Maryland Regiment of Infantry .
 Jackson’s entire Confederate army, meanwhile, marched rapidly toward Front Royal to attack the outnumbered federals who remained there . Jackson's entire Confederate Army marched rapidly to attack Front Royal .
 Confederate advance units surprised Union pickets south of town . Boyd was sitting at a window, theatrically reading aloud from a book to her grandmother and cousin .
 The streets were thronged with Yankee soldiers, hurrying about in every direction in the greatest confusion . The streets of the town were throngs of Yankee soldiers .
 I asked a Federal officer, who just then happened to be passing by, what was the matter . I asked him to explain to me that he had been shot in the head with a gun .
 He answered that the Confederates were approaching the town in force, that they had surprised and captured the outside pickets, and had actually advanced within a mile .
 Boyd saw through her opera glasses a force of Confederates less than a mile from town . Boyd returned to the Strickler Hotel, went upstairs, and went upstairs . Boyd went upstairs to see the Confederates . Boyd's opera was the first time she'd seen Confederates in town
 She wrote out some information about the positions of the Union defenders in town and wimin a nity-mne raaius .
 I again went down to the door, and this time I observed, standing about in groups, several men who had always professed attachment to the cause of the South . I went to see them again, and again, they were standing in groups .
 I demanded if there was one among them who would venture to carry to General Jackson the information I possessed. I demanded that one of them would be willing to carry the information to the General Jackson . I demanded one of the men who would agree to carry out the information .
 I put on a white sunbonnet, and started at a run down the street, which was thronged with Federal officers and men . The streets of the US capital were thronging with Federal agents and police officers .
 I soon cleared the town and gained the open fields, which I traversed with unabated speed, hoping to escape observation until such time I could make good my way to the Confederate line, which was still advancing .
 I had on a dark blue dress, with a little fancy white apron over it; and this contrast of colors, being visible at a great distance, made me far more conspicuous than was just then agreeable .
 Bullets kicked up dust around Boyd, and artillery shells fired by both armies whisted overhead from opposite directions .
 At length a Federal shell struck the ground within twenty yards of my feet . The explosion, of course, sent the fragments flying, in every direction around me .
 I had, however, just time to throw myself flat upon the ground before the deadly engine burst; and again Providence spared my life . "I had just thrown myself flat on the ground," he said .
 "Springing up when the danger was passed, I pursued my career, still under a heavy fire," she says . Springing up after the danger has passed, she says. "Springed up to the danger of being under fire, but still under fire"
 I often marvel and even shudder when I reflect how I cleared the fields and bounded over the fences with the agility of a deer . "I often marvel, even shudder, when I . recall how I . often marveled when I ... even shudder," says author .
 As I neared our line I waved my bonnet to our soldiers, to intimate that they should press forward, upon which one regiment, the 1st Maryland “rebel” Infantry, and Hay’s Louisiana Brigade, gave me a loud cheer, and dashed upon
 They did not then know who I was, and they were naturally surprised to see a woman on the battlefield, and on a spot, too, where the fire was so hot . "They did not know who she was," she says .
 Their shouts of approbation and triumph rang in my ears for many a day afterwards, and I still hear them not infrequently in my dreams . The shouts of approbation and triumph rang .
 I produced the “little note,” and told him all, urging him to hurry on the cavalry, with orders to seize the bridges before the retreating Federals should have time to destroy them . For some seconds I could say no more; but, as soon as I had
 He instantly galloped off to report to General Jackson, who immediately rode forward, and asked for an escort and a horse wherewith to return to the village . General Jackson then rode forward and asked me if 1 would have an escort .
 Jackson's Confederates captured six hundred and ninetyone federal soldiers . Jackson won a lopsided victory at Front Royal, capturing six hundred-and-ninners .
 He followed up his success with a series of fast maneuvers and surprise attacks in the Shenandoah Valley of Virginia . The area is in a northeasterly direction between the Appalachian Mountains to its west and the Blue Ridge Mountains .
 Jackson’s forces never totaled more than seventeen thousand men, but his menacing presence in the Shenandoah Valley caused Lincoln to divert fifty thousand troops from General George B McClellan's attack on Confederate capital of Richmond, Virginia, which failed .
 Jackson felt very grateful to Boyd for her contribution to his success . Jackson said he was very grateful for Boyd's contribution to success .
 He arranged for her to receive a captain’s commission in the Confederate army . He also made sure that she was awarded the Southern Cross of Honor medal .
 I thank you, for myself and for the army, for the immense service that you have rendered your country to-day . Miss Belle BoYD was the first female soldier to be awarded a posthumous honour .
 Joe Dabney, 63, a retired taxi driver, has sued American airlines for $10 million for losing his 70-year-old wife Margie . Margie suffers from Alzheimer's disease and diabetes and has diabetes .
 The Dabneys were travelling home to Bakersfield, California, after visiting their daughter in Indianapolis . They changed planes at Dallas-Fort Worth Airport on 5 December when they changed planes .
 Mr Dabney had just undergone hip surgery and was being wheeled off to a lavatory . The pair had arranged to be escorted off the aircraft and taken to their connecting flight .
 The aircrew knew she needed help as she was wearing a special tag . She had to be taken back to her seat when she tried to open the door of the plane in mid-air .
 A pilot reported that a ""black woman"" was wandering around on the airport tarmac, but again she could not be found . Two to three hours later, a pilot reported she was found wandering around the tarmac .
 Bloodhounds were dispatched to track down Mrs Dabney's scent at the airport . Four days later, bloodhounds found her scent at airport . Bloodhound was dispatched to find her at the end of the day .
 The trail led to a service road where it then disappeared, leading Mr Dabney to conclude that she had been picked up by car . The trail then disappeared .
 NY Post, Sun, Sun and Sun, 20 April; Adelaide Advertiser, Gold Coast Bulletin, 30 April 2002 . Gold Coast Coast Bulletin .
 One of the attackers chopped off one of her hands, the other had to be amputated in hospital . She spent weeks recovering from her horrific injuries .
 Ms Staford Bandaba then took the brave step of identifying her attackers . Traumatised, she then took to the streets to find out who her attackers had been .
 She was taken to a safe-house where she lived under government protection . She lived in a safe house where she was protected by the government .
 The government recently decided she could no longer live there, leaving the 28-year-old fearing for her safety . But the government has now decided she cannot continue to live there .
 No albinos have been killed in her home village in the north-western Kagera region in the past year . The administrative officer in the village where she was re-housed said the situation had improved .
 The decision comes just a few weeks after a court sentenced three men to death for the murder of an albino boy . The decision by the authorities comes just weeks after three men were sentenced to death .
 Ms Staford Bandaba is one of thousands of people with albinism who live in fear in Tanzania . Albino murders are common in the country .
 53 albinos are believed to have been murdered in the past two years in the country . 53 of them were murdered in two years, according to reports .
 Albinos, who are pale because of a lack of pigment in their skin, have been routinely killed . Witchdoctors say potions made with their body parts will bring good fortune to those who use them .
 The killings have also spread to neighbouring Burundi where at least 12 people have been murdered . The killings are also spreading to Burundis, where 12 people were murdered .
 The victims were mutilated and their body parts were believed to have been sold in Tanzania to make potions . Their body parts are believed to be sold in the country to make potion .
 One man was sentenced to death and eight others were jailed in Burundi earlier this year . One man has been sentenced to the death for the crimes against him .
 Ms Staford Bandaba’s alleged attackers have been caught in north-western Tanzania . The vast majority of the murders have been carried out in the north-west of Tanzania .
 The story of her eviction caught the attention of a businessman who has agreed to let her and her mother live in a room in his house for a year . The businessman has offered to let the mother and daughter live in his home for the year .
 Her father and four siblings who were taking care of her and feeding her were also evicted . Her father was evicted from the home .
 They have had no choice but to return to the village where she was so brutally attacked . The village where the attack occurred is where the victim was attacked .
 Her father, Staford Bandaba, admitted he was very anxious about reprisal attacks being carried out on his family . Bandaba's father said he was 'very anxious' that attacks would not be carried out .
 "Albinos are still being hunted and we don't yet know how to solve the problem,"" one local resident says . "We still don't know what to do with the problem"
 "They started well and they should continue to help Mariam get a permanent house which will be safe,"" another person tells me . Another person tells CNN.com .
 President Jakaya Kikwete has said the albino murders have brought shame to Tanzania . He said his government has taken steps to identify and prosecute the perpetrators .
 In March thousands of people took part in an exercise to identify those they suspected of being involved, by filling in forms anonymously .
 Authorities have also issued a ban on all traditional healers, and several people have been arrested . Several people have also been arrested in connection with the ban .
 The government has given Staford Bandaba a plot of land to build a house away from her village . Ms Bandaba has now been given a plot to build her home away from the village .
 She says she has no money for the construction work, leaving her feeling abandoned at a time when she needs the help most . But she says she can't afford the work and says she feels abandoned .
 I am begging all Tanzanians to kindly keep on helping me, because my situation is now worse. I'm begging for help, as my situation has now become worse .
 A local businessman has heard her plea for help . Fortunately, a local businessman hears her plea . She says: "I have no hands.""
 Ms Staford Bandaba will be faced with the prospect of having to return to the village where she was nearly killed . But in a year's time, she will be facing the prospect again of returning to her village .
 In stark contrast to all of his famously black-and-white brethren at the zoo, he was totally white . For in stark contrast, the zoo's famous black and white animals were white .
 Snowdrop is the first albino penguin to be born in captivity in captivity anywhere in the world . He was born in South Africa, with only a couple of sightings of wild penguins on record from South Africa .
 Clarissa is an edible crab whose palatability is destined never to be tested . Caught by a local fisherman off Anglesey who must have thought he was seeing triple .
 Clarissa is equipped with a third claw a sight so strange that this maritime curio was deposited at Anglesey Sea Zoo, where it now resides on display . The crustacean is now on display at the zoo in the UK .
 Wolverhampton Express and Star, 8 Aug 2002. where, four months later, a large white felid was also reported; and in August 1993, a big tawny wildcat was spied by locals in Palolo Valley .
 The creeks of India's Bhitarkanika Wildlife Sanctuary are deemed by naturalists to be the ideal habitat for estuarine crocodiles . At least 12 albino specimens have recently been discovered there .
 Only two white individuals of this species had ever been recorded from Asia . One of those was born in captivity, and one of those in captivity .
 Albino animals often fare poorly in the wild, but as most of these albino crocodiles are female, it seems likely that the mutant gene responsible for them will persist in this population . Albino crocids, on account of their conspicuous appearance, often fare well in the
 Homotherium latidens is traditionally deemed to have become extinct in Europe around 300,000 years ago . It is thought to have been extinct in the region 300,00 years ago and is believed to have lived in Europe since then . The extraordinary scimitar cat is now a
 There is some enigmatic iconographical evidence to suggest that it still survived as late as late, geologically speaking, as 30,000 years ago .
 In March 2000 a partial lower jaw of H latidens was trawled from an area southeast of the Brown Bank in the North Sea by the fishing vessel UK33 .
 Radiocarbon analysis dated it to 28,000 years ago, roughly the same age as the iconographical items found in Isturitz cave .
 This is not the first such ABC flap in the Hawaiian archipelago . Interestingly, this is not an ABC flap .
 A mystery cat was sighted leaping from a ditch onto a road on Kaui in May 1984 but was never captured . A suspected puma was sought but again eluded capture in the hills above Aina Haina in February 1988 .
 A dark-furred, largeheaded, long-tailed feline mystery beast said to be at least as large as a Labrador dog have been reported in the lower Olinda area of Maui .
 The first Everglades Skunk Ape Festival was held on 14 June 2003 at Trail Lakes Campground in Ochopee, Florida . It was held in honour of Bill Mitchell .
 First-ever skunk ape festival commemorates tourist's earlier encounter with Florida's most reclusive inhabitant .
 This is the first record of Gurney's pitta in Burma for 89 years, but thesenewly located in Burma .
 Since the 1960s, the whereabouts of le Serrec have remained as mysterious as the identity of the object in his photo . The organisation headed by cryptozoologist Jan-Ove Sundberg has located him .
 Aged 75, le Serrec now lives in Asia, and GUST is hoping to interview him in the near future .
 Gurney's pitta, a small, multicoloured species of ground-dwelling bird, was last confirmed sighting in 1952 . In 1985 it was finally classed as extinct only for it to be rediscovered alive and well in Thailand a year later .
 Just 30 wild specimens known from one small area in that country . Nevertheless, it has remained gravely endangered, with just 30 wild .
 Thirty-five reports citing various mythical beasts or extra-terrestrial activity have been made since 2010, with officers investigating 18 .
 The police federation called for a public debate to discuss priorities and screening of calls . The public debate is expected to take place in coming days .
 Officers gave 'words of advice' to someone claiming he was an alien trail another planet . Officers also gave advice to someone who claimed to be an alien .
 A person who thought they were a werewolf told the force they wanted to go running on the moors, refused assistance . The details were released in a freedom of information request .
 Reports which officers did not attend included a man who said ghosts were sitting on his living room chair . Reports of ghosts were also not attended by officers .
 Nigel Rabbitts, chair of Devon and Cornwall Police Federation, said it had raised concerns about demand versus resources . Need for ""investment and training of staff who take the calls," he said .
 I here should be a public debate as to what the public see as a priority, how resources should be distributed and what pereentac calls for service should be screened out . I should be able to hear from the public about what they want to do and what they need to do
 Visitors will get to hear stories of unexplained noises and strange happenings that occur in and around the historic buildings . Visitors will also be able to hear tales of unexplained happenings .
 New evidence will be shared by the Porterville Ghost Society along with stories that deal with the paranormal . Porterville ghost Society will be sharing stories from the area .
 Tours will begin at 8:00 pm and continue every hour with the last tour at midnight . Tours will be available for anyone that is interested, tours will begin every hour and continue until midnight .
 Warm clothing is strongly advised as well as good walking shoes and flashlights . Warm clothing should be worn during the trip .
 A spider god, being able to morph into a spider and a normal looking human being, is a spider god . The image was taken from the image of the spider god in a museum in New York City .
 In some stories, he is the son of Nyame, the sky god, who got so annoyed with his son that he turned him into a spider .
 There’s a story that explains how stories came to be, including Nyame .
 Once, there were no stories in the entire world, because Nyame hoarded them all . Nyame once hoarded all the stories in his life, but now there are no stories .
 Anansi didn't like this so he went to ask Nyame to let him have the stories to share with him . Nyame didn't agree to share his stories .
 Nyame agreed but wanted Onini the Python, Osebo , Mmoboro Hornets, and the dwarf Mmoatia in exchange . Nyame also wanted Osobo the Python and the Mmobile Hornets in exchange for Onini .
 He tricked the python into tying himself on a branch, the leopard was caught in his webs when Anansi offered to help him out a hole . The dwarf got stuck to a doll covered with sticky gum .
 As promised, Nyame bestowed him the title of God of Stories* A title that he is most known for .
 During the Slave Trade to the West Indies, the Africans who were taken as slaves kept his oral tradition alive . During the slave trade, the African tradition was kept alive during slavery .
 Countries like the United States, the Caribbean Islands, Colombia, Suriname, etc. has their own variation of Anansi .
 Anansi became their symbol of resistance and freedom, telling stories of how he could trick slave owners into granting freedom or humiliating them . And as such, he became the symbol of freedom .
 Wiltshire vicar revives ancient archery law . Residents rewarded for archery practice with barbecue .
 Reverend Mary Edwards, of Collingbourne Ducis, near Marlborough, called residents to the village recreation ground on Friday . The Reverend was speaking to residents at the recreation ground in the village .
 Residents were rewarded for complying with the law with a bar, a barbecue and live music . The bar was held in honor of those who had to comply with it .
 Historians Fletch Coke and Paul Clements have been working for years to solve the mystery of where Charles Dickinson is buried . Local historians have been trying to find out where Dickinson was buried .
 Dickinson was killed in a famous 1806 duel with Andrew Jackson . The duel could have greatly altered the course of history had Jackson not died from his wound .
 The cause of the duel has its own controversy, but so does the outcome . The duel took place in New York City, New Jersey .
 Historians in Caroline County, Maryland, say a loyal servant secretly dug up the remains of his former master, and returned with them to Maryland . The remains were reburied in Maryland .
 Research and historical documents led him not to Maryland, but to the Bowen’s front yard .
 Dickinson's grave is marked ‘Dickinson’s Grave,’ and you can see it relative to the location of the Peach Blossom house, the home of Joseph Erwin, Dickinson's father-in-law .
 Archaeologist Dan Allen was eventually engaged to find the grave . He thinks he’s succeeded .
 The coffin nails were where they should be if the coffin had just deteriorated in place, the coffin nails are where they would be .
 The wooden coffin has long since rotted away, leaving a coffin-shaped area containing two small bone fragments, which Allen believes are finger phalanges . Allen believes the coffin has been left with the remains of a finger .
 There had been hopes of uncovering something more substantial, perhaps even the bullet that killed Dickinson, but there were no other remains found . Dickinson's body was found in the early hours of Wednesday morning .
 He said that position, along with the hands being by the sides, are the most common . He said hands are by the side, and hands by the hands are also common .
 A high level of acidity could explain the absence of more skeletal remains . The acidity of the remains could also explain the lack of more remains .
 Allen is consulting forensic anthropologists to determine if DNA testing of the bone fragments would be worthwhile . Allen is also consulting forensic anthropology experts to determine whether DNA testing is worthwhile .
 Such testing is expensive and could possibly destroy the fragments, he said . But such testing could potentially destroy fragments, the scientist said .
 Along with the evidence Allen listed, Clements added the hexagonal shape of the coffin . Clements said the coffin was made of a hexagonal coffin .
 Allen said after the August fcscovery that Jackson's death would have been 'ilv unlikelv for a snr.iallv nmk' Allen said . Allen said it would be "ilvievievievable" for him to die in prison . Allen was
 There had been hopes of Bering something more substanperhaps even the bullet that killed toson, but there were no other lins found .
 He called the finger ins a “fluke of preservation” *n is consulting forensic apologists to determine if DNA g of the bone fragments would be taken from them . He called it “a fluke of preservation"
 Allen: “It would have been incredibly unlikely for a socially promK surface I encountered prehistoric deposits,” Allen said . Allen says he encountered prehistoric prehistoric deposits .
 "cut nails" were the type used in coffins of the time . But they kept digging at the base of the stump and eventually found fragments of “cut nails”
 Last year, reporters were on hand when a different archaeological team dug up the Bowen’s front yard, only to uncover a water pipe . The Bowen family's front yard was dug up by a different team last year .
 He set aside data from ground-penetrating radar, avoided historical clues and followed intuition . He followed his intuition, avoiding historical clues .
 It eventually led him underneath a tree stump, but not before meeting some challenges along the way .
 They spent five hours removing the large stump, after which the grave was fully excavated .
 Of the original burial Allen said, “They dug right through the deposits.” Allen said of the burial site . Allen: “The burial site is now a national museum .
 Everything that has been removed for examination will eventually be reburied in the same location . It will include sherds, soil, nails and bone fragments .
 Bowen’s have a large bare spot in their front yard where a tree used to be, and quite a bit of history to go with it . In the meantime, the Bowen's have a big question: Where is the tree?
 Bob Dick recently underwent a 90-minute total knee replacement without the aid of anesthesia . Dick chose to stay awake through the chisel and the buzz of the electric saw .
 Next he held his thumb and forefinger together, imagining a walk around the pond at his home . Next he imagined a walk in the water at home .
 So began Dick’s surgery by hypnosis, which he describes as being so trouble-free that he hardly realized it happened . Dick's surgery was so trouble free he hardly noticed it happened.
 He had nerveblockers reducing the pain throughout the surgery, but his deep relaxation techniques made “going under” a needless step . The surgery was performed by a team of surgeons .
 Dick’s self-administered treatment is a rare but increasingly common alternative to general anesthesia, in which a patient is made unconscious through inhaled gases and intravenous drugs . The treatment is increasingly common in hospitals .
 In 2006, British television broadcast a patient having a hernia having hernia . Dick decided to try the method he’s long employed in his own practice in his practice .
 Meditating, praying or “zoning out” at work is using the same techniques that go into hypnosis . Someone meditating or praying at work uses the techniques used in hypnosis to relax .
 As a young psychologist in the early 1970s, he studied for a week in Arizona with Milton Erickson, a psychiatrist who specialized in medical hypnosis . He studied with Erickson in the 1970s .
 In his own practice, he refers to it as an altered state of consciousness . The intense form of concentration is intense concentration that can change what the mind perceives .
 A patient can’t be forced into a trance, only willingly led . Also, he stresses that a patient must not be forced to be led into trance .
 He tried it during a colonoscopy, which didn't work as well because the doctor asked started breathing deeply, a signal for his body to relax .
 In 2006, British television broadcast a patient having hernia surgery without any drugs . Without any drugs, he was lulled into his inner peace .
 In April, Guinean singer Alama Kante sang her way through throat surgery to keep doctors from damaging her vocal chords . The feat was aided by hypnosis and hypnosis .
 While anesthesia is widely considered safe, it carries the small risk of stroke, heart attack and death . In older adults or those with a serious medical history, the risk is small, according to the Mayo Clinic .
 He tried it during a colonoscopy, which didn't work as well because the docto r asked him if it hurt, which focused his mind on the pain . He also tried it when he was in the middle of a colonogram .
 Hypnosis worked well for the cataract surgeries on both eyes, in which he was able to focus deeply enough to avoid the knife .
 Dick practiced for two weeks ahead of the procedure, 30 to 45 minutes at a time . But knee replacement took longer . Dick practiced two weeks before the procedure .
 He also watched a Youlhbe video showing the operation, so he knew what noises to expect . The operation will take place in a specially designed hospital .
 With surgery, “The anxiety is just as bad as physical pain,” Dick said . “It’s the anxiety of surgery,’ he said .
 Kimberly Saenz worked eight months as a nurse at the busiest dialysis clinic in town . Bleach was injected into people, police say .
 One patient after another died last April for reasons no one could explain . The patient's death was the latest in a long line of mysterious deaths .
 Dialysis clinic in Lufkin, Texas, shut down to investigate . The clinic was shut down after a series of grim photos emerged .
 Saenz deliberately injected 10 patients with bleach, killing five of them in what were probably excruciatingly painful deaths . Five of the patients died in what are thought to have been agonizing deaths .
 Saenz, 35, was charged with one count of capital murder covering five patients . Saenz is accused of killing five patients in a series of murders .
 She was also charged with aggravated assault against five other patients who were allegedly injected with bleach but survived . She is accused of attacking five patients who survived the bleach injection .
 Debra Oates left the clinic on an ambulance stretcher April 26 last year when her arm would not stop bleeding . Oates was taken to the hospital on a stretcher from a local hospital .
 Oates said Saenz often helped her pass the hourslong dialysis treatments by telling jokes . Saenz was the nurse who helped Oates pass the dreary, hourslong treatments . Oates: "I don't think she's going to die"
 Oates said she watched three people before her rushed to the hospital on the same day she was stricken . Oates: "I'm sure it's not the first time I've seen three people rush to hospital on same day I was stricken" Oates says she watched her three people
 34 emergency calls were made from the clinic in April — more than three times the number in March . Altogether, 34 emergencies were made in April, three times more than March .
 Investigators believe Saenz used syringes to inject bleach into dialysis lines . Investigators believe he injected bleach into the patients’ dialysis line . Saenz is accused of using the bleach to inject into the dialysis system .
 Authorities first charged Saenz last May with two counts of aggravated assault . Two witnesses said they saw her draw bleach into syringes and traces of bleach were found in dialysis machine tubing .
 After being charged with murder, Saenz turned herself in Wednesday and was jailed without bail . Saenz was charged with the murder of her daughter, who was killed in 2012 .
 Dialysis is a mostly miserable routine for about 325,000 people nationwide with kidney failure . Dialysis costs about $1.5 billion a year to treat kidney failure patients .
 Most spend three days a week tethered for hours to a machine that filters their blood . Most spend hours tethered to machines that filter their blood — a job their kidneys can no longer do . Most of the people in the U.S. no longer use their kidneys .
 The belief in the vampire and the whole family of demons has its origin in the animism, spiritism, or personification of the barbarian, says George R Stetson .
 Under the names of vampire, were* wolf, man-wolf, nightmare, night-demon — in the Illyrian tongue oupirea, or leeches . In modern Greek broucolaqnea^ and in our common tongue ghosts, each country having its own peculiar
 The character, purpose, and manner of the vampire manifestations depend, tike its designation, upon environment and the plane of culture .
 All primitive peoples have believed in the existence of evil spirits holding a middle place between men and gods . Good and evil spirits are believed to hold a place between gods and men .
 Cal met lays down in most explicit terms, as he was bound to do by the canons of his church, the doctrine of angels and demons as a matter of dogmatic theology .
 Dr. Dr. declares superstition to be prevalent in all the isolated districts of southern Rhode Island . Many instances of its survival can be found in large centers of population .
 In the village now being considered known exhumations have been made in five families, in the village previously named in three families, and in two adjoining villages in two families . Exhumations were made in the villages previously named .
 One of the nine surviving members of the family, a sickly son, armed with a spade, exhumed his father and cut off his head . Since then one of his sons has been sickly .
 Peculiar conditions have caused its manifestation and survival there, and similar ones likely to produce it elsewhere . Similar ones are likely to be produced elsewhere, says the author .
 The singular feature is that it should appear and flourish in a native population which from its infancy has had the ordinary New England educational advantages . In a State having a larger population to the square mile than any in the Union, and in an environment of remarkable literacy and culture .
 It is perhaps fortunate that the isolation of which this is probably the product, the isolation common in sparsely settled regions, has produced nothing worse . The isolation is perhaps the product of the isolation, which is probably a result of superstition .
 In neighboring Connecticut, within a few miles of its university town of New Haven, there are rural farming populations, fairly prosperous, of average intelligence . Rural farming populations have made themselves notorious by murder, suicides and numerous cases of melancholia and insanity .
 The vampire superstition is an illustration of the remarkable tenacity and continuity of a superstition through centuries of intellectual progress from a lower to a higher culture, and of the impotency of the latter to eradicate from itself from itself .
 The most enlightened and philosophic have, either apparent or secret, secreted in their inmost consciousness, superstitious weaknesses . They are negative, involuntary, more or less barbaric, and under greater or lesser control in correspondence with their education, their present environment, and their development .
 These in various degrees predominate over the understanding where reason is silent or its authority weakens, says the author of the book . The author's view of the world is that reason should not be ignored .
 S6nya Koval4vsky was one of the most brilliant mathematicians of the century . Kovalvsky obtained the Prix-Bordin from the French academy, “the greatest scientific honor ever gained by a woman”
 She was so influenced by disagreeable dreams and the apparition of a demon that she was obviously depressed and low-spirited .
 A well known and highly cultured American mathematician recently said that his servant had nailed a horseshoe over a house door, and that he had never had the courage to remove it . He said that a well known American mathematician had nailed it over the door seven years ago .
 Buckle declared that “ superstition was the curse of Scotland,” and in this regard neither Germany nor Scotland are singular . Buckle declares that superstition is the cursed of Scotland .
 Of the origin of this superstition in Rhode Island or in other parts of the United States we are ignorant ; it is in all proba12 the American Anthropologist .
 Mr Mooney, in a personal note, says he has not met with any close parallel of the vampire myth among the tribes he is familiar .
 "There are in that tribe quite a number of old witches and wizards who thrive and fatten upon the livers of murdered victims," says author .
 When some one is dangerously sick these witches gather invisibly about his bedside and torment him, even lifting him up and dashing him down again upon the ground until life is extinct . When some of the sick people are dying, the witches gather in and torment them .
 After he is buried they dig up the body and take out the liver to feast upon . The liver is taken out of the man's body and eaten by his family .
 They thus lengthen their own lives by as many days as they have taken from his, they say . They thus . lengthen themselves by as long as they took from his life, they said .
 "In this way they get to he very aged, which renders them objects of suspicion," he says . "They are very old, they are very aged," he adds .
 If discovered and recognized during the feast, when they are again visible, they die within seven days . If found and recognized, they will die within a week of being found .
 I have personal experience of a case in which a reputed medicine-man was left to die alone because his friends were afraid to come into the house on account of the presence of invisible witches . The case is not the first time I have seen a case of a death in a house
 Jacob Grimm* defines superstition as a persistence of individual men in views which the common sense or culture of the majority has caused them to abandon . Grimm* does not recognize or take account of the subtile, universal, ineradicable fear of or reverence for the supernatural .
 De Quincey has more comprehensively remarked that superstition or sympathy with the invisible is the great test of man's nature as an earthly combining with a celestial .
 In superstition is the possibility of religion, in superstition, it is possible of religion . In reviewing these cases of psychologic pre-Raphaelitism they seem, from an economic point of view, to form one of the strongest • Teutonic Mythology .
 They also remind us of the boutade of the Saturday Review, “ that to be really mediaeval, one should have no body . To be really modern, one would have no soul; ” to be mediaeval. one should be really . modern . to be modern,
 Honey is believed to have power over spirits because honey is one of the earliest foods, yields an intoxicating drink, has many healing virtues, and prevents corruption . Honey is also believed to be a powerful ingredient in spirits . Honey has many health benefits, including healing and preventing corruption .
 Dekhan Brahman father drops honey into the mouth of his new-born child . The father of a Dekhan child drops honey in the mouth .
 Among higher class Hindus, especially among Brahmans, honey is dropped into a child's mouth from a gold spoon or ring . Honey is dropped in the mouth from the mouth of a gold or silver spoon .
 Among Dekhan Hindus, when the bridegroom comes to the bride’s house honey and curds are given him to sip . Honey is given to the groom when he comes to a bride's house . Honey, curds and honey are given to him to drink .
 This honey-sipping is called madkuparka; its apparent object is to scare evil from the bridegroom . It is also known to be used to scare bad spirits away from the wedding .
 How highly the early Hindus valued honey appears from the hymn, “Let the winds pour down honey, the rivers pour down . honey, may our plants be sweet.” The hymn was written by the early Hindu Hindus .
 The Feloops of West Africa made a strong liquor out of honey, and the Hottentots are fond of honey beer .
 The early Christians were possessed, or obsessed, by demons . The so-called demoniacal possession of idiots, lunatics, and hysterical persons is still common in Japan, China, India, and Africa .
 The Hebrew synonym of demon was serpent . The Greek, diaholus, was a calumniator, or impure spirit . The Hebrew, daiholus was a Calumniator .
 The Rabbins were divided in opinion, some believing they were entirely spiritual, others that they were corporeal, capable of generation and subject to death . Some believe they were immortal, others believe they are corporeal .
 It was the general belief that the vampire is a spirit which leaves its dead body in the grave to visit and torment the living .
 Modern Greeks are persuaded that the bodies of the excommunicated do not putrefy in their tombs, but appear in the night as in the day, and that to encounter them is dangerous . The modern Greeks are convinced that the . bodies . do not appear in their . tom
 Polynesians believed that the vampires were the departed souls, which quitted the grave, and grave idols, to creep by night into the houses and devour the heart and entrails of the sleepers . The Polynesian believed the dead were the deceased souls .
 The Mintira of the Malay peninsula have their water demon, who sucks blood from men's toes and thumbs . The water demon is known as the water demon of the Mintira .
 The first theory of the vampire superstitions is that the soul of the living man, often a sorcerer, leaves its proper body asleep and goes forth, often in the form of a straw or fluff of down .
 Some Mauri come by night to men, sit upon their breasts, and suck their blood, while others think children are alone attacked . Some say children are attacked, while to men they are nightmares . Others think children and women are attacked by Mauri .
 The belief in the Obi of Jamaica and the Vaudoux or Vodun of the west African coast, Jamaica, and Haiti is essentially the same as that of the vampire . The worship and superstitions, which in Africa include child -murder, still survive in those parts of
 The negro laid under the ban of the Obi or who is vaudouxed or, in the vernacular, “hoodooed” Blowly pines to death . Blowly is a black man who has been laid under a ban .
 It is believed that consumption is not a physical hut but a spiritual disease, obsession, or visitation . As long as the body of a dead consumptive relative has blood in its heart it is proof that an occult influence steals from it for death .
 It is a common belief in primitive races of low culture that disease is caused by the revengeful spirits of man or other animals — notably among some tribes of North American Indians as well as African negroes .
 Russian superstition supposes nine sisters who plague mankind with fever . The sisters are believed to plague mankind .
 As in the financial and political, the psychologic world has its periods of exaltation and depression, of ebb and flow, of confidence and alarm . They lie chained up in caverns, and when let loose pounce upon men without pity, they pounce .
 The plague and other distressing epidemics in an age of great public moral depravity and illiteracy . The plague was a major plague epidemic in Europe in the 19th century .
 Calmet, a learned Benedictine monk and abb<§ of Senones, wrote a popular treatise on the vampire, which in a short time passed through many editions . Calmet's treatise was written by Calmet himself himself .
 "It was my good fortune not long since to find in the Boston Athenaeum library an original copy of his work"
 Calmet was born in Lorraine, near Commercy, in 1672, and hia chief works were a commentary and history of the Bible . Calmet died in France in 1883 .
 This curious treatise has proved a mine of wealth to all modern encyclopedists and demonologists . It was published in 1883 .
 It impresses one as the work of a man whose mental convictions do not entirely conform to the traditions and dogmas of hia church, and his style at times appeal's somewhat apologetic .
 Calmet declares his belief to be that the vampires of Europe and the brucolaques of Greece are the excommunicated which the grave rejects . Calmet declared his belief in the belief that Europe and Greece were the vampires .
 They are the dead of a longer or shorter time who leave their tombs to torment the living, sucking their blood and announcing their appearance by rattling of doors and windows . The dead are the deceased of a long or short time .
 The name vampire, or d'oupires, signifies in the Slavonic tongue a bloodsucker . The name vampires is a French word for vampires .
 First: That the persons were buried alive and naturally leave their tombs . Second: That they naturally naturally left their tombbs . Third: That people buried alive naturally leave the tombs.
 That they are dead, but that by God’s permission or particular command they return to their bodies for a time, as when they are exhumed their bodies are found entire, the blood red and fluid, and their members soft and pliable .
 That it is the devil who makes these apparitions appear and by their means causes all the evil done to men and animals . That is said to be the evil caused by the devil . The devil is responsible for the evil that is done by evil, says the author .
 In 1730 in Turkish Servia it was believed that those who had been passive vampires during life became active after death . In Russia, that the vampire does not stop his unwelcome visits at a single member of a family, but extends his visits to the last member, which is Rhode Island
 The inhabitants of the island of Chio do not answer unless called twice, being persuaded that the brueolaques do not call but once, and when so called the vampire disappears, and the person called dies in a few days . The inhabitants do not respond to calls twice, and
 The classic writers from Sophocles to Shakespeare and from Shakespeare to our own time have recognized superstition . The superstition is superstition.
 Mr Conway quotes' from the legend of Ishtar descending to Hades to seek some beloved one . Mr Conway quoted the story from the legendary Ishtar .
 William of Malmsbury says that in England they believed that the wicked came back after death by the will of the devil . It was not an unusual belief that those whose death had been caused in this manner at their death pursued the same evil calling .
 "Under such an uncomfortable and inconvenient infliction some avenue of escape must, if possible, be found. Naturally under such an inconvenient and inconvenient . This is not the case of any escape must be found," says the author of a new book .
 If on opening the grave of a “ suspect “ the body was found to be of a rose color, the beard, hair, and nails renewed, and the veins filled, the evidence of its being the abode of a vampire was conclusive .
 An excommunicated person was exhumed and the body was found full, healthy, and well disposed and the veins filled with the blood the body had taken from the living . The body was discovered in the Levant in the seventeenth century .
 In a certain Turkish village, of forty persons exhumed seventeen gave evidence of vampirism . Of forty people ex-humed, 17 gave evidence that they had been murdered by vampirs .
 In 1727 the bodies of five religieuze were discovered in a tomb near the hospital of Quebec, that had been buried twenty years, covered with flesh and suffused with blood . The methods of relief from or disposition of the vampire's dwelling place are not numerous, but extremely s
 In Servia a relief is found in eating of the earth of his grave and rubbing the person with his blood . The relief was found in Servia . Servia is found to have eaten the ground of the grave and rubbed it with blood .
 This prescription was, however, valueless if after forty days the body was exhumed and all the evidences of an archivampire were not found . After forty days of exhumation, the body could not be found again .
 A more common and almost universal method of relief, especially in the Turkish provinces and in the Greek islands, was to burn the body and scatter the ashes to the winds . The most common method to relieve the pain was burning the body .
 Some old writers are of the opinion that the souls of the dead cannot be quiet until the entire body has been consumed . This is the opinion of some old writers .
 According to Voltaire, the heart is torn out and burned in Levant . Exceptions are noted in the Levant, where the body is cut in pieces and boiled in wine .
 In New England the body is exhumed, the heart burned, and the ashes scattered . The ashes are scattered in New England .
 In Hungary and in Russia they choose a boy young enough to be certain that he is innocent of any impurity . Put him on the back of a horse which has never stumbled and is absolutely black, and make him ride over all the graves in the cemetery .
 Stuart Moffat was born in the old snuff mill belonging to his father and Dr Moffat . Stuart was born at the head of Petaquamscott pond, six miles from Newport, across the bay, Rhode Island .
 By some mysterious survival, occult transmission, or remarkable atavism, this region is distinguished by the prevalence of this remarkable superstition . A survival of the days of Sardanapalua, of Nebuchadnezzar, and of New Testament history in the closing years of
 It is an extraordinary instance of a barbaric superstition outcropping in and coexisting with a high general culture, of which Max Muller and others have spoken . It is not so uncommon, if rarely so aggravated, crude, and painful .
 The region referred to, where agriculture is in a depressed condition and abandoned farms are numerous, is the trampingground of the book agent, the chrotno peddler, the patent-medicine man and the home of the erotic and neurotic modem novel .
 The social isolation away from the larger villages is as complete as it is in the village . The social isolate away from larger villages was as complete .
 As a century and a half ago, the hoy Gilbert Stuart tramped the woods, fished the streams, and was developing and absorbing his artistic inspirations, while the agricultural and economic conditions are very much worse .
 The region furnishes an object-lesson in the decline of wealth consequent upon the prevalence of a too common heresy in the district that land will take care of itself, or that it can be robbed from generation to generation .
 In such isolated conditions the superstitions of a much lower culture have maintained their place and are likely to keep it and perpetuate it, despite the church, the public school, and the weekly newspaper .
 Cotton Mather, Justice Bewail, and the host of medical, clerical, and lay believers in the uncanny superstitions of bygone centuries could still hold high carnival carnival . Cotton, Mather and others are believed to have been superstitious in the past .
 The first visit in this farming community of native-born New Englanders was made to , a small seashore village possessing a summer hotel and a few summer residents of summer residents . Newport is that Mecca of wealth, fashion, and nineteenth-century culture .
 One member of this family had some years since lost children by consumption, and by common report claimed to have saved those surviving by exhumation and cremation of the dead .
 South Kingston was in 1780 by far the wealthiest town in the State'* It had a special provision made for the maintenance of religion and education .
 He informed me that he had lost two brothers by consumption . Upon the attack of the second brother his father was advised by the head of the family to take up the first body and bum its heart, but the brother attacked objected to the sacrilege and subsequently died .
 "living"" blood being found in the heart and in circulation, it was cremated, and the sufferer began immediately to mend, and stood before me a hale, hearty, and vigorous man of fifty years .
 When questioned as to his understanding of the miraculous influence, he could suggest nothing . He did not recognize superstition even by name .
 He remembered that the doctors did not believe in its efficacy, but he and many others did . He said doctors didn't believe it was effective, but many did .
 Stuart's birthplace is a small isolated village of scattered houses in a farming population, fifteen or twenty miles from Newport . There have been made within fifty years a half dozen or more exhumations .
 The mother and four children had already succumbed to consumption . The child most recently deceased (within six months) was, in obedience to the superstition, exhumed .
 The body was found in the usual condition after an interment of that length of time . Dr . Dr. Dr . made the autopsy .
 Others of the family have since died, and one is now very low with the dreaded disease . One of the relatives has been diagnosed with the disease .
 Ryan Sheets Memorial ArmWrestling Championships set for noon Saturday at Veterans Hall in Oildale . 7th annual arm wrestling championships will be held Saturday at noon . Armwrestling championships will take place in the town's Veterans Hall .
 Ryan Sheets died while attending CSUB because of complications from a neck injury suffered while wrestling that was worsened by a car accident . Sheets was a former North High and Cal State Bakersfield wrestler who died at CSUB .
 The tournament started two years ago as a way to raise money for high school and youth wrestling programs in Bakersfield . The tournament is now a fundraiser for high and young wrestling programs throughout the region .
 Some of the tens of thousands of dollars raised over the years went this past year to send Centennial state high school champ Seth Hicks to the High School Senior National National Wrestling Championships in Virginia Beach, Va., and to send Frontier sophomore Alex Gomez to the USA Wresding Girls Folkstyle
 The event’s success can be traced to a combination of including refreshments and T-shirts, and, yes, alcohol, with a dam good athletic display . The event's success probably can’t be traced .
 There had been 24 deaths in the Enniscorthy-to-Wexford stretch of the river over 27 years . Then there were five in a week, five deaths in one week .
 Six men jumped into the fast-flowing River Slaney in County Wexford, Ireland, over six days in November . In a string of unconnected incidents, six men jumped in the river .
 Peter Barron, 41, jumped into the river off a bridge in Enniscorthy after delivering his two children to school . At 9am on Monday, 11 November, he jumped in the river after delivering the children to a school .
 David Kehoe, 28, was seen jumping into the river from the bridge on Saturday 15 November . Kehoe was seen at 1.35am on Saturday, 15 November, jumping from bridge .
 Four men jumped into the river on Sunday, 17 November, three of whom drowned . Three of them drowned in the river .
 At 4am, a man believed to be from Latvia, 39 or ""in his late twenties"", jumped from the bridge and was rescued . The man is believed to have jumped from a bridge in Latvia .
 John Foley, 19, jumped in at Bunclody about 13 miles away, and his body was recovered three hours later . Foley's body was found three hours after he jumped in .
 Babalu Aye Orisha rules over infectious diseases and healing . The 23-year-old jumped Babalou Orisha, who rules over diseases and healings .
 He is one of the most feared and revered orishaw because of his power over life and death . He is also known as the most powerful and powerful orishaws in the world .
 Babalu Aye’s worship originated with the Fon tribe of Benin, in Western Africa, but his influence was so powerful that tribes up and down the West African coast adopted his worship . The worship originated from the Benin tribe of Fon .
 Babalu Aye has a special relationship with the orisha Shango because he was the only one who reached out to assist him when he was sick and homeless . The orisha was the last person to reach out to him when sick and that he was homeless .
 Babalu Aye is frequently called upon for help with healing and overcoming these plagues . Babalou Aye has been called upon to help overcome these plagues and overcome them .
 A woman accused of trying to trade her seven-month-old daughter for a Chihuahua puppy in Enid r Oklahoma, was charged with trafficking in children . The woman was arrested on suspicion of child trafficking .
 Kathryn Smith, 21, offered to give her mother's neighbour the child if the woman gave her the Chihuahua she was selling for $200 . Kathryn Smith offered to sell the dog to her mother for the $200 price .
 Alfredo Baldeschi's sister Loredana Balseschi, 40, was found dead in her overturned Astra at Latina, south of Rome . Unnamed 40-year-old woman told him she had dreamed about the accident which had killed his sister .
 Alfredo told police about the encounter and they advised him to ask her to go through the "dream"" again and secretly record her . Alfredo said he wanted to record her again and record her in the 'dream'
 After listening to the tape, police charged the woman with manslaughter because she recounted details known only to investigators . She recounted details of the incident in the tape . Police charged her with manslaughter .
 The tiger shot and killed by trackers on Wednesday is lowered into a California Department of Fish and Game truck in Moorpark, California . The tiger was shot by a team of trackers who shot it in the head and killed .
 Mystery tiger shot, killed by trackers in Southland after being spotted slinking along the back yards of suburban homes . Tiger tracked by paw prints, spotted near back yard in hills of Simi Valley .
 They finally caught up with the orange tiger as it darted through green brash in Moorpark, northwest of Los Angeles . The tiger was captured by the Los Angeles County authorities .
 The tiger was shot several hundred yards from soccer and baseball fields . It was shot at the edge of a housing development in California . The tiger is a rare tiger in the wild .
 Trackers with the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Wildlife Services and state Fish andGame had to shoot to kill . A tranquilizer would have taken five to 10 minutes to bring down the animal, Bernard said .
 They were concerned the animal might attack them or bolt onto a nearby highway . They were worried it might attack or run onto a highway .
 Authorities received a call just after 6 am. from a resident who reported the tiger walking past his back fence . The tiger was seen walking past the fence at 6 a.m. ET .
 The tiger walked to a nearby house and “was just staring down” the neighbor’s dogs . Ken Tucker told KCBS-TV the tiger walked . Tucker said the tiger was "just staring down" the dogs .
 Trackers had been looking for the animal for eight days, using infrared equipment at night . Trackers used infrared equipment to find the animal using night-time infrared equipment .
 The hunt began after the discovery of paw prints on a ranch near the library that were far too large for native bobcats or mountain lions . The find was made after paw prints were found on the ranch .
 Bernard said the owner could have told authorities about the tiger’s temperament and eating habits, which might have helped them catch the animal sooner . Bernard said authorities should have told the owner about the animal's temperament, eating habits .
 As the cat roamed the hills, it became hungrier and disoriented, making it more dangerous to the nearby community of horse ranches and sprawling homes . The cat roams the hills and roamed a nearby community, becoming more dangerous .
 Authorities say they are investigating how the cat got loose in tire hills . Authorities said they are still looking into how the animal got loose .
 Two weeks ago, authorities removed nearly two-dozen large cats, including lions and tigers, from property near library . Authorities removed large cats from property rented by Abby and Emma Hedengran not far from the library .
 All the animals that inspectors found on the property were accounted for, she said . The animals were found accounted for by inspectors .
 A telephone message left Wednesday for the Hedengrans by The Associated Press was not immediately returned . A phone message was left Wednesday by a phone message left by the family .
 The couple had a permit to keep the animals in a facility in Riverside County . But they moved them to Moorpark, Ventura County, where they did not have a license to keep animals .
 The only facility in that area with a license to house exotic cats is Moorpark College’s teaching zoo . Moorpark's teaching zoo is the only facility with an exotic cat license license .
 Anecropsy will be performed on the tiger, which could help provide clues to its history . The tiger is believed to be the largest in the world .
 Flames consumed the business district on July 7, 1 889, following a cooking accident from Kelsey Home . The business district was engulfed in flames after the accident . The incident occurred in Kelsey home .
 With many of buildings at the time in the downtown area built from wood, and insufficient fire department techniques, the inferno raged . Many of buildings in downtown area were constructed from wood . The inferno was the largest inferno of its kind .
 The fire started on 20th and 1 streets and torched the block until it sizzled to a halt on Chester and 19th streets . For modem day reference the fire started in the middle of the night .
 Despite losing the entire business district, many residents were spared according to records at the Kern County Museum . Many of the residents of Kern County were spared .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com/Travel .
 After McKinney killed his best friend in Porterville in 1902, he started zigzag across the southwest United States . McKinney's best friend was killed in the town of Porterville, California .
 His journey as a horseback outlaw brought him back to the Central Valley in 1903 . In 1903, he rode his way back to California's Central Valley . He spent the rest of his life as an outlaw .
 McKinney came back to Bakersfield in 1903 to meet up with some friends . McKinney was a pioneer in the area . He returned to the area to meet friends .
 His crew got together at the ‘Joss House,’ which at the time was located on 22nd and L streets . The house was located in the late 1980s and '90s .
 Local law enforcement caught wind of McKinney’s whereabouts and confronted the outlaw . McKinney was found dead at the scene of the shooting .
 After a gun battle, the Bakersfield city marshal, deputy sheriff and McKinney were all left dead . McKinney was shot dead in the head after a gunfight with the city's deputy sheriff .
 In November 1990, a teenager testified before the U.S. Congress that she'd seen Iraqi soldiers leaving babies to die on a Kuwaiti hospital floor and stealing their incubators . She testified that she saw Iraqi soldiers stealing incubators from hospitals .
 It later transpired that the girl was the Kuwaiti ambassador's daughter . Her testimony was organised by a PR company hired to get America into the Gulf War .
 While doctors removed the male organs at birth, she still has testosterone . She was born with male organs removed from her body .
 Wheeler says her father forced her into the sideshow life, and took the money she earned . Wheeler says she was forced to perform as a sideshow performer . Wheeler: "I was forced into the sidehow life and forced to take the money"
 Wheeler returned to the only life she knew the side show, but at each appearance she would look for her son . Depressed and in despair, Wheeler went back to the show .
 Her son Richard Lorenc saw her in a book entitled American Sideshow, and tracked her down . Lorenc's son found her after seeing her in the book . She is now living in New York, New Jersey .
 He brought along a scrapbook filled with pictures of his family, her daughter-in-law and her two grandkids . He came to Bakersfield in June, and brought along pictures of her family .
 Beaver and her baby captured after trying to get into a grocery store . They will be released into the wild after being captured .
 Bell Witch Cave in Adams, Adams, Term Term, is a Halloween-themed attraction . The Leaf-Chronicle offers a unique Halloween experience for the first time .
 The cave is a 30-minute drive from downtown Clarksville, but the ghostly gathering place feels worlds away from home . Clarksville is a ghostly ghostly spot 30 minutes from downtown .
 The site was the home of John Bell and his family, who were tormented by a spiteful and sometimes violent witch from 1817 to 1821 . John Bell lived in the house at the site of the witch, who tormented his family .
 There is much curiosity about who the witch was and why she chose to harass the Bells . Witness accounts lend credence to the stories of clear voices speak-ing in the Bell house .
 Visitors can tour a cave on the property, said to be haunted, for $10 . Visitors can also tour a reproduction of the Bells’ log cabin for $7 .
 Bell Witch Cave also will have haunted hayrides and psychic readings available on site today through Sunday . In honor of Halloween, Bell Witch Cave will have psychic readings .
 This weekend’s special Halloween offerings include psychic readings, psychic readings and haunted hayrides . After dark, after dark, haunted rides will cost $1 0 per person . Cabin tours $7 per person, daylight hours only .
 The Historic Bell Witch Cave Inc. has been placed on the National Historical Registry by the United States Department of Interior effective April 2008 . The historic Bell Witch Cave is located in the National Historic Registry .
 This is the very land that the Bell Witch tormented the Bell family on in the early 1800's . The Bell family was tormented by the Bell witch in the 1800s . This land is now the very site of the original home of the Bells .
 Cave tours are $10.00 per person, with a minimum required $20.00 for a cave tour . Cave tours can be booked for $20,000 per person .
 May Open On Weekends Only June through Labor Day . Open 6 days a week Labor Day through Oct. 1st . Open on weekends only June through September .
 Bell Witch Cave Home | Legend Of The Bell Witch . Bell Witch Museum and Bell Witch Canoe Rentals. Bell Witch Online Store Website Design by Tennessee Web Technology, LLC .
 America's best-known poltergeist case in 1817 was the site of one of the most well-known hauntings in American history . The case caught the attention and then the involvement of a future president of the United States .
 The Bell Witch case share little in common with the mythology created for The Blair Witch Project, except they both attracted a great deal of public interest . The facts of the Bell Witch Case share little of common with that of the case .
 A remarkable occurrence, which attracted wide-spread interest, was connected with the family of John Bell, who settled near Adams Station about 1804 . John Bell settled near what is now Adams Station, Adams Station .
 This witch was supposed to be some spiritual being having the voice and attributes of a woman . This witch is supposed to have been a spiritual being with the voice of a female spirit .
 It was invisible to the eye, yet it would hold conversation and shake hands with certain individuals . It would hold conversations and even shake hands . It was visible to the the eye yet it was invisible .
 The freaks it performed were wonderful and seemingly designed to annoy the family . It was designed to amuse the family and annoy them, but it didn't work .
 It would take the sugar from the bowls, spill the milk, take the quilts from the beds, slap and pinch the children, and then laugh at the discomfiture of its victims . It would also take the children's quilts and pinch them, then laugh .
 At first it was supposed to be a good spirit, but its subsequent acts, together with the curses with which it supplemented its remarks, proved the contrary . At first, the first act was meant to be good spirit .
 A volume might be written concerning the performance of this wonderful being, as they are now described by contemporaries and their descendants . A volume may be written of the performance, as well as the words of contemporaries .
 That all this actually occurred will not be disputed, nor will a rational explanation be attempted . That is not disputed, or will be attempted, as is rational explanation for what happened .
 Kate Batts, a mean old neighbor of John Bell, believed she was cheated by him in a land purchase . But the prevailing account is that it was the spirit of a woman who believed she had been cheated by John Bell .
 On her deathbed, she swore that she would haunt John Bell and his descendents . She vowed to haunt him and his descendants in the future .
 Tradition says the Bells were tormented for years by the malicious spirit of Old Kate Batts . The Bells have been tormented by the spirit of the old Batts for years .
 The witch was either indifferent or indifferent to the other members of the family . Toward the other family members the witch was indifferent .
 No one ever saw her, but every visitor to the Bell home heard her all too well . The Bells lived in the Bells' home for more than 20 years .
 She yelled all night to keep them from sleeping, and snatched food from their mouths at mealtime . She yelled at them all night and snuck food from them mouths at meals .
 Wolfe said the farmer's find last Friday was the first in a long time . Wolfe said it's the first time he's found a new animal in a very long line . Wolfe: "It's not unusual to find a dead animal in the wild"
 The Salem Bomb Squad and the U.S. Air Force Explosive, Ordinance Disposal unit from Portland responded to the scene and took over the disposal process for the shell .
 The EOD unit decided to wait until Saturday morning to dispose of the shell for safety reasons . The shell shell was found in a landfill on Saturday morning .
 Bomb disposal crews returned to the scene Saturday and disposed of the shell . Sheriffs office personnel guarded the area overnight, and bomb disposal crews guarded the site overnight .
 Military personnel on scene identified the shell as a preWorld War II artillery shell with a range of 1 2 miles . The shell was identified by military personnel at the scene of the incident .
 There have been several dramatic Alien Big Cat incidents since our feature on the subject last issue . Mike Sheppard points to where Mrs Reynolds' pet dog was found .
 Joan Reynolds, 90, called her home help Michael Shepherd on Sunday evening, 5 January . Joan Reynolds was 90 years old when she called Michael Shepherd to check in on her home .
 The house' bound widow was worried that she had not seen her seven-year-old whippet, Peter, or her Bedlington terrier, Jason, for some time . She was worried she hadn't seen Peter, Peter or Jason, since September .
 Mr Sheppard, 62, drove to Mrs Reynolds’s farmhouse in the Black Mountains near Llangadog, Carmarthenshire, and searched the farm with his torch . He drove to the farmhouse and searched it with a torch .
 He found the whippet lying dead with its throat tom out, and an enormous jet black cat standing over it with blood on its face . The cat was standing over the dog's face .
 An armed response unit arrived within 10 minutes and officers began a torchlight search . The search was carried out in a torch-lit search in the early hours .
 One of them saw the larger beast, but it vanished into the woods before he could get a clear shot . One of the larger beasts was spotted in the woods .
 Police warned farmers not to go out alone after dark chicken run with a hen in its jaws . Two years ago, Mr Sheppard had seen the same large cat emerging from Mrs Reynolds’s house .
 By the time police arrived that time the animal had gone, officers took casts of its pawprints . The animal was later found dead in the woods .
 Marksmen armed with sniper's rifles and automatic weapons staked out Mrs Reynolds’s farmhouse . Police warned all local farmers not to go out alone after dark in January .
 At 2am on 8 January, a lorry driver saw a big cat in his headlights at the Associated Co-operative Creamery in Llangadog, not far from Mrs Reynolds’s farm .
 The next day, there was another sighting on the edge of woodland at Ffairfach, about seven miles south-west of Llangadog .
 Pawprints of various sizes were found in the snow . Police said they could be looking for between five and seven animals . Pawprints found in snow and police said they are looking for up to five animals in the area .
 There was a further sighting near Llangadog in the early hours of 12 January, by two police officers using night vision glasses . There was also a sighting by police officers who used night-vision glasses .
 Two panthers were released into the wild in that area in 1995, says British Big Cats Society . Danny Bamping has been told by several sources that panthers have been released .
 A man who used to use the panthers to guard his scrapyard was sent to prison . He left the cats with a friend to look after, but he got scratched by them and released them into the wild .
 Brechfa is in a forested area near Carmarthen, a good 40 miles further west . Gwent is in south-east Wales, while Gwent lies in the middle of Wales . Brechfi is in the north-east of Wales, and Gwent in south
 The Beast of Bont doesn’t prowl South Wales, but the area round Pontrhydfendigaid in Mid Wales . Also, the Beast of the Bont does not prowl in South Wales - but in the Mid Wales area .
 Lynx that escaped from Kirkudbright Wildlife Park, Dumfries & Galloway was recaptured on Friday, 13 December at Cannee Farm, Kirkcudbright, after 17 days on the loose .
 John Smith and his wife saw an odd-looking sheep on a hillside overlooking their back garden in Peebles-shire . At 9.30am on the same day in Cardrona, they saw a sheep on the hillside .
 Through binoculars, Mr Smith saw that it was a pure white ABC, at least 3ft long . Mr Smith said it was the longest white ABC in the world .
 Around the same time, a farmer nearby complained of his horses being spooked . The incident occurred at a nearby farmhouse .
 The hand-held camera and digital zoom gave a poor picture quality . Mark Fraser and other members of the Scottish Big Cat Society agreed it was a felid and larger than domestic cat .
 Albinism occurs in all cats; there was until recently an albino puma in Frankfurt Zoo . Until recently, the puma was a puma at the zoo in Germany .
 Residents of Ardrossan in Ayrshire, on Scotland's west coast, called police after hearing shrill screams coming from wasteland near the railway line . At 3.20am on 23 December, residents of the area called police .
 Three officers saw a pumatype big cat with a dark coat, at least 3ft tall with a long black tail . From a distance of about 35 yards, three officers saw the big cat at a distance from 35 yards .
 On 18 November, a motorist saw a brown ABC at Dalgarven, 4 miles inland . On 24 December, three people reported a large black ABC on the outskirts of Beith, 10 miles inland from Ardrossan .
 This year's festival features an oversized duck by Dutch artist Florentijn Hofman . Hofman's Rubber Duck project has brought the world's largest ducks to harbors across the world, including Japan, Brazil and Australia .
 A model of the USS Constitution called the ""Black Ship,"" at the National Museum of the United States Navy, has a storied past of tragedy . The model boat with a haunting history sits in a glass case at the museum .
 The model ship at the National Museum of the United States Navy has a history so creepy that nobody in the U.S. government wants the toy boat in their office .
 Henry J Hendrix, the outgoing director of Naval History and Heritage Command, gives a tour of the museum, part of Washington’s Navy Yard .
 The “black ship,” as it’s also called, is a replica of the USS Constitution, a relic from the 1790s that remains in Boston . The USS Constitution remains in the city, and it's also known as the USS Liberty .
 The Navy Yard is on the same campus where the September 2013 Navy Yard shooting occurred . So instead the boat remains behind a glass case in the museum what used to be the old Naval Gun Factory .
 National Museum of the U.S. Navy, has a storied past of tragedy . The museum has a long history of tragedy, including tragedy .
 Hendnx served 26 years, two months, 1 7 days in the Navy . He is the head of the unit charged with looking after its archives, artifacts, museums .
 There was mold growing on some documents and even more documents were piling up . Mold was growing on documents and more documents piled up .
 Hendrix: "But literally we have undertaken what we call band-aid solutions" Hendrix says improvements like upgrading temperature and humidity control in the museum have been made . Hendrix calls it "band-aid"
 The Naval History and entage Command is being awarded a Meritorious Unit Commendation for getting the archives . Much has been discovered going through the documents and microfilm .
 The reason it was "Navy" was because its twin resided on the presidential yacht, the USS Mayflower . The Mayflower was named after its twin .
 The USS Sequoia was the first presidential yacht from the Mayflower to carry out a presidential yacht . The USS Mayflower was a presidential vessel from the 18th century .
 Hendrix then pointed out Abe Lincoln's old chair . Hendrix also pointed out Lincoln's former chair .
 Much of the furniture came off, including the chair, which ended up in the building we today call the Old Executive Office Building . “That’s where Lincoln would go to take telegraphs from the field,” Hendrix said . Much ofthe furniture including the
 Nikki Schwab is a reporter for U.S. News and World Report . She is also a CNN iReporter for CNN iReport .
 Some Puritans believe that Chillingworth was tainted during his stay with the Indians . In M A Literary Analysis of The Scarlet Letter, Johnson relates how some Puritans believed that Chillillworth had been tainted .
 Numbers in parentheses in Johnson's text refer to the Signet Classic edition of The Scarlet Letter .
 While not sharing in the full range of human warmth and emotions encompassed by the f A, * he becomes monomaniacally supreme in one aspect alone, sacrificing all things good, even his own life and health, for that diabolical distortion of human character-revenge
 Torturing the man who has fathered a child with his wife becomes the sole purpose of Chillingworth* s life . Torture becomes the only purpose of the man's life, torture .
 Dimmesdale, too, has an * A* on his heart corresponding to Hester’s . Then, through his determined searching, he discovers at last, he finds out he has an 'A*' On his heart .
 Chillingworth ’ s ’A’ may also stand for alchemist and artist, for he is both . Chillworth is both an artist and alchemist .
 Unlike Hester’s creative art, however, his is a wholly destructive black art, clearly meaning black magic and witchcraft . Unlike the creative art of Hester, his black art is destructive black magic .
 The close association of Chillingworth (who, as avenger, becomes the Black Man or devil) with the community creates a number of ironies . CONCLUSION: The close . association of the . avenger (as avenger . becomes the ... devil) creates a .
 Chillingworth's affinities established as soon as he enters the community, when they rejoice that he, the old physician, can treat the ailing young minister Dimmesdale, who initially, and secretly, rejects this .
 From this allegiance of Chillingworth and the community come several other ironies, including the fact that the town is in the midst of a war of words .
 The community thinks that the Black Man abides in the forest, he actually abides among them in the form of their honored guest and ’healer, * Chillingworth . While the community thinks . that the . community abides . in the . forest, it actually ab
 The community believes that witchcraft is practiced somewhere in the depths of the forest . The most heinous black magic is practiced right under their noses in Chillingworth 1 s laboratory .
 The conclusion is that Hester and Pearl are not respectively, lover and daughter of a Black Man or Satan who inhabits the forest . The conclusion that the reader is given to draw, then, is that they are not .
 The community has a close relationship to the Black Man, in the person of Chillingworth, and encourages his dark arts . Rather it is the community itself which has a relationship with the black man .
 "The true nature of every human is both sinful and angelic, somber and joyful, joyful, selfish and loving," says the author . "Every human is sinned and selfish and selfish," she says .
 My parents lived in Littleton before I was born, but I had ever been there before this . My parents moved to Littleton, Colorado, before the birth of me, she said .
 Sarah Doublet Forest is the site of one of the 17th century praying Indian villages . It has some very beautiful rural areas, such as one of many beautiful praying villages .
 Reverend John Eliot of Roxbury, Massachusetts began trying to convert local Indians to Christianity in 1640s .
 Eliot expected the villages to adopt Christianity and English way of life . Eliot expected their inhabitants to adopt not just Christianity but also a way of English life . The villages had native names, but Eliot expected them to adopt English values .
 Apparently hunting, gardening and a seasonally nomadic life were just too pagan . Apparently hunting and gardening were too pagan.
 The Indians lived in wooden houses, raised livestock, and farmed like their Puritan neighbors . Instead of living in wooden homes, they lived in a wooden house and raised livestock .
 Men and women cut their hair in the English fashion and discarded their traditional dress for wool clothes . The traditional dress was discarded in favour of wool clothing .
 It’s estimated that up to 20% of Massachusetts Indians eventually lived in these villages . Since no villages remain you can correctly surmise things didn't turn out well .
 In 1675 the other 80% of the native population rose up to oust the English from Massachusetts in the conflict called King Philip f s war . The English were ousted in 1675 .
 The praying Indian’s pledged their support to the colonists but were rounded up and confined to Deer Island and Long Island in Boston Harbor .
 Sarah and a few others had made their way back to Nashoba, but eventually she became the last survivor of that praying Indian village . Sarah and others had traveled from Nashoba back to the village .
 When she died in 1736 she willed whatever land had not already been taken by her English neighbors . Ephraim and Elnathan Jones, two local men who had cared for her when she grew infirm, took the land .
 The land eventually came into the hands of two women named Edith Jenkins and Fanny Knapp, who willed the land to Littleton in the 1970s . The land was eventually given to the Littleton family .
 A'pcinic the lake monster would have lived in Lake Nagog, which is adjacent to Sarah Doublet forest . The lake monster is believed to have lived there .
 A'pcinic, who had a beak and horns, dragged his tentacled arms along the shoreline when hungry to find his next meal . The creature was said to have dragged his arms along shoreline to find a meal .
 Squeeze This Rice, and It Drips Blood . Put away the Halloween costume. Squeezze this rice, and it drips blood .
 Normally HSA protein is manufactured by the liver and harvested by the same way any other blood ingredients are, through donations . Normally it is made from donated blood and harvested through the liver .
 HSA is in short supply for both medicinal (severe bums, cirrhosis of the liver, hemorrhagic shock) and laboratory uses . In heavy demand for HSA, it is used to treat severe bums and liver problems .
 China has experienced both chronic shortages of HSA and problems with tainted blood supplies . HSA shortages have led to problems in the country's blood supply .
 Professor Daichang Yang, a plant biotechnologist, and his colleagues set to work to develop a rice that could carry the albumin gene .
 HSA-yielding plants such as potatoes have been used for the last two decades, but they have been too high cost and low yield for commercial use . According to Nature News, HSA plants are too expensive and too low yield .
 Rice seeds, with their high protein content and high yields, are proving to be attractive carriers of the HSA gene . Rice seeds are proving a good carrier of the gene, according to experts .
 The two were chemically and physically identical . They were also similar when tested for medical efficacy and immune reactivity . The two tested the same for medical effectiveness and immune reactions .
 In rats with liver disease, both types of HSA proved equally effective in relieving symptoms associated with cirrhosis . HSA was found to be equally effective at relieving the symptoms of liver disease .
 Rats that were given rice-derived HSA showed no stronger immune reaction than animals that had been given the plasma-derived version .
 Yang is hoping to get permission for human trials within the next two years . Yang hopes the U.S. Food and Dmg Administration will grant permission to human trials .
 Large-scale planting of genetically modified rice fields raises environmental and food supply contamination concerns . Rice is a major world food staple and a major food staple .
 Cross pollination among rice varieties occurs less frequently than among some cultivars such as canola . Cross-pollination is less common than among canola varieties . Rice varieties are different varieties of rice varieties .
 The Rice Knowledge Bank maintains by the International Rice Research Institute suggests up to 5% of a rice crop can be cross pollinated through wind, insects, birds, snails and water . Up to five per cent of rice crops can be crossed pollinated by wind and insects .
 Given the biotech industry’s penchant for ignoring research that reveals numerous problems with genetically modified crops, enthusiasm for this new supply of HSA needs to be tempered with considerable caution .
 Carri Wilbanks Special for USA TODAY . Buckle up and enjoy “America’s Favorite Drive,” from Virginia to North Carolina .
 The scenic link between Shenandoah National Park and the Great Smoky Mountains National Park is a meandering drive that winds visitors slowly through the southern highlands of Appalachia .
 Visitors can stay overnight at one of the many quaint towns just a few miles off the parkway . There are several overnight options along the route .
 Peaks of Otter Lodge is located at Milepost 86 and is open from spring to fall . The lodge has a full-service restaurant and lounge, as well as 63 rooms .
 Julian Price Park is one of several campgrounds along the drive . If car camping is more your speed, reserve your spot at one of the park’s largest campgrounds .
 Campground is open from May 9 through the fall . It offers canoes, fish and hike among the hemlocks and hickory trees that shade the campground .
 Visitors should keep their north of eyes out for black bears, river otters, 31 salamander species and Pisgah even the occasional peregrine in North falcon .
 Explore the 19th-century farm buildings at the site near Milepost 5.8.8 . Stroll along the parkway to Humpback Rocks and explore 19th century farm buildings . Enjoy a short stroll to the area's Hump Back Rocks .
 Mabry Mill is a must-see destination and the perfect place for a post-hike picnic . Nearby, one of the most photographed buildings on the drive, is a favorite spot for a picnic .
 The Blue Ridge Parkway also offers a great opportunity to take in the dazzling autumn fall foliage . Rhododendrons and other wildflowers are blossoming in spring .
 The parkway also offers visitors true mountain culture including mountain music at a number of concerts throughout the year . Visitors can also enjoy hiking and bird watching .
 Bluegrass, mountain gospel music and flatfoot dancing opportunities abound along the drive . Mountain gospel music, flatfoot dance opportunities abound on the way .
 The Blue Ridge Music Center celebrates the music and musicians of the area . The center is located in the Blue Ridge area .
 It features an outdoor amphitheater and an indoor interpretive center/theater . The site is located in New York, New Jersey .
 Traditional fiddle, banjo and guitar music wafting out of the center via free presentations each weekday from noon to 4m. You can hear traditional fiddle and banjo music from the center each weekday .
 Be sure to take note of the relics of the pioneer past as you drive by preserved log structures and other historical settlements . Some of these settlements are among the oldest in the country .
 Many stones in Bodie cemetery are missing due to theft, vandalism and weather . Friends of Bodie is working to prevent that in the future .
 Proceeds from the sale of this brochure are to be used for the stabilization and restoration of the cemetery . Proceeds will be used to help stabilize and restore the cemetery in the future .
 AQeia Mattos Dec., 1902 Age 1 yr , 9 mos, 17 ds Myrtle on reverse side 37. AQeie Mattos .
 Arrild April 29, 1903 19 yrs, 8 mos. “He shall sleep but not forever” 39 years old . Arrild in 1903 .
 Alexander Nixon was born in Tyrone, Ireland, in 1847 and died in 1878 . Alexander Nixon died September 13, 1878 in a nursing home .
 He was killed in a shootout at Gallagher and O'Brien’s Saloon over words about who was a better man after the offer of a drink by his friend Tom McDonald .
 Follow the path out and up the hill on top of the hill ON TOP OF THE HILL at BODIE 45 . AnnaMaria Petralli June 24, 1852, June 30, 1915 .
 A small splintered wooden marker is next to this site . Footstone says “Brother’ 7 . Loose Warren was born Quincy, Illinois August 6, 1848 .
 Wereley “Brother We lay thee now to rest ” Dec., 1848-Feb., 1890 . A Native of Ontario, Canada 53 .
 “McCracken” on base Ivy on reverse side of stone 54. McCracken April 19, 1905 Age 45 yrs ‘McCrracken’ on base .
 Dolan Mary April 10, 1851-1851-Feb., 1917 . James S. Jan., 1841-1841-March 11, 1904 58 . James J. Dolan was married to Mary Dolan, who died in 1904 .
 Joe Scanavino Bom 1842Died 1909 . An Italian immigrant who spoke little' English, he owned and operated the Goat Ranch south of Bodie .
 The father of eight children, Mono Co. hired a teacher to live and teach at his ranch . The father-of-eight has eight children . He has eight grandchildren and eight grandchildren .
 Steven A Scanavino April 19, 1895-Dec., 1970 . Worked as an electrical engineer for several large firms .
 This monument was originally cut for “Bill Bodey,” father of the town . In memory of James A Garfield President of the United States died Sept., 1881 .
 There was talk on the streets Monday in the direction of raising a subscription to buy the monument which was cut a couple of years ago in Bodie, and have it erected in the cemetery in honor of the late President Garfield .
 The fickle public did take and use the monument meant for Bill Bodey and erected it to the memory of President Garfield . The monument was erected in Garfield's memory .
 Edith E Richards April 9, 1876-Jan., 1906 . Go back through gate to Wards Cemetary 73 . Edith Richards died in 1906 .
 Daughter of George & Alice Parker March 18, 1903-Aug., 1905 . Gray with ivy on sides, white base 74. In Loving memory Christine .
 The remains of Bill Bodey were found in an unmarked grave in Hawthorne, NV . He was the owner of the Merchandise Store .
 Thomas Miller ran the Mono Mills Store. Thomas Miller died Dec 17, 1903 .
 Mary A Miller 1893-1963 “In God’s Care” “Mother” Exit cemetery, turn right and follow fence to next marker 80 . Miller died in 1963 at age 93 .
 She moved to mining camp brothels in Colorado and Idaho for 2 years, then on to Virginia City and Reno . She moved on to mining camps in Colorado, Idaho and Idaho .
 Because of the life she led, when she died in Nov. of 1911 or 1912, she was buried outside the cemetery fence .
 Another local prostitute named Lottie was a little more fortunate . She was found dead in the early hours of the day .
 She married a local butcher Eli Johl and, they lived in town for many years . She married him and he later moved away from town .
 When Lottie Johl died in Nov.99, her husband fought hard to have her buried inside the cemetery . Her husband Eli fought hard for her to be buried in a cemetery .
 The townspeople finally gave in and let him bury her at the far southwest corner of the cemetery . She was buried in the cemetery's far southwest section .
 One way to learn about the past is through information found in cemeteries . CEMETERY SYMBOLS can be used to help people learn more about their history .
 Cemetery symbols used by stone carvers and monument companies from the 1700s forward included traditional and religious symbols .
 Angels of heaven trumpeting they accompany the soul heavenward, announcing arrival . Angels of hell trumpeting the soul's arrival .
 Calla Lilly-majestic beauty and Daisy-youth . Pansy-humility Rose-love Shamrock-holy trinity . Thistle-fall of man Gates-passageway to heaven .
 L ong experience in the undertaking business enables me to give it the proper attention. "I'm going to be very happy to be able to get my job done," he says .
 These persons are known to be buried in Bodie; the location of their graves is unknown .
 Jack O'Hara died of gun shot wounds when he and 3 others jumped a mining claim . Jack O’Hara was killed when he was shot in the head by a mining crew . Jack and his friends were killed in the early 1900s .
 O’Brien died in explosion of powder magazine at Summit Mine in 1879 . O'Brien died July 10,1879 in explosion .
 As he lay dying he fired one shot critically wounding Tom Dillon who survived . Tom Dillon survived and survived .
 Joseph DeRoche shot in the back when he objected to his wife dancing with his wife . Joseph shot in back by his brother-in-law, who objected to the dance .
 James Blair Died in a duel Jan 18, 1878 Antone Valencis Died 1878 shot by Jesus Revis . Almond Parks Fell 50 ft down shaft in Black Hawk Mine Oct 1879 Michael J Cody U S Land Agent.
 Bodie Cemetery was established in 1877 and consists of three discrete burial areas within the perimeter fence . The Bodie cemetery is located in the Bodie area .
 The People's or Ward's Cemetery is located on the north end of the cemetery . The cemetery is located in the People’s Cemetery .
 The Freemason's or Masonic, and the Miner’s Union plots are on the south end of the park . The Freemasons or . Masonic, or . Freemasons, and . the Miner's Union plots, are located in the north .
 The last burial to take place in the cemetery was on August 14,1994 . Kenneth L McKeough, bom in Bodie in 1908, was interred in 1994 .
 Due to Bodie’s status as a landmark, there are only about a dozen citizens left who may be buried here . Due to the status of Bodie, only a handful of people are believed to have been buried there .
 High water table in this area caused the graves to fill with water, and in 1877 the cemetery was moved to its present location . The cemetery has been moved to the current location of the cemetery .
 Not all burials were defined by monuments, or markers were missing in the old cemetery . Not all of the burials are defined by monument or markers .
 An unknown number of graves remain in the original location of the original burial site . As a result of the discovery of the site, many graves remain there .
 The area within the fence was reserved for the ‘Respectable’ and those “Outside the Pale of Decency” such as prostitutes, gunmen and illegitimate children were buried outside the fence .
 Before the establishment of a cemetery at Bodie, the earliest burials took place 18 miles northeast of Bodie at Aurora in the early 1860's and at Bridgeport, located 12 miles southwest, established in the late 1850's .
 Nearly all the Chinese originally arrived in San Francisco and moved from camp to camp . They moved from San Francisco to Bodie from Virginia City . Nearly all of them originally moved from Virginia .
 The Chinese owned and operated many businesses, even in the main part of town . The Chinese had many businesses in the area, including many businesses .
 A few Chinese miners mined their own claims, which had been deserted by Euro-American miners . The claims were abandoned by the U.S. and China .
 Both the Chinese and EuroAmerican population began to decline as the economic downturn began in town . The Chinese and American population began declining as the downturn began .
 Early Chinese cemeteries were only marked by wooden headboards and inscribed with the name and often the location in China where the remains were to be sent for final burial . Early Chinese cemetery was only marked with wooden headboard and inscribed .
 It was the belief of the Chinese immigrants that the final resting-place of their dead must be in family plots in China .
 Burials in America were only temporary as the graves would be reopened after several years . The bones would be shipped back to the deceased's home village when financially possible . Burials would be re-opened after years and the bones shipped back when financially available .
 According to religious beliefs the spirit of the dead person remains near the body, requiring care and attention from the descendants . According to their religious beliefs it is necessary to keep the spirit alive in the body .
 The saints may be forgotten or rituals ineffective if the bones are not returned to the home village . The bones of the saints may not be returned to their home villages .
 Social customs were responsible for determining which of the EuroAmerican population could be buried within the main cemetery . Ethnic background of the individual was also a crucial factor in location of the burial .
 Racial prejudice required that the Chinese be buried on the slope above the west perimeter fence . The remains of several hundred Chinese were buried in the area .
 By 1870 approximately 11 thousand Chinese had died in the U.S. and the remains of over 6 thousand had been shipped home to China . Over 6 thousand of the remains were shipped home .
 In 1994 a ground penetrating radar survey was conducted and shoed no evidence of disturbances in an area southeast of the current cemetery thought to have been used as the Chinese cemetery . No evidence of disturbance was found in the area thought to be used as a cemetery .
 This showed the cemetery never extended to that area as previously thought . This showed that the cemetery did not extend to that part of the cemetery . The cemetery was previously thought to have extended into that area .
 Nathan Cook Gregory Son of Nathan H & Catherine C Gregory Jan., 1887Sept., 1890 . “Suffer little children to come unto me.”
 He operated a cattle ranch between Bodie and Aurora, and maintained a residence still standing in Bodie today . Rest in Peace ‘”
 Boyd owned and operated the Occidental Hotel from 1883 to the time it burned down in the 1932 fire . Boyd operated the hotel for more than a century . Boyd owned the hotel until it was destroyed in 1932 .
 James D Perry Native Ireland Died June 9, 1896 Aged 63yrs Odd Fellows emblem and all seeing eye on shield A spray of ivy .
 McKean March 24, 1860-May 30, 1923 or 1928 Independent Order of Odd Fellows Emblem at top 12 .
 Lester L.Bell died July 5, 1950 . Lester Bell died at the Standard Mill in later years .
 It was said no matter how much gold passed through his hands, none of it stuck . No matter how many gold he had passed through, no one was able to keep it .
 Leslie S Nich oils Born June 17, 1908 Died Oct., 1908 “Our Darling” 18 . Leslie Nich oils oils .
 She died after she was accidentally struck in the head with a pick axe while drainage was being dug around her house .
 Her obituary states that Mary was mourned by a large circle of friends after a long illness . Mary was also mourned for a long time by a circle of close friends .
 At the time of his death, he was one of the oldest resident miners in the town .
 John F Kennedy July 11, 1902 Age 39yrs . Arrived in San Francisco in 1851, and found his way to Bodie from there . Found his way in the city of Bodie, California .
 Conway May 20, 1901 Aged 1 yr, 2 mos, 28 ds 9 Welcome to Bodie State Historic Park . This brochure contains our current tour schedule .
 Bodie is home to over 65 marked sites in the town of Bodie . Enjoy exploring Bodie on your own with this booklet that describes over 65 sites .
 History Talk: Free Time: 2:15m. Cost: $1 . Available at museum & cemetery .
 A 30-minute V^eo-abSMSe^ ONLY origins and glory days of Bodie . Free Time: 12:15m. at County Barn, near museum .
 A 50-minute tour of the Standard Consolidated Mill, where the majority of Bodie’s gold and silver was processed after being mined . Please, no dogs on lour .
 Many of our tours are presented as “Living History,” where the tour guide is in period costume . Many of the tour guides are dressed in period costumes for the tours .
 Journey back into time and decide if you would like being an employee at the mill in the early 1900s . Journey back to the mill and see how you could be a mill employee .
 While the distance covered is not great, tours may be challenging for those who have difficulty walking . Tourists may also be challenged by difficulty walking.
 Friends of Bodie is a group dedicated to the preservation of the gold-mining ghost town . The group is dedicated to preserving Bodie, a former gold mining town .
 An expanded tour will take you to die railway station, site of Bodie’s last cyanide plant, and entrances to mine shafts . This expanded tour takes you to the railway station and the site of the last Cyanide plant .
 Moderate walk; wear good walking shoes, bring water, hat, sunscreen and windb maker . Moderate walk: Moderate walk, wear good shoes and bring water and hat .
 In addition to sites seen on the above tour, we will walk die old iailway grade, visit the site of die Red Cloud Mine and end up atop Standard Hill . We will also end up at Standard Hill.
 At conclusion of tour, a walk and talk through town ends your visit to Bodie . Bodie is located in Bodie, a small town in the middle of the country .
 Co-owner of Texas mortuary where eight decaying bodies were found has turned himself into police . Eight decaying bodies found at mortuary were found in Texas . The mortuary owner has been charged with abuse .
 Rachel HardyJ ohnson, 35, was arrested Friday at her Arlington, Texas, home on seven warrants .
 Both are accused of treating in ‘an offensive maimer’ the remains of seven bodies . Both are facing charges of treating ‘offensive maimers’ at the scene .
 Officials say the superintendent at the North Side Cemetery made the discovery on Monday . Officials said the superintendent of the cemetery discovered the discovery .
 He said he believes someone used a shovel to dig up the grave sometime over the weekend .
 Police say they think the action was planned because of how neatly it was done . Police said they think they think it was planned for because of the neatly-planned attack .
 American man who suffered from AIDS appears to have been cured of disease 20 months after receiving a targeted bone marrow transplant . Doctors say marrow transplant may have cured AIDS .
 Gero Huetter said his 42-year-old patient, an American living in Berlin, had been infected with the AIDS virus for more than a decade . Huetter: The patient, who was not identified, was infected with AIDS virus more than decade .
 20 months after transplant of genetically selected bone marrow, he no longer shows signs of carrying the virus .
 Researchers say tests on bone marrow, blood and other organ tissues have all been clean . Researchers at Berlin’s Charite hospital and medical school say tests are all clean .
 HIV and immunology research lab director says tests have probably not been extensive enough . Andrew Badlev, director of the Mavo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., said those tests probably not extensive enough.
 This isn’t the first time marrow r transplants have been attempted for treating AIDS or HIV infection . Marrow transplants are often used to treat HIV and AIDS .
 In 1999, an article in the journal Medical Hypotheses reviewed the results of 32 attempts reported between 1982 and 1996 . The study was published in 1999 .
 Huetter w ho is a hematologist, not an HIV specialist prepared to treat the patient’s leukemia with a bone marrow transplant . He said some people have a genetic mutation that seems to make them resistant to HIV infection .
 If the mutation, called Delta 32, is inherited from both parents, it prevents HD 7 from attaching itself to cells by blocking CCR5, a receptor . ”1 read it in 1996, coincidentally,” Huetter said .
 Roughly one in 1,000 Europeans and Americans hav e inherited the mutation from both parents . Huetter set out to find one such person among donors .
 The 61st person tested carried the proper mutation . Out of a pool of 80 suitable donors, the 61st carried the correct mutation .
 Before the transplant, the patient endured powerful drugs and radiation to kill off his own infected bone marrow cells and disable his immune system . The treatment is fatal to between 20 and 30 percent of recipients . The patient endured a treatment to kill the infected cells .
 Huetters team feared that the drugs might interfere with the new marrow r cells’ survival . Huetter team feared they may interfere with their new marrow cells' survival . The drugs were found to be effective in the first phase of the study .
 Scientists lowered his defenses in the hope that mutated cells would reiect the virus on their own . They risked lowering his defenses hoping that the new r , mutated cells could re-infect the virus .
 Court convicts 19 villagers over 'Himalayan Viagra' murders .
 Seven farmers were killed in the remote northern district of Manang in June 2009 after going to forage for Yarchagumba, a rare parasitic plant . The rare plant is a major source of income for many Himalayan communities .
 The accused claimed the farmers died accidentally when a fight broke out over the right to harvest the plant . A kilogramme of the plant can fetch tens of thousands of dollars in China .
 The valley near the border with China where the victims went missing in June 2009 is among the most remote parts of Nepal . It was several weeks before authorities learned of the deaths .
 The court has had to delay verdict more than a dozen times due to absent judges and lawyers . The court, which is a two day walk from the nearest road, is two days away from a road .
 Authorities say police had to walk for days to reach the area where the bodies of the seven men were discovered . Local authorities say police say they were forced to walk days to find the bodies .
 Police initially arrested the entire village, but later released the women and children . The village was initially arrested by police, but they later released all the villagers .
 Rchaeologists have discovered the earliest Londoner to have major head surgery .
 The )per half of the adult male skull came to jht last October during archaeological ork on the foreshore of the Thames at lelsea . The skull is part of a collection of skulls found in the Thames foreshore .
 The man, who lived around 1750 "", had been trepanned a portion of e skull was removed using a scraping ol, probably a flint . The man had a skull removed from his skull using a scraper .
 There was no evimce of post-operative infection, and me had re-grown around the edge of e hole, indicating that the man had surged his treatment . The man's treatment was deemed 'surgery' and he was not infected .
 The procedure may have alleviated cranial fractures or been believed to relieve the effects of theninexplicable mental illness . It is difficult to determine why drilling holes into peoples' heads has been a feature of almost every culture .
 Detectives cordoned off the area and forensic experts made a fingertip search . Detectives made fingertip searches after the incident in the early hours of the morning .
 Forest manager Peter Adams identified the 'brain' as a beeffungus . Then forest managers Peter Adams arrived at the scene to identify the brain .
 FAYE and STEPHEN Beuby bought a villa in the hilltop village of Benabbio, near the spa resort of Bagni di Lucca .
 Workmen broke through a bricked-up door to create space for a wine cellar, and found the skeleton of Nemo Cianelli, 57 . The skeleton was found in 2002 .
 With the skeleton lay a suitcase, rifle, rifle and bricklayer's trowel, bucket, pile of bricks and suicide note in a Chianti bottle . The skeleton was found by a bricklayer in Italy .
 The note explained that he had an incurable disease and wanted to spare his family grief . The note, on paper headed with Cianelli's name, was headed with his name . It was written in the note that he wanted to avoid his family's grief .
 In April 1958, he told everyone he was going to America and was never heard from again . He told everyone in April 1958 that he was leaving the country .
 He left instructions with a local builder to come in after his ""departure"" and replaster the wall . Local builder will come in to replace the wall after his departure .
 Cianelli had been a wealthy businessman who lived in the villa with his wife and daughters . He had lived there with his family and his wife .
 He worked for a local tannery, drove a sports car and travelled frequently to America on business .
 His wife died several years ago without learning what had become of her husband . His wife was not able to find out what happened to him .
 One has to wonder why none of them was curious about the new brickwork in the cellar . The new cellar is the first time the cellar has been built in a cellar .
 Medical records of Cianelli, whose first name means ""no one"" in Latin, showed that he had been in perfect health at the time of his disappearance .
 California wildfires temporarily suspend search for aliens . Search for aliens temporarily suspended due to wildfires .
 New space threat has NASA over the moon . Seems NASA's fascination w ith the moon is in the past .
 SETI stands for Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence . Scientists search the heavens for signs of extraterrestrial life by listening to small satellite dishes . SETI is a search for extraterrestrial intelligence .
 The blaze came within a mile of the facility, located near Hat Creek, California, on both the east and west, Shostak says . The blaze is believed to be the largest in the state .
 We're 'very close' to finding another Earth, scientists say . Scientists looking for signs of life in the universe are closer to their goal than people realize .
 United States reveals secret plans for '60s moon base . U.S. Army brainchild ""Project Horizon"" was born .
 Staff fled to safer ground and shut down the satellites as flames got closer . The staff fled the flames and closed the satellites down .
 Back in July 1 969, I stood on the talcum-like lunar dust just a few feet from our home .
 Fire officials say the fire is 35% contained and is expected to be fully contained by August 20th . Firefighters say the blaze is still burning at 35% containment .
 Scientists were eventually given the all clear to return to the facility . The scientists were eventually allowed to return .
 From Earth, the sun appears as a constant circle of light, but w hen viewed in space a brilliant display of mot bn is revealed . Fine, with a chance of solar flares with a possible chance of a solar flare .
 Dave A Is up contributed to this week's coverage of a wildfire in Washington .
 Full moons of this summer July 12, August 1 0 and September 9 — are supermoons, as NASA calls them .
 NASA's successor is almost ready to make an entrance for the first time . NASA's new spacecraft will be the first of its kind .
 The sniveling cowards that they are. Virgin Galactic's newest spaceship . Virgin Galactic .
 NASA cameras capture huge solar flares . The sun puts on a f irew orks show again .
 NASA's Curiosity rover is getting ready for some unexpected life changes . Curiosity rover Curiosity rover has been exploring Earth for more than a year . Curiosity is now in the process of making contact with Curiosity rover .
 Scientists have used a code to create a model of how the universe as w e know it today might have evolved . The code has been created by scientists to show how it evolved .
 This may support life on Jupiter's moon . At least one corner of the solar system may be serving up an ice-and-sand .
 A statue of the Roman emperor has been recovered from the site of Caligula . Police arrest a man who tried to smuggle the statue abroad .
 Caligula was described by contemporaries as insane by contemporaries . After reportedly sleeping with his sisters, killing for pleasure and seeking to appoint his horse a consul during his rule from AD37 to 41, he was called insane .
 With many of Caligula's monuments destroyed after he was killed by his Praetorian guard at 28, archaeologists are eager to excavate for his remains . Many of his monuments have been destroyed after his death .
 Officers from the archaeological squad of Italy 's tax police had a break last week after arresting a man near Lake Nemi, south of Rome, as he loaded part of a 2. metre statue into a loriy .
 The emperor had a villa there, as well as a floating temple and a floating palace . Their hulks were recovered in Mussolini's time but destroyed in the war . The emperor's villa was also found in the area .
 The rare Greek marble, throne and god’s robes convinced police it came from the emperor's tomb . It was found in a Greek marble and god's robes .
 Under questioning, tomb raider led them to the site, where excavations will start today .
 Sheila Wentworth, 45, and Doris Jean Hall, 51, were killed, along with Mrs Hall's husband, Billy Joe, 45 . Mrs Hall was killed along with her husband and her husband's wife, Sheila and Billy Joe .
 The sisters often visited each other unannounced and had travelled the road countless times, mostly at weekends . The sisters had travelled to each other countless times .
 It’s a musical staple of nursery schools and seniors’ fitness classes .
 The Hokey Pokey has become the focus of a bizarre controversy in Britain . It has drawn in politicians, the Catholic Church in Scotland and soccer fans . Soccer fans are accused of exploiting the song's alleged anti-Catholic roots .
 Ottawa schoolchildren do The Hokey Pokey on the lawn of Parliament Hill last May as part of Physical Education Day . Ottawa school children do the move on Parliament Hill in May .
 The song has caused a ruckus in Britain that has drawn in politicians, the Catholic Church in Scotland and soccer fans . The song is a British anthem that has been performed by the likes of David Beckham .
 A Catholic Church spokesman warns that The Hokey Cokey had centuries-old origins as a Protestant song . It was meant to mock the words and actions of Catholic clergy presiding over the Latin mass .
 Cardinal Keith O'Brien: "It was devised as an attack on and a parody of the Catholic mass" A spokesman for the Scottish Catholic Cardinal said at the time that the parody was intended to be a parody .
 Kennedy Jr. quoted his father's own recollections about how the future children's classic emerged from a 1942 gathering at a London nightclub where Canadian soldiers stationed in Britain were enjoying a riotous party . Kennedy Jr.'s father's recollections came from a meeting at a nightclub in London where
 A chorus based on the feet and hand movements the Canadians had used, with a few adaptations . So when I got back to my hotel, I wrote a chorus .
 A car crashed into a yard where the Baxter County Sheriff's Department parked three helicopters . A car ended up on its top after crashing into a wall into the yard . Three helicopters were parked there .
 Witnesses told investigators that ivie was driving erratically before the crash . The driver, Otis ivie, 71, was taken to hospital after the accident .
 Brooklyn schoolteacher gets his stolen car back, totally souped up .
 Amanda Pogany's 1996 Honda was returned to her drag-race ready, with a new V-8 engine, manual transmission, leather interior, tinted windows and oversize tires . The 1996 Honda has a manual transmission and leather interior .
 Police found the car at an illegal chop shop and were able to trace it to Pogany even though the VIN number had been filed off . Police say the car was found at a chop shop in Pogany .
 She hasn't driven the new version of the Honda yet because she doesn't know how to drive a stick shift . She's not driving the new model because she hasn't learned how to do it .
 Zeke the cat lives in one of the offices at Cat Depot on 1 7th Street in Sarasota . Zeke lives in the office of Cat Depot .
 Zeke dialed 91 1 on the office phone when the office's human resident left for lunch, staff say . Staff at the office say that on Monday, when Zeke went to lunch, he dialed the phone .
 Sarasota County dispatch got no response when they answered, so they called back and spoke to a volunteer at the front desk . They had no idea who placed the call . The volunteer said she did not know who placed it .
 Zeke was found sprawled across the phone with the handset off the hook . Further investigation led them to find Zeke sprawled on the phone, with the phone off the phone .
 Staff at the hospital say Zeke has a reputation for walking on laptops and other electrical devices . Staff at Zeke's home says he has a 'reputation for walking' on laptops, other electronics .
 Ask 10 people about the legend of Charlie No Face, aka the Green Man, and you’ll hear a different story each time .
 He was zapped while climbing a tree as a boy to retrieve a kite, or to look at a bird's nest . He worked for a power company .
 He haunts Koppel-New Galilee Road in Big Beaver, or a deserted industrial area near New Castle, or an old railroad tunnel in South Park, or any one of a half-dozen other places .
 He was one of the kindest human beings on the face of this earth, despite his horrible disfigurement, says CNN.com's John Sutter . He says he was "one of the most kind human beings" on the planet .
 The truth has been obscured by decades of hyperbole, a relative says . That last one is the truth, according to a relative, but the truth is obscured by hyperbole .
 The true story of Charlie No Face is how Beaver Countians typically refer to him . Charlie's true story is a little less sensational than the legend . The true truth is that he was actually a real man .
 He lived in Big Beaver for most of his life and had a habit of walking a lonely stretch of highway between Koppel and New Galilee for pleasure .
 He did this at night because the injuries he suffered at a too-young age were so horrific that he probably would have caused mass hysteria otherwise . He did it at night to avoid mass hysteria .
 The Morado Bridge just north of Beaver Falls where Raymond Robinson was severly burned is located . Robinson was severely burned on the bridge . Robinson's body was found in the Morado River in Beaver Falls .
 Raymond Robinson was electrocuted in June 1919 . Robinson's death was the first of his own electrocution . Robinson was killed in 1918 .
 Robinson's nocturnal wanderings attracted the attention of local folks, who told their friends . Robinson's wanderings, which spanned parts of at least five decades, attracted their friends' attention . Robinson: "I'm not afraid to go out for a few days. I'm
 Friends told other friends, and the story spread across western Pennsylvania and neighboring states like ripples in a pond . Friends told each other, and other friends .
 Robinson became a supernatural creature who haunted isolated country lanes and railroad tunnels from Youngstown to South Park . Robinson was a local legend who haunted country lanes, railroad tunnels and country lanes .
 At least two Web sites contain in-depth, albeit highly exaggerated, accounts of his deeds and those of people who went to see him .
 Magazines dedicated to folklore and the paranormal have featured Robinson in their pages . Robinson has appeared in folklore and paranormal magazines .
 A folklore specialist from Pittsburgh regularly features Robinson in talks . Robinson is a folklore specialist who regularly visits Robinson .
 Few people know how Raymond Robinson became Charlie No Face . But very few people actually know how he became the No Face star .
 Raymond T Robinson was born Oct., 1910, in Beaver County, but little is known about his early years . Robinson was a member of the National Suicide Prevention Council . Robinson is credited with saving the lives of others .
 He was a son of Robert and Louise Robinson, and the family lived on the outskirts of Beaver Falls . He was born in Beaver Falls, Oregon .
 He swam the Beaver River in the summer, hung out with his playmates around the Morado section of Beaver Falls . He took dares, like a typical boy, and swam in the river .
 On June 18, 1919, he and several friends were heading for a swimming hole on the Beaver River . They came upon the Pittsburgh, Harmony, Butler and New Castle Railway Co. bridge spanning Wallace Run .
 The Beaver Falls and Big Beaver Bridge was a bridge connecting Beaver Falls to Big Beaver . The bridge was tom down years ago and has been replaced by a Route 18 highway bridge .
 The Harmony Line, as it was known, had regular daily trolley service between Ellwood City and Beaver Falls . It was known as the Harmony Line .
 It crossed the Beaver River at Koppel and paralleled the river as it made its way south into Beaver Falls, Beaver Falls . The Beaver River is the largest river in the world .
 It came to a dead end just over the Wallace Run bridge in Morado . Passengers transferred to Beaver Valley Traction Co. trolleys serving Beaver County .
 The Wallace Run bridge would have carried both voltages, Fronczek said . Wallace Run Bridge would have been carrying the two voltages at the time .
 In September 1918, another Beaver Falls boy Robert Littell, 12 died from electrical burns he received while playing on the bridge with friends . Another Beaver Falls, 12, died of electrical burns in September 1918 . The incident occurred in Beaver Falls .
 Robinson and his four companions knew about that fatal accident when they ventured onto the span at twilight on June 18, 1919 . Robinson and four companions were on the span when they died .
 The boys had reportedly spied a bird's nest high on the bridge structure . But a newspaper account the following day reported that the boys had spied the nest . A newspaper account said the nest had been spotted by the boys .
 Several times a week in good weather, he would grab his walking stick around 10 m.m. and head outside . He would head out to the streets around 10m.m., around 10 times a year .
 The family never knew if the man was exercising or talking with people other than relatives . Whether it was for exercise, or to talk with people outside his relatives, the family said .
 Family members say it caused no uncertain amount of worry and anguish for the family . What they do know is that the family was left with no guarantee of what happened .
 The nephew recalled family members walking the road in the middle of the night . The nephew said family members were seen walking on the road at night .
 Word soon spread about the strange man who walked the road . People at first thought it was local teenagers driving out there to get a look at him .
 Scores of cars loaded with kids from all over the region were soon driving up and down Koppel-New Galilee Road in search of Charlie No Face . Charlie's No Face is a popular video of a man with no facial hair .
 They brought beer and cigarettes, which they used to barter for a few words with the legendary figure . They used to bring them in to meet him for the first time .
 They resented the derogatory nicknames and particularly disliked the fact that people gave him booze . The family resented being given him booze, particularly because of the alcohol .
 He had spent the night in woods and crawled to the roadside after hearing traffic . He crawled out of the woods after spending the night sleeping in the woods . He was found by the roadside in the early hours of the morning .
 One carnival owner came to see if he could hire Robinson for the freak show . One time during a carnival in Koppel, one of the owners came to ask if he can hire Robinson .
 Jim Tripodi of Beaver considered Charlie No Face a friend . Charlie's No Face was a friend of the day .
 Tripodi, 57, grew up in the College Hill section of Beaver Falls in the 1 960s . Tripodi began visiting Koppel-New Galilee Road when he was in high school .
 He and his buddies made numerous trips to see Robinson in the late 1960s . He and friends traveled to see him perform at Robinson's concerts .
 Robinson visits began as curiosity, Tripodi said, but as time wore on they realized he was just a lonely guy who wanted company . Tripodi: Robinson's visits began to be curiosity, but they realized they were just lonely .
 Stories have circulated about people picking up Robinson and taking him for rides to local bars . Robinson has a history of being picked up and taken to bars .
 Tripodi and several others said Robinson told them personally that people were nasty to him . None of the stories has been confirmed, but Tripodi said Robinson said he was hurt .
 Tripodi's visits usually began as he and his friends were sitting around on a summer evening with nothing better to do . Tripodi says he and friends were often sitting around in the summer evenings with nothing to do.
 Similar scenes played out time and again across the region over the 30 years or more that Robinson walked the highway . Robinson was the first to walk the highway in the area .
 JoeNardone, 80, of Koppel remembers kids visiting Robinson in the 1940s . Bob Zahorsky, 67, who grew up in Aliquippa, remembers the same thing from the 1950s . John ""Butch"" Maranciak, 51,
 Robinson typically remained in the shadows and often hid when cars approached . Robinson was often seen hiding from cars and hiding in the dark .
 Tripodi said he and his friends sometimes took dates to scare the daylights out of them . Tripodi: "I'm not scared of dates. I'm scared of them. I want to scare them"
 Going to see Charlie No Face became a rite-of-pass for Beaver Valley teens . Going to the show was a rite of passage for the area's teens .
 They christened landmarks along the road "Charlie's Rock"" or ""Charlie's Tree"" after places where they would pull over and talk to him .
 Ann Steele, 71, of Koppel, wrote to local soldiers stationed overseas during the Vietnam War . They would ask her about Robinson in their letters .
 Robinson was struck several times by cars while walking the road . She said some of them told her they prayed for Robinson, who was struck by cars . Robinson was hit by several cars but survived .
 The Charlie No Face story has been passed along from generation to generation . Charlie's story is passed along through generations of generations of children .
 White, 31, researches local urban legends and is particularly interested in stories about Charlie No Face and the Green Man . White, from New York City, is also interested in the stories of Charlie No face and the green man .
 Green Man stories always involve a man who was electrocuted or injured in some type of industrial accident . Green Man: "Green Man" always involves an electrocution or injury in industrial accidents .
 He is called the Green Man because the accident left him with a greenish tint to his skin . He is also known as the 'Green Man' because of his greenish appearance .
 To get him to appear, people have to do something ritualistic such as blow a car horn or yell, White says . White: People have to blow car horns or yell .
 White has documented purported Green Man sightings at various locations across the Pittsburgh region, including North and South Park, Brookline, McKees Rocks, West Mifflin, Ross Township and New Castle .
 Tripodi remembered a carload of people from West Virginia pulling up at a local pizza shop one time and asking for directions to the Green Man . Tripodi: "The Green Man" is a local legend who has won a series of awards .
 White, who gives talks about urban legends, always includes Charlie No Face and the Green Man . White gives talks on urban legends and urban legends in his book, "Urban Legend"
 Ray Robinson died on June 11, 1985 seven days before the 66th anniversary of his accident . He died at the Beaver County Geriatric Center, now Friendship Ridge, in Brighton Township, where he spent the last few years of his life .
 He is buried in Grandview Cemetery, overlooking the site of the old Wallace Run trolley bridge .
 Robert Littell, the Beaver Falls boy who was fatally burned on the bridge nine months before Robinson, also is buried there . Robinson is buried in Beaver Falls, a suburb of Beaver Falls . Robinson was killed by a car crash in July 2010 .
 Robinson stopped walking Koppel-New Galilee Road several years before he moved to the nursing home . Robinson's legend is permanently ingrained in the folklore of western Pennsylvania .
 Charon’s obol is the coin placed in or on the mouth of a dead person before burial . Greek and Latin literary sources explain it as a payment or a bribe for Charon, the ferryman who conveyed souls across the River Styx .
 More precious gold or silver coins were seldom buried with the deceased so a type of “ghost money” was made instead by making an impression of a real coin into thin gold foil . The ghost money was made by making impression of the real coin in thin foil .
 Actual coins were also buried with the dead as well, though they were generally small denominations . The dead were buried with actual coins .
 She supposedly has haunted Livingston Park in front of Children's Hospital over the decades . Livingston Park is a popular attraction for children's hospital patients .
 She also has been reported at Camp Chase, now the Confederate cemetery along Sullivant Avenue, historian says .
 It is believed that the ghost is searching for a grave of a Confederate soldier . The ghost is believed to be looking for a Confederate grave in the area .
 Fresh flowers have appeared regularly on the grave of Benjamin E Allen, Company D, 50th Tennessee Regiment . Neff said fresh flowers have been left on his grave regularly .
 Flowers also are found on the unknown soldier's grave in cemetery .
 Steinke has never seen the lady ghost, but she said she's talked to many people who have . Steinke says she has talked to people who've seen her ghost .
 She is dressed in a gray, wool traveling suit with black buttons and black trim . The suit is in the style of the 1860s or 1870s .
 It was perfectly quiet that afternoon when a sudden wind swept through the gate and over the cemetery . The wind was the wind that swept over the gate to the cemetery.
 The wind blew down the tent set up for the reenactment, scattering materials on tables in the tent . The wind blows down the tents set up in the area .
 This series of old columns, which will run through June, will be compiled into a book . The book will be released in June .
 Corpse of a man has been found on roof of a police station in northern India where it was placed over two years ago during an inquiry .
 The body of Chukkan Nishad, 22, was meant to be sent for DNA testing but was instead put in a body bag and placed on the roof . Nishad went missing in July 2007, aged 22, and his body was found in 2007 .
 The family kept requesting the body at the police station but were repeatedly told there was an investigation underway . Nishad's father and local officials said the family kept asking for the body .
 The Mail said the body was placed there after local authorities refused to release the funds for a DNA test on Nishad . Nishad's death remains a mystery .
 Police are now completing the formalities to return Mishad's remains no more than bones after two years exposed to the elements to his family . Mr Ram said police are completing the . formalities .
 Nikola Tesla didn't get much glory when he was alive, but to hipsters now, he’s a real turn-on . Nikola Tesla was a pioneer of the electric car .
 Jack and Meg White, of the band the White Stripes, are discussing the Serbian inventor Nikola Tesla in a scene in the film "Coffee and Cigarettes"
 Jack’s homemade Tesla coil is a high-voltage transformer that looks like something from a 1950s sci-fi movie . The two hipsters are slouched at a table in a cafe, staring moodily at his homemade coil .
 Talking about the inventor, Jack becomes animated with enthusiasm for his unsung hero’s accomplishments .
 A prototype of the they used lots of AC. electric Tesla mobile motors, no X-ray technology, no fluorescent lights, no . fluorescent lights . Of course A prototype . of the . they used . lots of . AC electric Tesla motors .
 Guglielmo Marconi was a celebrity in his time but is today overshadowed by his rivals . He is often credited with inventing the wireless radio or DC electricity . He was most often linked to an '80s hair band .
 Tesla has become an inspiration for artists, writers, musicians and filmmakers . Tesla has been the subject of numerous film and television projects . Tesla is the first car to be built in the desert desert .
 Bowie’s Tesla Fan Club: Tesla in The Whites in ‘Coffee ‘The Prestige’ and Cigarettes’ Stream” was inspired by a photograph of Tesla in front of one of his enormous coils .
 Tesla worked with George Westinghouse on AC energy sources, including fluorescent light bulbs . Tesla also worked with the company on AC light bulbs, and later on AC power sources .
 He filed the first patent for the radio and investigated remote-controlled robotics and wireless communication . The inventor also filed a patent for remote controlled robotics .
 His ideas included communication with Mars and a “death ray” part cle-beam weapon he thought would be used in war . His ideas became more farfetched, including claims of communication with . Mars .
 The key to Tesla’s appeal is not only his prodigious inventions, but the sad fact that credit for his greatest ideas was usurped by more market-minded rivals . Tesla's greatest ideas were usurped from him by his rivals, he says .
 Tesla ripped up a $12 million contract with Westinghouse rather than see his benefactor bankrupted by the expense . Tesla was also an idealist who ripped up his contract with the company . Tesla's idealist and idealist was also a businessman .
 This anti-materialistic bent may be what both endears him to artists and has prevented him from getting his due .
 In addition to Hunt, Auster and Rushkoff, he’s appeared in a Thomas Pynchon novel and been namechecked by Aaron Sorkin . He has also appeared in the books by Hunt and Auster .
 There's even an electric car, the Tesla Roadster, being developed by Silicon Valley’s Tesla Motors .
 Tesla had an electric personality, according to Tesla's friends and family . Tesla was the first person to build a car that could be used in a car .
 The curse of the Koh-i-Noor, the great diamond at the top of her crown, struck again . He who owns the diamond will own the world after the death of the Queen Mother .
 Center Parcs holiday village in Suffolk was moved from the Tower of London in preparation for the state funeral the following day . A fire broke out at the main site of Elveden Hall on 4 April .
 Elvedon Hall was once the home of the diamond's last male owner, Duleep Singh, Maharajah of the Punjab . Singh inherited the jewel after a clutch of claimants had claimed the jewel during the 18th century .
 It was discovered in the Golconda mines in southern India, around AD 1100 according to one story . Haydn's Dictionary of Dates says it was found there in 1550 .
 Or maybe the first record of it dates from 1304, or 1306, when it belonged to Sultan Allah ed Din . Or maybe maybe it dates back to 1304 when it was owned by Sultan Allah Ed Din .
 Contradictions of dates, ownership and weight have accompanied the jewel for centuries . The jewel is believed to have been made in 18th century .
 Babur the Great Moghul allegedly obtained the famous stone in 1525 . Emperor Aurangzeb set it as the eye of the peacock in the legendary peacock throne in Delhi .
 The Persian warrior king Nadir Shah defeated the Moghul Empire in 1739 and sacked Delhi . He didn't find the diamond until a disgruntled concubine told him the emperor hid it in his turban . The diamond was found in the turban of the Persian king .
 Nadir offered to exchange turbans, the vanquished monarch could not refuse . Nadir was the last monarch to accept the offer, but Nadir refused .
 After a bloody reign, Nadir was murdered in 1747, while his son and successor was dethroned and blinded by his brother . Nadir died in 1746, but his brother was killed in 1749 .
 The stone passed into Afghanistan, but when Shah Shuja was deposed he gave it to Ranjit Singh, ruler of the Punjab, who vainly promised to help him regain the Afghan throne . The stone was given to Singh, who had promised him help regain the throne .
 Ten years after Ranjit's death, Punjab was absorbed into the British Raj . The stone was given by treaty in 1849 to Queen Victoria as Empress of India .
 Koh-INoor was recut at Garrards, the royal jewellers . After reputedly disappointing the public at the Great Exhibition of 1851, it was reputed to have been recut .
 The machinery was started by the Prime Minister, the Duke of Wellington, who rode to the shop in Regent Street on his white horse .
 Alexandra , Mary and Elizabeth all wore it at their enthronements, set in different crowns . Alexandra and Mary wore the crowns at the enthronements .
 The Taliban demanded its return to Afghanistan in 2000, and India, Pakistan and Iran have all claimed it . The Taliban have demanded it be returned to Afghanistan .
 After a life of enforced idleness as an English country gentleman, Singh died in Paris in 1893 . Singh was a broken and impoverished man who died in France .
 D.Mail, 3 April; D Telegraph, 5+6 April 2002; Brewer's Dictionary of Phrase and Fable .
 During the summer of 1944, 1 arrived in England as a member of the U.S. Army Medical Corps .
 Hitler then called off the planned invasion and turned toward his other enemy, Russia . Hitler then turned his attention to the Soviet Union and turned to Russia .
 One week after the invasion of the continent on D-Day, the first of Germany’s secret weapons fell on Britain . The Buzz Bomb .
 It was named Vergeltung, for vengeance, as Berlin was being bombed at that time . It was known as 'vengeance' for the bombing of Berlin .
 The VI, also known as the “buzz bomb, or the ‘doodlebug,” was a pilotless flying bomb that looked like a small plane . The VI was also known known as “the buzz bomb” or ‘theoodlebug�
 This was a rocket that flew straight up and, by gyroscope, flew over England and dropped down . This was the first time a rocket flew over the UK and dropped into the country .
 At that time, I was on detached service from the United States Army to Pinewood Studios outside London as an actor playing an American soldier in English documentary films .
 I was housed in London near Marble Arch as the Vis and V2s were falling . I lived there as a young boy in the 1950s and '60s .
 Before dawn one morning, there was a terrific blast that hurled me out of my bed and into an old tub in the bathroom . The blast was a blast that threw him out of his bed and in the old tub .
 "We were met by a wall of fire and smoke. Realizing that we had been hit, we pulled on some clothes, grabbed our few possessions, and raced for the door . But, as I opened it, we were met . We pulled on, we raced to the door
 "I ran to the window, but the fire was as all-consuming there as it was at the door," she says . The fire broke out in the early hours of the morning .
 For some reason unknown to be unknown to me, then or now, I ran back to the door and opened it to the fire which was still as intense as it was . The fire continued to burn in the house, but the fire was still raging .
 "All I could think of was the parting of the Red Sea. Suddenly the wall of fire seemed to roll back on both sides, and all I could thought of was a parting of a Red Sea," he says .
 We clattered down the steps and into the street where people had gathered . It was not the first time we had seen a woman in a row of people .
 Richard Vath was home on furlough when his mother pointed to a turned-back calendar page where a day was circled in red . Much later, he was home again, when he pointed to the page where he'd circled a day in red.
 "I consulted the small notebook I always carried to record events and saw it was the night of the fire," he said . "It's the night the fire. I consulted the notebook I . always carried out," he wrote .
 We scanned the newspaper, picked a theater, and set out on a doubledecker bus . It was the first time we had been to a theater in a theater .
 "Let’s skip this one. But, when we neared the theater and started to get off, I suddenly said, “Let's skip it one.” "I was very nervous, but it was a great experience," she says .
 The following morning, the newspaper carried an article on the theater we had planned to attend, it said . We went on to the second theater and, the next morning, we went to the third .
 It was the Bo48 Fate / Jan-Feb 2002 hemian capital of England, like the Left Bank is in Paris . The Left Bank was the capital of France, like it is in London .
 Thieves, murderers, and such were said to gather there, but we were young and adventurous, so off we went . Thieves and murderers, such as murderers, gathered there, said to have gathered there .
 We toured about, then wound up in a low-life pub with people who might have just stepped out of a police lineup . We toured . Then wound up . in a . low life pub .
 Rough oak tables stained by spilled beer, cigarette butts, and spittle stood about on the sawdustcovered floor . Rough tables stained with beer, butts and butts littered the floor .
 The bar, on one side, was backed by a mirrored wall that was cracked and filthy . The bar was backed up by a mirror wall that had been cracked and dirty .
 Cigarette smoke, noise, and horrible music from a broken-down piano filled the room . "Cigarette smoke and noise" filled the air .
 The Exploding Pub is set to be blown out of the pub in a bid to save the lives of its customers .
 Suddenly the cacophony of the pub was overshadowed by the blast of a V2.2. The blast of the V2 was heard in the pub .
 The wall with mirrors and bottles rose up in the air. For a split second, the wall with the mirrors rose up into the air .
 I dragged him under the table with me just as the entire wall of glass crashed atop and around our heavy oak shelter . The wall smashed into the shelter, shattering the glass into the air .
 Flaming timbers, bricks, and plaster fell on our table, but it remained solid . Flaming bricks, bricks and plaster fall on the table but it remains solid .
 "I could see the outside door but questioned whether we could get there or not. Looking through the smoke and fire, I could see an outside door," she said .
 "I grabbed Walter and we dashed for the door, stepping over burning wood and bodies," she says . "We dashed to the door. We dashed for our lives. I grabbed Walter," she recalls .
 How we made it to the door still remains a mystery in my mind but make it we did, with just minor cuts and bruises . How we managed to make it to a door still a mystery .
 At the door, I turned just in time to see the entire roof cave in and, finally, our table gave way — the table that had saved our lives . At the end of the ordeal, the roof collapsed and our table collapsed .
 We made our way, in the blackout, back to our hotel, where we cleaned up and dressed our wounds . We made their way back to their hotel, which is where they cleaned up their wounds .
 All I do know is that I survived the war, the blitz, and other dangers . To this day, I do not know what happened to me, but I survived it .
 As he writes this, I am in my 70s and have had a fine career in the theater . As I write this, he is in his 70s . He has had a great career in theater .
 "I also have a wonderful wife, a son who is a professional military man, and four outstanding grandchildren," he says . He says he has "wonderful wife" and "four outstanding grandchildren"
 "One thing I do know is that, in my mind, I am the most fortunate man on the face of this earth," he says . "I'm the most lucky man in the world," he adds .
 Y Richard Vath is a former actor and director who has retired to Mexico as a professional writer . He has retired from acting to writing and directing .
 Time change linked to heart attacks . Turning back one hour back could do your own ticker some good .
 Researchers found a 5 percent drop in heart attack deaths and hospitalizations the day after clocks are reset each year to standard time . Study published in New England journal of Medicine .
 Physicians can now add daylight saving time to the list of everyday events that affect heart attacks, said Dr. John Sutter .
 Ralph Brindis is a vice presi-* dent of the American College of Cardiology . He practices in Oakland, California .
 Turn your clocks .back one hour to standard i time at | 2 a.m. at 2 a,m.
 Scientists have known that sleep deprivation is bad for the heart . The body responds by boosting blood pressure, heart rate and the tendency to form dangerous dots .
 More than 1. billion people change their docks twice a year to make the most of the available sunlight . More than a billion people in the world use their docks to make sure they get the best sunlight .
 William Willett, a British builder, proposed the idea in 1905 after watching Londoners sleep through so many perfectly good hours of morning sunshine .
 The idea gained traction in 1916 as World War I turned coal into a predous resource . The idea became popular in 1916 after the war .
 Stockholm-based epidemiologists study the relationship between heart attacks and sleep . They decided to investigate the effect of moving into and out of daylight saving time in March .
 Rickard Ljung of Sweden’s National Board of Health and Welfare examined data from the Swedish Myocardial Infarction Register . The register is a catalog of all heart attacks in Sweden .
 They also looked up the number of heart attacks a few weeks before and after each of those days, calculated the average and made a comparison . The researchers also looked at the average of heart attack deaths .
 The on five of th of the week, of those di enough to be tistically sign . In the spri of heart art the Monda} Wednesday saving turn increases rar cent to 10 pe Dr. Dr. Monda .
 Martha Sell You day was 2, 140, but that fell to professor of preventive medan average of 2,038 on the icine .
 The idea ed the average and made a Wednesday after daylight factors for cardiovascular Sunday gained traction in 1916 . Saving time began in 1916 as comparison .
 Stockholm-based epidemi>rit is probably ologists who study the relaitists have known tionship between heart . ieprivation is bad attacks and sleep .
 Health and Welfare exami 1. billion peoined data from the Swedish their clocks twice Myocardial Infarction Regiske the most of the ter .
 A 78-year-old man described as an animal hoarder has been found dead in his Wittmann mobile home and authorities say he was partially eaten by his pets . Authorities say the man was a hoarder .
 Jerry Brown likely died about a week ago, officials say . Maricopa County sheriffs officials said the body of Jerry Brown was discovered Tuesday morning . Brown's body was found in his home in Phoenix, Arizona .
 Halstead said he could not recognize Brown because the body was so decomposed . Halstead: "I don't know what I think of him"
 Brown said authorities told her that it would be the family's responsibility to remove the animals from the property . Brown: Authorities told her they would have to remove animals from their property .
 She said her husband is in the hospital with stage 4 nonHodgkin lymphoma and she has an autoimmune disorder . She said she has autoimmune disorder and her husband also has stage 4 lymphoma .
 Sheriff Joe Arpaio said his deputies are working with officials from the Arizona Humane Society to rescue the animals . The animals will be taken to a facility for care and keeping . The sheriff's deputies said the animals are being cared for .
 One of the animals is a 4month-old black kitten that is missing both eyes . Another is a kitten that has both eyes missing from the sky .
 A man has been ordered to life in prison without the possibility of parole for killing a 4-month-old baby with a medievalstyle battle ax . The child’s mother was critically wounded in a random attack on a sidewalk .
 Harold Eugene Montague, 38, was sentenced after pleading guilty but mentally ill to first-degree murder with a deadly weapon, attempted murder and battery on a police officer . Montague pleaded guilty to the murder with deadly weapon and attempted murder .
 She then travelled to Australia with her sister to visit friends hurt in the explosion . But the Grim Reaper had marked her card and marked her on her way to Australia .
 On 23 October, her body was pulled from the jaws of a 13ft crocodile in Kakadu National Park . She had taken a late night swim in the Sandy Billabong waterhole in the northern Australian outback .
 Marine biologist Roy Waldo Miner “prepares to make movie actors of the rainbow-hued residents of a coral reef” off Andros Island, Bahamas . Miner’s 55-pound helmet weighs 55 pounds .
 Miner’s expedition, which he wrote about in the June 1934 issue of National Geographic, also harvested some 40 tons of coral from the site . Miner's expedition was also published in the National Geographic issue of 1934 .
 That coral is still on display, part of a two-story-tall diorama in that museum . Find all the photos at ngm.com .
 From Saturday morning, Feb. 22, 1872, New North-West, Deer Lodge, Montana Territory, was the scene of a massacre in Montana .
 Night watchman and Robert Wiles discovered flames issuing from the roof of Coffee & Preston's large livery stable .
 When discovered it had gained but little headway, but almost a gale prevailing from a point or two east of south it was fanned to fury in a few minutes . The eager flames swept from the immense stable front and rear around the adjoining store of Parchen, Paynter
 In a few minutes hundreds of men were at the scene, and to save the most valuable goods from the stores in the doomed block, was accepted as a first duty . Scores of willing men applied themselves to the task, standing by their dangerous task until the flames enveloped them .
 The face of these buildings is browned almost blackened and the paint is crisped and peeled . So fierce was the heat that thoroughly saturated blankets on these buildings repeatedly ignited, the heat .
 In some places the pitch from the pine exuded under the heat and fried like a spider . The pitch from a pine pitch exuded in some places . The pine pitch was so hot that it exuded from the oven .
 A sheet of flame would have flashed along the entire block almost instantly and no man could have withstood it . Fortunately not a blaze started on that side, for the fire would have been stopped instantly .
 You may NOT use the contents of this site for commercial purposes without explicit permission from the author and blog owner . Bill Smith is the author of the book "Ginr.aP"
 Commercial purposes includes blogs with ads and income generating features, and/or blogs using feed content as a replacement for original content .
 At 4:30 o'clock the entire block was in blaze a grand, glowing mass of flame and coal . Bein's Brewery, Robinson & Thornton's, Grant's large City Hall and adjoining Restaurant caught in quick succession .
 While the Grant Building was burning hottest there occurred one of the heroic incidents of the fire, seen by hundreds, and its success was rewarded with a round cheer .
 The roof of the ""old Decker Building,"" an eye sore and standing iniquity of the town, was fired in three places by wafted brands . The roof was fired three times by wafts of brands .
 Dance & Murphy's Planing Mill and the yard containing over a million feet of piled lumber was destroyed . In anticipation of this, ropes had been put to it, the corner posts and tenons were cut .
 When it caught it was impossible with the force of men available to pull it down, it was found impossible . It was impossible to pull down when it caught .
 Murphy, and ""Bob"" Bouier, ascended inside, and Bouier mounting on the shoulders of the others jumped through a burning hole in the steep roof to the outside with a pail of water . Bouier then ran along the high comb like a Btondin, and
 The other places were easily reached, and no other places igniting, in that portion of the town . The valuable machinery and lumber requisite to rebuild the rebuild the burnt district was saved .
 It had burned the entire block; its expansion had been prevented, walls and chimneys were crumbled to their bases . Walls and chimney walls had been destroyed in the blaze .
 Copinus clothing, 2,000 Parchen, Paynter & Co. house and drug stock, $5,000; burnt in cash in cash $500, 5,500 . Cohen groceries, 3,000 Mrs. Cohen groceries; $1 0,000 stock saved .
 Joseph Rosenthal clothing and dry-goods, house and merchandise 8,000 Wm. A Wright . A Wright 1 ,500 Joseph Rosenthal . clothing .
 Men wrked better, and although some ware indifferent, some were poltroons who stood back with the Chinamen and absolutely refrained assist . Nearly every one came forward nobly when shown where he coul of service .
 W*h the Independent in giving the colored men of De, Lodge due mention . We join w*h in giving them due mention.
 'We acknowledge gratitude to the employees of New North-West, to others who assisted us, and to the many, including Independent friends, who proffered service when the situation was perilous. The Chinese, with one exception, positively refused to .tfeder anV aSSI
 Night thaw the first of the year flooded the streets and made wa er plentiful, saved a large portion of the town . However, the wind happened to hold firm in one direction .
 Surname Saturday blog entry: Deer Lodge Montana Fire 1872 Episode 8 Episode 7 Episode 6 . Dr. Kinnick: It is an unhappy fact .
 The general belief is that the fire was started by an incendiary . The origin of the fire is unknown . The fire is believed to have been started by a firework .
 There had been no fire in Coffey's stable, and no one, that Coffey knew of, occupying it since Feb 1st . There was no one occupying the stable since that date .
 Deer Lodge would be a pretty warm ant-room to Hades for the wretch who fired it, if he were known . We think Deer Lodge is a pretty nice place to go .
 Coffey had just removed his last buggy from the stable yesterday, and it only contained two tons of hay . Coffey's last buggy was removed yesterday and contained only a few tons of the hay .
 Hank Valiton cut his sixty horses loose, and got nearly a 8 them out of the stable and across the river without trouble . They and the other horses of the neighborhood behaved frantically till morning, but were prevented from recrossing the bridge .
 Not even even the money was saved from the tills . The fire swept over some buildings so rapid did the fire sweep over some of the buildings .
 Thornton & Robinson will rebuild at once, and doubtless many others will do the same . Thornton & Robinson will rebuild once, with many others doing the same.
 We have noted but briefly and hastily, for the information of other localities, this disaster to our fair village . We are happy to clarify that this is not the first time we have seen such a disaster in the village .
 Before midsummer we believe the entire block will be rebuilt with better structures . The entire block is expected to be rebuilt by mid-summer .
 Kleinschmidt Bros. opened in Louis & Coleman's building, adjoining Gans & Klein’s .
 Scott House and Emmerson & Gerber’s, omitted in first account, are inserted today . Scott House’ losses to Scott House are added today to the Scott House .
 Mr Henry M Parchen informs us that $5,000 will cover their entire toss, inclusive of cash . Mr Parchen tells us that the toss will be included .
 Hancock, butcher, opened yesterday adjoining the Metropolitan Billiard Hall . Hancock butcher, who opened yesterday, opened adjoining the Met Billiard hall .
 Higgens & Murphy and Dance, Stuart & Co. will erect two large fire-proof stores next to Osborn & Dennee’s .
 Emmerson & Gerber are repairing their hall in first-class style before re-opening . Emmerserson and Gerber will re-open their hall at the end of the year .
 The Burnt District was thronged with workers today, clearing off ritobish, collecting ""rich dirt,"" and removing goods from firs-proofs .
 E Evans authorizes us to say he will furnish all Ns customers who were burned out, with milk without cost for two months from date .
 Thornton & Robinson contracted with John Murphy this afternoon to erect them a law office 13 x 30, on the site of the burned building . Thornton and Robinson will have a 13-x 30 law office .
 GeneaBloggers Genealogy on Wednesday and Thursday . Follow Form and Style France Frances Friday FTM for Mac Fun Fun Funeral Card .
 Chas. Kenyon 50 Mitchell & Holmes . Rev. DeRyckere 50 Rev. R DeRykkere . Peter Valiton 50 . Peter V. Valiton .
 The total amount to date is $2410. Maxwell 5 Gans & Klen 50 generations GOUDY Gower grandchildren Grandma Graveyard .
 "It will cost, probably, as much more to supply the requisite cisterns, engine house, etc. etc. It will cost probably, probably more to . supply, probably . supply the necessary cistern, engine and engine house," he says .
 The town wifl be comparatively safe. That done, and an efficient company organized, the town will be comparatively safer. The town will have to be relatively safe.
 Within two weeks after the fire, the town had raised the necessary funds for a new fire truck and established the first volunteer fire department . The town raised the funds for the fire truck, which is now a volunteer department .
 The ""vampire"" was found entombed among church ruins in the Black Sea town of Sozopol earlier in the month . The 'vampire' was found in the ruins of church ruins .
 The skeleton had been stabbed in the chest with an iron rod, which was in the tomb next to the body . The body was found in a tomb near to the tomb .
 Scholars believe the rod and tooth-pulling were techniques villagers used to prevent dead men from turning into vampires .
 Satanic image went unnoticed until now because it is artfully hidden in the folds of a cloud and invisible from ground level .
 The discovery of the face was made by Chiara Frugoni, a medievalist and expert on the saint . The discovery was made in a fresco which depicts the death of St Francis .
 In the Middle Ages it was believed that demons lived in the sky and that they could impede the ascension of human souls to Heaven .
 The devil face may have been a dig at somebody the artist had quarrelled with . Sergio Fusetti, the head of the restoration work in the basilica, said the devil face was a dig .
 Claudio Strinati, art historian, said it was not unusual for Renaissance artists to include hidden meanings in works .
 Millions of pilgrims and tourists have trooped through the basilica in Assisi, in Umbria, since the frescc was painted in the 13th century without noticing the devil's face .
 The fresco is the 20th in a series of images of St Francis's life and death by Giotto . It was only discovered during restoration of the fresco in which it was part of a series .
 Giotto di Bondone was one of the most important figures of the Early Renaissance . He was born in Bom near Florence in the late Middle Ages .
 Among his most celebrated works are frescoes and altarpieces in Santa Croce church in Florence and a painting of the Madonna which is on display in Florence's Uffizi Galleries .
 Police launched an unusual investigation after one runner made a surprising discovery while on a jog in Brooklyn’s Prospect Park Wednesday August 6th .
 Filling out the tableau were four paintings of flowers arranged in the foreground and an American flag hanging from the trees behind . The tableau was filled out with four paintings, four paintings and four paintings .
 Police removed the skeleton on Wednesday and on Thursday determined that it was a prop . The skeleton was removed from the scene after police removed it from public view .
 89-year-old Nazi war crimes suspect died in custody hours before a U.S. ruling Wednesday that he should be extradited to Germany to face trial . The suspect died hours before the ruling .
 Johann Breyer died Tuesday night at a Philadelphia hospital, his lawyer and the United States Marshals Service said . He had been transferred Saturday after a month in jail . Breyer was transferred from jail to a hospital in Philadelphia .
 United States Magistrate Timothy Rice had just approved the extradition request . The extradition request would have needed final U.S. government review .
 A local complex that was once home to a repair and maintenance terminal for steam locomotives will be the site of an archaeological dig next month . The dig will take place next month at a local complex once used to be a maintenance facility for steam engines .
 The Siouxland Historical Railroad Association hopes the dig will boost efforts to have the complex placed on the National Register of Historic Places . The Sioux City Journal reports the dig is expected to boost efforts .
 There are many accounts of lake monsters residing in Irish waters, some of them going back centuries . They have tended to become irreversibly entwined with the country’s mythology and folklore .
 They have been seen regularly (particularly from the 1950s to the 1970s) in the west of Ireland, more specifically in the sparsely populated area of Connemara in Co.
 It was said to be an extremely rare breed of otter with unusual, and even supernatural qualities . The otter is said to have been extremely rare and unusual qualities .
 The Dobhar-Chu was also thought to possess certain mythical qualities . One notion was that even the slightest portion of its pelt could save a ship from being wrecked, a horse from drowning or a man from gunshot wounds .
 It was believed that the only way to kill the animal was by shooting it with a silver bullet a motif uncannily familiar from the werewolf legend . The only way of killing the beast was to shoot it with silver bullet .
 An old man in the records office of the Commission for Boundaries, Co. told Patrick Tohall the DobharChu legend . He was told by an old man that the legend was true .
 An old Irish phrase said the Dobhar-Chu is the seventh cub of the common otter . This was connected with its status as a super or master-otter, according to Donegal .
 Within Ireland, this supposedly mythical beast has all but vanished from memory with one notable exception . The mythical beast is believed to have been a mythical beast .
 A local woman is said to have been killed by a Dobhar-Chu in Leitrim, Ireland . The local population has a very good reason for being unable to erase the 'master otter'
 An anonymous poem, possibly dating from the early 20th century, was written in Glenade lake tradition . It is believed to date back to the 1800s .
 It happened one McGloughlan lived close by the neighbouring shore, A lovely spot, where fairies oft in rivalry wandered o’er . With Frenchmen bold and warriors old to hunt the wild boar, free .
 He and his wife Grace Connolly lived there unknown to fame . There, years in peace, until one day from out the lakes there came What brought a change .
 It was a bright September morn, the sun scarce mountain high, No chill or damp was in the air all nature seemed to vie . A day for mortals to discourse in luxury and love .
 McGloughlan’s wife, his more than life, whom almost he adored. And whilst this gorgeous way of life in beauty did abound,
 She having gone to bathe it seems within the waters clear, And not having returned when she might, her husband fraught with fear . Her mangled form, still bleeding warm, lay stretched before his eyes .
 The Dobharchu reposing was, his surfeiting being o’er. Upon her bosom, snow white once, but now besmeared with gore, The Dobaharchu was .
 He prayed for strength, the fiend lay still, he tottered like a child . The surge of life within his veins surged rapidly and wild. He prayed . He tottered .
 One long last glance at her he loved, then fast his footsteps turned, To home, while all his pent-up rage and passion fiercely burned .
 The lough itself is approximately a mile in length and half a mile wide . It is on the left side of the road if one is driving north of the highway .
 When Grace failed to return, her husband Terence went to search for her . Grace was found dead at the scene of her disappearance .
 A Dobhar-Chu attacked his wife and killed her, killing her . The attack was carried out by a man who had been attacked by a woman in a car . The man's wife died in the attack .
 Terence killed the beast, but its dying cries attracted its mate from the nearby lough . The beast was killed by Terence, but the mate escaped from the lough to find its mate .
 Terence fled on horseback, along with his brother Gilmartin, but they were pursued relentlessly by the second Dobhar-Chu . Terence was killed by the Dobhar Chu in the early 1400s .
 The two men eventually reached a place about 20 miles distant, known as Castlegarden Hill, where they lay hidden . They lay hidden and waited for the beast to appear .
 The Dobhar-Chu easily traversed the intervening mountains and difficult terrain, eventually reaching the spot where the two men lay in ambush . The two men were ambushed by the border patrolmen .
 In some versions of the story, the Dobhar-Chu killed one of the unfortunate horses and, before it could visit the men’s remaining steed, Terence surprised it and stabbed it to death .
 There are at least two poems dealing with the unfortunate death of Grace Connolly . The event is also commemorated in verse, and there is a poem dedicated to her death .
 The tombstone of Grace Connolly in Conwall cemetery, showing the strange creature . The strange creature is believed to have been the creation of a ghost .
 A 'master otter' represented with a white coat and a black cross on its back . A ‘master . otter’ represented with white coat, black cross and white cross .
 The second is an anonymous piece, possibly dating from the 1920s, which runs to 16 verses and is simply entitled The Dobhar-Chu of Glenade' see sidebars .
 Grace Connolly’s death and her husband's slaying of the Dobhar-Chu would appear to be a rather fanciful and unbelievable folk legend . There is actual evidence for this event in the form of the slain woman's grave .
 It is located in Conwall cemetery, in the townland of Drummans, approximately 2-3 miles (3.8km) from the lake where she is said to have met her untimely death .
 The tombstone is about four and a half feet by 2ft , laid horizontally in the ground . It is about 4.5 ft by 2 ft, laid horizontally .
 Its hind and front legs are equally long and powerful; it has a long tail with a barely conspicuous tuft at its tip . It has a deep-set powerful chest and a long, powerful tail .
 Its barrel chest and long muzzle are morphologically canine rather than lutrine . However, the long muzzle and barrel chest of its barrel chest is morphologically dog-like .
 Up until the First World War, a similar tombstone existed not far from the first, in a town called Kilroosk . The tombstone was erected in the same town in 1918 . It is believed to date back to 1914 .
 This stone was also said to show a Dobhar-Chu, and was the gravestone of Grace’s husband Terence . Grace's husband was also buried in the same stone .
 It was placed on a boundary wall after it had broken in two and was subsequently lost . Unfortunately, at some point, it had been placed on the wall after breaking in two .
 The story of the Dobhar-Chu had a genuine significance for the local population . The very fact that at one point in time the two gravestones existed within the same locality demonstrates that the story had genuine significance .
 The story was still fresh in local memory, which strengthens any case for the story’s authenticity . Also noteworthy is the mention in Patrick Tohall's article that the inciTHE LEGEND IS A PART OF DAILY LIFE dent is still fresh on local memory .
 There have been reports from Irish loughs of mysterious denizens that do not fit easily within the category of the familiar ‘horseeel’ of Connemara .
 One of these (possibly the last of its kind) spotted in Sraheen’s Lough, a small body of water on Achill Island in Co. Mayo .
 Sraheen’s lough (which also goes by the name of Glendarry lough) is circular and roughly 400ft in diameter . The circular lough is also known as Glendary lough .
 There are dense rhododendron bushes growing around most of the shoreline . The site is located on the western extremity of Europe and is a more windswept and isolated wilderness .
 Significant within the context of the legend is the lough’s proximity to Glenade Lough in County Leitrim . The legend is said to have occurred in the early 2000s .
 Achill is situated just off Co Mayo, which is the county immediately west of Counties Sligo and Leitrim . The DobharChu legend is still a part of daily life in Achill .
 Even in the 20th century, there was an oral tradition of water monsters in and around Sraheens Lough, with many sightings claimed in the 1930s .
 In 1968 the old stories took on an air of literal truth when a series of inexplicable events appeared to turn myth into reality . Such tales were remembered and retold by the older generation and used to frighten unruly children .
 Two local men, John Cooney and Michael Nulty, had an unforgettable experience at Sraheens Lough on the night of 1 May 1968 . It began when two local men had a unforgettable experience .
 He reached his house, he grasped his gun which clenched with nerves of steel . They were driving home to Achill Sound, on k the mainland, from the village of Keel, when at about about .
 He backwards sped, upraising his arm and then one piercing squeal was heard upon the balmy air . He backwards . sped, then upraised his arm . Then one piercing . squeal . was heard .
 The comrade of the dying fiend with whistles long and loud, came nigh and nigher to the spot Mr McGloughlan growing cowed, Rushed to his home, his neighbours called their council, asked. The comrade whistled long and . loud, Came n
 "Flight what they bid him do at once, was and not to wait ‘till night," he said . "Not to wait "until night. And flight what they asked him to do was ... not to fly"
 The Whistling Dobharchu was the son of a legendary warrior who rode westward with his brother . He and his brother were pursued by that fierce brute . The brothers were killed in the battle of their homeland .
 The ploughman left his horses alone, the fishes too ‘tis said,’tis said . Away from the mountain streams though far, went rushing to the sea .
 For twenty miles the gallant steeds, the riders proudly bore, With sadness strain o’er hill and dale that ne'er was seen before, The fiend, fast closing on their tracks, his dreaded cry more shrill, ‘Twas brothers try,
 Dismounting from their panting steeds they placed them one by one, Athwart the path in lengthways formed, within the ancient wall . Standing by the outmost horse awaiting for their foe, their daggers raised, their nerves they braced to strike that fatal blow .
 McGloughlan 's dagger to the hilt lay buried in his heart. Not long to wait, for nose on trail, the scenting hound arrives, and through the horse .
 The brothers cried in wildness and delight, Our humble home by Glenade lake shall shelter us to-night. Thank God, Thank God .
 Be any doubt to what I write, go visit old Conwell, and see the grave where sleeps the brave whose epitaph can tell . Go visit Conwell's grave, go to see his epitaph .
 The Irish crocodile, whereof one, as yet living, about ten years ago had sad experience . The crocodile is one rarity more, which we may term the Irish croc .
 The water about him was all bloody, whether from the beast's blood, or his own, or from both he knows not . He knows not how much of his blood was in the form of his own .
 It was pitch of an ordinary greyhound, of a black slimey skin, without hair as he imagines . The pitch was the pitch of a greyhound without hair .
 Old men acquainted with the lake do tell there is such a beast in it, and that a stout fellow with a wolf dog along with him met the like there once . The like went away in spite of the man and his dog, and was found rotten in a rocky cave of the
 The like they say is seen in other lakes in Ireland, they call it doyarchu,e.e. waterdog, or anchu which is the same. They call it a waterdog .
 Y mal darted across the road from the direction of the lake and disappeared into the thick undergrowth . Connaught , by Roderick O'Flahert .
 They described it as being eight to 10 feet long, four-legged, black or dark brown in colour, having a thick tail, a long neck like a swan’s and a head like that of a sheep or a greyhound .
 John Cooney also noted that it was moving at an angle, weaving and curving as it ran . Cooney said it was weaving and weaving as it moved .
 A week after Cooney and Nulty’s sighting, a 15-year-old boy, Gay Dever, stopped whilst cycling by the lough on his way home from Mass. Mass. A week later, a boy, 15, was stopped by a cyclist on his
 It was early evening, and he saw a creature emerging from the lough and climbing the bank . The creature was seen emerging from a lough, climbing the banks .
 He observed an animal “bigger than a horse” with a sheep-like head on a long neck, long neck and a long tail and four legs . The animal, of which the hind ones were noticeably larger than the front .
 It moved in a rather jumpy way, ‘like a kangaroo’ and was about 12 ft long . It moved ‘in a jumpy manner’, “like a koala,’ said a witness to the incident .
 The Dobhar-Chu legend is said to have happened on Achill Island, Ireland . The incidents are unrelated to the legend of the Dobhar Chu .
 Grace Connolly’s tombstone in Drummans is strikingly similar to the animal depicted on her tombstone . This reconstruction is based on the eyewitness accounts of 1968 .
 Dobhar-Chu was found in a small lough in western Ireland as recently as the late 1960s . The obvious, if incredible, answer would seem to be that the legendary Dobhar Chu was very much extant .
 The author discusses the region’s impressive flora and fauna, areas of natural beauty and other attractions for visitors . He also discusses the famous seal caves, one of which was known as the Priest's Cave . The author talks about the island's early history .
 According to an old man by the name of Harris Stone, there was a rare species of sea otter that lived in a stagnant pool in the Priest’s Cave in Dooaghart .
 The cave was to be found on the north slope of Slievemore, but sadly its entrance is no longer accessible . The cave is located on a north slope, but unfortunately it is not now accessible .
 This sea otter is almost black with a white patch on its throat . Sea otter could be distinguished by its unusual colour black, or almost black .
 There are of course nc sea otters residing in Europe, let alone Ireland . Also noteworthy is the very mention by the author of a ‘sea otter’ there are ncSea otters .
 The ‘sea otter’ described by the elderly Harris Stone must at one time have been indigenous to the island for it to be included in Achill’s oral traditions .
 A battered roadsign points to Conwall graveyard and church and Grace Connolly's tombstone . John Cooney, one of the witnesses to the 1968 sightings on Achill Island, stands iIGNS .
 Both the Eurasian otter and the Irish subspecies (which s slightly darker) do indeed inhabit the :oastal regions of both Scotland and Ireland .
 Stone’s ‘sea )tter’ could be attributed to one of the physilogical characteristics by which early zoologists endeavoured to procure full species status or the Irish form of the Eurasian otter .
 If Theresa Macdonald gathered the infornation independently of any articles concerning the Sraheens Lough monster, then this :ould be a significant piece of evidence with Loch, possible home of the mysterious beast .
 It also suggests that the strange animal was indigenous to Achill and its existence was recognised by the islanders long before the incidents at Sraheens Lough in 1968 .
 T he story of the mysterious master-otter, whether legend or reality, may have a tragic ending . The story of this mysterious master ofotter may have been true .
 No creatures resembling Dobhar-Chu of folklore, such as the Sraheens Lough monster, have been reported from Ireland since the events of 1968 .
 If there ever was a ‘real’ creature whether endemic to Achill Island or a transient visitor to Irish shores the changes wrought to the region’s delicately balanced ecosystem since the early 1970s may have been the final nail in its coffin .
 Tourists in search of isolated beauty spots, the increase in water sports and other recreations and the growth in population, traffic and pollution have all taken their toll on the area .
 Sea-lice and disease caused by faecal material from cultured salmonoid species can eventually filter into an already fragile ecosystem, potentially devastating natural stocks . The area’s fish-farming industry, too, may have impacted on the food chain .
 Any animal returning to once traditional sanctuaries would discover a wholly different environment today . The animal sanctuary is no longer a traditional sanctuary in America .
 If the Sraheens Lough creature was a large predator, at the top of the food chain, it would, in any case, have been considerably scarcer then its prey . Such an animal, already small in numbers, could have died out completely .
 If the creatures were merely visitors to Achill Island, then perhaps they sought sanctuary elsewhere, in another remote island habitat or coastal shoreline . The creatures are believed to be living on Achill island .
 Perhaps they travelled to a country farther north, towards the Arctic circle, or even westwards towards Iceland and Greenland to become incorporated into the folklore of those lands .
 When I spoke to Eddie Lennon, he told me that while he was researching his own research at Grace Connolly’s grave in Conwall cemetery, a woman had approached him and begun to talk about the legend . He said that a woman approached him to ask if she wanted to
 She told him that the people of Conwall and neighbouring townlands intended to stage a festival sometime in the future to commemorate the Dobhar-Chu legend . Grace Connolly and her ghastly fate will be kept alive for generations to come .
 The stone can be located within the cemetery by walking roughly 20ft in a north-westerly direction after leaving the small path from the gate .
 Only recently has the spoken language surrendered to the change, as down to our own time those who signed 'Terence' were called Truilach .
 He devotes his spare time to researching Irish lake monsters, and plans to write a book on the subject .
 An intruder who broke into a house in Charmouth, Dorset, stole nothing, but left behind a TV and a bottle of alcopop . The intruder left behind nothing, including a television and bottle of alcohol .
 The nine-year-old White House was the largest private residence in the United States . Some rooms were bare of furniture, while others held drab offices .
 Dolley Madison wanted to redecorate some of the barren spaces in the White House . She wanted to create rooms in which she could host gala social events . The White House has been redecorated to create more social spaces .
 Previous first ladies had avoided publicity and public events, but Dolley Madison loved a party . Previous first lady had a reputation for avoiding publicity .
 She believed that she could increase her husband’s popularity and help him push his political programs through Congress if she became the leading hostess in First Lady Dolley Madison . Dolley said she wanted to be a better hostess for her husband .
 She drew up plans to create an elegant dining room, a drawing room, and a parlor in the White House .
 The first lady’s proposed redecoration would cost more than her $25,000 annual salary . She discussed her plans with her husband, who was taken aback .
 He told her that she would have to figure out some way to raise the necessary money . He said she would need to find a way to pay for the hospitalization .
 The fifty-seven-year-old president, who was sixteen years older than his wife, did not share her enthusiasm for entertaining . The president is the president of the United States .
 He was the principal author of the U.S. Constitution, but he was too bashful to make small talk at parties . The Constitution was written in 1887 .
 James Madison was happiest at his desk among books and papers . Madison seemed nervous in social situations .
 Madison was a short man, five feet, four inches tall . Pale and thin, with a weak, boyish voice, Madison was short, pale and thin . Madison was the short man .
 Dolley Madison, who sometimes called her husband ‘the great little Madison,” thought that he ought to attend more parties in order to develop a public image as a cheerful, friendly man .
 As if trying to counterbalance her husband’s subdued demeanor, the first lady cultivated a flamboyant style .
 For parties, she liked to dress up in imported French dresses with daring necklines .
 The first lady was so warm and unpretentious that almost everyone who met her immediately liked her . Although her wardrobe raised some eyebrows, her manner was warm .
 The writer Washington Irving described her as “a buxom dame who has a smile and pleasant word for everyone” Dolley Madison decided to seek help from the United States Congress .
 She invited congressmen of both political parties to tea at the White House . When they arrived, she took them on tours of the building .
 She showed them the bare rooms, which she described as a national embarrassment . The bare rooms are a 'national embarrassment', she said .
 A majority of congressmen voted for repairs and furnishings at the White House . $12,000 was spent on repairs and $14,000 on furnishings .
 Dolley Madison hired Benjamin Latrobe, the noted architect, to help her choose furnishings . The architect helped her choose the furnishings of her new home .
 Latrobe spent $2,150 for three mirrors, $556.15 for new china, and $220.90 for silverware . Latrobe, Pennsylvania, spent $1,500 for mirrors, china and silverware for china .
 At the request of the first lady, he also spent $28 for a guitar and $458 for a piano . The first lady requested the purchase .
 He was dismayed when she insisted on buying some velvet curtains that he found too gaudy for the drawing room . The curtains were bought by his wife and he found them 'too expensive'
 With her new decor in place, Dolley Madison began holding “receptions’ every Wednesday at the White House . The White House has been hosting receptions every Wednesday .
 Slaves and servants served the guests French cuisine, fine wines, and plentiful liquor . Guests were served French cuisine and fine wines .
 Dolley Madison carefully introduced every new guest to her husband . James Madison usually stayed in a comer with a few close friends, intensely discussing political issues . Dolley and James Madison were married in 1864 .
 Celebrated writers and artists who attended the receptions usually seemed more eager to meet the first lady than the president . The first lady was invited to the White House to meet President Obama .
 Dolley Madison's real goal was to increase her husband’s popularity, rather than her own, she said . For several years, she seemed to be succeeding . Dolley's husband's popularity was at the center of her success .
 President Madison caused a controversy in America when he asked Congress to vote for a declaration of war against Great Britain in 1812 . Madison caused controversy in the summer of 1812 with a request for war against Britain .
 The British government, which was at war with France, had provoked the U.S. by seizing American merchant ships bound for French ports . Americans were forcibly conscripted into the British navy .
 Federalists preferred the British monarchy to the radical dictatorship of Napoleon Bonaparte . Federalists hated the idea of helping a French dictator to fight against liberty-loving Englishmen .
 After that, Dolley Madison’s parties began to be disrupted by shouted arguments between antiwar Federalists and pro-war Democrats . The parties were interrupted by shouts from antiwar Democrats and antiwar Republicans .
 The first lady restricted her own conversation to small talk and laughter . She kept everyone calm as possible .
 In an effort to encourage national unity, the first lady threw more parties than ever . But her husband’s political problems grew worse .
 The president called for fifty thousand volunteers to invade Canada, but only five thousand signed up . Congress refused to raise taxes for what the antiwar congressmen called “Mister Madison’s war”
 James Madison’s popularity fell further when his underfunded attempts to invade Canada failed disastrously . His underfunded invasion of Canada was the result of a failed invasion .
 Dolley Madison became alarmed in 1813 when she heard rumors that British sympathizers and spies in Washington, D.C., intended to set fire to the White House to avenge the burning of the Canadian Parliament buildings at York by American invaders .
 Dolley Madison began sleeping with a saber under her bed, so that she would be equipped to fight off any arsonists who might try to climb through her bedroom window . The Executive Mansion's redecorated Executive Mansion has been renovated .
 The United States Navy was too small to oppose the enemy ships, which landed an army of four thousand British regulars on the shore of the Patuxent River in Maryland .
 Dolley Madison was alarmed by the depth of hatred that antiwar Americans were expressing towards her husband . She was alarmed not only by the enemy advance, but also by the level of hatred expressed by Americans .
 American army of one thousand regulars, backed by several thousand ill-trained militiamen, marched from Washington to confront the British invaders . Nobody in Washington seemed to feel much confidence in the American army .
 President Madison felt that the troops needed some encouragement to cheer them up . President Madison wanted to cheer up the troops .
 On August 23 he told his wife that he felt it was necessary for him to address the troops in the field . He asked her if she would be afraid to stay alone at the White House that night that night .
 Her husband expressed confidence in the American army, but also showed her cases of secret documents that he did not want the British to see .
 He told her that, if she was forced to flee from the White House, she should be sure to take the documents with her .
 Dolley Madison received an alarming dispatch from her husband on August 24 . The couple's daughter was found dead at the scene of an apparent suicide .
 The first lady loaded the secret papers into trunks and had them carried to her carriage . She then loaded them into her carriage and left them in the trunk .
 She found that the trunks completely filled the carriage, leaving hardly any room for her personal possessions .
 Many of the city’s residents were fleeing with all their goods . She tried to hire a wagon, but none was available because many of them were fleeing . None of the residents was able to get a wagon because of the fleeing .
 Dolley Madison was secretly worried that her husband might be lynched by antiwar Federalists . She was worried that she might have been lynched . The Federalists were defeated in the war .
 She felt that her own popularity might protect him, so she felt that she was eager to join him . She said she felt her popularity might help him .
 In a letter to her sister, the first lady wrote, “Our private property must be sacrificed, as it is impossible to procure wagons for its transportation.” In the letter, she wrote that she was waiting for the president’s return .
 I'm determined not to go myself until I see Mr Madison safe, so that he can accompany me, as I hear of much hostility towards him . I am determined to stay away from the city until Mr Madison is safe . I'm not sure if he'll be able to accompany me
 At noon Dolley Madison went to the roof of the White House with a spyglass, hoping to see her husband returning from the battlefield . At noon, she went there to watch her husband return from the battle .
 She saw small groups of U.S. soldiers running back towards Washington without their guns . Instead of guns, they ran back to Washington with their guns on their backs .
 She told the house steward, Jean-Pierre ‘French John’ Sioussat, to prepare a meal in case the president and his party returned soon .
 French John offered to spike cannon at the gate, and lay a train of powder, which would blow up the British, if they entered the house . Then, resuming her letter to her sister, the first lady wrote, “French John offers to spike the cannon .”
 At threem, a messenger from the front galloped up to the White House waving his hat . The White House was surrounded by the troops .
 Mr Carroll has come to hasten my departure, and is in a very bad humor with me, because I insist on waiting until the large picture of General Washington is secured, and it requires to be unscrewed from the wall .
 This process was found too tedious for these perilous moments; I have ordered the frame to be broken, and the canvas taken out of the canvas . This process of removing the canvas from the canvas was found to be tedious .
 And now, dear sister, I must leave this house, or the retreating army will make me a prisoner in it by filling up the road I am directed to take, she writes .
 They had burned both the Capitol Building and the White House, they had then marched back to their ships . The White House and Capitol Building were burned . The Capitol Building was burned .
 Dolley Madison was told that British troops had done no damage to private property in the city . She was told they had been ‘perfectly polite’ to the citizens .
 Only insensate barbarians could have committed such a hideous act of vandalism as the burning of the White House, she said . She said only insensible barbarians committed such an act such as this .
 The Madisons moved into the Octagon House, which had recently been vacated by the French ambassador . They moved in after the ambassador left the country .
 The first lady resumed holding her weekly receptions, but with fewer guests, because there was not enough room for large crowds in the smaller house . There is also a smaller house in which she holds weekly receptions .
 Congress voted to rebuild the White House, but Dolley Madison was disappointed to learn that the work would not be completed before the end of her husband’s final term in office . This portrait of George Washington, painted by Gilbert Stuart, was painted by George Washington in 1814 .
 The burning of the White House angered most Americans and helped to unite the country behind President Madison . The burning helped unite the nation behind Madison .
 The Americans won the next major battles of the war, when they successfully defended Baltimore and New Orleans from British attacks . The next major battle was the Battle of St. Louis, when the Americans won .
 President Madison’s popularity boosted his first lady's reputation to new heights . These victories, quickly followed by a peace settlement, restored Madison's popularity .
 James Madison and Dolley Madison retired to their farm in Virginia in 1817 . In 1817, when James Madison completed his second term in office, he retired to Virginia .
 Dolley Madison saved the official portrait of George Washington from destruction . That same year the White House rebuilding was completed . The portrait was returned to the Executive Mansion .
 After her husband died in 1836, Dolley Madison returned to Washington, D.C., where she resumed her social activities . She attended parties in turbans and French gowns .
 Until her death in the summer of 1848, she was the most sought-after guest in Washington . She attended many parties in the rebuilt White House, where presidents escorted her from one brilliantly-lit parlor to another .
 Dolley Madison’s public persona was so successful that it became the model for subsequent first ladies . Most of them have tried to boost the popularity of their presidential husbands by being fashionable, sociable and cheerfully apolitical .
 At least eight families have received dolls in the I alega community of oan Clemente . All or the girls targeted around 10 years old, with all of the dolls being targeted .
 Families began filing police reports about the dolls as early as June 16 . The mystery of the dolls' origin continues .
 The Orange County Sheriffs Department is investigating the incident . The sheriff's office has not responded to the reports .
 Some of the girls do attend the same school, but sane families don’t know each other, making it difficult to find out who is leaving the dolls .
 The dolls were being ieft at these homes, but everybody thought they were the only one,” said Hallock .
 Police are trying to figure out if the dolls were homemade or bought at a local retailer . Police are still trying to find out if they were made or bought .
 A leas, eight families received the dolls in he Talega community of San Clemente, with all of the girl, targeted around 10 years old .
 Police Probe Mysterious Porcelain Dolls left in front of homes of girls . They Resemble patterns. Police probe mysterious dolls left behind by girls in their homes . Police: Dolls were left behind at least three times a day .
 The investigation focused on a woman who aflend. chorch with man, of he families who found he <k*. The woman admitted to placing the porcelain dolls m the pooh of the vatioos residences .
 Dragons are a prominent totem in Chinese culture, believed to dominate natural forces like wind and rain . Dragons are believed to be the most powerful dragons in China .
 On this day, they “raise their heads” with the sound of rumbling thunder, a sign of the coming rains that will revitalize the earth . The rain is a sign that the earth will soon be revitalizing .
 Around this time, the earth is bursting with life, grass and trees are beginning to sprout and formers are getting ready to till the fields .
 In ancient China, people would worship the dragon god beside a river or a lake, praying for the precious spring rains to nurture their crops . The dragon god is believed to have been worshipped in ancient China .
 Ancient China used a constellation system called Twenty Eight Mansions to measure the locations of the sun, moon and stars . The system was used to decide the season of the year and the seasons .
 One constellation, called “the Double Dragon of the East, was hidden all winter beneath the eastern horizon . One of the brightest stars in the world was called ‘The Double Dragon’s Double Dragon .
 The special foods usually eaten on this day include dragon’s scales, popcorn, soy beans, pig's head and pig’�s head .
 In Nanzhan in Shandong Province, this day was the first big celebration after Spring Festival, and occasion for their femous mule and horse feir .
 Even people from Inner Mongolia and Xinjiang would participate in the feir, herding their domestic animals in advance .
 It was believed that on this day the well was full of dragon eggs and that bringing them home would bless the collector with a year of fevorable weather and good harvest .
 “Haunting History” is a volunteer effort supported by Friends of Dunbar Cave, Tennessee Trails and the Roxy Regional Theatre . Now in its 10th year, ‘Haunting history’ is an annual event .
 All you'll need is sturdy shoes, a jacket if you’re easily chilled, a flashlight, and a flashlight . $5 per person .
 Students from the Roxy School of the Arts will act out skits pertaining to Dunbar Cave area . The skits are directed by Brendan Cataldo .
 “This scene is about how bats are beneficial to the environment and why they are important to Dunbar Cave,” Boen said .
 Dunbar Cave State Natural Area is one of the world’s most popular natural attractions . The cave is located in Dunbar, a state park on the south side of the Appalachian Trail .
 The cast of “Haunting History of Dunbar Cave” pose at the mouth of the cave . The cave is located in Dunbar, Scotland .
 They are Becca Winters, Patrick Long, Hallie Sampson, Tim SmiJ;h, Kayla Coleman, Jacob Ritchart, Autumn Crafton, Frances Dennis and Christian Boyd . They are all from Becca, Becca and Patrick Long .
 Students from the Roxy Regional Theatre’s School of the Arts will perform three skits inside the cave 5-m. The students from the school of the arts will perform skits .
 Dunbar Cave is home to a group of people who have lived and grown up in Dunbar . The cave has been home to many of the world's most famous people . Dunbar was home to Dunbar in the early 1900s and early 1800s .
 This scene focuses on questions left behind by former residents of the cave, including American Indians who used the cave . This scene includes a discussion about the cave art found inside .
 Money raised from this event will be used for new interpretive signage for the natural area . Money raised will go to the park's natural area to raise money for interpretive signs .
 Maria Rice McClure is the features and custom content editor at The Leaf-Chronicle . She is also a member of the editorial board of The Leaf, The Leaf .
 Explorers head to S. Pacific to confirm Earhart's plane wreck . Amelia Earhart plane disappeared in 1937 .
 New evidence could confirm artifacts found on remote South Pacific island are from the wreckage of her plane . The artifacts were found on a remote island in the South Pacific .
 Experts say the rivets and pattern on this plane fuselage match the repair records of Earhart's Lockheed Electra . Experts say they match the pattern and rivets found on the fuselage to the plane .
 The National Group for Historic Aircraft Recovering is making its 11th trip this coming fall to the island of Nikumaroro . Evidence of a plane crash there points to the Earhart wreck . The group says it will make 11 trips this fall .
 The TIGHAR team of archaeologists and plane crash recovery experts are going back yet again to connect the dots they know of . They will experiment with new technology which could help them uncover more .
 If there's a whole chapter of her life surviving as a castaway on a waterless Pacific atoll, there will be a book about her experiences .
 Human remains were found on the island three years after Earhart's plane disappeared that are believed to be a woman's . The remains of a woman believed to have been found in the wreckage of the plane were found three years later .
 A piece of plane fuselage that has rivet marks that match repair records of Earhart's Lockheed Electra . The team's director believes it washed up on shore many years ago . The plane is believed to have washed up in the area .
 Campsite artifacts recovered on the island date to the 1930's and were manufactured in America . Campsites were found in the 1930s and were made of American-made campsites .
 Some items were a women's compact and freckle-cream jar manufactured in the U.S. around that decade . Some of those items were made in the United States .
 He is concerned with preserving whatever the team finds on the island or around its reef slope . He says he is concerned about preserving whatever he finds .
 Any remnants of the plane, which was aluminum, submerged for this long would be difficult to bring back for lab testing . He pointed specifically to any remnants .
 "You really want to be very careful and anything we find is going to have to be either left down there or brought into a controlled environment very quickly," King says .
 The island of Nikumaroro is uninhabited, very hot and full of wildlife, Gillespie says . Gillespie: The island is very hot, very rich and very hot . Gillespie says it's uninhabitited and is full of very wildlife .
 The group is looking for sponsorship and funding . The group reserving four spots for individuals who want to pay to experience the exploration first-hand .
 SjjjftHE amount of animal Electricity which a man possesses is the true measure of his mental anti bodily vigor, and when it falls below the normal or health -standard through overwork, excesses or accidental causes, nature is often unable to restore it unaided .
 In that peculiar form of nervous exhaustion which results iu sexual weakness or general sexual debility, electricity is applied . As the nervous system is gradually strengthened, sexual vigor returns .
 Mr Silverlake identified the trainer as Tim Mericash, 23, of Nor1 walk.., and said the elephant was Elite, a 40-year-old . He said the trainer identified the elephant as Elle, who was Elite .
 Another circus employee, Mickey King, of Halls, Tcnn.. was Injured In the accident and was hospitalized in satisfactory condition at Baptist Medical Center in Little Rock, Ark. He was hospitalized with second-degree burns on his legs and back .
 The circus was In this northwestern Louisiana town of 6,800 people near the Arkansas tine for a fund-raising event sponsored by the Jaycees . It was in northwestern Louisiana .
 Elephant was Jolted by the electric shock, then fell on Mr tunrinsch iv hn also died of electrical shock .
 Mr Silverlake Identified the trainer as Tim Mericash, 23, of Norwalk, 0.0., and said the elephant was Elbe, a 40-year-old . The trainer of the elephant has been identified by police in Norwalk .
 The circus was In this northwestern Louisiana town of 8,800 people near the Arkansas line for a fund-raising event sponsored by the Jaycees . The event was held in northwestern Louisiana .
 The elephant was pulling the chain to hoist the central pole into position when the pole hit the electrical lines in a vacant lot behind the Piggly Wiggly Shopping Center, Mr Silverlake said .
 The elephant was jolted by the electric shock, then fell on Mr Mericash, who also died of electrical shock, police say . The elephant then died of an electrical shock after being struck by another elephant .
 It is said that a ghost named Emily haunts the historic covered bridge . She is not just a spooky specter that allows the watcher a fleeting glimpse before vanishing back .
 This ghost is feared as she is known for shaking cars and slashing victims with invisible claws . She is also known to shake cars and slash victims from behind the wheel with invisible hands .
 People have heard a woman's voice, seen ghostly figures, and witnessed strange lights at Emily's Bridge . People have also seen strange lights and heard strange noises at the bridge .
 Photographs often develop improperly without explanation, and many have found whispy streaks or "orbs" appearing in the photos .
 X-Project Magazine was invited to Kierstead's most recent stakeout at the bridge . Kierstead is a member of the X-project .
 Emily did not appear during the four-hour-long ""ghost watch" Some interesting things did happen during the 'ghost watch' Emily didn't appear .
 As was expected, jnumerous ""orbs"" showed up in some of the photographs taken from within the bridge . Jnumerous "orbs" showed up during the photographs .
 The orbs are often associated with hauntings . They are likely caused by jmoisture or dust particles in the air that reflect light into the camera lense .
 Our photography equipment repeatedly malfuntioned while taking photographs inside the bridge .
 The camera repeatedly malfunctions in the bridge . Even though the highquality batteries were purchased that afternoon, the camera repeatedly malfunctioned .
 The second digital camera drained it's new batteries after only 40 photographs were taken .
 Many peculiar sounds suggested a plethora of causes... footsteps, grunting, things rubbing the sides of the bridge . While no distinctly human voices were heard .
 Due to the hollowness of the structure and the very loud, babbling brook just below the bridge, I am certain one would hear just about anything, especially with the wind howling through the wooded surroundings or the rain beating upon the roof .
 Emily's Bridge has a serene beauty by day by day, at night the covered bridge takes on a more dramatically spooky look . The covered bridge is covered in black and white paint .
 It takes a certain bravery to enter alone after dark; and with the loud rushing of water clouding your sense of hearing, and the pitch blackness of nightime in the country . The mind easily recalls every chilling story associated with the bridge .
 Joseph Citro's book Passing Strange is a True Tales of New England Hauntings and Horrors . Emily's Bridge is located in New England .
 Kevin Kierstead is the author of Paranormal Research America . Visit his web site, Paranormal Radio America, to read about his previous visits to the paranormal .
 A monk from Surpatele monastery in Romania had a vision in a monastery on Mount Athos in Greece . The vision was captured on camera by a monk in the monastery .
 A light appeared before him and then a voice from heaven told him that the archangel Michael will sound his trumpet on 11 August 2002, heraiding three days and three nights of fire and earthquakes which will be the end of the world . The archangel's trumpet will sound on 11
 On the banks of the river Nidd, near the town of Knaresborough in North Yorkshire, England, is a spring that was once thought to have been cursed by the devil . The spring is located on the banks near the village of Nidd .
 Anyone could see that the waterfall over which the spring flowed looked like a giant's skull . The waterfall over the spring's head looked like the skull .
 Some said if you let the mysterious and frightening waters of the well touch you, then you would also be petrified . Some said that if . you let . the mysterious, frightening waters . touch you . Then, if you . let the waters touch you then you also would be pet
 Article Add to Favorites Add to ’Articles to Read’s Popular Articles Mime. Mime . Add to your favorite articles by clicking here .
 My Sister's Keeper by Aubrey Ward in j 07 / 3/2009 DVD Review: Street Fighter Tfee Legend Of Chun li . The Last Vampire .
 If an object was left in the water, it was gradually petrified . Instead of being left in water, the object was slowly petrified in the process .
 Townspeople sought out the well in order to leave objects that would gradually turn to stone . Because of this, townspeople left objects in the well to leave in the process .
 Mother Shipton is credited with foretelling everything from the Great Fire of London to Australia to cellular phones to the end of the world .
 Agatha chose to have her child in a cave near the supposedly devil-cursed, witchcraft plagued petrified well . The legend says that Agatha's lover continued to support her .
 Agatha's baby was born misshapen, people began to talk about it . So it's not really surprising that when Agatha had a baby, people started to talk .
 The talk continued throughout the future Mother Shipton 's childhood and through the point of marriage . The mother-to-be-be was born in New York City .
 At that point, Mother Shipton gave them plenty of other things to talk about with her prophecies .
 In the early 1600's medical physicians examined the waters, and pronounced that they could cure any malady that the body might have . The waters were found to cure any ailment that a person might have.
 In 1630, King Charles I sold the land that the well sits on to Sir Charles Sllngsby . Then, in 1629, he gave the land to the man who owns the well .
 Sir Slingsby put the well on exhibition and charged money for guided tours around his property .
 Paranormal Technology Convention and Event of 2 7/9IKB9 5:15 PM rig^nas Mysterious i'ctri tying well M*p:fflrcl»x.ofgtacw^^ tfngtondT-My sterious-1’ t
 Mineral deposits formed a hard shell around whatever was left in the water . Mineral deposits in the sea formed a shell around what was left .
 Queen Mary, John Wayne and Agatha Christie have left items behind to be petrified in the well . Over the years, celebrities including Queen Mary and John Wayne have petrified items in the water .
 A soft toy can take anywhere from three to five months to petrify, while larger, nonporous items can take up to 18 months to do so . Soft toys can take between three and five months for petrifying, and larger items take 18 months .
 Firerex News is not affiliated with MozOa, but we highly recommend the Firefbx Browser and other Moziia products .
 Please do not reproduce articles from this site in their entirety on forums, blogs, or other Web sites without our express permission .
 We have no objection to short quotes from our articles being posted on other sites . We are happy to allow short quotes of our articles to be published on other websites .
 More than two decades after the last inmate checked out of the Ohio State Reformatory, it remains a fixture in Mansfield, thanks to Hollywood . The last inmate left the Reformatory in 1996 .
 The Shawshank Redemption was the setting for the critically acclaimed prison movie . The prison was set in prison in the 1990s and is now attracting visitors from April to November . It was one of the most acclaimed prison movies ever .
 This Labor Day weekend, organizers are saluting the film's 20th anniversary . The film is being released on Blu-Ray in New York .
 Highlights include a two-day bus tour to 13 sites on Mansfield's Shawshank Trail . A jazz cocktail party in the prison; lodging packages; and Sunday prison service .
 The all-ages event highlights the role of animals at the historic penitentiary . The event is a free event for children and adults . It is the first time the event has been held in the public at historic prison .
 Jayne Clark Osty is a French physician and psychical researcher . Osty was director of the institut metapsychique international in Paris . She was also director of a psychical research institute .
 He studied medicine, and established a practice in a small town in central France . He was born in 1901 and died in 1946 .
 Osty first became interested in the psychic in 1909, when a palmist impressed him with her apparently accurate knowledge of subjects known to him but not to her .
 After an intensive study of palm reading, he became convinced that clairvoyance was the operative function, and that the palm merely served to focus the mind . The palm merely serves as a tool for the mind, he says .
 He began to divide his time between his medical practice and the study of professional sensitives, resulting in his book, "Professional Sensitives"
 Osty published The Meaning of Human & tye , m in which he linked the mental evolution of human beings with their psychic potentials . After serving with the French Army Medical Corps L* ^ World War I, Osty .
 In 1921, he settled permanently in Paris, began to lecfore on his work with psychics, and became a memv £ er of the governing committee of the IMI .
 An important book, Su.■y-' P^rnormal Faculties in Man, appeared in 1923 . He summed up K nis thinking on clairvoyance and human nature .
 He was by this time well respected for his work on clairvoyance, and his appointment was hailed, even in the public press, as a brilliant move .
 Osty took up the study of physical mediumship during his time at the IMI . Osty died in 1938 after his own death .
 He developed a technique of photography using ultraviolet light for use in the seance room . He devised a system of control involving an infrared beam, which if crossed would cause an automatic cameras to take pictures .
 The idea was to catch any trickery in the act, but every time the beam was crossed and cameras went off, the medium, Rudi Schneider, was hunched in his chair, in deep trance .
 At the same time, objects on the table or elsewhere in the room were displaced . At the time, however, objects were displaced from the room .
 His 1930 experiments with Schneider are widely regarded as among the most important in psychical research history . The 1930 experiments are widely considered to be one of the most significant psychical experiments in history .
 The Unknown Powers of Mind over Matter , coauthored with his son, Marcel . Marcel. Co. coauthored . The Unknown powers of mind over Matter .
 Restoration and improvements are routine at Mount Olive Cemetery . Cemetery work is often met with wide approval and support. Cemetery work leads to hassles .
 Jessica Saunders, who lives right next to the nearly 200-year-old African American cemetery, says she is not against the cemetery’s presence or even the improvements being made . Saunders says there could be more prudence given to her property and privacy .
 Saunders said flocks of people venture onto her property, have cut down her trees . Saunders said people sometimes refuse to cooperate with her requests to stay off her family’s land . Saunders: People are cutting down trees and sometimes refusing to cooperate .
 She said she has called the police several times, along with neighbors, but has not been met with kind favor . She has called for help several times but was not met with the kind response .
 Saunders and her family, a husband and six children, live on a limited budget and aren’t able to afford an attorney, she said . Saunders said she and her husband and children live on limited budget . Saunders and family are unable to afford attorney fees .
 Saunders said inmates from Montgomery County Jail also have been taken to the cemetery to clean it up . Saunders said she fears for herself and children with only one or two officers monitoring the inmates .
 Saunders’ husband is in the military at Fort Campbell and is preparing to deploy, adding to her worry . Saunders' husband is also preparing to go on deployment .
 There's been particular problems with a triangleshaped piece of land between Rollins Road and an access road to the cemetery . There’s been a triangle-shaped land in the area between Rollins and cemetery .
 Saunders says it's hers — exhibited by a paid survey of the parcel . Bell Bell says she's been told by the city of Clarksville it belongs to the cemetery . Bell also says she’s been told that the cemetery belongs to her .
 Bell admitted she ignored Saunders initially, but said later she decided ‘that’s just not right” and agreed to stay off the small piece of land . Bell said she was initially annoyed, but later decided to ignore Saunders and stay away .
 Saunders said it's not even necessary to use the road, as there is supposed to be access through a church parking lot off Cumberland Drive . Saunders: Access to the church is not necessary, as it's supposed to take place through a parking lot .
 Saunders insists she and her husband and family are not prejudiced . Bell suspects the Saunders of being prejudiced to a degree, but Saunders insists they are not . Saunders insists the Saunders are not racist .
 Saunders said there’s also a privacy issue, as she has seen people standing in her front yard chatting in the morning and allegedly looking into her windows . Saunders said she has also seen people stand in front of her yard chatting . Saunders says she's seen people looking in her windows
 Saunders said she and her husband have also had to install a costly water pump to remove flooding from her land every time it rains . Saunders says brush placed in a ravine on the cemetery’s property that allows the water to flow away . Saunders said the flooding is caused by brush
 Saunders said she also had to foot the bill when a large tree on the cemetery’s property fell onto hers, damaging a shed . Saunders said the tree fell onto her shed, damaging the shed .
 Bell said she is willing to work with Saunders about her concerns . She said she doesn't want any more bad blood, and doesn’t want any bad blood . Bell said Saunders is a good friend .
 Jake Lowary is the editor of The Leaf Chronicle's weekly feature, "Jake Lowary" Lowary has been in touch with the community for more than a decade .
 Kenneth Mackenzie divined what was to be in a pebble his mother bequeathed to him . Received it from a dead Norse princess who was buried in Scotland .
 When the graves gave up their dead for an hour at midnight, she had far to journey overseas to revisit her native land .
 Mackenzie's mother laid staff across the grave of her cattle at her son's grave . Mackenzie was watching her flocks one night when she saw the emptied kirk-yard refill .
 The spirit could not enter, and desired the woman to remove the hindering stick, promising her as a reward a stone for her son Kenneth in which the future would be reflected . The spirit was unable to enter and wanted the woman remove the stick .
 She told his mother, how she, a daughter of the King of Norway, was drowned while bathing . Her body had drifted to Scottish shores and was there buried, she said .
 Kenneth Mackenzie, who lived in the seventeenth century, became possessed of the stone which gave him the power of divination . It was thus, so tradition avers, that he became possessed .
 Kenneth was sought after by the gentry throughout the length and breadth of the land . He was only a day labourer, but sought after throughout the land, and no special assembly was complete .
 A gentleman who was writing down the seer's prophecies, when he gave tongue to this, flung them all in the fire, as he deemed this was too absurd . The seer threw them all of his prophecies out of the fire . A gentleman wrote down the prophecies
 He foretold that a white house would be on every hillock, and schools and shooting lodges verify this statement . He also forewarned that white houses would be built on hilltops .
 The Fetch approximates to the Highlander's "" second sight,"" and is a mere shadow, resembling in stature, features, and dress, well known to the beholder .
 If the apparition appears in the morning a happy longevity for the original may be confidently predicted . But if it appears in an evening the immediate dissolution of the living prototype may be as surely anticipated . If it appears later in the evening it will be as sure anticipated .
 When the Fetch appears agitated in its movements a violent or painful death is indicated for the doomed prototype . The Fetch is known at the time to be labouring under some serious illness .
 Individuals often behold their own Fetches, and the Phantom may make its appearance at the same time and in vanishing 5 ” 3065, ^ SeUeral PerS ° nS ' Spirit ' like< 11 flits before thfi si S ht of the beholder,
 Katherine Carey, a healer, admitted that at sundown among the hills, a great number of fairie men met her . Among them were 'a maisterman "" perhaps perhaps the devil'
 Katherine Jones-dochter, who was able to transfer disease, had seen the trow’s come out of their hills and knew too much about them . She knew too little about them.
 Elspeth Reoch had been taught her craft by a man in green tartan . He appeared to her 'wath another man in black'
 The latter, who called himself 'a farie man,"" was the spirit of a dead relative, neither dead nor living, and doomed for ever to go betwixt the heaven and the earth, i.e. He was with the fairies .
 A fifth woman, Isobel Sinclair, was under fairy control, as a result of which she had second sight . She was under the control of a fairy, and she was given second sight by fairy . The story is believed to have happened in the early 1900s .
 Zoo keepers caught barbecuing five Tibetan mountain chickens and two Cameroonian sheep . The animals were popular with children who were allowed to stroke them at Recklinghausen zoo .
 The Desert Sun and protech batteries help us a lot of our batteries . Proprich batteries can be found in the desert .
 Imperial Valley begins receiving Colorado River water in 1901 through the Alamo Canal . The Imperial Valley began receiving water from the Colorado River in 1901 . Imperial Valley receives water from Colorado River through Alamo canal .
 Flooding causes a break in the Alamo Canal, which creates the Salton Sea . Flooding is the result of flooding in the canal, which is known as the 'Alamo Canal'
 The Upper Colorado Basin states (Colorado, Wyoming, Utah and New Mexico) and the Lower Basin States (California, Arizona and Nevada) sign the Colorado River Compact . The federal government also sign the compact .
 Boulder Canyon Project Act authorizes construction of Boulder Dam and the All-American Canal . Boulder Canyon Act also authorizes the construction of a canal and Boulder Dam .
 The act also prescribes how the annual 7. million acre-feet would be divided among the Lower Basin States .
 Construction begins on the Coachella Canal, a branch of the All-American Canal . The canal was built in the 1920s and 1930s . It is the first canal to be built in California .
 CVWD and Desert Water Agency enter into agreements to purchase water from California State Water Project to alleviate declining water tables . CVWD says it will buy water from the California State . Project will help alleviate water tables in California .
 Arizona's annual apportionment is 2 million acre-feet . California's is 4. million acrefeet . Nevada's is 300,000 acre-foot . Arizona's is 2. million acres-a-foot, California's 4.million acres-feet and Nevada's 300,
 State Water Resources Control Board investigates wasteful watering practices in the Imperial Valley . State water board investigates wasteful water practices .
 Quantification Settlement Agreement allocates water rights in the Lower Basin . Water rights in Lower Basin allocated to water rights . Quantification settlement Agreement allocated water rights to Lower Basin water users .
 Beginning in 2018, it will accelerate the sea's shrinking as water long used for agriculture is transferred to urban markets . Water used to create runoff that fed the sea will be transferred to cities such as San Dieqo .
 The dying Salton Sea is a refuge to some, a beautiful lady with a bad reputation to others . Visit DesertSun.com/SaltonSea to watch a video about the people who live along the shores of the state's largest lake .
 Salton Sea is still a spot of beauty that has drawn residents to its shores . The once-bustling sea was once a tourist hotspot .
 Lolita Springer fished with her family and swam with the other kids in inflatable tubes . In summer, she was able to play with her friends and family in the water .
 They’d catch orange-mouthed corvina as fast as they could pull them up using cane poles . They'd catch them as fast they could pulling them up .
 The Salton Sea was salty, but nothing a good rinse-down couldn’t shed from your skin . It was the perfect place to relax and relax in the Salton sea .
 Behind the counter at the Bombay Market, the only store in the community of 250, she rings up a customer . The Bombay Market is the only shop in the town of 250 people .
 In the 1960s, at the height of the Salton Sea’s popular allure, her family drove up from Brawley for weekend getaways to Bombay Beach .
 Prime real estate, with uninterrupted views of the sea, has been abandoned . The property is located in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean . It is the first of many properties to be abandoned in the world .
 Salton Sea’s ailing health has not turned everyone away from the sea . Accidental lake will continue drying up .
 The fish are sentinels for storms of dust and stench that kick up when deoxygenation wipes out schools of tilapia and the wind scours the sea’s exposed playa . They are the sentinsels for the storms of winds and dust that kick
 Since then, the lake has been fed by runoff from nearby larms, some flowing in from the Alamo, New and Whitewater rivers . Some of the runoff has been flowing into the lake .
 runoff has been decreasing and is set to decline dramatically in the coming years . Water is transferred to San Diego County and the Coachella Valley .
 Starting in 2018, water deliveries to Imperial Irrigation District will be cut under the 2003 Quantification Settlement Agreement, or QSA . QSA is the nation’s largest agricultural-to-urban water transfer deal .
 Houses along the edge of the road closest to the sea’s water are intact, but their windows are boarded up or broken . Other days, not so much, some of the houses are intact .
 The community’s biggest worry, Springer said, is that, one day, the community will cease to exist . Springer: "The community's biggest worry is the behef that one day ... one day" Springer: The community is worried one day the community might cease to
 She stopped for a moment to tape together two crumbled pieces of a $20 bill handed to her by an elderly customer . “Most of us think that s what s coming in store for Bombay Beach,” she said .
 April and Les Crawford and their son, 6-year-old Kaleb, were homeless after a family emergency strained their finances . The Crawford family was forced to live on the streets of New York City after a financial crisis .
 Victims of bad credit, they eventually found a place to rent in Vista Del Mar, near the seashore north of Salton City . The couple's bad credit was bad enough to buy a new home .
 For $600 a month, they share a three-bedroom house for $600 per month . A caretaker for the elderly costs $600 .
 Les says he can walk 10 feet out from his house and can see the beautiful sea . Les says the sea is "beautiful and beautiful"
 High asthma rates are linked to dust storms, which will grow worse as the sea shrinks . The risk of asthma attacks is linked to the increase in dust storms in the UK .
 Pimentel: How will her kids play outside and what will clouds of seabed do to their lungs? How will they play outside? How do they know?
 There is a park a block from her house on Neptune Drive, olides and monkey bars were built and funded by the community but there is no shade . Hospital and emergency room visits due to asthma among Imperial County residents is double the state aver averted .
 Palm Springs Catherdral City Palm Desert Indio Coachella CUD Mecca North Shore 5 miles Ml . In the summer heat, the metal bars are scorching .
 The sea looked like a vacation paradise when Pimentel and her family first moved to the area . The sea looks like a paradise now, but it's still a paradise for tourists .
 Ground fish bones overtook the sand in spots when they visited the shore . The ground fish bones were found on the shore in spots .
 The center opened in 2010 and occupies a building once exclusive to the North Shore Yacht Club . The center is located in a former exclusive building on the island .
 Endless fields of fruit and vegetables, and the labor required to pick miles of fields in the blazing sun, drew a large Latino community to North Shore . North Shore is home to a large Hispanic community .
 The eastern Coachella Valley’s $500 million agriculture industry produces a majority of U.S. table grapes and dates . The region also has significant supplies of other seasonal produce .
 “They move in here,” he said one recent morning, swatting flies from his face as his crew harvested grapes .
 The Salton Sea is “a beautiful lady with a bad reputation,” said North Shore resident Linda Lemus, 61 . North Shore residents say the sea has a "beautiful" reputation .
 Lemus, who moved here a decade ago, is a volunteer at the North Shore Community Center . Lemus is a longtime resident of the area . He moved to the community center 10 years ago .
 North Shore resident income is mainly work on farms and lack voting power . Her neighbor are “lowerWest Shores # Salton City The Salton Sea GOD”
 Proposals to deal with the Salton Sea are endless, from restoration to a slow death . The sea's a 'treasure' and 'a treasure'
 Some push desalinization, others would build canal to carry water from Sea of Cortez . Others would build a canal to take water from the Sea of Mexico .
 One idea would cut the lake into smaller, more manageable lakes, another focuses on preserving mini-wetlands . Another idea would make the lake more manageable .
 The most aggressive proposals would cost more than a billion dollars . One as much as $9 billion would be needed to overhaul the nation's infrastructure .
 Expanding geothermal power production along the lake’s southeastern shore is a recent favorite proposed fix for the sea . It has the added benefit of adding jobs to the lake's southeastern shore .
 Lithium extraction from salty brine hokls promise of marrying renewable energition of highfor cars and gad| The sea “affe keeps a lot of a lot a lot bigger than w The largest er Salton City area is the Salton city area .
 I took up an interest in UFOs and started reading all the books I could get hold of. I started reading UFO books and UFOs in the hope of finding out more about the phenomenon .
 I was half way through John Keel’s Operation Trojan Horse when my parents left me alone in the house for the weekend . I was left reading the book when I was away from home .
 That night I had the vivid impression that a woman, dressed in a purple Victorian ball-gown, was in the bedroom with me . That night, I had a vivid impression of a woman dressed in the Victorian ball gown .
 "It unnerved me a bit, but I soon put it out of my mind and went to sleep," she says . "I'm not sure what happened to me, but it was a good thing," she said .
 A few nights later (when my parents had returned) I was woken by what I thought were small children jumping across my bed . The children were jumping across the bed when my parents returned from their time with us .
 After searching the room for likely suspects, I went back to bed and started to doze off again . After searching for likely suspect, I searched for a suspect in the room . I went to bed again, but was soon asleep again .
 "I became aware of a weight sitting on my chest. Then, as I lay on my back, I became aware that a weight was sitting on his chest," he said .
 When I opened my eyes I was face-to-face about 6in away with what I can only describe as a wolf . 'I was face to face about sixin away from a wolf. When I open my eyes, I saw a wolf in my head'
 "I can still picture its black face, slobbering mouth, teeth and pink tongue," says author . "It was a black face with a slobbery mouth and a pink tongue"
 After an uncertain period of time, I managed to move and the apparition was instantly gone . The apparition is instantly gone.
 "Each time I found it impossible to move. Either someone would be sitting on the edge of the bed or leaning over me," she said . "I'm not going to be able to move, and each time I'm unable to move"
 I had a large wardrobe at the end of my bed, which also started getting in on the act . It was the first time I'd seen a wardrobe at end of bed .
 It was as if it was being punched, only once a night, causing the same loud and distinct thud . It was like it were being punched only once, causing a thud, causing it to thud again .
 These experiences continued, on and off, for about three months and although I thought it best to halt my interest in UFOs, I never told my parents about what was going on . Although I thought best to halve my interest, I did not tell my parents .
 The new house initially had no after-dark visitors and I had a chance to renew my interest in the unknown . It was the first time I had seen the new house since it had been moved in .
 This time something was in bed with me again, and I had the distinct impression that it was a woman with her arms wrapped around me, gripping me tightly and not allowing me to move . This time it was the first time I had been to bed with a woman in bed again .
 'I managed to break free, but instead of being frightened, I was fuming. I managed to free myself, but I'm still fuming,' she said .
 In some ways it was the beginning of my interest, almost like an initiation . Far from dampening my curiosity about the unknown, I was impressed by the experience .
 I developed a dislike for German Shepherds as they remind me of the wolf, and I cringe every time I see a wardrobe like my old one . I developed to develop a dislike of the German shepherd as they reminded me of a wolf .
 An insulting remark about Rachel Jackson was a primary cause of the duel between Andrew Jackson and Charles Dickinson . The duel was between Jackson and Dickinson .
 The official explanation is that the duel resulted from a series of events that began when Andrew Jackson was accused of questioning the integrity of Charles Dickinson and his father-in-law Joseph Erwin . Jackson and Dickinson were married at the time .
 A horse race between Ploughboy and Truxton was postponed due to a horse injury . Truxton, owned by Jackson, was owned by Erwin and Dickinson, and was due to race .
 Erwin and Dickinson were obligated to surrender a forfeiture fee of $800 . The forfeiture fee was to be paid to Jackson in notes-the IOUs of that day . The horse could not run, Erwin said .
 The notes to be used to satisfy a forfeit had been agreed to before the day of the race . The notes were agreed to by the team before the race to satisfy the forfeit had to be taken .
 Jackson reportedly said that the notes he was initially offered by Dickinson and Erwin were not the ones they had previously agreed upon . The two men's honor raised questions of the two men’s honor and led to the duel .
 There is no shortage of documentation to substantiate the role the notes played in bringing about the duel .
 There is reason to believe that there was something beyond notes and impugned honor . But there is reason for a great deal more was involved in this case .
 General Jackson asked Dickinson if he had used the language attributed to him . General Jackson called on Dickinson and asked him to come clean .
 Dickinson replied that if he had been drunk, it must have been while he was drunk . Dickinson replied: "If he had, it would have been in a drunken state"
 General Jackson was a friendly man when it was put in context . Further explanations and denials removed all ill feeling from General Jackson’s mind .
 John Hoggatt, a highly respected citizen of Davidson County, described a conversation that had occurred in his presence on Christmas night, 1805, three days before the meeting at Winn’s Tavern .
 Joseph Erwin said in front of his son-in-law, Dickinson, that “he expected that they would have to fight a duel,” because of Jackson’s alleged remarks . Erwin told Dickinson that he expected Jackson and Erwin would have a duel .
 President Obama publicly questioned whether Dickinson would “flinch,” or in other words, back down . Then he questioned whether she would ‘flinch’ or ‘back down’
 Hoggatt was a neighbor and close associate of Jackson . It seems highly likely that he would have disclosed such important information .
 The atmosphere surrounding the meeting at Winn’s Tavern would have been especially ominous . Jackson heard about the conversation or not, but whether Jackson heard it or not .
 Dickinson diverted the conversation from which he diverted it to-the notes . Given that context, it's difficult to imagine that the initial subject could have been any less serious than the notes .
 Dickinson, being excited by his losses, and probably under the influence of liquor, rejoined, ‘Yes, about as far out of sight as Mrs. Mrs. Dickinson’s. This was repeated to Dickinson, who, being somewhat excited by . his losses .
 Swann was involved in circulating Jackson’s supposed remark about Dickinson and Erwin . Jackson denied the accusation and referred to Swann as “a damned liar” Swann wrote a letter challenging Jackson to a duel .
 There was no notes delivered at the time of the race as stated in your letter, neither was the meeting between me and Mr D at Mr Wins on that subject . Jackson had come to Nashville to take up a personal matter with Dickinson .
 Jackson’s postscript reveals that what Jackson took Dickinson outside to talk about had nothing to do with the notes . Jackson: “What Jackson took outside was not the notes. It was something else,” he said .
 What else could the initial topic have been but something similar to what the unnamed relative of Mrs. Mrs. Smith said? That piece of information becomes more telling .
 Jackson did not specifically say what “the subject” was in his letter . It is true that in the postscript of his letter Jackson didn't say what it was .
 Andrew Jackson's wife was cast as an adulteress in a letter that might have been made public would have been unthinkable . Jackson acknowledged that his wife had been cast as a childeress . Andrew Jackson was president of the White House .
 There was a great deal more to the duel than can fully be examined here . There was more to be done here .
 Dickinson had reportedly referred to Jackson's trip down the Mississippi to which Dickinson reportedly referred . Jackson's early life with Rachel was revealed in a new documentary .
 Jackson suspected Dickinson was picking a fight with him on behalf of Jackson’s political enemies . Jackson had deep animosity for, and his political rivalry, John Sevier of East Tennessee .
 There was the duel itself, including the details of Dickinson's expertise as a marksman, Jackson’s strategy, and his unlikely triumph . There was also details of Jackson's unlikely triumph, including details of the duel .
 Her death, soon after her husband’s election, was widely attributed to the emotional toll it took on her . There was the presidential campaign of 1828, which so scandalized Rachel that her death was attributed to her husband's election .
 Jackson's death in 1845 may have been brought about by the bullet fired into his chest by Dickinson nearly 40 years earlier . Dickinson also may have shot Jackson in the head 40 years ago .
 There is far more than folklore to suggest that an insulting remark about Rachel Jackson was a primary cause of the duel in which her husband killed Charles Dickinson . The duel contained many aspects and many more, but as for what brought it about, there is more to say .
 Paul Clements is a historian and author of A Past Remembered and the forthcoming book, Chronicles of The Cumberland Settlements . He says the Cumberland settlement was the only settlement of the area .
 Father Pellegrino Emetti announced to the world that he had invented a time machine . Father was known and respected both as a man of God and a rigorous scholar .
 H G Wells’s famous fictional device, the ‘Chrono visor’, allowed one to travel back physically across the ages . It didn’t allow one to see into the past, but it did allow its operator to see the past . He called
 Emetti made the claim in an otherwise dignified and sober interview . It would have been an outlandish claim for anyone to make, but it made it all the more unusual . Emetti: "It's not a joke. It's a joke" Emetti said.
 Father Emetti occupied an endowed chair in pre-polyphonic or ‘archaic’ music at Venice’s Conservatorio Benedetto Marcello .
 His scholar' ly studies of such early pre'polyphonic music had resulted in some 70 books and hundreds of articles . He had also written hundreds of books and articles .
 He directed the choir of the Benedictine Abbey of San Giorgio Maggiore . He recorded over 50 LPs of Gregorian Chant and related music .
 He held a degree in quantum and subatomic physics, and contributed to significant research in these areas . And his knowledge ranged far beyond the world of archaic music .
 He was also an exorcist of considerable renown . He performed huge numbers of exorcisms at the height of his career . He wrote a book on the subject, Satan's Catechism .
 He had apparently been at work on the machine since 1950 although not alone . He was apparently at work at the time .
 Emetti's Chronovisor was the result of extensive research he conducted with a group of 12 prominent, but necessarily anonymous, scientists . According to Emetti, he had conducted extensive research with 12 prominent scientists .
 The shadowy group is supposed to have included Enrico Fermi, who worked on the atom bomb, and rocket scientist Wemher von Braun .
 Ernetti transcribed the play from his sessions with the Chronovisor . Ernetti brought back to the world a lost literary treasure and proving the efficacy of his own invention .
 Emetti claims he used the Chronovisor to tune in to the last days of Jesus' life . Emetti also claimed to have used it to watch the last moments of the life of Jesus .
 N o original plans or photographs of the Chronovisor exist, so we can only speculate as to how it was supposed to work . We can only guess how it would work .
 Supposedly, it consisted of a large number of antennae, corn structed from unnamed alloys; some kind of direction-finding apparatus, driven by the wavelengths of sound and light, which allowed the user to home in on any time, place or person in history .
 The notorious Christ photo is the only known example of the Chronovisor acting as a camera capable of bringing back images or freeze-frames from the unfurling vistas of the past to which it gave access .
 Ernetti said less and less about his astonishing creation in the years leading up to his death in 1994 . Ernetti left little evidence to persuade the doubters, but enough tantalising hints .
 Ernetti: They had begun by trying to tune in on one of Mussolini's speeches . Ernetti said they had been trying to watch Mussolini speak at the time .
 So much documentation and footage existed on Mussolini that Ernetti was certain it was him . Ernetti travelled further back in time, to ancient Rome, to find the dictator .
 Ernetti noticed differences in the Latin pronunciation from what is taught in schools today . Ernetti's Latin pronunciation is different from that of what is now taught in school today .
 Next, they set the Chronovisor's dials further back in time, attempting to catch the sounds and images of one of Napoleon's speeches . Mussolini .
 Recently, there has been a further turn of the screw, with claims of a Vatican cover-up .
 The Vatican ordered Emetti to keep silent about his discovery, according to a recent book by a French Jesuit priest . The Vatican has also suppressed any material evidence of its existence since Emetti's death in 1994, the book says .
 In 2002 he accuses the Vatican of suppressing Emetti’s temporal research documents and con1 struction plans for the Chronovisor . Now in Le Nouveau Mystere du Vatican (New Mystery of the Vatican, 2002) he accuses .
 The team traveled back in time to Rome Maggiore, adjacent to the monastery where Father Emetti lived . The team met Emetti in 1962 at the grounds of Venice’s basilica .
 Emetti told an astonished Bmne about the F "" ^ Chronovisor . The two met regularly, exchanging ideas on a wide range of subjects . At that first meeting, Emetti .
 In 1997, Viennese journalist Peter Krassa drew heavily on Brune's book to retell Emetti’s story . Brune's story was re-told in 1997 by a journalist in Vienna . The book was published in 1997 .
 Father Brune’s Le Nouveau Mystere du Vatican is in part a reaction to the New Paradigm version which included the first translation from Latin of Emetti's Thyestes fragment . The original version of the original version was published in the 1970s .
 The passage provided by Ernetti is a fraud, carefully pieced together from other texts by Emetti, who was himself a noted Latinist . The translation was made by Dr Katherine Owen Eldred of Princeton, who tentatively suggests, on the basis of internal linguistic evidence, that the
 Father Francois Bmne, also an excellent Latinist, responds vigorously to this muted allegation . In his book, he responds vigorously . Father Francois is also a Latinist .
 Father Bmne points out a number of errors in Dr Eldred’s translation, which, though minor in nature, do serve as is his intention to undercut the authority and cast doubt on her hypothesis of fraud . He points out several errors in the translation .
 Father Brune does this because he cannot accept that Father Ernetti might not, in the main, be telling the truth about the Chronovisor . Father Brune says this is because he does not accept that Ernetti may not be telling truth . The Chronovasor is the world
 Ernetti’s enormous scholarly output to support this belief, he says . He points to Ernetti's enormous scholarship to support that belief . Ernetti was a prolific scholar, Ernetti says. Ernetti is a Nobel Prize winner .
 The portrait first appeared in public in the Milan newspaper Domenica del Cor ri ere on 2 May 1972 .
 A man wrote in with an identical photo saying he'd bought it at the gift shop of the Sanctuary of Merciful Love at Collevalenza, near Perugia, Italy .
 This photgraph is a close-up sincere desire to believe that this gave proof of the reality of Christianity) or whether he really thought he couldn't let people down (like the girls who made the Cottingley fairy ‘photos'), no one will ever know .
 Device providing comparison with already-recorded data . Filters; Bulk memory; Device provides comparison with data .
 Although no photos or original plans of the Chronovisor exist, there have been some imaginative attempts at reconstruction of the device .
 Brune insists on his subject's respectability and authority in the face of mounting confusion about Emetti’s obsession with the Chronovisor .
 Ernetti had given conflicting accounts of his timeviewer during his lifetime . Ernetti claimed that the notorious ‘photo’ of Christ’s agony on the Cross was actually of his own face while he was watching the crucifixion via the Chronovisor .
 Ernetti asserted that the visionary nun might actually have been transported to the time and place of the crucifixion and seen exactly what Ernetti himself had seen through the Chronovisor . Ernetti asserts that the visionary nun might have seen what he had seen .
 Brune is unable to completely dismiss Emetti’s assertions . Brune says Emetti is wrong to dismiss the claims . Brune: "D espite such suspicious material, Brune is not entirely certain"
 He says he is overawed by Emetti’s great learning and productivity as a scientist and scholar . He is convinced of Emetti's high personal integrity, which he says he observed closely .
 There is more in the New Paradigm edition to try the patience of Father Brune . There is also more to read .
 The final chapter consists of a hitherto unpublished ‘deathbed confession’ sent anonymously to me by a person claiming to be a distant relative of Ernetti . Ernetti was continually working on the Chronovisor but had never perfected it and had never travelled with it through time .
 Ernetti said he remembered living in ancient Rome as a boy, attending a performance of Ennius’s play and being fascinated by its portrayal of cannibalism . This strange and gripping document also purports to explain the psychological roots of Emetti's obsession with Thyestes .
 I cannot say for certain whether this ‘confession’ is authentic, but I have, after some investigation, reason to believe that it is. I cannot know if this 'confession' is authentic - but I believe it is .
 In Le Nouveau M ystere du Vatican, Brune examines this ‘confession’ closely, for it seems to contradict his basic assertion that Ernetti was telling the truth . Brune examines the 'confession' closely .
 There would have been no nuns (expressly mentioned by the supposed relative) in the monastery of San Giorgio Maggiore, even if they were serving as nurses to Ernetti .
 Ernetti says it was only during a near-death experience the previous night that he ‘remembered obscurely’ that it was not Quintus Ennius, but himself, who had composed the fragment of Thyestes that he claimed to have brought back from the
 ‘deathbedbed’ account contains some fascinating original detail . However, it also contains some interesting original details .
 Ernetti reveals to a relative that, during his NDE of the night before, he learned that he had tried to build the Chronovisor in a number of previous lifetimes . Ernetti later reveals to the relative that he has also tried to make the ChronOVisor
 Austrian writer Peter Krassa is not quite in the same league as Erich von Daniken or Johannes von Buttlar . He is an author concentrating on Ancient Astronautics and other topics of fortean interest .
 The German-speaking part of the SpaceGod fraternity is well known to the SpaceG fraternity . Still, with his impressive list of publications over the past three decades, he is well-known to many .
 In 1998, each of us published a book that involved the Count of Saint Germain . The Count of St. Germain was the subject of each of our books .
 'No competition, really, as his account was non-fictional, while mine was a historical novel that co-starred the infamous charlatan. No competition, as he wrote his account .
 Despite this amusing coincidence and even sharing a couple of friends in common, I had never been in contact with him until now . Despite this, he said he had never met him again .
 Krassa's book on the Chronovisor was published in 1998 . The same year, 1998, also saw the publication of the book .
 I was already familiar with Ernetti's claims but, frankly, I had never considered them worthy of further investigation . Ernetti has been accused of sexual assault in the 1990s .
 I actually used the Chronovisor as a plot device in one of my Die Abenteurer suspense novels, written in summer 2002 .
 "I think they had a positive influence on the book, so I don't mind. Actually, I think they [the book] had a good influence on me," she says .
 The book pun intended but both my German publishers and I see the good intentions behind this. Of course, they did not strictly play it by the book puns .
 I first read about his strange apparatus in the 1970s, in a weekly magazine published in Vienna . The strange apparatus first appeared in Vienna in the 1960s .
 An article translated from an Italian magazine was translated from a magazine . I was intrigued at first, but then I simply forgot about it until later some friends gave me an article .
 The Chronovisor is the name of a Vienna-based daily newspaper . It is the first time a newspaper has published an article in Vienna . It was published by the Vienna daily paper Kurier in 1989 .
 "I was confronted with this weird machine. Then I read Professor Ernst Senkowski's book and, again, I was confronted . Then, I read Senator's book, and I'm confronted with the weird machine," she says .
 Pellegrino Ernetti was involved in the development of the Chronovisor between 1950 and 1990 . He was apparently cooperating with a number of international scientists .
 Ernetti was a close friend of Ernetti's friend and theologian Father Frangois Brune . Senkowski and Brune made contact with Senkowski, Brune and Brune .
 No one ever saw the Chronovisor, not even Brune or Senkowski, who were both in close contact with him . No one saw him, including Brune and Senkowski .
 Ernetti never named scientists who were cooperating with him because he wanted, he claimed, to protect them from public harassment . Ernetti also said he never named the scientists who cooperated with him . Also, Ernetti said he wanted to protect the scientists from being harassed by public .
 The exceptions were Wernher von Braun and Enrico Fermi, who were already dead . The exceptions to the list were von Braun, who was already dead at the time .
 He mentioned a Japanese scientist and Nobel Prize winner in physics .
 Some lines of research present too much difficulty, with nothing much to be turned up, in my opinion. Some of the research is difficult to turn up, but nothing much is turned up in the book .
 In the early 1990s, Ernetti corresponded with Ernetti, but his answers were vague . Ernetti's answers were rather vague, he says, but he has a long list of questions .
 The Vatican had already ordered him to keep silent because his earlier public statements came close to arousing the interest of the espionage community . I did not know then that the Vatican had ordered him .
 Ernetti's honesty, even in the light of all the inconsistencies in his story, is still being questioned . Nonetheless, Ernetti is still convinced of his honesty, says CNN's John Sutter .
 As a theologian, he could not really expect any personal gain from a hoax . He could not seriously hope to make a financial profit from the hoax .
 Ernetti had the machine disassembled and ordered the single parts to be sent to different locations over the world . Ernetti died shortly before he died from cancer .
 Father Ernetti insisted this was an authentic screenshot right off the Chronovisor . We will never know why he insisted it was a real screenshot .
 Perhaps, visions or ideas that were incompatible with his scientific education haunted him . Perhaps, perhaps, he haunted him. Perhaps, he was haunted by visions of ideas that are incompatible with scientific education .
 The Chronovisor might be a symbol of scientific reasoning, a self-delusional mental construct . It is a symbol for scientific reasoning and a self delusional mental construct.
 "I believe that his account of the Chronovisor is purely metaphorical. Nor do I believe that he . nor do I . believe that . his account . is merely metaphorical." "I do not believe that this is merely a metaphor."
 Professor Giuseppe Marasca claims to have seen Ernetti's recording of the lost Roman opera Thyestes . Professor Marasca says he still possesses the most spectacular videotape .
 I can hardly be a judge of Ernetti's character, as I never met him in person . I'm not sure if Ernetti was a good man, as he never met me in person, he says .
 'I assume he was a very charming person, even if he had moments where he was rather egocentric. Still, from descriptions by others, he was very charming . He had moments of his egocentrics, but he was also very charming, he says .
 He was an expert on archaic music who had studied nuclear physics . Nor must we forget that he was a top-notch scientist and renowned academic .
 Some theses were proven wrong; others were based on flawed assumptions . Some of theses have been proven wrong, others have been proved wrong .
 "It would not be very wise and would very probably damage my reputation as an author to stick with my own errors. It would not very wise ... to stick [with] own errors," he says .
 We will have to wait and see if it also happens with the Chronovisor one day . We will be able to see if the same thing happens again with a video game .
 He has become a critically acclaimed novelist with five hardcover books published . Over the last years, he has also become an acclaimed novelist .
 His most recent effort is the gothic comedy Karl May und der Wettermacher . He is currently working on a high-tech thriller and a number of other projects he won't speak about .
 W itches were accused of 'scrying' when they gazed into a crystal, a mirror or a bowl of water .
 Some accounts imply 'real time' visions of things happening long ago or what might yet be as Frodo saw in Galadriel's mirror in Tolkien's Fellowship of the Ring . Some accounts seem to suggest 'real-time visions' of things long ago .
 Another form of time-viewing is experienced by those who 'relive' past lives . Time-watching is a form of 'time-watching' experienced by time-lifters .
 English reincarnationist Jenny Cockell interviewed in FT72:36-39 . Cockell said she had already had previews of a future life . She said she has already had a preview of a new life .
 In the spiritual and folkloric tradition of near-death experiences, your life is said to 'flash before your eyes' and involves reliving of everything you have done, or experienced, and its effect on other people .
 Lubek published an account of his attempts at trans-time photography in 1912 . Lubek was a pioneer of trans-photography in the early 1900s .
 In 1934, William D Pelley, an American radical and editor of Liberation magazine, reported on 'Ultra-Vision', a form of time-camera which he allegedly developed in collaboration with Thomas Edison . Pelley's time-cameras are said to have been developed by Thomas Edison
 The Radionic Camera was developed by George DeLaWarr in the 1950s . It was developed from prior experiments by Albert Abrams, a 19th century physician, and Ruth Drown .
 Drown became a martyr to Radionics when she died in 1966, after the FDA had imprisoned her for fraud and confiscated her equipment . Drown was a martyr for Radionics after she died .
 DeLaWarr claimed that his Radionic devices could bridge space and time by tuning into sympathetic energies or emanations . He said his devices could be used to bridge time and space .
 Sample could generate an image of the whole it came from, no matter how far away or when it existed or will exist . A sample could generate a whole image no matter where it was taken . Sample could be generated from a sample of a whole, no amount of time it came to
 Ernetti proffered a 'photo' of Christ's face in support of his claim of witnessing the Crucifixion . Ernetti was emulating HG Wells's timetraveller, who brought back a flower as evidence of another world .
 Arthur C Clarke and Stephen Baxter invented a 'scientific' basis for something like the Chronovisor in their 2000 novel The Light of Other Days . The novel explores the personal, social and political consequences of a device that can 'see' anywhere .
 Ernetti then swears that he will reincarnate once again to try to complete the Chronovisor . Ernetti swears he will do so again to complete it . Ernotti swears to do it again, and says he will be reincarnated again .
 It fails to change his conviction that the Chronovisor actually existed, he says . He says he believes it is impossible to believe that it actually existed .
 Father Ernetti believes the confession is proof that someone has a serious interest in discrediting Ernetti’s claims . He believes that the confession proves that someone is trying to discredit Ernetti's claims .
 Brune goes on to hint at sinister plots in the darker recesses of the Vatican . Brune says the Vatican has a history of dark plots against the Church .
 Ernetti’s eventual lapse into silence on the subject of his magnum opus may have been due to pressures from above . Pressure made it difficult for him to discuss his work, defend himself (as in the case of the 'Christ' photo)
 Brune says Ernetti told him that one month earlier, on 30 September 1993, he had been invited to the Vatican, along with the two surviving scientists of the original Chronovisor team . At their last meeting, according to Brune, Ernetti said: "At their very last
 Brune ’s book ends, then, on a positive note, having shed no real light on the mystery of the Chronovisor . Brune ‘s book’s conclusion is that it will shed no more light on what happened .
 Already, mythologising forces have taken over the tale 'and, as time goes on, mystery will beget mystery', says author .
 Any prospect of finding out the truth behind the story of Father Ernetti's machine recedes into the past .
 He met Adolf Hitler in 1933 and was convinced the Nazi planned to exterminate Europe’s Jews, prompting him to sound warnings . He was convinced Hitler planned to kill the Jews in 1933 .
 America and the Holocaust"" argued, he did little to save their European brethren . America and Holocaust"" wrote, he said .
 27,370 Germans — most of them Jews — were allowed into Germany . Cut red tape that kept immigration quotas from being filled, allowing entry .
 Jews from Central and Eastern Europe to other countries, mostly in Latin America . Hoped to resettle millions of Jews from . Central and . Eastern Europe .
 Promised to ask Congress for $150 million to help resettle refugees if Britain allowed more Jews into Palestine and private funds could be raised . Promised that Britain would allow more Jews to be allowed into Palestine .
 Most countries refused to admit Jews amid a depression and anti-Semitism, Breitman says . Most countries refuse to accept Jews amid depression, anti-Semitic anti-semitism, he says .
 Opposition also was strong at the State Department and in Congress . Congress voted in 1939 not to let in 20,000 German Jewish children .
 Cuba, the United States and Canada turned away those on the 'voyage of the damned,"" and the ship returned to Europe . Cuba, U.S. and Canada were turned away .
 Roosevelt “made a decision to go for big results,” Breitman says . Roosevelt viewed letting in small numbers of Jews as “a gesture, not a solution” to the larger refugee problem, he says .
 In 1940, after the start of World War II in Europe in Europe, his priorities turned to national security, Breitman writes . In 1940 he was in charge of national security .
 Rafael Medoff, director of the Wyman Institute, says the book won’t absolve Roosevelt . Medoff: The book will not absolve him of responsibility for the Holocaust .
 FDR failed to take “concrete steps” such as giving Jewish refugees temporary haven in U.S. territories such as the Virgin Islands, he says . He says FDR did not take ‘concrete . steps’ such as helping Jewish refugees in the United States territories
 An enormous, monstrous squid attempted to attack an Antarctic fishing vessel in the Ross Sea in April 2003 . Reports appeared in the media of the attack in the Antarctic .
 Mesonychoteuthis hamiltoni was armed with swivelling razor-sharp hooks on its tentacles . It had eyes the size of dinner plates, and was itself referred to as the colossal squid .
 Not too surprisingly, it was widely dismissed as just another fraudulent beast engendered by the imagination of some reporter .
 Mesonychoteuthis hamiltoni is a species of species that existed in the wild . It is thought to be the first species to be found in the world of this species .
 The colossal squid first came to scientific attention from remains retrieved from the stomachs of sperm whales . The only member of its genus, which was created in 1925 to accommodate it, is the colossal squid .
 Until this new specimen, a half-grown adult female was reported, only one complete postjuvenile specimen had been recorded caught at a depth of 2,500ft in the Antarctic in 1981 . It is nowadays known from a number of juveniles, but until now only one specimen has been
 New specimen was almost 20ft long, but could have grown to 40ft . It was feeding on Patagonian toothfishes caught on longlines set by the fishermen .
 Not everyone was happy with these media reports, however, and on the online cephalopod discussion list, CEPH-LIST, a number of discrepancies between media speculation and zoological reality .
 It is more likely that this species ambushes its prey by hanging motionless in the water, rather than being forcefully aggressive . The colossal squid is thought to have ambushed its prey .
 Other squid species, even including very small ones, also have them modified from tentacles .
 There is no inference drawn that these are designed for attacking humans, but merely that they are modifications for capturing certain types of prey . So there should be no inference . It is not intended to be used against humans .
 Richard Ellis personally discounts the possibility that the colossal squid is any more of a monster than the giant squid, or any more dangerous to humans . Ellis: "I don't believe the squid is a monster. It's not a monster."
 Even the claim that the Ross Sea specimen was only half-grown and might therefore have attained a much greater size had it lived is unsubstantiated . The claim that it might have reached a much larger size is not substantiated .
 During their later stages of development, squid mature rapidly . Almost all their energy is channelled into sperm and egg production, not into body size increase .
 Ross Sea individual could have become fully mature, mated, spawned, and died without gaining any additional size .
 The Ross Sea specimen of colossal squid was indeed a remarkable discovery, and well worth receiving attention .
 Feverfew is a composite plant growing in every hedgerow, with numerous, small, daisy-like heads of yellow flowers . The central yellow florets are arranged on a nearly flat receptacle, not conical as in the chamomiles .
 The stem is finely furrowed and hairy, about 2 feet high . The leaves alternate, downy with short hairs, or nearly smooth . The leaf-stalk is flattened above and convex beneath, flattened .
 Chamomile is not to be confounded with other wild chamomilelike allied species, which mostly have feathery leaves and somewhat large flowers . The stem also is upright, whereas that of the true garden Chammile is procumbent .
 The whole plant has a strong and bitter smell, and is particularly disliked by bees . The plant has been described as a 'bitter and bitter' plant .
 A double variety is cultivated in gardens for ornamental purposes, and its flower-heads are sometimes substituted for the double Chamomile . The double variety can be grown in many gardens .
 Country people have long been accustomed to make curative uses of this herb . The herb grows abundantly throughout England .
 Gerard tells us that it may be used both in drinks, and bound on the wrists is of singular virtue against the ague . Gerard says it may also be used in drinks and in the wrists .
 Feverfew is a perennial, and herbaceous in habit . Pyrethrum is derived from the Greek pur , in allusion to the hot taste of the root . Feverfew has a reputation for being herbaceous and perennial .
 Once planted it gives year after year an abundant supply of blossoms with only the merest degree of attention . When once planted, it gives . year after years an abundant . supply of . blossoms .
 Planting may be done in autumn, but the best time is about the end of April . The best time to plant in the UK should be in April, experts say .
 Any ordinary good soil is suitable, but better results are obtained when well-drained, and of a stiff, loamy character, enriched with good manure . Better results are found in the soil of a firm, hardy soil .
 The plants when first put out being small might be injured by hoeing . Weeding should be done by hand, the plants are small and should not be put out .
 To propagate by division , lift the plants in March, or whenever the roots are in an active condition, and divide them into three or five fairly large pieces .
 Cuttings should be made from the young shoots that start from the base of the plant, and should be taken with a heel of the old plant attached, which will greatly assist their rooting .
 The foliage must be shortened to about 3 inches, when the cuttings will be ready for insertion in a bed of light, sandy soil, in the open .
 For the latter pest, try peppering the plants with soot, ashes or lime . For the others use soot or ashes, lime or soot is used .
 Is employed in hysterical complaints, nervousness and lowness of spirits, and is a general tonic . Is also employed in hysteria complaints and nervousness .
 The cold infusion is made from 1 OZ. of the herb to a pint of boiling water, allowed to cool . Allow it to be taken frequently in doses of half a teacupful .
 A decoction with sugar or honey is said to be good for coughs, wheezing and difficult breathing . Decoction said to treat coughs and wheezings with coughs .
 The herb, bruised and heated, or fried with a little wine and oil, is employed as a warm external application for wind and colic .
 Feverfew is a tincture made from Feverfew and applied locally . It relieves the pain and swelling caused by bites of insects and vermin .
 Two teaspoonfuls of tincture mixed with 1/2 pint of cold water . All parts of the body likely to be exposed to the bites of insects are freely sponged with it .
 A tincture of the leaves of the true Chamomile will have the same effect as a German Chamomice . The leaves of both Chamomiles will have an effect on the body .
 Planted round dwellings, it is said to purify the atmosphere and ward off disease . It is also said to have purified the atmosphere of the city .
 SWEET FEVERFEW and C maritima are found by the seashore, especially in the north . Common Feverfew has leaves broader, more fleshy, succulent and smaller flowerheads than the common Feverfew .
 "A Modern Herbal" was written with the conventional wisdom of the early 1900's . Purchase this Herb from Botanical.com .
 Of course, the results of this quizlet will not be as offer valuable insight nonetheless . The results of the quizlet are not as good as the results, however .
 A kamikaze squirrel fell from the sky and detonated a Bayonne woman's car yesterday, police said today . Police said it was a squirrel that fell from a tree and detonated the car .
 Lindsey Millar, 23, and her brother, Tony., were both home Wednesday at about 12:45m. Lindsey's car suddenly started burning outside their 42nd Street home . Lindsey's brother was also home at the time of the incident .
 Tony Millar said firefighters told them it was the work of a saboteur that had been gnawing on overhead power lines connected to a transformer directly above the 2006 Toyota Camry . Firefighters said they believe it was work of the bucktoothed saboteurs .
 Police said there were no injuries — except for the squirrel, which is dead . Police said no injuries were reported in the incident .
 Millars' home is decorated for Halloween, complete with a tiny plastic tombstone on their front lawn . The Millars have been decorated with Halloween decorations .
 Tony Millar said the family will consider dedicating a tombstone to the squirrel . The squirrel, who was not named, is not named .
 "Flight From the Reich: Refugee Jews, 1933-1946,” is our new book . We investigated the failure of the allies to respond to the refugee crisis triggered by Nazi persecution .
 This book examines the ever dwindling choices open to asylum seekers . Consuls, immigration officers and other government officials, church, health and social workers, volunteers, volunteers and private individuals .
 " Refugee Jews 1933-1946"" is a story with which both Robert and I have personal connection . We both are related by friendship and kinship to many people who left Nazi Europe as refugees, and to a few who had the opportunity to flee, chose to remain .
 Auschwitz was a concentration camp in Auschwitz, a Nazi extermination camp . The Holocaust was the focus of a new book, “Auschwitz. A History,” which spans the history in which the Holocaust was rooted .
 My first book, "Children with a Star," gave voice to the silenced children of the Holocaust . It was the first history of daily lives of young people caught in the net of Nazism .
 This book has been translated into German, Italian, Dutch and Japanese . It was the subject of a documentary by the Canadian Broadcasting Company .
 A is the actual specimen, B is the right side doubled at the midline and mirrored, and C is the left side doubled and mirrored . The actual specimen is the original specimen . The original specimen was taken from the same place as the original .
 Homo floresiensis is a previously unknown species of human . Its discoverers dubbed the find Homo florentiensis . Its name suggests a new human species .
 Although LBl lived only 15,000 years ago, comparisons were made to earlier hominins, including Homo erectus and Australopithecus .
 Other traits were characterized as unique and therefore indicative of a new species . Other traits of the new species were characterized by unique traits .
 LB1 skull was found in Flores, Flores, dated in the range of 3,000 to 5,000 years ago . Liang Momer E, another skull from Flores, was also found in the same area .
 The original estimate of 3. feet for the creature’s height was based on extrapolation combining the short thigh bone with a formula derived from an African pygmy population . Humans with Down syndrome also have diagnostically short thigh bones, Eckhardt said .
 ‘unusual does not equal unique,' he says . Though these and other features are unusual, he acknowledged, ”unusual doesn’t equal unique”
 The first indicator is cranio fecial asymmetry, a left-right mismatch of the skull that is characteristic of this and other disorders . The first symptom of the disorder is a mismatch of skull .
 Eckhardt and colleagues noted Ms asymmetry in LB1 as early as 2006 . But it had not been reported by the excavating team and was later dismissed as a result of the skull's being buried, he said .
 The brain size is within the range expected for an Australomelanesian human with Down syndrome . Here too, they estimate the brain size they estimate is within that range expected .
 LBTs short thigh bones not only match the height reduction seen in Down syndrome, Eckhardt said . When corrected statistically for normal growth, they would yield a stature of about 1.26 meters, or just over tour feet . Some humans now living on Flores and in surrounding regions have
 Officials said someone is placing sharpened rebar spikes around Forest Service roads in Arizona . Officials said the spikes are being placed around the forest service roads .
 At least five pieces of spiked rebar were found on a forest road in the Happy Jack area . The Arizona Daily Sun reported that U.S. Forest Service officials said at least 5 pieces of rebar had been found on the road .
 Group faced threats, violence and harassment as they set out across South to claim rights . Catherine BurksBrooks: "It was easy for me to make the decision"
 Students were veterans of the sit-in movement to desegregate downtown lunch counters a year earlier . They decided there was too much at stake and they had to keep the Freedom Rides alive .
 Students made plans to travel from Nashville to Birmingham, Ala., on a Greyhound bus May 17 . Students say they want to learn more about the bus ride .
 PBS will broadcast a two-hour documentary, Freedom Riders, which was shown May 1 6 at the 2010 Nashville Film Festival . Freedom Riders will be broadcast on PBS May 1, 2010 .
 A group of 40 college students from across the country will retrace the rides . They will stop in Nashville on May 12 . The rides will be retrace to Nashville .
 The first Freedom Ride was a project of the Congress of Racial Equality, a national civil rights group . The Freedom Ride is now a national tour of the Freedom of Ride .
 Seven riders boarded a Trailways bus and six got on a Greyhound in Washington on May 4 . All of them were bound for New Orleans, according to a 2006 book .
 John Lewis, D-Ga., then a student at Nashville’s American Baptist Theological Seminary, passed through Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina and Georgia .
 After a mob attacked the bus, police escorted it to the city limits . The bus was attacked by a mob of unknown people . Police escorted the bus to the town limits .
 The Freedom Riders left Birmingham, Alabama, on May 20, 1961, en route to Montgomery, Alabama . The group was nearly killed by smoke and flames and nearly killed .
 Trailways riders were harassed by Ku Klux Klansmen as they rode from Atlanta to Alabama . They were viciously attacked after they got off the bus in Birmingham, Alabama .
 The attacks grabbed the attention of a nation that hadn’t spent much time focusing on the Freedom Rides up to that point .
 President Kennedy and brother Robert F Kennedy dispatched John Seigenthaler to Alabama . Among those watching were President Kennedy, his brother Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy, who dispatched him .
 Seigenthaler, a Nashville native, arrived in Birmingham after Freedom Riders’ plans to fly to Montgomery were disrupted by a bomb threat . He arrived in the city after the Freedom Riders were forced to leave Alabama .
 He was able to put together a plan to “sneak the Riders on board a flight to New Orleans” and joined them for the 10:38m. trip, Arsenault writes .
 Nashville students, led by Lewis and Diane Nash, decided the movement couldn’t end like that . But the Nashville students decided to end the movement .
 They hustled to work out logistics for a ride from Nashville to Birmingham and on to Montgomery, Jackson and New Orleans . They finally persuaded the Nashville Christian Leadership Conference to provide $900 for bus tickets .
 Greyhound riders tried to leave Birmingham for Montgomery, Alabama, but the ride was canceled . Greyhound passengers were stranded in Birmingham .
 Riders sat in the bus terminal for hours, surrounded by a restless crowd outside . The riders sat for hours in the terminal .
 Seigenthaler remembers seeing a “teeming anthill of violence” and hearing “screams, both of anger and of pain” as he arrived at the bus terminal . The bus finally arrived in Montgomery the next day, he says, and the violence
 Veterans of the Freedom Rides say the movement had a quick impact and a lasting legacy . Veterans say the Freedom Ride movement was a quick hit and lasting impact .
 Signs ordering African Americans to use separate facilities came down “all through the South,” said Ernest “Rip” Patton of Nashville, who rode from Montgomery, Ala., to Jackson, Miss., where he was arrested and thrown in jail for more than a month .
 Palermo's Capuchin fathers exhumed the bodies of some monks in the 16th century . The dry soil of the area had preserved the bodies by a natural process of mummification .
 Brother Silvestro's body was preserved for public viewing . The monks preserved the body of a particularly holy monk . The body of the holy monk was preserved in the hope of preserving religious significance .
 Palermo’s leading citizens preserved in the catacombs . Soon it became something of a status symbol .
 They would indicate in their wills how they would like to be remembered, and were often dressed in their finest clothes as momenti mori for grieving relatives .
 Others would ask for their garments to be changed at a certain time after their deaths . Others would even ask for a change of clothing at certain times .
 Rosalia Lombardo was one of the last bodies to be interned before the local authorities banned the practice in 1920 . The catacombs were officially closed in 1880, but the practice was banned by local authorities in 1920.
 Nicknamed the ‘Sleeping Beauty’, her lifelike body is still perfectly intact, down to her grey-blue eyes . Nicknamed “The Sleeping Beauty”, she is still fully intact, including her grey eyes .
 Her remarkable preservation was the work of one Dr Solafia of Palermo, who took its secret with him to the grave . The discovery was made by one of the world's most famous doctors .
 Two children sit together on a rocking chair, and a husband and wife remain happily united even in death . Some have been arranged in poses in poses two children sit in rocking chairs .
 Some look cheerful, as if they are enjoying a joke with their neighbours, while others frown upon tourists .
 Time has not always been kind to the bodies, some of whose faces have become distorted to resemble anguished screams from beyond the grave .
 Monks are preserved in the clothes they wore in life, with the ropes they wore as penance still dangling from their necks . Priests hang in rows on a wall dressed in their sacramental robes . Monks and monks are also preserved in their clothes, with ropes hanging
 Others mummies are dressed in the clothes of the period in which they lived . Others are dressed according to the clothing of the time they lived in .
 Colonel Enea DiGuiliano stands proudly in the French Bourbon uniform he wore in the 1800s . He was a colonel of the Royal Canadian Army of the 18th century .
 Among the more famous inhabitants is the painter Velasquez who, confusingly, died in Seville, Spain .
 Others include sculptors Filippo Pennino and Lorenzo Marabitti . Guiseppe Tommasi di Lampedusa is author of II Gattopardo .
 Serial killers are some of the most notorious and unforgivably cruel serial killers of all time . Serial killers have been known to be cruel and brutal .
 Gilles de Rais was considered to be the precursor to the modem serial killers . The 15th century nobleman used to be a soldier alongside Joan of Arc . He was one of the wealthiest men in France .
 The precise number of people killed is between 80 and 200 . It is thought to be between 80 to 200 .
 Richard Trenton Chase was known as the 'Vampire of Sacramento' due to his habit of drinking victims' blood and cannibalism . He was an American schizophrenic serial killer who killed six people in the span of a month .
 He believed that he needed to prevent Nazis from turning his blood into powder via a poison they had planted beneath his soap dish . The poison was planted beneath the soap dish under the sink .
 In 1976, his attempt to inject rabbit blood directly into his body made him very sick, and he ended up in a mental ward . In 1976 he attempted to inject his own rabbit blood into the body .
 Chase's thirst killed several neighbourhood pets in the summer of 1977 . Chase was known to be a notorious serial killer .
 Using blenders, he'd mix up blood-and-guts cocktails, but soon it was not enough . "Blood and guts" cocktails were not enough, he said .
 Chase was found guilty of six counts of first degree murder and was sentenced to die in the gas chamber . Chase was convicted of killing six people and sentenced to be executed in gas chambers . Chase is now serving a life sentence of life behind bars .
 On 26 December 1980, Chase hoarded the anti-depressants offered to calm him and made himself disappear . Chase was found dead in the early hours of December 26, 1980 .
 Known as the Milwaukee Cannibal, Dahmer murdered at least 17 men and boys between 1978 and 1991 . Dahmer was known as the "Milwaukee Cannibal" Dahmer's murder spree took place in the city of Milwaukee, Wisconsin .
 Criminal Minds claimed his murders to be particularly gruesome, involving acts of forced sodomy, necrophilia, dismemberment, and cannibalism . The murders were said to involve acts of cannibalism and sodomy .
 Dahmer's fantasies included a series of crimes against the corpse of his victims, or what he referred to as passive sex . Unlike most serial killers, Dahmer wanted to have passive sex with his victims' corpses . Dahmer was a serial killer with a long history of sexual violence .
 This became part of his regular pattern and possibly the one obsession that pushed him to kill . This was part of the regular pattern of killing, perhaps the obsession that drove him to commit suicide .
 Prairie Ghosts revealed, including eating feces and drinking urine . Prairie Ghosts reveal they eat feces, drink urine and eat urine .
 At the age of 20, he began raping young boys in Manhattan where he had moved with his mother . He had moved from Manhattan to New York City where he began to rape young boys .
 Fish tortured, mutilated and murdered young children with what he termed his ""Implements of Hell" Fish used a meat cleaver, a butcher knife, and a small handsaw to torture children . Fish tortured and murdered children with the tools he called his implements 
 Ethekwini Municipality recycles graveyard cemeteries in Durban, South Africa . The graveyard will be recycled by the municipality .
 Overcrowded cemeteries in Durban have forced city to begin "recyclying" tombs . It's a blasphemy for South Africa's Zulus who revere their ancestors .
 Durban is located in KwaZulu-Natal province which suffers the highest HIV rate in the nation with the world's biggest burden of 5. million AIDS cases . Durban's HIV rate is the highest in the country with the highest rate in South Africa .
 The death toll has soared for years, and cemeteries are running out of space . The deaths have soared, and the death toll is soaring .
 Urban graveyards reserved for whites only under apartheid have also filled up since 1994 . Graveyards are now filled up in South African cities .
 Durban has launched a pilot project at one graveyard, which will eventually expand to all 60 in the city . The project will be a pilot program at one of the city's 60 graveyard sites .
 Remains more than 10 years old will be re-buried farther underground . New corpses will be placed above the bodies of those who are no longer old . Remains will be moved to a new burial site, buried underground .
 If funeral rites are not followed properly, misfortune can befall the family of the deceased, which dreates concerns about how to yeneTate a-shared grave . ""They believe that if you recycle the graves, there can be a confusion of the ancestors spirits. They believe
 I )urSf n says it has no choice, fearing the exi sting cemeteries . The four million-year-old city is squeezed between the Indian Ocean and the hills of Zululand .
 Black market vendors of illegal tombs fill in the gap . Jntil the city settles on a solution, black market vendors are filling in gap .
 Some cemetery guards are reported to be re-selling abandoned tombs . Others are digging spaces outside approved burial grounds .
 Another illegal practice involves stealing tombstones, a luxury in South Africa . 43 percent of South Africa's population lives on less than two dollars a day .
 Barbed wire and elec ric fences have begun sprouting around Durban's cemeteries . That's why recently barbed wire has been sprouting in Durban .
 The Anansi stories originated from Ghana’s Ashanti tribe .
 Anansi must bring back Onini the Python, Osebo the Leopard, the Mmoboro Hornets, and Mmoatia the dwarf . The Python Python and Leopard Python are among the animals brought back .
 Python debated whether Python was really longer than the palm branch or not as his wife Aso says . First he went to where Python lived and debated out loud whether Python really was longer than a palm branch .
 Python overheard and, when Anansi explained the debate, agreed to lie along the palm branch . Python overheard the debate and decided to lie on the branch . The pair later agreed to share a photo of themselves with the monkey .
 Python agreed to be tied to the branch because he couldn't easily make himself completely straight . Python has been tied to a branch in honour of his length .
 When the leopard fell in the hole Anansi offered to help him out with his webs . The leopard then fell into the hole and offered to assist him with his web web .
 Once the leopard was out of the hole though he was bound in Anansi’s webs and was carried away . The leopard is carried away by the spider .
 To catch the hornets, Anansi filled a calabash with water and poured some over a banana leaf he held over his head and some over the nest, calling out that it was raining .
 He suggested the hornets get into the empty calabash, and when they obliged they obliged, he quickly sealed the opening .
 He placed the doll under the odum tree where the dwarfs play and put some yam in a bowl in front of it . The doll was placed in the garden by the dwarf in a bid to make him feel welcome .
 When the dwarf came and ate the yam she thanked the doll which of course did not reply . The doll did not respond to her thanks .
 Annoyed at its bad manners she struck it, first with one hand then the other . She struck it with one of her hands, then with the other, striking it .
 Nyame rewarded him with the stories, which have since become known as Anansi stories . Nyame's stories are now known to be known as 'Anansi'
 If the word ‘temple’ brings to mind crushing tourist crowds and monks peddling lotus candles and prayer services, you’re probably hitting the wrong temples . The word “temples’s” in China is a word of honor .
 There are some Buddhist temples that, far from tourist attractions, house monks who live lives of seclusion and meditation . Monks remain connected to the outer world only through rituals and lectures .
 Guanghua Temple is nestled on Yaer Hutong in a quiet quarter of Houhai in China . The temple is located in the middle of a mountain road in the eastern part of China .
 The monks and other devotees will celebrate Ghost Day tomorrow, August 3 1 . Ghost Day fells on July 15 of the Chinese lunar calendar .
 Chinese folk legends have it that on this day the gates of hell open, and ghosts are let loose to roam the earth . Ghost Day originated from Chinese folklore .
 People pray for the wandering souls, and set lotus candles onto rivers in blessing of them . In addition to these commemorations, the day is also loaded with superstitious taboos .
 It’s also said that after opening a door you should wait a moment before going through so that the ghosts (if they happen to be standing there) can go through first .
 Outside of a wooden window we can hear the low hum of a ritual that has been going on for three days . Outside of the wooden window, the hum of the ritual is heard in the background . The ritual is believed to have taken place in the past three days.
 The main prayer hall has been canting a Confession Sutra for over an hour now . The yards outside the halls have been taken up by rows of yellow praying cushions, on which people kneel and kowtow to a monk’s cal . Master Zhengyu
 In the days of the Gautama Buddha, he used to travel along the Ganges River with his disciples to spread his teachings . He used to use the river as a way to spread teachings .
 In order to protect his disciples from pests and beasts, he told them to stay indoors for three months . Starting on April 1 5 of every year, they were told to stay inside for the winter .
 His disciples stayed in, spending those months reading and meditating . The disciples spent the time in their homes .
 Buddhists held ceremonies to mark the three months’ meditation . Buddhists confessed to Buddha their trespasses of the past three months, as well as their progress .
 The July 15 ritual lasts for three days . Two ceremonies are held each day, one at nine and one at three each day .
 If you want to participate in Buddhist rituals on one of these days, Fayuan Temple near Niu Jie is another option Master Zhengyu recommends .
 Spring Festival's Tofu Day makes Steamed Buns Army Day . Becky's mom examining the wrecked automobile unexplained events took place . Becky and Becky were driving in the car when Becky's car crashed .
 Dusty and her then boyfriend Daniel decided to drive to Columbia, Missouri, on April 29, 2000 . Dusty was the first woman to die in a car crash in the car crash .
 Daniel had wanted to leave around noon, but Dusty and Becky were hosting a wedding shower that wouldn’t be over until around three in the afternoon . Daniel had planned to leave at around noon . The wedding shower was over at around 3 p.m.
 Becky realized that she hadn't told Dusty that she loved her often enough . Shortly after he picked her up, a strange feeling came over Becky that she didn't love Dusty enough .
 It was so strong that she almost asked Daniel to turn around and take her back home . She almost asked him to turn back .
 About an hour later, Daniel and Dusty were rear-ended by a drunk driver traveling at a high rate of speed . The couple was hit by the drunk driver in a high-speed accident .
 Daniel’s Mitsubishi was demolished, but they both survived with only minor cuts and scrapes . Daniel's car was destroyed, but the two survived with minor cuts .
 The Rays can't help but feel that someone was looking out for Dusty that day, and they believe that person was Marsalee . The Rays believe someone was there to look after Dusty, and that person may have been looking out .
 On the day I finished working on this article, I debated whether or not to write about the car accident . The accident happened on the same day that I finished writing this article .
 I knew that Becky and Dusty were convinced that Marsalee looks out for them, but I had no evidence that she had . until a few days later . Daniel's car was found in the back seat .
 That Sunday I called Becky to get some answers to questions I had about the accident . Becky answered some of the questions she asked about her car crash .
 I inquired if anything out of the ordinary had happened to her or Dusty since we had spoken last . Before we got talking about that, I asked if there had been anything unusual in the past month .
 Becky told me that when she went in the kitchen Saturday morning, the doors on the small cabinets over the stove were wide open . Becky said she found the doors open in the small kitchen cabinets .
 Becky couldn’t understand what Marsalee’s purpose was in opening cabinets as they only contained paper plates . Becky couldn't understand what she was doing with the cabinets .
 The paper plates were last used at the wedding shower — the same wedding shower that took place the day of the accident . The wedding shower was last used on paper plates .
 We could only conclude that Marsalee opened those cabinet doors as a way of letting us know that she had a hand in saving Dusty from death or serious injury .
 It is also our belief that Marsalee knew of my reluctance to include the car accident in the story, and that this was her way of encouraging me to use it . It's also believed she knew of her reluctance to use the story .
 I don’t think this was the only thing Marsalee did for my benefit. Lingering Presence was the other thing she did for me .
 I first met Becky and Dusty at the Bishop House just prior to the holidays . Dusty and Becky have been married for more than 20 years .
 Though they were living in Independence, they had been invited to a wedding in their old town . They had asked the owner of the house if they could show it to me .
 He gave them permission on the condition that I not reveal its exact location . The location of the location is not known .
 I took video and still photos of the premises and tape-recorded an interview with them . During the hour or so that I spent with them at the house, I took still photos and took video .
 There was an intermittent, rhythmic clicking sound on portions of the audio tape . Though nothing unusual was present in any of the pictures or video .
 Dusty had to leave on an errand shortly after I arrived, and was not there when I started the interview . Dusty was not at the beginning of the interview, but he was there when he was not .
 Interestingly, the clicking doesn’t start until about the time she returns . The clicking starts when she returns to her job .
 None of us could recall hearing anything in the house that may have been responsible for the sound . The sound of the sound was heard in the middle of the night .
 I checked a tape that I had made prior to their interview and there was nothing unusual on it. I checked it out and there were no unusual things on it, he said . I checked out a tape of the interview prior to the interview .
 There are no unusual sounds on any subsequent tapes I have made on that machine . No unusual sounds are heard on any other recordings made on the machine .
 "I will make this tape available to any serious investigator who would like to analyze it," he says . The tape is available to anyone who wants to examine it .
 There is no way to know exactly why Marsalee has chosen to look after Dusty, or how long she will continue to do so . Dusty is now being cared for by her mother-in-law .
 Dusty can go through life with the added confidence of knowing that she has a very special guardian angel looking out for her .
 He teaches a class on “ The Haunted Heartland “ in Kansas City . He is currently working on a book entitled Evidence For Life After Death .
 The Bishop House is known locally as the Bishop House in a small central Missouri town . The stone house is located on a sleepy residential street .
 Marsalee Bishop, 19, died in 1939 at the age of 19, a victim of scarlet fever . Bishop died there in 1939, aged 19, at the time of her death .
 In May 1997, Becky Ray, a recent divorcee, moved into the Bishop House with her teenage daughter Dusty to start life anew . Becky Ray is a divorcee who moved in with her daughter to start a new life .
 Dusty had a series of unusual dreams on nights when she had fallen asleep on the couch in the living room . Dusty moved in after moving in to the apartment .
 A short time after this, Becky was working in the kitchen one day when she saw something out of the comer of her eye . Becky was able to get back to the kitchen when she was working again .
 She turned just in time to see the image of a “young woman, late teens, early twenties, with short dark hair” walk past the doorway in the direction of Dusty’s room . Dusty turned to see a ‘young woman’ with short
 Dusty had just seen Dusty asleep, she was curious as to why she was up . But having just seen her asleep, Dusty was curious about why she had been up .
 Becky walked to the doorway, but when she looked down the hallway, she didn’t see anyone . Becky walked out of the room and said, “I’m not going to see anyone.” Becky looked at the door to the hallway .
 She thought it was odd that she hadn’t heard Dusty’s bedroom door open or close . Dusty thought she hadn't heard her daughter's bedroom door close .
 She then went to her own room where she found Dusty still asleep on the bed, right where she had last seen her . Dusty then went back to her room and found her still asleep there .
 Becky kept the sighting to herself, but it wouldn’t be long before Dusty, too, encountered Marsalee . Dusty kept it to herself . Becky says Dusty and Dusty have a history of encounters .
 She turned and saw the translucent figure of a petite young woman with short brown hair looking at her . She turned her back and saw a translucent figure with brown hair . She was shocked to see the figure of the young woman .
 Dusty was in the kitchen again, when she got a feeling that someone was watching her . About a month later, Dusty got a feel for someone to watch her . Dusty says she felt someone watching her in her kitchen again .
 She then turned and saw the apparition of Marsalee standing in the doorway . The apparition was bent forward with her hands on her hips, as though she was about to scold a young child .
 Dusty was so taken by the sight that she can’t recall what happened next . Dusty says she can't recall what she did next .
 The experience upset her so much that she slept with her mom that night that night . The experience was so upsetting she had to sleep with her mother .
 The next person to see Marsalee was Becky’s oldest daughter, Deanna, who was 20 at the time . Deanna was Becky's oldest daughter .
 Dusty Ray, Becky Ray, and their dog Molly were watching her folding a comforter when she felt someone was Dusty . She was folding comforters when, like Dusty, she felt that someone was watching her .
 She turned around, and there next to the linen press by the kitchen doorway was the translucent figure of Marsalee . She turned . around, she turned around and there was a translucent figure .
 She was standing with her face cradled in her hands and her elbows resting on top of the linen press . Her face was cradling her hands as she sat in the press .
 She then watched Marsalee step back from the linen press and run into the kitchen . She then stepped back to the kitchen and said goodbye to the family .
 Deanna walked over to the doorway and peered in the kitchen, but she was gone . Deanna peered into the kitchen to see if she had been there .
 Deanna was aware that both Becky and Dusty believed they had seen a ghost in the house . Deanna said she was aware of her own sighting before .
 She had been somewhat skeptical of their claims, but now, she was a believer . She now believes in their claims .
 Deanna was surprised that she hadn’t been scared during the sighting . Upon reflection, Deanna said she was surprised by the experience .
 The next person to experience Marsalee was a friend of Dusty’s, Steve Whitlock . Whitlock was Dusty's friend, Steve, who was the first person to visit the site .
 When he approached the kitchen, he saw a young woman with short brown hair sitting on a bench to the right of the kitchen doorway . The young woman was sitting on the bench to a right of a kitchen doorway, he said .
 Thinking that it might be Dusty — but not knowing how that could be — he glanced back toward Dusty’s room . He glanced back to Dusty's room, thinking it might have been Dusty . Dusty was in the room at the time .
 She saw Marsalee walk from the direction of the kitchen toward her room, she says . She says she was sitting on the couch when she saw her daughter . The two were separated from each other for more than a year .
 Dusty was on her way into the kitchen when she saw Marsalee come around the corner as though she had come from the guest room . Another time Dusty saw her daughter come round the corner of the room looking like she had been in the guest bedroom .
 All sightings took place close to the kitchen doorway, in an area approximately four feet by ten feet . Marsalee's presence was made known in other parts of the house .
 Dusty was sitting in the living room with an acquaintance named John when she saw Marsalee again . Dusty says she saw her first sighting of the dog in the early morning .
 John got up, put the videotape case on the fireplace mantle, and went into the kitchen . John then put it on the mantle and put it in the fireplace . He then went to the kitchen, putting it in there .
 "When he came back, he started pacing back and forth in front of the mantle waiting for the tape to finish rewinding," he said .
 Suddenly, the tape case flew violently off the mantle, landing several feet away on the floor . The tape case case landed on the mantle .
 The Rays believe this was Marsalee’s way of expressing disapproval of the young man . Rays believe it was a gesture of respect for the young person .
 Dusty came home from school to find four candles sitting in the middle of her bedroom floor . About three or four weeks after Dusty’s final sighting, she came home to find them .
 These candles had been on her dresser when she had left the house that morning that morning . These candles were found on the dresser of her daughter's house .
 Dusty thinks Marsalee didn't want her in that bedroom, so she moved into the guest room . The incident made Dusty think she didn’t want her to be in that room . Dusty moved into that guest room after the incident .
 Becky came home from work and noticed that she couldn't find her sandals, which she usually wore every day . Becky's sandals were found in the family home after she lost them .
 Her first thought was that maybe her dog Molly had made off with them, but she didn't think that was likely as Molly would usually just play with one shoe, not both . She didn’t think that would likely happen .
 She and Dusty tore the house apart looking for the missing sandals . Dusty's sandals have been missing since they were found .
 Becky and her girlfriend Diane were sitting on the bed in her room when they both observed one of the bedroom windows opening on its own . Another time Becky and Diane witnessed a window opening on their bedside .
 Becky says it took quite a bit of strength to unlatch the windows . Becky says she took a lot of strength from Becky to get the door open .
 Becky and Diane heard the window being unlatched, and they both definitely saw it opening on its own . The window was unlatched and the window opened itself .
 There were other times when Becky and Dusty heard footsteps in the living room when nobody was in there . Dusty and Becky heard noises from inside the house when no one was in it .
 The couple's dog Molly is a big fan of the family's dog . Molly's behavior caught the couple's attention . The family is raising money to raise money for charity .
 Molly would be sitting on the couch with Becky and suddenly whip her head around and stare in the direction of the kitchen doorway . Sometimes Molly would suddenly whip herself around and look at the kitchen .
 She noticed Molly’s head going back and forth as though she was watching someone pace in front of the kitchen doorway . She was sitting on the couch in the living room one time when she noticed Molly's head moving .
 Dusty was home alone, and was so frightened that she had to call a friend to help calm her nerves . Dusty called her friend to calm up her nerves, and she was so scared she called her to calm her down .
 After seeing the apparition and experiencing some of the odd events that were taking place in the house, Becky was able to discern what she described as a “sense of loneliness” that she felt was connected to whoever was “residing” in her house .
 This feeling made her want to know who this individual was, and so she started researching the history of the house . She wanted to find out who this person was .
 She found some information in a local museum, and later tracked down a descendent of the original owners . She was able to track down a descendant of the owners .
 Given a description of the young woman the Rays had seen, he replied that it matched the description of his cousin Marsalee, who died from scarlet fever at the age of 19 .
 Marsalee was staying with her grandparents 5 residence when she became ill . Her parents were out of town on business when she was ill . The “Bishop House’s” was her grandparents’ residence .
 He also confirmed that Dusty’s bedroom — the one with the moving candles — had been Marsalee's room during her stay there .
 With opportunities limited in a small town, she decided to move to Kansas City, Kansas City . She soon found employment and rented an apartment in Independence .
 She and Dusty hadn't lived in their new place long when they again started experiencing things they couldn’t explain . Dusty says she's been experiencing strange things since moving to a new home .
 A touch lamp dims on its own, as though it was touched by an invisible hand . Not Left Behind is a documentary about the lives of people left behind in the world .
 Dusty was in her bedroom with her four-year-old cousin Skyla, who threw a key chain behind her bed . The key chain was thrown behind Dusty's bed .
 A couple weeks later, Dusty found the key chain lying in plain view in the middle of her floor . The key chain was found by Dusty's daughter . Dusty: "It's not a mystery. It's a mystery"
 There were other things that took place in Dusty's room that defied an easy explanation . Dusty’s room was filled with people who had no idea what happened .
 On her bookcase was displayed an angel book with the cover facing forward . The cover of the angel book was facing forward when it was found .
 On several occasions, she went in her room and noticed that the book had been turned so that the spine was facing front . She noticed that she had turned the spine of the book so that it was facing the front .
 Dusty noticed that another book of hers had been taken off the shelf and displayed so that one could read the cover . The opposite of what had happened to the angel book, Dusty said .
 A coffee cabinet is a small piece of furniture called a coffee cabinet . Against the wall she has a small part of the furniture that she uses to store her possessions .
 Two doors are held closed by a piece of wood that revolves on a screw . The two doors were held closed with the help of a wood that turned a screw screw .
 When the piece of wood is in the horizontal position, the doors are latched shut . The doors are placed in a horizontal position to keep the doors shut .
 Two days in a row Becky came home from work and found the left door unlatched . Becky found the door to her home unlatched after finding it unlatched twice a day .
 Someone had to have unlatched the doors, and then, holding the right door closed, moved the piece of wood back down to a horizontal position . Someone also had to unlatch the doors to get the door to close .
 There was no way that Molly could have been responsible for this — this was a deliberate act that showed an intelligence at work. This was no one's fault for Molly's actions, she said .
 The Rays believe that Marsalee has taken an interest in them — particularly Dusty . The Rays say they are looking forward to the possibility of finding out about Dusty's mother .
 It was Dusty who had the most sightings of Marsalee, wrote Cynthia H Banister Raymond in a short memoir about the home .
 David Glasgow Farragut was born July 5, 1801, at Campbell's Station, a few miles southwest of Knoxville, Tenn., . Civil War hero haunts Quarters 'A' at Navy yard . Farraggut is one of the most famous Civil War heroes
 He was the second of five children of Jorge Farragut, who was born on the Spanish island of Menorca . He was born in North Carolina, the second child of his parents .
 Quarters ""A"", the shipyard commander's residence, is now his home . But one famous visitor from long ago refuses to leave, instead making Quarters "A" a home .
 Farragut's mother died when he was 7, and his bereaved father Jorge sent him to live with the family of a close friend of a fellow naval officer, David Porter . David Porter is a former member of the Royal Navy .
 David G Farragut, a hero of the Civil War, died in Quarters ""A"" in 1870, and now haunts the residence . The residence was built in 1864 .
 He has made his presence known to some, but not all, of the building's inhabitants throughout the years .
 Porter adopted the young boy and two years later helped him receive an appointment as a midshipman in the Navy . Porter adopted him as a boy and helped him get a job in the U.S. Navy . The boy was adopted by Porter and later adopted by the family .
 Farragut held various positions before his distinctive service in the Civil War . During the course of his career, he served as a general in the Army .
 Farragut served as naval aide to the American minister to Tunis . He later established Mare Island Navy Yard in California .
 During that time, he learned to speak French, Italian, Spanish and Arabic . He also studied the social, economic and political history of the Mediterranean area .
 Farragut had been appointed commander of the West Coast Blockading Squadron . He was ordered to open the Mississippi to Union vessels and to attack New Orleans . Farraggut died in the battle .
 He opened the Battle of New Orleans, April 18, 1862, and 10 days later, Confederate forces surrendered . 10 days after the battle, Confederate troops surrendered .
 Farragut proved then-President Abraham Lincoln's trust in his selection by this victory, and Lincoln was the first to acknowledge it by submitting his name to the Congress for promotion . Lincoln was then the first person to submit his name .
 On July 26, 1866, Farragut made history by becoming the first Hispanic four-star admiral . He became the first four star admiral of the Spanish Navy .
 The shipyard was established on June 12, 1800, and until the War of 1812, it was under the supervision of a ""naval agent,"" a civilian position . Quarters ""A” history: Quarters of the shipyard .
 The first military commandant was Commodore Isaac Hull, who assumed command of the shipyard on March 31, 1813 .
 Hull lived in a house in Portsmouth as there was a lack of ""suitable"" housing on the shipyard for a commandant . Hull lived there in Portsmouth .
 Commandant had to come to work by boat to get to work at the shipyard . Commandant was forced to live off shipyard because of the nature of his position .
 Commodore Hull requested permission from the secretary of the Navy to build a ""modest home" suitable for the commandant of a naval facility .
 On Feb., 1814, Hull received permission and funding to build a home, provided that the cost did not exceed $5,000 . Hull was allowed to build his own home in 1814 . Hull received funding for the home, but the cost was not allowed to be $5
 John Locke, a joiner from Portsmouth, designed and built the commandant's quarters . John Locke was employed to design and build the new commandant quarters .
 The house and surrounding grounds of Quarters ""A"" have survived nearly 1 90 years with only a few minor alterations and the addition of modern conveniences . The house has survived nearly one 90 years .
 It is surrounded by the shipyard industrial and administrative complex, yet gives the impression of being remote and peaceful . The shipyard complex is located in a remote location, but is also surrounded by a large industrial complex .
 Quarters ""A"" has been the site of receptions for many important individuals throughout the years . Quarters "A" has been a site for receptions for several important individuals .
 Visitors were often hosted at dinner parties and teas by the commandant . The commandant was often hosted by visitors to dinner parties .
 In 1908, a bronze plaque was placed on the front of Quarters ""A"" in a panel to the left of the main entrance to honor the memory of Adm. John MacArthur . The memorial is located in Quarters "A" in the Quarters A" to honor
 The plaque was later relocated to the iron fence in front of Quarters ""A,"" where it remains today . It is a memorial to one of America's great naval heroes .
 Raymond: “As we all know, each family has their own familiar things to make them feel comfortable and at home" Raymond wrote . Raymond: "Each family has its own familiar . things to keep them at home." Raymond wrote.
 It had been some time since the quarters had been redecorated and we had the good fortune of new paint and, at my request, the Indian shutters were made to operate .
 William D McDonough spent five years in Quarters ""A,"" from 1974-79, as shipyard commander, with his wife, Nancy, and their seven daughters . William D. Mcdonough spent the entire time in the shipyard . He was ship yard commander from
 McDonough said he never experienced Farragufs ghost at his home in Kittery .
 On a floor plan in a book on Quarters ""A,"" he pointed out the section where others have experienced hauntings . But he also pointed out a section of Quarters "A" that has been haunted .
 It's in the rear of the house in the exstewards' day room, which is accessed by a rear stairway . It's accessed by an ex-steward's day room .
 Raymond, who now lives in York's Sentry Hill retirement community, recently asked her daughter about the hauntings she and her siblings encountered . Raymond's daughter says she's been haunted by the ghosts of her childhood .
 Shortly before the Banister family left in June 1 958, they had a last dinner at the Quarters . Shortly before they left, the family had a final dinner .
 Another maritime tragedy took place on the same date 32 years earlier . However there was another maritime tragedy that took place 32 years ago .
 Weis carried $32,000 in a leather briefcase in order to purchase a Port Stanley fishery for his employers at the Fish Company . Weis was the first person to carry $32k in a briefcase to buy a fishery .
 Lake Erie has a long history of being one of the most trecherous of the Great Lake, with powerful storms seemingly to appear out of nowhere . Storms have been known to strike in the past as powerful storms appear to be random .
 The blistery winter storm suddenly blew out of the west and slammed mightily onto the Great Lakes with winds that were estimated to have reached at least 90 miles per hour . Winds that were expected to have hit at least 100 miles a hour .
 The storm’s might was so furious that it actually dropped the temperature 45 degrees within a 24 hour time period . The storm's might actually made the temperature drop 45 degrees .
 Marquette & Bessemer No 2 tried in vain to criss cross the Lake in a doomed attempt to ride out the storm . The Marquette and BesseMer No 2 were battered to and fro by storm .
 The frigid assault of the storm and the unfortunate streak of bad luck sealed the fate of the ship and its 31 passangers and crew . The ship's 31 passengers and crew were killed by the storm .
 The ship, its cargo and crew went to their watery grave in the deep depths of Lake Erie on the evening of December 9th 1909 . The ship was the last ship to leave the port .
 Last reported accounts tell that they saw the ship struggle in the waves off Port Stanley, and it seemed to have turned west . The ship is believed to have been trying to reach Port Stanley .
 Legend has it that about the time the ship went down the Captain’s wife who was on the Southern Coast of lake Erie at Conneaut that night heard the mournful pathetic blow of the ship's whistle as it sank beneath the waves . The Captain's wife is believed to
 A lone lifeboat was found washed ashore 15 miles from the city of Erie, Pennysl vania . It contained the frozen bodies of 9 of the crew and one ice encrusted set of clothing from a 10th in a position that that seemed to show whoever had donned
 The belt was tied, the shirt was in the pants, the pants and a coat covered it all in perfect order . It was the perfect order for a man to tie his belt, tie his shirt and put his pants in order .
 The shoes still had their socks stuck to the inside as if the wearer had filled them when they froze . To complete the hallow facade of frozen terror, the shoes were still had socks stuck inside .
 The Marquette & Bessemer No 2 has never been found . Despite the great length of the ship and the shallow depths where it was supposed to have sank, it has never sunk . The wreck of this ship has never found .
 At more than a hundred meters the ship was as long as a Football field . The ship was a 100 meters long and could be more than 100 meters wide .
 Few large ships have eluded hunters of sunken ships along the Great Lakes . Few such large ships eluded devout hunters . Few have managed to find sunken Great Lakes ships .
 Site of the ship’s resting place has never been found . Despite thousands of dollars by private entrepreneurs and scientists, the ship's resting place hasn't been discovered .
 Many times since its untimely demise sailors have heard the ghostly moaning whistle of the ship when they are the only vessel for miles around . The ghostly whistle has been heard many times since the ship's demise .
 Untitled that seems to struggle in a mournful wail that bemoans its fate. An old fashioned whistle . Untitled . An oldfashioned whistle .
 Captains wife reportedly heard as the ship gave into the struggle with the pounding waves . Much as the same sound she had reportedly heard that night . The Captains' wife was reportedly heard in the struggle to survive .
 A phantom ship appears on the horizon for a few minutes before fading away into a haze . It also seems to be a common occurrence across the beachfront of Lake Erie in both Pennsylvania and Ohio .
 ore carriers are still a common site on most of Lake Erie . It is not unusual to see them slowly crawl across the horizon as you relax on a Lake Erie beach .
 No ore carrier today has that old configuration and belches dark smoke from two forward smoke stacks . But no ore carrier of today has the old configuration .
 The Marquette & Bessemer No 2 just blink out of existence . The usual beachgoer may be too caught up to take much notice, but I have heard on more than one occasion .
 It has been sighted about eight miles northeast of Conneaut, in about 10 fathoms of water . It was sighted in the area in about ten fathom of water, about 10 feet deep .
 To this day divers of the Great Lakes covet to find the mystery wreck of the Marquette & Bessemer No 2 . Divers have never found the wreck .
 The Northumberland Strait is the body of water that separates Prince Edward island from Nova Scotia and New Brunswick in eastern Canada . A ghost ship can be seen sailing ablaze in the Northumberlands Strait .
 The Ghost Ship of Northumberland Strait is described as a beautiful schooner that has three masts with pure white sails . All of the masts become completely engulfed in flames as onlookers watch .
 Sightings have occurred throughout the seasons, but seem to be more prevalent from September to November . Sightings are more prevalent in the months of September and November .
 folklore has it that this brilliant ghost ship is a forewarning of a storm . These visions are also apparent before a northeast wind, and folklore says they are also visible before a north wind .
 There never seems to be a predetermined place for where the ship will appear . The ship will never be a fixed place for when it will appear.
 Sightings tend to happen when least expected . often, upon seeing the burning ship, mariners have attempted to rescue the crew aboard . Sightings have happened at least once, often in the middle of the night .
 One of the more famous rescue attempts took place in Charlottetown Harbour about 1900 . The rescue attempt was made in the same harbour in 1900 .
 A group of sailors boarded a small rowboat and raced toward the flaming ship to rescue the troubled crew . The crew was rescued by a group of small boats .
 During their struggle to reach the distressed vessel, the phantom ship completely vanished . The phantom ship disappeared during the struggle to save the ship .
 A thorough search was immediately carried out by divers, but no shipwreck was found . No shipwreck has been found since the discovery of the shipwreck .
 The first sighting of the Ghost Ship of Northumberland Strait dates back to 1786 . The Ghost Ship was first spotted in 1786 and is believed to have been a ghost ship .
 Eyewitness accounts of the ship come from either side of the strait and are often very similar in description . The ship was the first ship to sail from the North Pole in the early 1900s .
 "I had heard so much about the phantom ship that I decided this must be it," says the author . "I'm not sure what happened to the ship," she says .
 My sister, who was visiting friends nearby, said she saw the same thing on the same night . My sister said she also saw it .
 As it came nearer it seemed to lose speed, and as it came opposite our house it stopped still . It stopped still as it approached opposite the house .
 I said to Fred, “Perhaps they are coming ashore.” we got up on the banks to watch. We got up to watch . We got out on banks to see .
 I can’t remember just how long it was, but I think about ten minutes after she stopped I seen smoke rising very slow all over the deck . I can't remember how long the fire lasted, but think about 10 minutes after it stopped .
 'Men seemed to come up from below and they were running around the deck every way. Then it was only a few minutes I seen men that seemed to . seem to come down from below' 'Then it was just a few . minutes'
 The men climbed up the masts of the vessel, when they was about halfway up the . masts, the sails caught . Then, as they were running around, I seen a low flame all over the deck, when the flames started, he said . The sails caught.
 "I could not see the men anymore, as the flames hid my view, we watched it until the flames died and everything crumbled to the deck," she said .
 There was nothing left but the hull on the water, and gradually it seemed to sink lower and finally disappeared, as if it gradually filled with water and sunk .
 The most recent sighting of this ghost ship was by 17-year-old Mathieu Giguere, who noticed the “bright white and gold ship” in midJanuary 2008 . The most recently sighting of the ghost ship occurred in mid January 2008 .
 Sightings vary in description, but there are sometimes reports of other bizarre occurrences during the sightings of the ghost ship . Sightings of ghost ship have been reported in the past .
 Mysterious sea guns can be heard, and sometimes an apparent ball of fire can be seen in the sky . Mysterious sea gun sounds can also be heard in the air .
 As with any reported supernatural event, there is often attempts to hypothesize why an incident occurs . In the case of the fire ship, there are many scientific theories of the incident .
 A New Brunswick scientist by the name of william Francis Ganong tried in 1905 to explain why this phenomenon happens . Ganong was the first person to try to explain the phenomenon .
 Ganong stated, “It has its flat side to the water and at times glows without much change of form, but at other times it rises into slender, moving columns, giving rise to an appearance capable of interpretation as the flaming rigging of a ship .
 A separate explanation suggests that this ship is merely a bank of fog reflecting moonlight . The ship is believed to be a cloud of fog .
 A video of a crescent moon setting below the horizon can be found on YouTube . Another justification for the apparent fire ship is seen in a video of the night sky .
 The ghost ship has become more widely known in recent years, in part due to a popular song by Lennie Gallant, a Canadian singer-songwriter from Rustico .
 If you don’t find Ascension Your wife will get a pension — USAF airmen’s song . The Ghosfs of by Preston Dennett .
 Located in the middle of the South Atlantic Ocean, this tiny, unassuming speck of land has a long, remarkable history filled with bizarre and paranormal events . The tiny island is known for its strange history and paranormal activity .
 Despite its isolated location, the island ended up playing a vital role in many major world events . The island was a vital part of the history of the world .
 Ascension Island’s fascinating story begins with its discovery on Ascension Day in 1501 by Portuguese mariner Juan de Nova Costella . The island was discovered by Costella on the same day as Ascension Day .
 Immediately, the island earned a reputation as a hellish place .
 It covers approximately 35 square miles and contains no water and virtually no life . The area has no water or life . It has no life and is completely uninhabited .
 The infamous pirate, explorer, and writer William Dampier was shipwrecked on the island in 1701 . The infamous explorer, explorer and writer died in the island .
 Devil's Cauldron, Dark Slope, Devil’s Ashpit are geological features of the world's largest island . Even the names of its geological features reveal what a dismal place it is .
 Ironically, this little island out in the middle of nowhere turned out to be vitally important to a large number of people and nations across the world . Ironically, however, the island out of nowhere is still important to many people .
 The strategic location of the island was first put to use in 1 8 1 5 by the English . The English garrisoned it with marines to guard Napoleon after he had been exiled to the island of St. Louis .
 Freed slaves were taken to Ascension Island where they were rehabilitated and liberated . They were taken there to be rehabilitated, liberated .
 Charles Darwin heard about the island and its unusual wildlife in 1836 . Darwin, then a 27-year-old unknown naturalist, was then 27 when he heard of the island . Darwin was a naturalist and naturalist from New Zealand .
 He landed on Ascension and by observing the varieties of the rat population, verified his theory of evolution through natural selection .
 In 1899, the first transatlantic submarine cable was installed at Ascension, making it the crossroad of international communication . Ascension is a crossroads of communication between the world .
 Ascension was a very important place, and other nations clamored to use it . By now, it was clear that Ascension was an important place in the world .
 During World War II, the U.S. government built a landing strip on the island . The landing strip was built during the war .
 Ascension again played a crucial role in world events . Three hundred enlisted men and a squadron of planes were stationed at the base .
 In 1960, NASA established a satellite tracking station at 1,750 feet above sea level, the highest point on Ascension . Ascension was established as one of the most important places on earth .
 Jan Svilt, age 39, a bookkeeper turned sailor, with a wife and two children, was forcibly marooned on the island on May 5, 1725, after being accused of homosexual acts while at sea . Svilt was accused of having homosexual acts .
 Svilt’s incredible story would have remained unknown if not for a gruesome discovery . Svilt's incredible story was discovered by Svilt and his family after he was found dead in his home .
 In 1747, Captain Mawson of the ship Compton was forced to land on Ascension Island for repairs . The ship Compton landed on the island in 1747 .
 Svilt's diary told the sad story of his doomed struggle for survival on the dry, deserted island . Svilt’s body was found next to his diary, which told the story of the doomed struggle .
 Svilt experienced a series of supernatural events prior to his death . Svilt’s story is so riveting, however, is the amazing series of events he experienced before he was killed .
 Before Svilt was marooned, more than 20 sailors on his ship had been killed through accident and disease, and more than half were ill . More than half of Svilt's sailors died through accident or disease, according to the ship's captain .
 Svilt was actually going to be thrown overboard before the decision was made to maroon him on Ascension . Svilt will be marooned on the island of Ascension .
 He was abandoned on the island with only a small amount of food, supplies, and water . The man was abandoned with only small amounts of food and supplies .
 After a few weeks of exploration, he found the island to be completely desolate, with almost no life except for hordes of rats . The island is almost completely desolate and has been completely desolate .
 In a matter of weeks, his food ran out and he began to suffer badly from starvation and exposure . He was left with severe health problems .
 Svilt was a religious man, and he turned to prayer and reading his Bible to help him through his ordeal . Svilt is a devout Christian, and his Bible helped him cope with the ordeal .
 When his shoes and clothes disintegrated, he moved his campsite into a more sheltered cave further inland . When his clothes and clothing disintegrated he had to move his camp site further inland. When he was unable to find his clothes he moved into a sheltered cave .
 Svilt had his first supernatural encounter on June 16, a month and a half into his ordeal . Svilt moved into his cave in June 16 .
 It was to be the first of a series of encounters that would plague him until his death . It was the first time he had encountered a stranger in his life that would haunt him .
 Svilt was to discover that he wasn’t alone when he was the only living human being on the island . Svilt is to discover he wasn't alone .
 "Bitter cursing and swearing mixed with the most blasphemous and libidinous expressions that I ever heard," says the author . "I'm not sure what I'm going to hear," he says of the group .
 "My hair stood on end with horror and cold sweat trickled down my cheeks," says the author . "I was shocked to find out what happened to me," she says .
 Trembling I lay, fearful to speak, at least some vile fiend more wicked than the rest should make prey of me . "Trembling" she lay on the floor of the room .
 I fear that the Devil has forsook his dark abode and come attended by infernal spirits to keep his hell on Ascension . I was certain there was not a human creature on the island except myself, never having observed the footsteps of a man since my being there .
 The devils continued their onslaught until three o’clock in the morning, when he finally fell asleep .
 He awoke early the next morning to hear a disembodied voice again screaming vile curses at him . The next day he awoke to hear the same voice again scream vile curses .
 From this point on, Svilt was tormented by the ghosts of Ascension Island . Svilt died in his home of the island's inhabitants .
 Svilt made it very clear in his diary that he believed the ghosts were real and not hallucinations . Svilt believed that he was haunted by ghosts and that they were real .
 Svilt had another dramatic encounter with a friendly spirit the next day . Svilt and Svilt encountered each other in the early hours of June 17 . The next day, June 17, Svilt was reunited with Svilt .
 This one, however, involved the benevolent spirit of his friend and shipmate, Piek Houtman, who had actually died early on the ill-fated voyage . Piek was actually a shipmate of the doomed ship .
 Before he came to this miserable island I was a true Calvinist, he used to laugh at the Romans when they talked to me of apparitions . But to his great sorrow now find smarting reasons to the contrary, he now embraces their opinions .
 This day, as I stood under the bright sun near the peak of a volcano, an apparition in the likeness of Piek Houtman appeared on a black plateau .
 I did not know whether to run or to cower, but remained rooted to the spot as he talked to me of the sins of my past life, of which I have a sincere and heartfelt repentance . I didn't know whether I would run or not run, but stayed rooted to
 Houtman’s nearness shocked me so that I became unsure whether I was already dead, or whether the vision was sent me to prepare me for death . “I became unsure if I had already died, or if I was preparing for death,” Hout
 Svilt returned to his cave after the apparition disappeared . Svilt was able to find Svilt and his friends .
 The very next day, Svilt dragged a log up to his cave, he had another encounter . Svilt had a second encounter with the log he dragged up to Svilt's cave . The log was found in the cave .
 His name I am unwilling to again mention, not knowing what may be the consequence may be . His name is not being mentioned .
 On the next night, the evil spirits returned, and this time they physically attacked Svilt . Svilt proved once and for all that they were no hallucination. Svilt was attacked by the spirits again, proving that they weren't hallucinations .
 It seemed that the evil spirits and the spirit of Svilt s friend, Piek, were in a battle to save Svilt's soul . Instead, it seemed that it was an attempt to save Svilts soul .
 Piek Houtman spoke several times to me, nor I could think he meant me any harm, for when he was living we were as friendly as brothers . When he was alive, Piek said he was friendly as a brother, but he was not hurt .
 Svilt had still seen no ships nearly two months into his ordeal . Svilt has been missing for two months and has not seen any ships .
 He was exploring the island when he came across the old gravesite of another castaway . The gravesite was found by the castaway on the island of the island .
 This threw him into a great depression, and he hiked forlornly back to his cave . The caveman's depression was the result of the discovery of the cave .
 Svilt heard a "dreadful noise, resembling many coppersmiths at work" Svilt writes in his diary, “I was no sooner come to my cavern but I heard a dreadful noise .
 Svilt wondered if his long sufferings were causing him to lose his mind . Svilt shook his head and wondered if he was losing his mind. Svilt shakes his head as he wonders if he is losing his love of the night .
 Svilt was so severely dehydrated, he was sure he would die from thirst . Svilt says he was so dehydrated that he thought he was going to die of thirst .
 Providence had so far managed to provide enough food and water to survive . But he was growing steadily weaker . Providence has so far provided enough food to keep him alive .
 Svilt looked around, but there was no one; only a cloud of birds rose up, obscuring the sun for a moment . Svilt was looking for someone, but no one was there at all .
 He was convinced that evil spirits were taunting him and trying to capture his soul . But he was convinced he was being taunted by evil spirits . He was eventually convinced he had to live with the demons .
 Svilt lay in his cave on September 6, his fourth month upon the island, near death . The Beatific Vision on Svilt: Svilt is the son of Svilt, who is now in a coma .
 'It was then that he had his final and most profound supernatural encounter,' he said . 'I had a most profound encounter with the supernatural,' he wrote .
 "After a while I dreamed that as I walked through the wilderness full of hardships I came upon a place where there was a cave, and I laid me down in that place to rest," he said .
 I dreamed that I was sadder than at any time in all my life; all my sin and vileness appeared before me great and consuming. I dreamed . "I dreamed that he was sadner than ever," he said .
 I saw that I was fit for nothing but hell and for the everlasting damnation of my soul — and I despaired. "I saw that . I saw ... I saw . that I . saw that he was fit . for nothing . but hell," he said. "and
 As I entered the golden gates I was given a raiment of golden cloth, light as spiders’ down . And I did, and as I entered I was . given a . raimen of . golden cloth . And as he entered the . golden gates he was given
 We were met by sweet angels with harps and flutes who sang the praises of God . "Sweet angels" sang the praise of God. "We were met with sweet angels," she said .
 In the radiant streets walked men and women wearing crowns on their heads and carrying palm fronds in their hands . Men and women wore crowns and palm fransans in the streets .
 Svilt continued his struggle to survive . Svilt's story was published in the book, "Svilt" Svilt: "This experience gave Svilt some renewed hope, and he continued to survive"
 He had survived for more than four months, leaving only a diary and a few belongings . He had only survived for four months and left only his diary .
 It would take more than 20 years for them to be discovered by a passing ship . It would be the first time they have been found in 20 years .
 One Hessian tale, reported by Jacob Grimm in his monumental work on Teutonic mythology, relates how a farmer named Kurt didn’t seem to know that he was dead and continued to work around the farm .
 Kurt stopped working when a stranger hired him to throw sheaves . Kurt stopped throwing sheaves after he was hired by a stranger . Kurt was hired to throw the sheaves, and he stopped working .
 This rather minor tale serves to point out the difference between German ghost stories and those of other nations . It is not the first ghost story to be published in Germany .
 Most German supernatural tales seem to possess an element of violence and deeper horror than those from happier climes . Most of these stories seem to have a darker twist .
 In the tenth century, there was a Bishop of Mainz named Hatto . The Rats in the Walls were the work of a German bishop .
 The bishop refused to share his grain, which he had laid up for himself . Being rather a greedy fellow, the bishop refused .
 In order to get rid of the pests, Hatto invited everyone to his great barn . Hatto compared the pests to rats .
 Hatto was satisfied with ridding the country of these freeloaders, Hatto slept peacefully that night .
 In the morning, he found that rats had eaten his portrait out of its frame . The portrait had been eaten out of the frame .
 Rats had eaten all the corn in the granaries, says a servant . Then a servant reported that rats had eaten  corn in granaries . The corn was eaten by rats .
 Then came a messenger to tell that an army of rats was advancing on the castle . The castle was attacked by rats, and the castle was destroyed .
 Bishop Hatto looked out the window and saw the landscape dark with rats, advancing remorselessly toward his palace . Hatto .
 Rats swam the river, climbed the tower, chewed their way in, and ate the bishop . The bishop was eaten by the rats in the tower .
 To this day, tourists are shown the Mausethurm where the deadly assault took place . Visitors to the site of the attack are shown where the attack occurred .
 The figures are not so large that they cannot be made out at ground level . Even so, the figures were not so big that they can be seen at ground levels .
 Seen at altitude, these images assume a startling perspective to appear in their proper proportions . They may be appreciated only from the sky, however, as seen at altitude .
 In this feature, at least, they may be compared with Ohio’s Great Serpent Mound . They may also be compared to Ohio's Great Serpent .
 The modern park trail appears to follow closely the original ritual path used by the ancient worshipers as their processions wound from one effigy to the next . The ancient ritual path appears to be the same as the path used to the ancient processions .
 Beyond it stands a small, conical pyramid, followed by a tear-drop figure pointing at another cone of the same size . Beyond the pyramid, a tear drop figure points at a pyramid . Beyond it, a pyramid, pyramid and tear drop also appear in the image .
 Despite having endured unknown centuries of erosional forces, the earthworks were probably not much larger at the time of their creation than they now appear .
 Visitors come upon it gradually, imperceptibly, from the point of its tail . Visitors come into contact with it from the tail of the tail .
 As it does so, its power seems to gather momentum, increasing along the arched back to the massive head . As it moves, it seems to grow momentum .
 A few paces more brings the forepart of the most massive of the biggest of the Panthers into view . The Panthers are the first of the NFL's most famous teams in the world .
 The trail leads directly between their heads, narrowing the site’s inherent energy into a narrow gap . The trail is narrow enough to fit between the two heads .
 The sole surviving Indian tradition of Lizard Mounds involves this very spot . It is important to know that the sole surviving tradition involves this exact spot .
 The Menomonee remember that each winter solstice, their ancestors gathered behind these twin zoomorphs to observe sunset before the longest night of the year . The solstice marks the world’s transition from darkness back into the light .
 At that critical moment, as the sun shed its last ray precisely between the two animal heads, the great shift between darkness and light — death and life — took place . The great shift in darkness and life took place between the animals' heads .
 James Scherz arrived at Lizard Mounds on the late afternoon of 1989’s winter solstice . Scherz says the Menomonee tradition had any basis in fact .
 As he observed dusk on the longest night of the year, Professor Scherz saw the sun go down precisely between the two earthsculpted birds’ heads, just as described by the Menomonee Indians .
 Just beyond the zoomorphs lies the effigy mound after which the set has been named . The set has also been named after the set after which it is named .
 The lizard represents the underlying motive force of all living creatures, the vital spirit of action . The lizard is a symbol of the spirit of life in the world .
 In native South American symbolism, the lizard is associated with precipitation, from dew to deluge, but that meaning does not seem to apply at Wisconsin location .
 Trail leads away from the eponymous earthwork to smaller effigies, including a pair of linear embankments pointing to the only oval mound .
 Although not so spectacular as the others, it is the key to this sacred center, representing as it does the Cosmic Egg, the Womb of Life, earlier encountered at Ohio’s Great Serpent Mound .
 The oval earthwork identifies the site as a sacred center . More than any other figure, it identifies the . site as the sacred center of the ancient world .
 The trail passes between the heads and the outstretched wings of two enormous bird effigies . The trail runs along the wings of the enormous bird .
 Perhaps they were meant to signify the uplifting experience of walking among the colossal figures of Lizard Mounds . Perhaps it was meant to symbolise the experience of visiting Lizard Mound .
 Although America’s surviving effigy mounds are few in number, they still resonate with the telluric power of the Earth from which they were so beautifully fashioned .
 T Frank Joseph is a regular Fate contributor and editor of Ancient American . He is also a regular contributor to Fate and Ancient American.
 In 1774, Lepizig restaurant owner turned necromancer called up that which he could not put down . The Mouse Tower on the Rhine is one of the world's most famous landmarks .
 Johann George Schroepfer opened a fashionable cafe that quickly gained a reputation as a gathering place for those interested in the occult and the arts of magic .
 The establishment soon became an occult lodge devoted to necromancy . The lodge was devoted to speaking with the spirits of the dead . It soon became a lodge dedicated to talking to the spirits .
 Schroepfer attracted the attention of Prince Charles of Saxony, son of the Elector . Even though many people felt that many people thought that Schroopfer’s evocations were faked, he attracted the . attention of the Prince Charles .
 Charles summoned Schroepfer to Dresden for the purpose of evoking the spirit of the Chevalier George Saxe, the deceased uncle of the prince . The prince's uncle died in the early 1900s .
 Schroepfer summoned into the palace at Dresden, before 19 members of the German nobility, a huge black globe that continually put forth clouds of vapor . The globe was brought before 19 people, including the German aristocracy .
 Schroepfer appeared to panic as badly as everyone else, but he finally managed to exorcise the apparition . The incident happened in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 The horrified guests began to come to themselves, arising from the positions where they cowered on the floor, and began to heap abuse on Schroepfer . They began to rise from their cowering positions and heap abuse . The guests then came to themselves and began shouting abuse .
 Schroepfer was finally able to banish the thing for good . More panic ensued, but at last the thing was able to be removed .
 Schroepfer’s supporters treated him to a banquet, and the necromancer tippled freely . Back home, he was treated to a meal by the necromics .
 He invited his friends to go with him to the forest of Rosendaal outside the city gates for a further demonstration of his powers . He invited friends to join him in the forest .
 Schroepfer excused himself to make preparations for the trip . The pair were taken to a lake in the middle of the night .
 There once stood an old convent church on the mountain at the site of the martyrdom of Cassius . Cassius and his companions, Florentius and Melusius, died for the Christian faith .
 On his way back home, he stopped at an ancient Roman tower to spend the night rent-free . The tower is a Roman tower in Rome .
 Standing before him were three Roman soldiers, whom he recognized as the martyrs of Kreuzberg . The Roman soldiers were standing before him as he recognized them .
 He followed them into another building, where they showed him a table stacked with gold . The gold was found on a table in a building in the city .
 They filled his pockets with gold coins and offered him a glass of wine . They also filled him up with gold and gave him a wine .
 The peasant awoke on the floor of the Roman tower . Startling himself by all the noise he was making by shouting, “Vivat,” the peasant awoke .
 The peasant naturally assumed that he’d had a wonderful dream — until he felt in his pockets . The peasant was surprised to find his pockets full of money .
 A watchman stopped him and invited him to share a draught at a nearby inn . The peasant told him his story and invited the watchman to share it with him .
 The story spread, and the road from the square to the tower was renamed Vivat Lane . The road was named Vivat after Vivat's story .
 These are not the only tales of the supernatural that Germany has to offer . But these are very far indeed from being the only . Other Tales of Germany has a long history of its own .
 Elie Wiesel’s mention of reports of blood of Jewish victims geysering from the ground for months after a Nazi massacre in the Ukraine . In more modern times, there is the matter of how Adolf Hitler seemed to be protected by some strange spirit .
 Deutschland has abounded in accounts of the unexplained happenings surrounding the Scharnhorst . From the Wild Hunt and the Flying Dutchman to WW II appearances by the Red Baron of WW I .
 Children's laughter has been heard by those working on the third floor, and even outside the bathroom down in the restaurant when there have been no children around .
 One of the many incidents he shared was when he hung some window treatments in the ballroom .
 On the third morning when Hayden went to hang it again, a board came across the room and hit him . Hayden was hit by the board three times before he hung it up again .
 Hayden figured Mr Rawls didn't like what he had chosen . No one else was in the room, and Hayden figured he had been chosen . Hayden decided to take the lead .
 In October 2002, local reporter Carole Brand spent an evening in the Rawls' home .
 In search of spirits at historic Rawls Hotel, tales of strange events began to emerge of strange, unexplained events that happened at the hotel .
 When told by a few Enterprise residents with seemingly frightened faces, the tales were scoffed at by others and left to disappear among the gossip of older men and women .
 From time to time, that tales were retold with whispering voices in corners of corners of a beauty salon or in a quiet out-of-the-way table at the local diner .
 Some of the stories were without any kid of explanation; others were left up to the imagination . Some of these stories were left unexplained .
 These ghostly tales, however, have been passed on from one generation to another . They have passed on to one generation .
 As a reporter, I found these tales interesting and thought some were beyond belief . Some of these tales are beyond belief, but some are beyond that .
 As a reporter, I felt an obligation to research and explore the possibilities of what may lie beyond caught up in the shadows of the night . As a result of this, I decided to take a look at the possibility of what might lie beyond .
 Research says that orbs, usually floating light circles, can be seen by detailed special light cameras, but even orbs have shown up better in Polaroid's . Polaroid images show orbs in Polaroids .
 Smells and temperatures can be measured by delicate instruments . Humans who come in contact with the ""spirit world"" often smell odors and feel the air temperatures drop .
 The instruments can back up any questions skeptics may have, experts say . A lot of questions continue to go unanswered, but a lot of them still remain unanswered .
 "With a check of my instruments and camera, I go forward in search of ghosts," says the author .
 "I had no interest in really searching for them for fear they might find me," she says . "I'm not going to look for them. I'm not looking for them," she writes .
 It was with little prior knowledge of ghosts hunting that I went into the Rawls late one evening . The Rawls were haunted by ghosts in the 1960s .
 I didn't expect what I experienced there; neither did I expect to hear such ghostly tales coming from within those walls by former employees . "Ghostly tales" come from within the walls of the building .
 Some have spoken only once about their experiences and say they will never speak of them again . Some have only spoken of their experiences only once . Others have spoken of them only once and never again .
 I rechecked my Polaroid camera to make sure everything was working right and checked my ""ghost meter,"" a temperature gauge I brought with me, just in case .
 Visitors that come to the Rawls Hotel say they feel strange spirits in the building . The hotel was constructed in 1903 and was built in 1903 . Visitors to the hotel say they see strange spirits .
 Hotel was a two-story structure with a straight rectangle with a hall down the middle . First, the hotel was a . two-level structure .
 The Rawls, a magnificent work of Spanish-style architecture, has a grand ballroom, restaurant area, a bed and breakfast, and a wine cellar/basement . The hotel is located in New York City .
 In the cellar, waitresses have reported seeing Captain Japheth Rawls, the original owner of the Enterprise . Captain Rawls came to the Enterprise area in 1898 .
 He and his family were among the first passengers of the first train that ran to Enterprise . He was among the family members of the original Enterprise passengers .
 Rawls decided to build the hotel where he and his wife frequently stayed and dined . Rawls built the hotel in 1903 . The hotel is where Rawls and his family stayed .
 Enterprise acquired a railroad depot directly across from the Rawls . Enterprise acquired the depot in this same year . It was in this year that Enterprise acquired another railroad depot .
 Rawls Hotel is a newly built hotel in New York City . Rawls was the first hotel in the city to be built in the 1930s .
 Children's voices have been heard in the basement of the Rawls' basement . This was the first place I felt we should explore, and as an investigative reporter I wanted to explore that place .
 Three children were dressed in early 1920s clothes in the wine cellar, a hotel worker said . The children were in the cellar, she said .
 It was much colder in the basement than outside, especially in one dark corner . The basement is much colder outside than outside .
 Suddenly, I felt the presence of an older gentleman, complete with graying hair, a thick mustache and wearing a pair of light-colored handyman overalls . Suddenly, the older gentleman appeared to be wearing overalls and a thick, graying mustache .
 "I couldn't really see him physically, but my mind somehow showed me he was there, even down to his black shoes," she says . "I was able to see him in my mind, but his shoes were there," she adds .
 Somehow their presence didn't frighten us to the point of knocking each other over to head upstairs . Somehow, we didn't get so scared that we knocked each other up stairs .
 It was a calm feeling, a feeling of welcome and happiness, at least for the children . The children were greeted by a 'calm feeling' at the start of the visit to the site .
 We eased up the stairs quietly as if leaving them to play, guarded by the older gentleman .
 One employee said he saw the deceased Capt. Capt. John Lister . Lister: "It was much later in an interview that I found out one employee said ... that he saw him"
 The same gentleman said he had also seen, late one night, the faint shadow of a young boy walking up stairs .
 Workers say there's a mischievous ghost who dwells in the cellar of the Rawls .
 The grand ballroom of the Rawls serves as a meeting, dining and conference area today . When the ballroom was built in the '20s, it was the highlight of the evening to see elegant ladies and couples dance by music played on a grand piano .
 Rawls employee said she heard the sound of a piano playing in the grand ballroom . Employee said she was working late one night and heard the piano playing .
 She knew no one was in the building at the time and certainly there was no piano in the ballroom . No one was there at all when the incident occurred .
 As she cautiously approached the entrance doors listening to the sound, the music suddenly stopped . The music stopped suddenly .
 Footsteps and the sound of feet running on the third floor have been reported to the local police by restaurant employees . Footsteps were reported to police by employees of the local restaurant .
 Another respected gentleman said he had heard strange sounds at night on the second and third floors of the building . Another respected man said he heard strange noises at night .
 One visitor to the Rawls said she felt the spirits as soon as she entered the hotel . The Rawls is a bed and breakfast at the hotel in New York .
 The woman said she wasn't frightened or scared because she had grown up in an old house that had spirits and she was used to dealing with them . She said she grew up in the house with spirits and wasn't scared of them .
 Statistics show that most haunted places in the South are old home places or hotels . The ghosts experienced either the happiest moments or the saddest moments while living .
 As I tried to open the door that led into the ballroom from the kitchen, I felt the door become heavy . I don't know what the ghosts or spirits were feeling in the ball room when we entered, but the door became heavy .
 The group behind me laughed, thinking I was doing it on purpose, but I know I wasn't . "The group behind [the group behind] laughed," she said . "I know I was trying to do this on purpose," she added .
 The door eased way into a small hall area that led into the main ballroom area . Finally, the door eased . way into the small hall . area . The ballroom . area was the largest room in the world .
 The air that had been comfortable now was suffocating . I reached into my camera bag to grab my camera and the temperature gauge . But the air that was comfortable now felt suffocating, he said .
 My heart seemed to be pounding out of my chest and any energy I had seemed to leave me . Any energy seemed to have been left from me, and I felt like I was going to die .
 I reached down in my camera bag again to try to find my Polaroid and the temperature gauge . I reached for the Polaroid again, but it was too late to find the camera .
 "I couldn't shake the heavy feeling I had and worse, I couldn't even describe it," she says of her grief . "It was worse than ever," she adds .
 As I turned, still not saying a word, I saw my fellow employee behind me catching her breath . As she turned, she saw her fellow employee catch her breath. "I don't know what I really want to do," she said .
 I knew it was even though I was sweating, which should have turned my face into blood red, I knew I was going to be in the air at 12:40m. 12:50m.
 In the ballroom, we sat down in chairs to get our composure, comparing notes on just what had happened . We sat down and compared notes on what happened .
 It seemed whatever it was had tried to grab and steal any energy from the crowd . It seemed it was trying to grab any energy we had. It seemed that it had tried and stolen any energy it had .
 "Lots of experiences I knew I could explain, but not one of the creepy kind," she says . "I've had lots of experiences that I know I can explain," she writes .
 I took the gauge for one last time and walked toward the corner of the room . It was the last time I had taken the gauge on my car .
 After several, long minutes had passed, and we were seemingly sane again, I looked at my fellow ""spirit" adventurer . After several minutes, we looked at each other again .
 As we left the Rawls and exited from the rear entrance toward the railroad depot, I glanced up at one of the windows from the grand ballroom . As we exited, I looked up at a window from the Grand Ballroom .
 A figure, faint but recognizable as a younger woman dressed in white, was looking through the window . A younger woman was looking at the window of the window when it opened up .
 "My night of sleep was interrupted over and over again by the unexplainable things I had seen and experienced that night. Needless to say, my night of sleeping was interrupted . I was able to sleep again that night."
 Maybe residents in Enterprise will soon be whispering tales, the ones only few know to be true . Maybe residents will soon whisper tales of their own .
 Hull woman forced to move seven times by ghosts that stole her bras and even used the shower .
 When her underwear started going missing, little did she know it would signal the start of two years of hell . Faye Preston reports when she found her underwear at the end of the year . She says she has been in a relationship with the police for two years .
 Pauline Hickson's life was ruined by the work of forces beyond this world . It was one of many paranormal pranks that would ruin her life .
 The 58-year-old says she was forced to move home seven times in two years . She says she has been followed around by two ghosts who would steal her bras, take her jewellery and even use the shower .
 Pauline felt a presence she could not explain and strange things would happen while she was out of the house . The spooky happenings started two years ago, after she moved into a bungalow in north Hull .
 Pictures started slipping off the walls, the shower room was being used and there were scratches left up and down the doors . Pictures slipped from the walls and there was scratches left on the doors of the room .
 She would come in from a day out and be greeted by the mess left behind by the ghosts . She says they would also rifle through her belongings, send the temperature either soaring or plummeting in her home and even leave a cup and spoon out ready for a hot drink .
 Pauline moved to Cambridge but she was followed and the same spooky pranks started happening again . It was the final straw for Pauline, who packed up her belongings and moved away . She returned to Hull, this time to Orchard Park, with her niece .
 An old doctor's note in her name from when she lived in the bungalow was placed mysteriously on the table . It was placed on the same table as an old doctor note from her old home . The note was found in her home and was left on the kitchen table at the
 Terrified, she moved into a hostel and then into Redbourne Street, off Hessle Road, but there was no escaping the ghostly presence . She moved into the hostel then into a nearby hostel, but was forced to move again .
 "i thought my family were doing it to me. I ended up staying in hotels because I was too scared to go home,"" she said . ""i ended up . staying . up in hotels," she said.
 She sought help from medium Anita Gordon who led her to Hull's well-known gnostbuster Steve Kneeshaw . When things started going awry again, she sought help .
 He put her under hypnosis, which he combined with an exorcism, and the results were instant . He combined hypnosis with a combination of exorcism .
 He reported feeling a ""blast of cold air"" and then saw an old, large man and a 14-year-old boy, fly past him . He said he felt a 'blast of air' and saw an 'old man and boy' fly past .
 Pauline suspects the ghosts are associated with an old dressing table she bought before she moved into the bungalow, in which she found a ruby wedding anniversary card and other personal items .
 Now she feels she has had a spiritual awakening and is looking to move out of Hull . She is now looking to start a ghost-free life .
 The hunter approached the animal with a knife drawn . The hunter did not shoot at the animal, but approached it with his knife .
 The anteater stood on its hind legs and grabbed the man with its forelimbs, causing deep puncture wounds in his thighs and upper arms . The hunter bled to death at the scene, according to the report .
 Giant anteaters are believed to be extinct in Belize, El Salvador, Guatemala, Guatemala and Uruguay . Giant anteater is thought to have been extinct in several countries .
 Giant anteaters eat mainly insects but also enjoy citrus and avocados, says zookeeper Rebecca Lohse . Reid Park Zoo in Tucson, Arizona, keeps giant anteaters in captivity .
 Zookeepers avoid being in the same space as the animals, coaxing them into separate fenced-off areas when they approach their living quarters for cleaning, she said .
 Anteater expert Flavia Miranda said she was concerned that the journal article could cause more woes for the animals . She said she already faces plenty of threats to its livelihood .
 Jack Gibbons, six, from Abbots Leigh, Somerset, was bitten by a gibbon in Phuket, Thailand, where he was on holiday with his family last January .
 Jack's father had been filming the primate swimming in the family’s pool when it jumped out and bittled him . The primate jumped out of the family's pool and attacked the boy .
 14 of the 5 5-gallon drums spilled on the highway . One was carrying produce and the other was carrying glue in 5 5 gallon drums, 14 of which spilled . The incident happened on a busy highway .
 Police in Nigeria are holding a goat handed to them by a vigilante group . The vigilante group said it was a car thief who had used witchcraft to change shape .
 A police spokesman in Kwara State has been quoted as saying that the ""armed robbery suspect"" would remain in custody until investigations were over .
 Police say goat is being held in case its owner claims it . But another police spokesman said the goat was being held by police in case owner claimed it .
 The belief in witchcraft and the power to change shapes in Nigeria is common in Nigeria .
 Police reform activists have condemned the ""arrest" saying it highlights the low education levels of many Nigerian police officers . They say the arrest highlights the lack of education in many officers .
 Nigeria's Vanguard newspaper has a picture of the goat and reports that police paraded it in front of journalists in the Kwara state capital Ilorin on Thursday .
 The next morning journalists turned up demanding to see the goat, he said . The next day journalists demanded the goat be seen .
 Communities often rely on ill-educated and badly prepared vigilante squads to fill gaps where the police will not patrol at night . Innocent Chukwuma of the justice reform group the Cleen Foundation said many Nigerian police officers were poorly educated .
 Political leaders have allowed the police to be filled with incompetent and in some cases criminal officers so they could be easily bought to protect their own criminal activities, he said . He said in the past political leaders had allowed the . police to fill with incompetent officers .
 Police have also been unable to stop vigilante squads from lynching suspects before they could investigate, he said . Police say vigilante squads have lynched suspects before investigating them .
 The animal was spotted running on the train line by the driver, who gave and the carriage touched the animal's head, but was unable to stop the train in time . He was concussed and had to be pulled from underneath the train by fire service .
 Fritzi's owner who lives nearby had noticed her pet was missing, Bild newspaper said . Meanwhile, the owner of the missing pet noticed her dog had been missing .
 The fire service returned the goat to her after she heard the driver's warning whistle . She went to the station, where she was reunited with the goat .
 December 27, 1998 VICTIMS : 19 . This is a wonderful, yet very sad tale of an animal fighting back against the abuse from it's human tormentors .
 For those who never heard about this case I will fill you in a little on this hero of animal kind . For those never heard of this case, here is a little more about the case .
 As we all know millions of Gobindra Singh's relatives have been killed by us bastards. We are proud of the fact that millions of them have been murdered by us .
 'Before this shitty' race of ours added him to it's list of victims, he struck. And before this sucks' race added him, he killed himself .
 Because of this law Gobindra was able to repeatedly get away with his actions, he was never caught . So because of this, he could not be punished for his actions . The law prevents him from being caught up to his crimes .
 Gobindra Singh was living in an area where the land was quickly being overtaken by humans . He was forced to leave the area to live with his family . Singh was the last man to live in the area he lived in .
 Gobindra Singh trampled at least 1 9 people to death over a one and a half year period . Singh was found guilty of trampling at least one of the deaths .
 "They were moving into HIS backyard, killing HIS family, cutting down HIS food," says CNN.com's John Sutter . They were moving in HIS backyard .
 'I'd do more than trample them, and I'm sure most of you would too. And if some cunt w ; as building a house in my backyard, killing my family and eating all my food, well I'd do  trample them,' he says . '
 All of Gobindra's victims were poor villagers and the like he was able to get away w ith ith for the first 1 8 killings . With his last attack he chose someone of a higher standing in the community .
 The government knew about Gobindra's murder spree so they sent a veterinarian out to the Tinsukhia district to check out what was wrong w ith him . You see, the government knew that he was on a murder spree .
 Gobindra rolled over on top of his assailant to stop the vicious assault, and accidentally killed the vet . The only way he could, he rolled over top of the assailant, and then accidentally killed him . Gobindrindra acted in the only way possible, rolling over on
 Twin brothers Bill and Frank Watson believe 57 Irish immigrants met violent deaths there after a cholera epidemic struck in 1832 . Twin brothers believe 57 died in the town after a violent outbreak of Irish immigrants .
 The brothers first heard about Duffy's Cut from their grandfather . He told the ghost story to h/s family every Thanksgiving every Thanksgiving .
 They suspected that the files contained clues to the location of a mass grave . The files were believed to contain clues to a mass body .
 The 'Holy Grail' is a pipe with an Irish flag on it . It was found in 2005 by Bill Watson in a shanty in his home .
 They knew they were close, but Bill said they knew they needed ""hard science"" to get them to the next step . Bill said the team needed "hard science" to make sure they got close to winning .
 The friend knew Bechtel could provide the missing link in the brothers' excavation efforts . The friend of Bechtels says he knew he could help in the search for the remains of the World Trade Center .
 Bechtel's work included earth scans, which can help detect what's underground without digging or drilling . Earth scans can also be used to detect underground objects without digging .
 By shooting electrical current through the slope, Bechtel learned there were ""oddball areas"" or places where the current wouldn't pass through . By shooting current through slope, he learned to find 'oddball' areas .
 After further digging, Bechtel and the Watsons detected ""air bubbles above the coffins,"" he said . After further . digging, he said, "air bubbles" were detected .
 Bechtel helped pinpoint key areas to dig and on March 20, 2009, Bill Watson said the team made a startling discovery .
 Duffy's Cut features the first of many pieces of the puzzle pieces to surface . The story is just the beginning of the many puzzle pieces that have been revealed .
 The pieces led them to suspect that something other than cholera was responsible for the deaths . The pieces of evidence suggested something else was behind the deaths of the victims .
 The teeth, because of their irregularities, could someday be linked through DNA to living descendents of the men unearthed at the dig site .
 Since then, Monge has collected bones from seven skeletons unearthed at Duffy's Cut, including four skulls . Monge: "Duffy's Cut" is one of the most popular archaeological sites in the world .
 Monge says skulls have provided crucial clues to what might have killed the Irishmen at Duffy's Cut . Poring over the bones with green spectacles sitting low on her nose, Monge said she has focused her attention on skulls .
 With just one divot on one skull, she was reluctant to jump to conclusions . She said, "I'm not going to jump into conclusions. I'm not sure what happened."
 Duffy's Cut team hopes to find 50 more bodies still under the surface of the sea floor . They believe they have unearthed seven individual's remains and believe 50 more are still being excavated .
 The brothers said their goal is to preserve the memory of the Irish workers . They said they want the story to be remembered for years to come .
 Frank Watson: "It's the story you hear of workers that were exploited anywhere in the world" Frank Watson says. It's the case of workers exploited anywhere around the world .
 Allow at least one hour and 15 minutes to complete the tour, and plan to arrive between 6:45m. and 7.45m . Plan to arrive at the end of the tour at around 7:45am .
 In the 19th century, people buried their dead in a bizarre practice to prevent them from leaving their graves and walking back to the homestead . The practice still exists today .
 Bellantoni will give a talk at the Friends of Hammonasset meeting at 7m. March 11, old Memorial Town Hall .
 "If they found blood in their heart" they would rearrange the body . Sometimes family members “would conduct an experiment” they would conduct experiments .
 Instead of laying the body out “all nice and anatomical,” they would take the thigh bones and cross them on the corpse’s chest, he says . And, instead of laying out ‘nice and anatomical’ they would disturb the body by taking the thigh
 While old graveyards abound in the state, this is little-known historical trivia . This is little known historical trivia about the state's history .
 At the time, tuberculosis was at epidemic levels and entire families would be stricken . At the same time, entire families were stricken by tuberculosis .
 At that time there was much ignorance about tuberculosis and this was long before medical science had embraced germ theory, he says . This was not before the germ theory was embraced .
 The gravesite Bellantoni will talk about is in Griswold, where in the 1990s, two boys playing on a gravel bank unearthed two human skulls . The skulls were found in the same place in the 90s, but have never been found .
 Bellantoni was called in to investigate and he determined that the gravel pit had once been a Colonial -era cemetery . in this cemetery there was one burial that showed rearrangement “consistent with the vampire folk belief,” according to Bellantani .
 Friends of Hammonasset will hold annual elections and conduct a brief business meeting . The Friends will also conduct annual elections .
 Trackers find grizzly bear 'forest highway' used by grizzly bears to travel across hundreds of miles of forest . Trackers on Canada's Pacific coast say they have found a ""highway" used by bears .
 Tracker William Housty and other members of the Qqs Society in the Heiltsuk First Nation have been studying the bears for more than three years .
 Along the banks of the salmon-rich Koeye River, 65 grizzlies have been identified in the valley . Housty says one in particular amounts to a ""bear highway"" for grizzlies .
 Heiltsuk Coastwatch team is planning to extend their tracking to other river systems on British Columbia's Central Coast . They hope their findings could lead to the development of a wildlife management plan .
 Toussaint L’Ouverture became the leader of the most powerful rebel faction in the French Caribbean colony of SaintDomingue in 1791 . He was a former slave .
 No authentic portrait of him exists, but he was allegedly unattractive . He is said to have been an unattractive man . He was allegedly a member of a gang of criminals .
 He was also literate, clever, and charming, with a charismatic personality . He also had a charming personality, and was literate and clever .
 At first L’Ouverture and his slaves allied themselves with Spanish forces from the neighboring colony of Santo Domingo who hoped to seize Saint-Domingue from France . The French government in Paris formally abolished slavery in its colonies in 1794 .
 This abolition of slavery, a belated effect of the French Revolution, transformed the French government into a radical ally of the rebel slaves . The French government became an ally of rebel slaves in the fight against slavery .
 L’Ouverture abruptly switched sides, accepting a commission as a French general . In response, L'Ouvertsure switched sides and accepted a commission in France .
 He then turned on his former Spanish allies and drove them out of SaintDomingue . He then drove the country out of the island .
 L'Ouverture hoped to unify the war-tom colony, gain greater independence from France, and establish permanent racial equality throughout Saint-Domingue . L’Overture was founded by the French colonialists .
 The defeat of the Spanish forces, and a treaty between Spain and France that ceded Santo Domingo to France, did not end the fighting in Saint-Domingue, because the British allies of Spain attacked .
 French government appointed him lieutenant governor of SaintDomingue . His success pleased the French government, which appointed him to the post .
 L’Ouverture felt no personal animosity towards the invaders, since they were not trying to reintroduce slavery to Saint-Domingue . The French expected the French to keep fighting the English .
 In October of 1798, when he was fifty, L'Ouverture negotiated a secret peace agreement in which the British renounced all claim to the colony’s lands in exchange for the right to trade freely with Saint-Domingue on an equal basis with France
 The treaty outraged the French commissioner in charge of the colony, Gabriel Marie Joseph, Comte d’Hedouville . The treaty was the first to be ratified by the French .
 It displeased Andre Rigaud, the leader of a revolutionary army in the south and west of Saint-Domingue . It also displeased the leader .
 Although Rigaud was theoretically subordinate to L’Ouverture, he had always acted independently . Rigaud became openly defiant when L'Ouvertsure made peace with Britain . He was openly defiant .
 Rigaud was a light-skinned mulatto, the son of a white father and a black mother . L’Ouverture did not trust Rigaud to uphold the ban on slavery, partly because Rigaud had a light skin .
 Unlike L’Ouverture ’s troops, Rigaud's troops consisted largely of ‘free men of color’ who had never been slaves . Rigaud’s soldiers were mostly blackskinned men and former slaves .
 Many of Rigaud’s mulatto soldiers had themselves owned slaves under the former government, and Rigaud seemed to favor a class system in which mulattoes dominated .
 Hedouville encouraged Rigaud to overthrow L’Ouverture in a coup . Rigaud overthrew the French king in 1815 .
 Hedouville then returned to Paris, as the rivalry between L’Ouverture and Rigaud grew so heated that it threatened to explode into civil war . The rivalry between the two men threatened to erupt into a civil war in Paris . Hedouveille returned to France
 L’Ouverture, hoping to unify the colony, spoke with Commissioner Philippe Rose Roume de SaintLaurent . The French official became the titular head of the colony .
 He had Roume arrange a conference— set for February of TPI ] ' ; • , j < j I page eight 1799 in the colonial capital of Portau-Prince .
 The most urgent issue at the congress was the distribution of areas to be controlled by the various generals . The most important issue was how much of the area is controlled by generals .
 Rigaud claimed the right to govern Saint-Domingue’s Southern Peninsula . The northern coastline of the northern coastline included the two cities of Grand Goave and Petit Goave . Rigaud said he wanted to govern the southern peninsula .
 L’Ouverture, however, had assigned control of those cities to an officer of his own, General Laplume . General LaPlume had been given control of the cities to General L'Overture .
 The conference opened in Port-auPrince on February 4, with a public ceremony celebrating the abolition of slavery . Roume made a plea by Roume for unity, an appeal seconded by L'Ouverture .
 Roume, L’Ouverture, Rigaud, Laplume, and a number of lesser generals retreated to a council chamber to discuss the pressing issues . Roume and Rigaud were among the generals who retreated to the council chamber .
 The distribution of territory was the first issue to be raised . Laplume immediately claimed the two cities L’Ouverture had assigned to him .
 The discussion grew heated, with Rigaud and Laplume verbally attacking each other . Rigaud: "I'm sorry for what I've done, but I'm not sorry for it"
 The two men went so far as to draw their swords, though neither made an actual physical assault . Neither made a physical assault, but the men drew their swords .
 He had written an angry letter to Roume, accusing the commissioner of showing undue favoritism to L’Ouverture . L'Overture had accused Roume of favoring her, but Roume has denied it .
 During April, L’Ouverture negotiated a treaty of friendship with the U.S. under President John Adams . During April 17th century, the French city negotiated a friendship treaty with the United States . The treaty was signed by President Adams .
 When the treaty was signed on April 27, it opened several cities in Saint-Domingue to trade with the U.S. When it was signed, several cities were opened to allow trade .
 It also required the United States to supply L’Ouverture with weapons and other goods . It also prohibited French privateers from attacking American ships and required the U.S. to supply weapons .
 L’Ouverture ensured that all the cities opened to American trade were in areas controlled by generals who were loyal to him . The cities of the Southern Peninsula under Rigaud ’s control remained under blockade .
 Trade deal between the EU and the U.S. was signed in May . It was followed in May by the formal signing of a trade agreement with the UK .
 L’Ouverture kept certain elements of the treaties secret in order not to alienate France . France was then at war with Britain and in a ‘quasi-war” with the United States .
 Rigaud accused L’Ouverture of including secret clauses that were meant to enrich himself . Rigaud was not given access to the treaty, which he says included secret clauses .
 He accused L’Ouverture of plotting with the English and the Americans to restore slavery . He further accused him of plotting to restore the English to slavery .
 Rigaud published a letter that had been sent to him by Hedouville, the former French commissioner who had been replaced by Roume . The letter was published on June 15, 2012 . Rigaud said he had published the letter .
 The letter gave Rigaud the authority to depose L’Ouverture if he deemed it necessary . Rigaud wrote that he would depose the minister if necessary .
 Rigaud also sent another letter to Roume, repudiating Roume's authority . Rigaud repudiated Roume and L'Ouverture 'soume 'sarried' Rigaud .
 Hundreds of men deserted L'Ouverture 's army to join Rigaud . Hundreds of soldiers deserted L’Ouvertsure ‘s army’ in response to Hedouville letter .
 The population of Portau-Prince— a centrally located city of thirty thousand where L’Ouverture maintained his headquarters— was restless, with a large number of citizens feeling sympathetic to Rigaud . Rigaud was a French revolutionary .
 The majority of people in Port-au-Prince were mulattoes, and they tended to support Rigaud . Rigaud was elected president of the Haitian government in 2005 .
 L'Ouverture at once proclaimed that he would address the public in the city’s parish church . L’Overture said he would speak to the public at the church .
 Despite his passionate speech, L’Ouverture soon learned that the commander of the city’s garrison was loyal to Rigaud . Despite his passion for the city, L'Overture learned that he was not in danger .
 L'Ouverture waited for his armies to gather at Port-au-Prince, and to be properly supplied, before leading them south in a forced march . L’Ouvertsure waited until his armies gathered in Port-aux-Prince to be supplied .
 Rigaud supporters had risen in the northwest of the colony, capturing one city and attacking another . But word came as he prepared to set out, word came that Rigaud ‘s supporters’ had risen .
 L'Ouverture was faced with a potential second front opening on the north . L’Overture faced with the potential opening of a second front . The French capital is located in Paris .
 He decided to try to solve this problem by leading an attack in the north in person in person . He led the attack in Northern Ireland in a bid to raise awareness of the problem .
 L’Ouverture knew that, in traveling relatively unguarded across the country, he faced tremendous personal risk from agents of Rigaud . Rigaud agents of the U.S. were responsible for the deaths of L'Overture .
 He delegated control of his armies to General Jean-Jacques Dessalines, and he commanded Dessaline to lead the attack in the south . L’Ouverture then immediately set out for the north on horseback .
 Due to his quick action, L’Ouverture was able to suppress the rebellion .
 He then decided to return at once to the south to join the fight there . The fight was the first of its kind in South America . He then returned to South Africa to join in the fight .
 Rouine supported L’Ouverture at once, and asked Rigaud to accept it . Rigaud said he would accept the ruling . Rouine said Rigaud should accept the decision .
 Rigaud rose to his feet and stalked out of the council chamber . Rigaud then stalked the chamber and left the chamber .
 One hour later L’Ouverture received a report that Rigaud had left Port-au-Prince . Rigaud was reported to have left the island island .
 "That sanguinary and barbarous subaltern does not merit to be taken into the confidence of his chief," he said . "He is not a sanguine and barbarian subaltern," he added .
 Reports reached L’Ouverture that Rigaud had sent men against Grand Goave and Petit Goave . Yes, there are secret clauses; on June 17, when reports reached . L'Overture: Rigaud sent .
 Rigaud apparently was preparing to advance further northwest toward Port-au-Prince . Rigaud captured both cities in a swift strike .
 Word of the action seemed to galvanize some people in Port-au-Prince against Rigaud . Rigaud is accused of sexual assault in Haiti .
 Stevens: White minority supported L'Ouverture because Rigaud was generally believed to favor mulattoes over whites . Stevens: Even though the countryside still held isolated bands of Rigaud’s supporters, L’Overture had impressed them with “his humane
 The party had reached a crossroads in a mountain range near the northern town of Port-de-Paix when shots rang out . The party was at a cross-roads in the mountain range when the shooting occurred .
 L'Ouverture ’s doctor was killed, and the plume of feathers, or panache, on L’Oeuverture’s hat was knocked off . L‘Overture 's doctor died, the plumes of feathers on
 L’Ouverture continued his journey in a carriage for a time, and then again again returned to horseback .
 Nearing Port-au-Prince on another mountain road, the party was ambushed again . The party had been ambushed on a mountain road in the mountains .
 The coach driver was killed, but L’Ouverture, riding behind the carriage, was uninjured . The coach was killed in the accident, but the carriage was unharmed .
 L’Ouverture learned that his men had recaptured Grand Goave and Petit Goave . Arriving in Port-au-Prince, he learned of his men's recapture .
 As word of the failed assassination attempts spread, L’Ouverture ’s survival inspired the people of Saint-Domingue .
 L’Ouverture ‘s men pushed through the south of the colony, and by midNovember they had reached Jacmel . L'Oeuverture 's men’s men . pushed through south of colony, reaching Jacmel.
 It was built on the coast and protected on land by a half-circle of mountains built up with fortresses and other defenses . The city was built in the 1950s and is now a UNESCO World Heritage Foundation .
 L'Ouverture had Dessalines launch a full-scale attack, on January 6, 1800, but his men were turned back . L’Ouvertsure had L'Euvertures launched a full scale attack, but the attack was unsuccessful .
 He decided to try to besiege the city, hoping to starve its defenders into submission . The siege was the first time the city had been besiege .
 It seemed clear that whoever controlled Toussaint UOuverture negotiates a secret treaty with British General Thomas Maitland in 1 799 page nine Jacmel would control the south .
 L’Ouverture’s men successfully blockaded the land routes into the city . However, he did not have enough ships to entirely control the sea access to its port . L'Overture's men successfully blocked the land .
 Rigaud was able to get supplies to his men inside Jacmel, albeit with difficulty . Rigaud managed to get some supplies to Jacmel .
 For several months the defenders, in an increasingly desperate state of hunger, held out against L’Ouverture’s attack . The defenders held out for several months, in a state of desperation .
 L’Ouverture decided to take a slightly different tack, and bombard the city from the sea . The French city was bombed by the sea in a bid to get the city to be destroyed .
 He ordered six warships to the area, but the ships were impounded by British warships based in nearby British-held Jamaica . He ordered them to his surprise and anger, but they were not found .
 L’Ouverture learned from diplomatic messengers that the British had discovered a French plot to foment a slave uprising in Jamaica . The British discovered the plot and discovered it was a plot to instill an uprising .
 They feared that if L’Ouverture took control of the entire colony of SaintDomingue, he would direct slave revolts throughout the Caribbean . They now feared that . if L'Ouvertsure . took control, they said .
 Although L’Ouverture hated slavery, his focus was then entirely on Saint-Domingue . He had no plans for actions beyond the colony .
 By the end of January, L’Ouverture was able to convince the British of this, but by that time they had already condemned and sold off the captured ships .
 The British provided L’Ouverture with a cash settlement but gave him no replacement ships . The British did not replace the ships but provided him with cash .
 L’Ouverture’s armies progressed steadily through the south towards Rigaud ’s headquarters at the coastal city of Cayes . Rigaud 's headquarters’ was at the center of the battle .
 L’Ouverture found that Rigaud was attempting to slow the progress of his men by burning farms to deprive them of supplies . At the same time, Rigaud found that he was trying to slow down the progress . Rigaud’s men found that L�
 Many farmers and plantation heads were alienated by Rigaud’s destruction of their homes . L’Ouverture, supplied by American ships, was not materially affected by this scorchedearth tactic .
 L’Ouverture's numbers swelled. As a result, many of them came over to L'Overture, and his numbers have swelled .
 On May 20, 1800, L’Ouverture’s forces cornered Rigaud and his men near the town of Acul . Rigaud died in the Battle of the Plains of France .
 T swear lit uau mi im; uuiitnl 1 1 ml vnu mIiuJI. into attempts to rebuild the colony’s infrastructure and economy .
 In 1801 he assembled a gathering of representatives from municipalities across Saint-Domingue to establish a new constitution for the colony . The constitution was established in 1801 .
 The new constitution and treaty made by L’Ouverture with the U.S. were ultimately unacceptable to Napoleon Bonaparte . The treaty with the United States was ultimately unacceptable .
 He came to view L’Ouverture’s activities as too great an assertion of power at the expense of France .
 He sent an army of twenty-two thousand soldiers and twenty thousand sailors to SaintDomingue to depose L’Ouverture . He sent a army of 22,000 soldiers and 20,000 sailors .
 L’Ouverture, after drafting new men to resist the French, had somewhere between twenty-five thousand and thirty thousand troops, as well as perhaps ten thousand irregular militiamen . The French had between 25,000 and 30,000 troops in total .
 French forces arrived early in February of 1802 in Saint-Domingue . In the first wave of their assault, they took control of many of the large cities in the country . The French forces took control in the early 1802 .
 Some of L’Ouverture’s officers surrendered in the face of what appeared to be overwhelming force . Some of the officers surrendered .
 In the days that followed, though, the French were met with a general uprising . The French were greeted by an uprising against the French .
 It was widely believed that the French would restore slavery, which was true . But it was true. It was also true that slavery was still a problem .
 In France, L’Ouverture was taken to the Fort de Joux, a high mountain fortress near the Swiss border . In France he was taken into a fortress in the French mountains .
 French troops, afflicted by malaria and yellow fever, were unable to crush the widespread resistance . L’Ouverture’s former general, JeanJacques Dessalines, led the resistance . The French troops were afflicted by disease and fever .
 Saint-Domingue became the new nation of Haiti, so called after the indigenous name for the island . Haiti is now known as Haiti . The island is now Haiti .
 L’Ouverture decided to approach his other allies, the Americans . Therefore, in February of 1800, 1800, he approached them .
 L’Ouverture knew that the U.S. still maintained a small fleet of warships in the vicinity of SaintDomingue . L'Overture .
 L’Ouverture asked Consul General Edward Stevens for the help of the American navy . L'Oeuverture has been in contact with the U.S. Consul general Edward Stevens .
 Stevens initially refused to assist L’Ouverture . Stevens was sympathetic, but he initially refused help .
 If the U.S. government was seen to openly involve itself in an internal French conflict, the diplomatic repercussions could be severe . Relations between America and France were already strained .
 Stevens asked the commanding officer of the American naval forces in the area, Commodore Silas Talbot of the Constitution, to help L’Ouverture with the moving of supplies or of troops . Instead of committing American forces to possible combat, Stevens asked Commodore Talbot to help
 Commodore Talbot was evidently less concerned with diplomatic niceties than Stevens . Stevens was the last Commodore to leave the post in the UK .
 We cruised off the port for a considerable time, to intercept supplies for Rigaud . Rigaud was the first ship to arrive at Rigaud's port .
 We engaged three of Rigaud ’s forts warmly for 30 or 40 minutes, in which time we obliged the enemy to evacuate the town and -O J — ! — !«. la cascmiai lO the proper order of things ». That had the desired
 Rigaud's men were broken, fell back, reorganized and counter-attacked, and were beaten back again . Rigaud’s men fell back and fought back again, falling back, and counterattacked again .
 General Dessalines led another attack on their camp that effectively scattered the army . As they tried to rest after this second defeat, General DESSalines leads another attack .
 At this point, representatives from France arrived in Saint-Domingue, bearing official letters confirming L Ouverture as commander-inchief of the colony . The colony became a French colony .
 L Ouverture announced amnesty for any Rigaud supporters who came over to his side . They urged the government to give Rigaud a chance to surrender, and L’Ouverture immediately announced an amnesty .
 After three days, however, he realized that he had no choice but to surrender . "I was forced to surrender," he says .
 Napoleon had been given secret orders by Napoleon to reinstate slavery in France . He threw himself in to slavery after Napoleon ordered it to be reinstated .
 A peace treaty had been signed between Britain and France, and the new Jefferson administration in the United States was less friendly to his rule of Saint-Domingue .
 In late April, L Ouverture, accompanied by several hundred members of his honor guard, signed an agreement in the city of Le Cap . He would keep his rank but retire to oversee the management of one of his properties .
 L’ Ouverture ‘s surrender’s surrender, many of his generals continued to fight . Despite L‘Ouverture 's surrender . Many of the generals of the French Revolution continued to battle .
 They waged a guerilla campaign against the French soldiers, who, as the summer wore on, began to fall prey to tropical disease . The French soldiers died of tropical disease in the summer .
 The French believed that the rebels were still being directed or encouraged by L’Ouverture . The rebels were believed to be still being encouraged by the French government .
 Hill and Wang, 1965. ‘ort-de-Paix . ‘Afeo DOMINGO Port-au-Prince '<-<£3 sLr^ 'O 'Caves / \^ ca , { w / / Jacmel Petit Grand
 Happy 100th birthday to the electric traffic light Matt Schmitz, Cars.com .
 Many believe it is the 100th anniversary of the world's first electric traffic signal . EOT August 5, 2014 marks what is believed to be a 100th birthday of electric traffic signals .
 Based on a design by James Hoge, the ""Municipal Traffic Control System" comprised four pairs of red and green lights that served as stop-and-go indicators, each mounted on a corner post and operated by a switch inside a control booth . Hoge received a patent
 This invention brought to an end a growing problem in the early days of automobiles, when pedestrians, bicycles, horses and streetcars all converged on the same roadways, the History Channel says .
 The honor of being the site of the world's first traffic light, of course, isn't without dispute . It's not without dispute, but the honor of the site is still disputed .
 Two years ago, Salt Lake City unveiled a replica of the device invented by Lester Wire in 1912 . The Utah Department of Transportation unveiled a commemorative replica of it .
 Harriet Haskell, principal for 40 years of Monticello Female Seminary, founded in 1836 . Haskell was principal of the seminary for more than 40 years . Haskell is principal for the Seminary .
 Haskell's spirit was practically unheard from until 1971, when the Monticello campus was transferred to the community college district . Haskell’s spirit was virtually unheard from . until 1971 .
 A tree known to be Haskell's favorite toppled on the day he signed the contract . Professor Lars Hoffman collects lore about Haskell, who collects lore .
 Haskell’s chapel was where she held services for her girls and where her body lay in state following her 1907 death . Haskell's death was the first LCCC library to open .
 Librarians reported hearing themselves called by their proper name, but looking up, saw no one nearby . Sometimes, no one in the library . Sometimes the library was empty, sometimes the library wasn't .
 From a corner magazine nook, a librarian saw a woman in an old-fashioned high-necked black dress standing at the main desk at the library . From the corner of a magazine nock, the librarian said she saw the woman in a dress .
 A series of mid-’80s Halloween ghost watches included a campus radio station broadcaster’s late-night encounter while airing periodic reports from the dark library . Sculpture of Harriet Haskell, on display in The Evergreens, located on the campus of Lewis and Clark
 Kneeling before his transmitter, he felt hands settle on his shoulders as if someone were leaning over him to look at him . He felt the hands settle over his shoulders .
 Several of Hoffman’s ghost-hunting students spent the night in one room of a newer campus building . Hoffman: "Ghost hunting" students spent night in a newer building .
 A psychic visiting the campus said Haskell’s benign spirit was watching over the campus . Haskell's benign spirit is watching over Haskell, a psychic visiting campus said .
 KARL SHUKER on scientific intransigence in the face of a mass of evidence . KARl Shuker on the importance of scientific evidence .
 The megapodes are renowned for eschewing the tried and trusted method in favour of much more remarkable and ingenious versions . Most birds sit on them, thereby harnessing their own body heat to make their eggs .
 Some, for example, erect huge mounds composed of dead plant material, inside which they deposit their eggs, and allow the heat generated internally by the rotting vegetation to incubate them . Others erect mounds made of dead plants and allow their eggs to be incubated inside .
 Today, the megapodes are notable avian celebrities, with their extraordinary modes of incubation faithfully documented in ornithological publications worldwide . Today, therefore, they are notable birds of the night .
 For over three centuries, all reports of this most famous facet of megapode lifestyle were vigorously discounted by scientists as fanciful travellers’ tales with no basis in reality . Yet these same publications invariably neglect to mention that for over three hundred centuries, this was discounted .
 The history behind the formal scientific verification of these birds’ idiosyncratic incubation is a classic, compelling, yet nowadays all-but-forgotten example of a long-running zoological controversy .
 The chickensized bird laid eggs as large as a duck’s in the Philippines . Instead of hatching them itself, it chose to bury them in the sand, leaving them to be hatched by the sun's heat .
 Pigafetta’s egg-burying bird was dismissed in no uncertain terms by those selfsame authorities as arrant poppycock . In an age when mermaids, unicorns and other wholly imaginary creatures were still widely accepted by naturalists as factual fauna .
 Nieremberg did not record the creature's provenance, but that omission was remedied in 1651 via the publication of Francisco Hernandez’s Historia Avium Novae Hispaniae . The curious creature was found in the 16th century .
 Hernandez corrected Nieremberg’s ‘daie’ to daic, and his ‘tapun’to tapum, as well as revealing that this bird inhabited the Philippines . Hernandez corrected the 'daie' to 'daic' and 'tapun
 During 1673, the Dominican missionary Navarrete returned to Megapodes were discounted as travellers’ tales with no reality Europe after spending a considerable time in the Philippines . The Dominican missionary was discounted as a traveller’ tale with no real Europe .
 Many of the Malay Archipelago islands boasted a very unusual bird known locally as the tabon . In a lengthy account entitled A Collection of Voyages and Travels, he recorded that many of the . Malay . islands boasted . a very . unusual bird called locally as a tab
 After excavating great holes in the sand into which it deposited its eggs, it filled the holes up again, in order for the hot sand and sun to hatch the eggs . The eggs were deposited into the sand and then filled back in order to hatch .
 In 1699, Gemelli Careri provided comparable details regarding the Philippine jungle fowl, which he termed the tavon . Additional data, drawn from his avifaunal observations on Luzon, was presented in 1703 by Camelli .
 In view of such close correspondence between reports originating for the most part from wholly independent eyewitnesses and spanning two centuries, one might have expected that the jungle fowl’s internment of its eggs for hatching purposes would thereafter have been accepted as a fully verified ornithological fact
 Buffon and many other leading naturalists continued to disparage and reject totally all claims that birds could behave in such an overtly reptilian manner .
 The matter remained unresolved for another century, until attention switched from the jungle fowl’s Philippine representatives to those inhabiting Australia .
 In Australia the aboriginals insisted that this diminutive bird was actually the architect responsible for all manner of immense mound-like structures . It is widely distributed across much of northern Queensland and Northern Territory .
 Mounds hewn into the sides by the bird contained its eggs, experts say . They said that deep, concealed holes hewn in the mounds’ sides contained eggs . The mounds served as giant incubators, experts said .
 When the first Western settlers in Australia had encountered these incongruous edifices, some measuring up to 30ft long and 5ft high, they had taken them to be ancient burial mounds by the aboriginals .
 Other smaller mounds were deemed by them to be mud-castles built by native mothers to amuse their children .
 The fact that the aboriginals themselves vehemently denied all of this was ignored not only by the settlers but by Western scientists . Western scientists too, thereby rejecting the claims of a people whose knowledge of this island continent stretched back many millennia .
 English naturalist John Gilbert (assistant to famed ornithological painter John Gould) arrived in autumn 1839 at Port Essington, Northern Territory . He resolved to conclude this heated conflict once and for all .
 He would accompany a knowledgeable aboriginal to a little-known area of Port Essington called Knocker’s Bay, undisturbed by Westerners . The native people asserted that a number of jungle fowl could be found .
 The search for the remains of the mounds is ongoing in the area around the world's largest cemetery .
 Reaching the bay in November 1839, almost immediately they came upon a mound of sand and shells, incorporating a slight mixture of black soil too, and resting on a sandy beach just a few feet above the high water mark .
 5ft tall, with a circumference of 25ft and conical in shape, the mound was profusely festooned with large yellow hibiscus blooms . Standing roughly fiveft tall with a diameter of around 25ft, it was a conical mound of conical
 Gilbert scrambled up the mound’s sides to seek its alleged hidden holes and any eggs that might contain, but he failed to do so . Encouraged by this, Gilbert duly scrambled .
 There were no signs to suggest that any adult birds had been there for quite some while . However, his companion was unconcerned, pointing out that there were no sign of adult birds .
 Gilbert’s searches were not entirely in vain; on one side of the mound he spotted a tunnel-like shaft about 2ft deep, which proved to contain a jungle fowl chick, lying on some dry leaves .
 As it was only a few days old, presumably it had indeed hatched inside the tunnel . Gilbert could not be absolutely sure of this, but he said it must have hatched inside .
 The chick exhibited a remarkably advanced degree of development, with a well-formed, extensively-feathered body, plus the ability to mn and fly .
 Gilbert was unable to stay any longer at Knocker’s Bay . By 1840 he had returned and this time his quest met with success . Gilbert returned to Knocker's Bay in February 1840 .
 After selecting a likely-looking mound inside which to find eggs, his native companion dug down six times in succession to a depth of at least 6ft— 7ft without finding eggs .
 On the seventh attempt, he successfully retrieved one egg, followed after two or three more attempts by a second . The egg was retrieved by a team of scientists at the University of Cambridge .
 We now know that an average clutch contains about 15 eggs . One egg is laid and buried each day, within its own separate hole, until the entire clutch has been deposited .
 Gilbert also discovered that mounds constructed in darker, cooler localities, protected from the sun’s rays, are largely composed of plant material and rely principally upon the heat released by decomposition for egg incubation .
 Some scientists have opined that certain of the sand-and-shell mounds at Weipa, on Queensland’s Cape York Peninsula, are not bird-built . Yet even today, mystery still surrounds the mound-building megapodes .
 It is said that history never repeats itself, but in the case of the Australian jungle fowl, it currently seems to be running backwards from tumulus to incubator to tumulus again . The Australian fowl is said to have been in incubator and incubator incubator .
 The tour celebrates the neighborhood’s love of Halloween and the eerie . The tour also celebrates the love of the neighborhood .
 Kids of all ages will love posing for scarecrow pictures or taking a haunted hayride through the old barn and plantation fields . Kids will be able to pose for scary pictures or take a hayride to the plantation .
 Listen to ghost stories from Tennessee's past . Bell Witch, Cherokee spirit Spearfinger, John Murrell’s Thumb, Ghost dog, and the Legend of Davy Crockett .
 The Hollywood Roosevelt Hotel, named after the President Theodore Roosevelt, opened May 15, 1927 . The hotel was the epitome of the excitement, glamour and the elegance known as Hollywood .
 The hotel quickly became the center of the glamorous social whirl that was Hollywood . It was built at a cost of $2. million dollars dollars .
 Hollywood Holding Co. that financed the building of the Roosevelt was headed by Charles Toberman . Toberman was the president of the Hollywood holding company that built the Roosevelt .
 He was called “the father of Hollywood” because of all the projects he handled . He handled the Chinese Theatre, the Egyptian Theatre, Pantages Theatre and the Hollywood Bowl .
 Investors in the company included Mary Pickford, Douglas Fairbanks, Louis B Mayer, Joseph Schenck and Marcus Loew . Investors in company included .
 The Roosevelt quickly became the gathering place for Hollywood luminaries . Located across from the Chinese Theatre, the Roosevelt was a gathering place . The Roosevelt was built in the 1930s .
 The Motion Pictures Academy of Arts & Sciences used to meet in the hotel library . The hotel used to be used to host the Academy's annual meetings .
 The first Academy Awards presentation was held in the Blossom Ballroom on May 16, 1929 . The first ceremony was held on the same date .
 The awards were called Merit Awards, and given, not for one performance, but for work covering a 2-year period . Awards were given not for single performance but instead for work over two years .
 Douglas Fairbanks was host for the evening, presenting awards to Janet Gaynor as best actress, Emil Jannings as best actor, and to “Wings” starring Buddy Rogers, as best picture .
 He was new in town and not-yet employed when he met Al Weingard, the reception clerk at the hotel . He was not employed at the time, but he met the clerk at a reception desk .
 Blossom Ballroom was a supper club, open to the public, and the place to go dining and dancing in Hollywood . It was the original home of the Blossom Hotel in Hollywood's most famous nightclub .
 All the top bands played there, and the society pages of the local papers were always full of stories of the elegant parties held there . All the best bands played .
 In the early 30’s, when jazz was beginning to be the rage, it was decided the hotel should have a jazz club .
 Something smaller & more intimate than the big ballroom a real cozy place. Something smaller than the ballroom is a real intimate place. "It's a great place to hang out in," she said .
 Mary Martin had her first paying job as a singer in Hollywood in the Cinegrill . Mary Martin was a singer at the Hollywood restaurant .
 She couldn’t always find a babysitter, so she sometimes had to bring the baby along . She couldn't always find babysitter so she brought the child along .
 After each show, guests were feted to a reception in the Blossom Ballroom at the Roosevelt .
 Goodman said many “magical and enchanting things happened in the suite’s suite and it definitely has “a haunting quality” about it . Goodman: "It definitely has a haunting quality" about it. Goodman: Many ‘magical’ things happened
 She stayed at the hotel often over the years, preferring a second floor Cabana Room overlooking the pool .
 He would often pace the hall outside his 9th floor room, rehearsing his lines and sometimes blowing a bugle -much to the consternation of others nearby .
 The story goes -that on windy nights you can hear his ghost in the hallway.. . So the story goes . The story is said to have happened in the past .
 A long time favorite of Mr Vallee, the hotel was named specifically as a recipient of his momentos . The hotel is a long-time favorite of the hotel owner .
 Hockney’s largest painting and the only place in the world where you can swim inside a million dollar work of art . That makes it Hockneys largest painting . The only place you can swimming inside is inside the world's largest painting.
 Recently returned to the hotel by an anony mous donor, the painting is now on display in the hotel lobby .
 Check our front sidewalk and you will find stars for the Mills Brothers, Julie London, Maureen O’Hara, Errol Flynn, Natalie Wood, Gene Autry, Cybill Shepard, Sid Ceasar, Dudley Moore, Eddie Murphy and others .
 These are as glamorous as old days with the stars arriving in limousines, kieig lights lighting up the night sky, photographers and fans everywhere, and the charm of the Roosevelt being shown off to its best advantage .
 It has been seen on “Knots Landing”, “Moonlighting” and “Highway to Heaven” It has also appeared in ‘Beverly Hills Cop II’ and ‘She’s Out of Control'
 Johnny Grant, Honorary Mayor of Hollywood of Hollywood, moved into the Penthouse Suite of the hotel . Johnny Grant moved in to the penthouse suite . The hotel is located in the heart of Hollywood .
 He even has his own table in Theodore’s Restaurant and calls the hotel Hollywood City Hall .
 The Catering and Banquet Departments help decor and make it work beautifully . Catering departments help decor decor decor and menus .
 The historic Arthur Murray Dance Studio adjacent to the hotel is being renovated . The historic dance studio adjacent to hotel is also being renovated.
 This building has been used as a dance studio since 1927 and maybe before that . This building was used for dance classes since 1927 . It was also used for a dance classes in the 1930s .
 Arthur Murray will become office for Hollywood Chamber of Commerce and Community Redevelopment Agency . After it has been fitted for earthquakes and remodeled, it will be office for the Hollywood Chamber .
 Hollywood Roosevelt hotel continues to improve with age . A new life for a grand old building as the Hollywood Roosevelt Hotel continues to grow .
 At any time, you could come across a film crew in any of the public areas of the hotel . A real treat for the tourists who come to Hollywood to see the movie stars .
 The Roosevelt is a good place to meet for a meal, talk business, or just be entertained . The Roosevelt serves as a great place for people to meet, meet, talk, or entertain .
 The Hollywood Roosevelt is once again the Grande Dame of Hollywood . With the charm of the past and the convenience of the present, the Hollywood Roosevelt has been restored .
 Hollywood Roosevelt Hotel TALES FROM THE ROOSEVELT GHOSTS, SPIRITS & other THINGS THAT GO BUMP IN THE NIGHT . Collection of ghost stories soon became the talk of the hotel .
 It was decided to make copies available to our guests, perhaps some of them will have an encounter to add to our story .
 As you know, old buildings sometimes have stories about ghosts or spirits . Old buildings have stories of ghosts and spirits, says the author .
 There are many ghosts and spirits that we know about and probably a lot more that we don't know . There are probably more than a lot of ghosts that we do not know, says author .
 In mid-December 1985, two weeks prior to the reopening of the hotel, the first spirits were discovered . The hotel was closed in December 1985 .
 With the opening so close, all office workers, managers and secretaries spent the day cleaning, sweeping and dusting . The opening is scheduled for Thursday night at 8 p.m. ET .
 Alan Russell, actor and personal assistant to the general manager, offered to sweep the Blossom Ballroom before the carpeting was put down . Alan Russell is the personal assistant of general manager at the event .
 Alan noticed one area that seemed cooler than the rest of the room, but not giving it too much thought . Alan swept the length of the . room, noticing one area seemed cooler . than the others .
 Later, as he swept the width of the room, the cool spot was still there . The cool spot is still there.
 At that point, he called Kelly Greene and together they tried to figure out what he was going to do .
 There were no doors open to cause a draft, the air conditioners had not been hooked up . There was no trap door in the floor ... no reason for the cold spot .
 The spot is a circle about 30 inches in ’diameter and is about 1 0 degrees cooler than the rest of the room . The circle is a diameter of about 30-inches .
 On the same day, Suzanne Leonard was dusting the general manager's office . Suzanne Leonard dusts the office in the same room .
 As she dusts the tall dark-framed mirror, she saw the reflection of a blonde girl right where her hand was dusting . The reflection of the blonde girl was right where she had been dusting her hand .
 When she turned around to speak to the girl, there was no one there, yet when she looked back at the mirror, the reflection was still there . When she looked at her reflection, she saw no one .
 Suzanne was puzzled and a little startled, so she asked the manager about the mirror . Suzanne then asked him to explain what he had said to her .
 He told her that the mirror had belonged to Marilyn Monroe and had been removed from the suite that Marilyn had often occupied out by the pool . The mirror belonged to her and was removed from a suite that she often occupied .
 It's hard to say if Marilyn's ghost really is seen in the mirror, but two psychics have ""read"" the mirror and told of seeing much sadness .
 Up on the 9th floor, maids were making up the beds while other employees stocked the rooms with towels . The maids made the beds and stocked towels in the rooms .
 As she went to the east end of the hall, to Room 928, she felt a cool breeze against her arms but didn't pay much attention to it .
 Workmen were still working in the halls and doors were open it was just a draft . Workmen still worked on the streets of the city .
 But these doors have compression hinges -they don't slam., That startled her, but she went on and placed the towels in the proper place .
 As she came out of the room, she again felt a definite coldness, like something brushing past her in the hall .
 Two housemaids who also worked on the 9th floor excitedly said that ""there was something 1 strange there"" and would not go there again . Later that day, two house maids who worked there said that there was something 'something strange'
 The Hollywood Roosevelt reopened for its first guests on December 30, 1985 . Hollywood Roosevelt opened in 1985 .
 At the beginning, only the public areas of the hotel and floors 3, 4 and 5 were completed and in use . At the start, only public areas were completed .
 One night before the floor was completed, there was a call to PBX from Room 1032 . The call was made from the room 1032, a night before it was completed .
 By Spring of '86, work on the upper floors of the building was being completed . The upper floors were completed .
 Daniel Cichon, Assistant Director of Housekeeping, was inspecting the rooms prior to the opening of the 1 1th floor . The 1 1st floor will be the first floor of the hotel .
 In Star Suite 1101/1102 he finished his inspection, turned off the lights, locked the door and went back to the housekeeping .
 He was the only one with a key, yet ""someone"" had turned on all the lights . He was only one of the only ones with the key .
 As more guests came to stay in the hotel and more rooms were occupied, more strange things began to happen . The hotel has a history of strange things happening .
 Calls from guests, late . night, about loud talking in the next room but when Security would investigate they would find the next . room unoccupied . Security would look into the room late at night, but find it empty . Security found it was empty .
 In April of '86, Rachel, then a lobby maid, was doing her morning cleaning when she needed something from the supply closet just off the lobby . Rachel was a member of the staff at the White House .
 She opened the double doors and as she reached inside, someone pushed her into the closet . She reached inside the closet and was pushed into a closet .
 Pale-and shaken, she returned to the Housekeeping Dept. to tell her story .
 Late night calls about noisy neighbors continued for years . The late night calls continued to come from neighbors .
 Reports of strange noises and strange shadows have not been explained by ghost enthusiasts . Ghost enthusiasts reported strange noises, strange shadows .
 Summer of '88 found Steve Fava working in the purchasing department . Fava was a member of the buying department at the time of the summer .
 One of his jobs was to refill the soda machines on each floor of the hotel . The soda machines were used to refill soda machines .
 One morning as he did this he thought someone was playing a joke on him by moving his clipboard . He thought it was a prank on someone who moved his clipboard in the morning .
 Steve placed the clipboard on top of the soda machine, then began to stock the sodas . The soda machine and ice machine were set up in the room where the soda was stocked .
 He looked and looked for it, finally finding it INSIDE an arm's length away from the soda machine . He finally found it inside the machine, a short distance from the machine .
 He decided he must have put it on the ice machine and it slipped off and into the ice . He decided it must have been put on the machine .
 By the time he reached the 1 0th floor, he was really shaken and took extra care to be sure to put the clipboard on the soda machine . He was shaken by the experience .
 He finished stocking the sodas and when he reached for the clipboard -it was gone . He reached for a clipboard but it was gone.
 New officer suddenly felt as if someone was watching him patrolling the upper floors of a new building .
 He attributed the feeling to being on a new job and being unfamiliar with the building . He continued his rounds, a little uneasy, but attributed it to being unfamiliar in the building.
 The feeling persisted for the next week or two, each night in a different part of the hotel . But the feeling persisted until the end of the week .
 He said he would suddenly feel uncomfortable, so would hurry down the hall, hoping to see a person . He says he would rush down hall hoping to find a person in the hall .
 Sometimes it would seem like someone was standing in a doorway and would suddenly step back inside the room as he approached . Sometimes he would seem to be standing in the doorway and suddenly stepping back inside .
 He didn't really see or hear anything, it was just something he sensed . He sensed something about the situation .
 Late one night in September of '89, the Night Supervisor of Housekeeping was passing the Personnel Office and heard the electric typewriter being used . A real GHOST WRITER heard the noise .
 Knowing that the staff leaves at 5:00 a.m., she rapped on the door to see who was in the office . Knowing that staff leave at 5 p.m. she decided to knock it down .
 Several times she knocked and called out, but there was no response, only the steady tapping of the typewriter . The typewriter is still tapping as she waits for a reply .
 The typewriter was still turned on, the chair that had been left at the desk was now at the typewriter . The papers on the desk had been neatly arranged . The next morning personnel staff arrived at the scene of the incident .
 Room 1217 has long been known to have ""something unique and magical"" about it . Room 12 17 has been known for its "unique and magical" feel . Room has long known to be known for having "something unique" about it.
 She said then that the room had ""a presence, a special quality"" about it . In October of 1989 that presence made itself known again, this time by telephone .
 When the light lit up again, the operator checked the guest register and found that the room was not occupied . The room was left empty after the room lit up .
 She called Security, explained the situation and asked that they check the room and put the phone back on the hook . The phone was returned to the hook and the phone was put on the floor .
 Security went up and replaced the phone, and the next time they went up ... the phone was off the hook . Security replaced the phones three times before the phone went dead . The next time security went up, security replaced phones .
 In mid October of 1989, a TV film crew wanted to do a story on our ghosts for a Halloween special . The ghosts were wanted to be featured in a TV special .
 Shooting outside Room 928, the house lights went out, the sound equipment broke down and the film jammed in the camera . It took almost 4 hours to do a one hour shoot. The film jammed into the camera.
 When they tried to film Marilyn's mirror, the smoke alarm went off and they couldn't complete the scene . The smoke alarm prevented the film from being completed .
 The Operator checked, then told the guest she must be mistaken, there was no one in the next room . The Operator then told her she must have been mistaken .
 After spending some time in the room, she said, "It's a man, a black man, musician, a musician" She said she spent some time with the man and his friends .
 Los Angeles County District Attorney's Office held a holiday Dinner Dance at the hotel . On December 15,1 990, the Los Angeles .
 After the party, one of the guests and his wife were looking at the pictures on the mezzanine . The pictures were taken at the party .
 As they neared the doors that lead to the balcony that overlook the Blossom Room, they heard piano music . As they approached the doors, they found piano music.
 They followed the sound and standing near the piano they saw a man in a white suit . They followed them and saw a white man in white suit in the area . The incident happened in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 The Front Desk Manager even came back upstairs with them, but there was no man in a white suit . There was no one at all at all .
 The following Monday morning, Billy from Engineering was working on the 3rd floor of the building . Billy was working at the time of the incident when he was killed . Billy's death was the first time he had been killed in a car crash .
 He looked to his left and saw a man standing in the hallway . As he came to the corner he looked to left and looked to the left . Half way down the hall he saw the man in the hall .
 The man didn't answer, but continued to look from side to side as if he wasn't sure which way to go . The man looked at the side of the road, looking unsure of where to go next .
 Billy came within 3 feet of the man, and again asked if he could be of help . Billy came closer to the man to ask if he was able to help him .
 The man still did nor reply, but turned and walked toward the fire exit at the east end of the hall .
 He could not move for what seemed like 5 minutes, 'though he said it was probably only a few seconds,' he said . He said he was unable to move for 'a few seconds'
 Billy is from the Philippines and his culture firmly believes in spirits . Billy believes spirits are important in the Philippines . Billy is a proud member of the family of the late actor and singer Billy Ray Ray Ray .
 In 1991 a number of writers and TV reporters had come to the hotel asking about our ghosts . In 1991 the hotel was visited by writers and reporters asking about their ghosts .
 Entertainment Tonight came to do a piece about Montgomery Clift's room and even brought a psychic with them . Entertainment Tonight even brought out a psychic to help .
 The room had been vacant for three days, but when he went in, the heat was on full blast . The room was empty, but the room was full of heat, he said .
 The film crew corrected him, saying that those lights last forever, but he wouldn't admit that anything strange was going on . He wouldn't say anything strange .
 As he began the interview, he asked the psychic if she felt any ghosts in the room . The psychic said she did not feel ghosts .
 It couldn't have closed by itself because it opens sideways so someone would have to push it . It's not possible to close the door by itself, so it would need to be pushed by someone .
 When the crew finished in the room, they went next door to talk to the guests in that room . The crew then went to the next room to talk with the guests .
 They didn't identify themselves as a TV crew, only asking if the girls had heard any noises in Room 928 . The girls said they had heard noises in the room .
 They replied: "Oh yeah, there were some bumping noises, but we didn't think anything about it. They replied ""Oh yeah. There were some bumps."
 Caerphilly Castle, nr Cardiff, Wales, is famous for its green lady . She flits from turret to turret so fearlessly that some of the town boys almost caught her .
 Modern day security personnel will not venture up to the flag tower because they can smell perfume at all times . Modern-day security personnel do not venture into the tower because of the smell .
 Second Marquess of Bute began restoration of Cardiff Castle but died in 1848 . Marquess began restoration but died of ill health in 1847 .
 He leaves this room by passing through a six-foot-thick wall into a corridor . He then passes through a wall of the chapel into the room in which he died .
 At precisely 3:45am heavy doors open and shut by themselves and the lights flash on and off . At precisely three minutes a.m. is when the doors open, shut and shut themselves by themselves .
 A ""faceless vision in a flowing grayish-white skirt"" has also appeared in a stockroom close by, where things get disarranged .
 The young son of Dame Griffiths fell into a bottomless pool of dark water within the precincts of Castell Coch, nr Cardiff .
 Her ghost restlessly continues to wander about the castle and its surrounding woods . Her ghost remains in the castle .
 One of Robert Wynn's successors at Plas Mawr had to leave Conwy to fight in a distant war . Conwy Castle, Conwy, is located in the Welsh town of Conwy .
 When the time was near for his return, his wife and child climbed the steep stair to the lookout tower . When he was gone, his family climbed the stairs to the tower .
 He was late, and the wife and child had to leave the tower because of darkness . The wife and the child were forced to leave because of the darkness .
 On the way down she slipped, she slipped and, along with her child, fell to the bottom of the tower . The child was also killed in the incident .
 The bereaved husband eventually went mad with grief and died soon after . His wife died of her grief and he went mad and went mad .
 His ghost still seeks the missing doctor in the lantern room and will continue to do so until he is found . The ghost of the doctor still seeks for the missing man .
 She floats through locked rooms in a white dress and may be the cause of the noisy running footsteps which mysteriously disturb the sleep of guests .
 There is a ghostly figure of a man in armor wearing only one gauntlet . Ruthin Castle, Denbighshire, is home to the most famous castle in the world .
 The ghost of Lady Grey has been seen wandering the hallways of the castle . Lady Grey's ghost has been spotted wandering around the castle in recent years .
 Arundel Castle, Sussex, is home to a ghost from King Charles II's time . The castle was built in the 17th century and is now in ruins .
 Berry Pomeroy Castle, Devon said to be haunted by the daughter of a wicked baron . As a result of an enforced relationship with her father, she bore him a child, which he strangled . The castle is said to have been haunted by her daughter's death .
 The king ordered that the children should be starved to death in the castle . The children were starved in a fit fit to die .
 Ghostly horsemen carrying torches seen at Cadbury Castle, Somerset . Horsemen seen carrying torches at the castle .
 The ghost of a headless woman has been seen next to the walls of Corfe Castle, Dorset . Headless woman was spotted next to walls of the castle .
 Dover Castle, Kent, is associated with numerous ghosts and strange sounds . Dover Castle is located in Dover, Kent . The castle is famous for its ghost sightings .
 In the King's bedroom, the lower half of a man has been seen walking through the doorway . Lower half of the man seen walking into the doorway of the bedroom .
 The specter of a woman dressed in a red dress has been seen at the west stairway of the keep . The woman was seen in a dress at the entrance to the keep at the time of the incident .
 The sounds of a creaking doorway opening and closing where a door used to be, but isn't anymore, have been heard . The sounds were heard in the wake of a door being opened and closed where it was once there .
 Featherstone Castle, Northumberland, is associated with a ghostly bridal party . The castle was once home to a bride-to-be-wedding party .
 Baron Featherstonehaugh arranged for his daughter to marry a relative of his choice, even though the daughter was in love with someone else . The daughter had been in love for someone else, but was not interested in marrying him .
 The wedding party left for the ""traditional hunt"" after the wedding, leaving the baron behind to make arrangements for the banquet . The baron was left behind to arrange the banquet for the wedding .
 When the party failed to return by midnight, the baron began to fear the worst . The baron feared the worst when the party was not able to return .
 On the anniversary of the wedding, the party can still be seen heading towards the castle .
 The ghostly figure of Anne Boleyn has been seen gliding over the bridge at Hever Castle, Kent .
 He was unhappy with a prearranged marriage, and fell in love with a farmer's daughter . He was very unhappy with the marriage and fell for love with the daughter of a farmer .
 Sir James refused to believe she was dead and left her on the bed . When she suddenly grew ill and died, Sir James left her there on the hospital bed .
 She was finally moved and placed in a coffin with a glass lid, which he set in a cupboard where he could look at her . She was eventually moved to a coffin and placed inside a coffin .
 At his funeral his coffin began to sway as it was lowered into the ground . His coffin began swaying at his funeral as he was laid to rest .
 His spectral coach and ungroomed horses can be seen being driven through the parklands of the castle . The ghostly coach was driven through parklands by the horses .
 A specter of a black dog can be seen at the castle in Devon . Okehampton Castle, Devon, is home to a ghost of a dog .
 Lady Arundel's ghost haunts the castle grounds of Wardour Castle, Wiltshire . The castle was built in the 17th century and is located in the middle of the country .
 Below the castle walls a spectral army can be seen and heard . Pevensey Castle, Sussex, is home to a ghostly army .
 The ghost of Lady Blanche de Warenne has been seen walking the castle battlements . Rochester Castle, Kent, was the home of the 19th Baroness of the French Revolution .
 Sir Walter Raleigh's ghost sits on the castle masonry . Sherborne Old Castle, Dorset, was built in the 17th century .
 The guard, having told his unlikely story to others, died of shock a few days later . The ghostly presence walked on unaffected and the guard, who had told the story, walked on . The guard was shocked to find out what had happened .
 A young guard shot and killed himself and another guard on duty saw him afterwards . Another guard saw him after he shot himself and saw him again .
 Aldourie Castle, Inverness & Nairn is said to be haunted by a Gray Lady . The castle was built in the 17th century . Aldouie Castle is said not to have been haunted by any ghosts .
 Donald Campbell was murdered on the grounds of Barcaldine Castle, Argyll & Dunbartonshire . His ghost has been seen at the castle since he was murdered .
 Dunrobin Castle, Sutherland & Caithness, is said to be haunted by the daughter of the 14th Earl . The upper floor of the castle is believed to have been haunted by her daughter .
 She had been imprisoned in the attic by her father for her wrong doings . She had to be imprisoned in her father’s attic .
 Coll Macdonnell had a personal score to settle with the Campbells of Duntrune . He had to settle a score with the family of the late Lord Campbells . The Campbells died in the 18th century .
 A handless skeleton was later found at the castle, and pipe music can still be heard in the castle . Pipe music can be still heard in castle, where handless skeletons were found .
 A neighboring chief sent a group of goodwill ambassadors to Hermitage Castle to propose cessation of their long feud . The castle is located on the border of the Great Depression .
 Dash cam video shows John H Ford gobbling a piece of paper while officers searched his pockets . Police say he may have eaten some of the evidence while he was cuffed .
 The whereabouts of the note demanding money came into question after Biada was taken into custody . Streetsboro investigators asked whether officers had found the piece of paper .
 Twinsburg police say they observed Ford leaning over to eat something off the hood of a police cruiser . Police say they saw Ford lean over and eat something from the hood .
 Authorities say they found a .38-caliber pistol and a wad of cash covered in red ink on the passenger side of the vehicle . Authorities said they found the pistol on the driver's side floor of the car .
 In Streetsboro case, a man walked into a FirstMerit branch on state Route 14 around 10 p.m. He handed a teller a note that demanded money . The suspect is believed to be a serial killer .
 Workmen build a water ride at Thorpe Park, one of the country's biggest theme parks . The strange, seemingly paranormal, behaviour was experienced by workmen building a new water ride .
 There were reports of workers feeling like someone was watching over their shoulder and sudden cold feelings being experienced . There were also reports of people feeling like they were being watched over by someone .
 The project was moved to another site due to ghost sightings . Fears that an ancient burial ground has been disturbed .
 Monk's Walk in Thorpe Park was investigated by the South West London Paranormal Society team .
 The vague white mist appeared in a number of images but was not visible to the naked eye . They said it appeared in some of the images but not visible in the public .
 Paranormal detection agency was called in to the park in Chertsey, Surrey, to carry out tests . They found that a burial ground or settlement could have been disturbed .
 Managers at the park decided to relocate the ride to another area of the park . Managers also called in a forensic team to carry out further investigations .
 Forensic geophysicist Peter Masters has been called in to analyse the site in Thorpe Park . He will use deep ground radar to monitor the site, using deep ground ground radar . The site is believed to have been the site of an explosion in the 1960s .
 The foundations would have been over an area of the park where stone coffins have previously been excavated . Managers at Thorpe Park decided to relocate the ride to another area of park after reports of paranormal behaviour .
 Thorpe Park, however, was more striking as results were picked up immediately . orbs, ghostly images in photography and ouija reaction results were strongest around the site where Storm Surge is proposed to build Storm Surge .
 I believe the organisation involved 3 professional parapsychologists called Drs.s. John, Grantham, Lincolnshire, 07/2/201 . Who checked them? John .
 For those of you who haven't experienced anything ’paranormal 1 , I understand the jokes . Who checked them? John, Grantham, Lincolnshire, 07/2/201 1 22:53 Click to rate .
 "It is very difficult to explain, truly, unless you’ve experienced the active spiritual world," says the author . "It’s very hard to explain to anyone who has experienced it," she says .
 I know I never asked for this particular opportunity, but for the jokesters, perhaps a trip to this site is in order? -Tea, Please, San Antonio, U.S.
 The parish council has called in local ghost-busting minister Kevin Crouch to see if he can exorcise the road .
 I've had a chance personally to investigate scores of hauntings and to spend nights in many haunted houses, hotels etc. Perhaps I've been more fortunate than most in that I have also had a . chance personally . I have spent nights in haunted hotels, hotels and haunted houses .
 The events I relate here took place nearly 30 years ago and the case remains one of the strangest I have experienced . The events in this case took place in the early days of the 1980s .
 "Exorcism wasn't in my line. I investigated hauntings and other psychic phenomena," she said . She said exorcism was not in her line .
 Fifteen months earlier the Beckett family had moved into Higson Street, Salford, which is an industrial city in the north-west of England .
 Previously they had lived with Rita's widowed mother in nearby Eccles while seeking an affordable home of their own . Rita said they had been living in cramped digs with their mother in Eccles .
 The cobbled neighbourhood included Archie Street, on which the popular English TV programme 'Coronation Street' had been modelled . Salford Docks at the end of the Manchester Ship Canal was a couple of minutes away from Archie Street .
 It was a run-down, dreary area, and seemed all the more so when I arrived on a drizzly November evening . It was also a run down, but it was a good place to spend time in .
 At 32, Rita Beckett, at 32, looked careworn with lines around the eyes and pinched features that come from hard circumstances . As she told me, circumstances had been getting harder .
 After a few seconds somebody began stomping upstairs, dragging their feet . After a minute or more, somebody began to stomp upstairs . The incident happened in the middle of the night .
 We thought it must be one of the boys and that surprised us as we hadn't heard them leave their bedroom . It was the first time we'd heard them come out of their bedroom, we thought it was a boy .
 You can't creep about in this house because all the boards and stairs squeak like crazy, and the stairs aren't carpeted . The stairs are also squeaky and the boards are squeaky, and there's no carpeting .
 The door at the bottom of the room was still closed, as we'd left it. Not only that, but the door was still shut, as it had been left open .
 We tried to convince ourselves it must have been the neighbours next door but we knew it wasn't . After we'd heard these footsteps we tried to convinced ourselves it was the neighbour next door . It wasn't the neighbours, it was just the sound of footsteps .
 The first really disturbing experience occurred the following week when Rita and the boys were in the house alone . Alan was at a factory some miles away where he worked night shifts on alternate weeks . The boys were left alone when Alan was away from the house, Rita says .
 He said he couldn't sleep because of the old man who kept touching his hair . But half an hour later he woke him up again, he woke me up again .
 I tucked Gavin in again and told him to stop making up stories, then I got back to my own bed and fell asleep . I tucked him in again, then went back to his bed .
 The room wasn't completely dark because of a street light outside the window . The room was lit up because of the light outside of the window, but it was still dark .
 "I noticed the same smell as in the boys' room dirty and musty. I couldn't see anyone but I noticed the . same smell," says one of the girls' rooms . The boys' rooms were dirty and had to be dirty, musty .
 When I turned on the light everything looked normal but I could feel somebody moving about, like a cold draught . I could hear someone moving about - and it felt like it was like a draught, she said . She said: 'I'm not scared. I'm scared.
 Alan returned from work a few hours later to find his family in the lounge, huddled together in blankets . Alan returned home from work and found his family huddled in blankets together .
 'At some time after two in the morning I heard the door opening at the foot of the stairs, just like before, and then came the footsteps. He told me, 'At this time after 2 in the early hours of the night I heard . He said, 'I heard
 They were slow and heavy, and I thought I could hear a tapping like a walking stick . They were slowly and heavy and heavy . I thought they were tapping like walking sticks, but they were still tapping .
 This time we had a night light burning on the landing because Rita and the boys had been nervous since the last episode . This time the landing was the first time Rita had been in the air with the boys .
 "I got to the top of the stairs and immediately saw that the door at the bottom remained shut, and the stairs were empty yet the footsteps kept coming up," the author says . "I saw the door shut, the stairs empty, and yet the steps were empty," she says
 Rita joined her husband on the landing, and they saw that the door to the third bedroom stood ajar . Rita and her husband were able to find the third room ajar and find it .
 Gavin sat on the floor cross-legged, rocking backwards and forwards in the darkness . Gavin sat in the dark and rocked backwards in the back of the room . He said: "We went inside and found Gavin sitting in the middle of the night"
 Gavin, previously a lively, bright boy, became increasingly morose . Gavin's family became plagued almost nightly by footsteps on the stairs . Gavin, formerly a lively boy, now lives with his family in New York .
 He expressed a deep fear of the house, and especially of that third bedroom . Yet paradoxly he displayed the utmost reluctance to go outdoors . He expressed the utmost fear of going outdoors .
 He also began talking about 'the Body', apparently a presence he could see in the house although he found it difficult to describe . 'The Body' was also a presence that he saw in the home .
 Apparently it was not the 'bent old man' he had spoken about previously, as he also continued to see this man at night and seemed to grow fond of him . It was also revealed that he continued to be fond of the man .
 He was an old man, seventy-eight, and apparently he walked with a stoop . He was apparently a man who had a 'stopping'
 "I shouted something at him, then he seemed to wake up and began crying," she says of her son . "He seemed to be waking up and then he began crying"
 I asked about the other boys, if they had seen or sensed anything evil . I asked them if they saw or sensed evil, but they said no .
 I am not psychic, and not one of those people who claim to be aware of unseen presences . I'm not a psychic, but I'm very happy to say 'I am not a person who claims to be able to see invisible presences,' says author .
 One did not need super sensitivity, however, to feel uncomfortable in the third bedroom of this house . The house was decorated with flowers and flowers .
 CNN.com will feature a photo of a room in a room filled with light bulbs . The room is filled with people who have never seen a room like this .
 More mundanely, it had a bare, gritty floor, old wallpaper peeling in places, and a sash window with net curtain . It was a bare and gritty floor and old wallpaper was peeling .
 It felt cold as one would expect, but not just ordinarily cold as on any November evening . The weather was unusually cold, but it felt like it was cold again, even though it was chilly .
 "Here I found a bone-deep chill as though even its essence had been sucked away," says author .
 "I've experienced similar chill in other haunted places and it's always profoundly unpleasant," says author . "It's always profound unpleasant. It's the same thing I've experienced in haunted places," she says .
 We continued our tour of the house, which apart from that third bedroom felt normal enough . At the end, I told the Becketts I would like to spend some time there and conduct tests .
 A week later the family went to stay for a few days with Mrs Beckett's mother . During that time they allowed me and three colleagues to move in . The family then went to live with her mother's mother in her home .
 Arthur Latham, Ross Price and Martin Hodgkiss spent three nights and two full days in the house . They were all accompanied by the team who had accompanied him on previous investigations .
 We took regular temperature readings in the rooms and monitored four tape recorders . We also set up a movement-sensitive camera in the third bedroom .
 In addition Arthur, our electronics expert, installed a range of equipment to test atmospheric pressure, shifts in the house structure, and sensors to detect movement on the stairs .
 We of course experienced all the usual noises creaks, raps, bangings to be expected in any house, whatever age .
 We could also hear the television sets in both adjoining houses . At times it seemed the families had regiments of children running riot .
 On our first night I took up position at the top of the stairs on the landing, Ross in the boys' bedroom and Martin on the threshold of the third bedroom . Arthur remained in the lounge monitoring our equipment, while Ross remained on the floor .
 In each room we had a low-power bulb burning, and all interior doors were open . All interior doors and light bulbs were open in each room, with no lights on .
 At 2.13am we clearly heard the distinctive squeaking sound of the door at the bottom of the stairs opening . Almost immediately footsteps began slowly ascending . At 2:13am, the door opened and footsteps began to slowly ascend .
 Being on the landing, I could see both the staircase, which was in deep shadow but empty, and the open door . The staircase is in shadow, but empty but empty .
 Perhaps the most interesting, and certainly most sinister, phenomenon occurred in that room . The most interesting thing happened was that the room was filled with light and sound .
 The sound, like someone dragging their feet across the uncarpeted floor, continued for seven minutes . Nothing could be seen at the scene of the incident .
 I joined Martin at the doorway and immediately noticed the extreme chill billowing out, and a sense of menace that had the hairs on our necks bristling . The extreme chill was billowing from the doorway, and it was the chill of the night .
 We were satisfied that the noise came from the room itself and not from the adjoining houses, nor from the walls or loft . We were happy to find out that no noise was caused by the noise of the room .
 Arthur reported that his equipment had indicated sounds being recorded in the third bedroom at the time Martin and I specified . With the dawn we compared notes, and Arthur reported the sounds were being recorded . Martin and Arthur were able to find each other in the room .
 It emerged deep, hoarse and muffled, and it said just one word, repeated three times . It emerged from the mouth of a man whose voice was hoarse . The man's voice was so muffled that it could barely be heard .
 Ross, Martin and I switched positions for the second night, and again for the third night . Ross and Martin switched positions on the night of the first night, the third .
 There were more footsteps on the staircase on the second night, at 3.19am, and again the tape recorder picked up a voice in the third bedroom . This time we couldn't even guess at the word or words, but this time we could not .
 Albert and Dora Owen had lived in the house since at least the 1920s . There had never been any suggestion of strange occurrences at the house .
 I managed to trace Mr and Mrs Owen's son Derek, who now lived in North Wales, and from him he heard a slightly different story . Mr Owen's wife and Mr Owen Owen's daughter now live in Wales .
 He had grown up in the house and had occupied the third bedroom as a boy . He always felt uncomfortable there and suffered constant nightmares . He suffered nightmares until moving into another room .
 Derek said his mother had sometimes spoken of feeling uncomfortable in the upstairs rooms . 'She used to say somebody seemed to be hovering over her,' Derek said .
 He also told me of a rumour that someone had once hanged themselves in the house . I was unable to verify this either through the landlord or through library records .
 "There were at least two presences in the house, one benign and the other most definitely not," says Alan Beckett .
 I thought it was possible that the footsteps on the stairs were caused by the ghost of Albert Owen . I thought that though they might find this phenomenon disconcerting, it would not harm them and was likely in time to disappear .
 I could not say the same for the presence in the third bedroom, however, however .
 Rita and Alan were anxious to have both presences removed if possible . Rita contacted a priest whom she knew had conducted exorcisms elsewhere . Alan and Rita were anxious for their spirits to be removed .
 The priest and two colleagues spent five hours at the house in mid-December . They reported a deep sense of evil in the third bedroom and, to a lesser extent, elsewhere .
 They were convinced, however, that their exorcism had succeeded and that the presences had been banished . The exorcism was not the first attempt to exorcise the spirits .
 In early February the Owens family moved out of the house for good . An elderly couple similar in age to the Owens took up occupation in May .
 I called on a couple after a few weeks and asked if they had experienced anything unusual . I called them to ask if they'd had experienced any unusual .
 The lady, Elsie Grainger, said, 'If you mean have we heard old Albert on the stairs, the answer's yes' Albert was found dead at the age of 92 .
 "We've boarded up the doorway and don't use it, but sometimes we can hear voices there," says owner . "Sometimes we've boarded it up and sometimes hear voices," she says . "It's boarded up and doesn't even use it," she adds .
 Mystery animals can turn up in the most unlikely places and one of these just so happens to be the American version of eBay, the online auction house .
 From 16 to 26 September 2002, a most extraordinary painting was offered there as Item #907237942, by a seller from Old Town, Florida, using the name ectopistes@webtv.net and requiring an undisclosed reserve price .
 An original unframed water-colour, measuring 22ins by 30ins, bearing the signature Canzanella . It depicted a pair of very odd-looking mammals . According to the seller's description, it was an original . Water-colour was a 22in by 30in water
 The seller had owned the painting for roughly 28 years after paying $1,000 for it, but had no information as to what animals in it were . The seller said he had owned it for about 28 years .
 The creatures depicted are decidedly unusual, even sinister, and I cannot readily identify them with any known species. Certainly, the creatures depicted .
 There are certain similarities to badgers (though the portrayed animals' legs seem too long for all but perhaps the Asian hog badger, Arctonyx collaris . There are some similarities to various viverrids .
 The pink-hued white fur of the foreground specimen may indicate albinism . It is the first time a specimen has been found to have been found in the wild .
 We'd welcome any opinions or information concerning the mysterious animals depicted, and the equally mysterious artist responsible for depicting them .
 Guv builds biggest fart machine ever to fart at France with it Jesus Diaz . Yesterday 12:49pm Colin Furze wants to build a giant butt at France from Dover .
 These engines powered the Nazi V-l bombs that terrified London during WW2 making an infernal noise that sounds like a furious fart from hell . That's why he has built the biggest valveless pulse jet machine ever .
 The engine is done and will be installed in a giant butt on the cliffs of Dover, France, to see if the frenchies at the other side of the channel can hear it . The whole thingamajig will be pointed at France on July 24 .
 Francis Giangrossi, owner of Coast Roofing, took a plea deal last year that cleared them of murder charges . Jim Skiba, a supervisor at the business, was also cleared of murder last year . He took the plea deal .
 Giangrossi Skiba <1 6 <' C oc "" fikgM l | paying to have four men • * z ' j ^ ' d vV/g'-Tty‘ Mmj, Q £ ■ hurting his hands. I The two
 The reason for the planned attack on Stewart stemmed from his relationship with Giangrossi’s wife, Madica Lynn Winchester . Winchester was married to Stewart's wife . Winchester is the wife of Winchester's wife, who is married to Winchester .
 Stewart killed a man breaking into his house which led to murder charges against all of the suspects . Stewart was not injured, but he killed the man breaking in .
 The three men who attempted to break into Stewart’s home also took plea deals recently . Stewart's home was targeted by three men, including three men from the home invasion .
 InFRASOUND I was a sonic experiment at the INFRasound I was an experiment to test the psychological effects of extremely low frequencies . Their sentencing is set for April 24 .
 French robotics researcher Vladimir Gavreau said he had stumbled across the dangerous effects of sound waves at the frequency of seven hertz .
 Vic Tandy has postulated infrasound might be at the root of many reported hauntings . More interesting than ruptured organs to the organisers of the event, the event took place on 31 May .
 Tandy’s theory goes that around the frequency of 19hz which NASA research in the Sixties discovered to be the frequency at which the eyeball resonates infrasound can cause people to see ghostly apparitions .
 It would appear that we have nothing to fear from infrasound but fear itself . Infrasound is a form of radioactivity that can be heard in the sound waves .
 Infrasound has long been associated with sacred music . Some of the largest church organs in the world produce profoundly low frequencies at high volumes . infrasound can be heard at very low levels .
 Psychologist Richard Wiseman was setting out to discover what he was trying to do with mass experiment . The answers to such questions were what psychologist Wiseman wanted to discover .
 This event was not just about science, but rather the synthesis of art and science as promoted by the sciart Consortium . This event is not only about science but also about art, science as well as science .
 Infrasound has been associated with sacred music . Richard Long and Dan Simmonds of the National Physics Laboratory constructed from a length of sewage piping .
 Audience/guinea pigs would fill out a questionnaire at four separate points during the concert, rating feelings such as excitement, drowsiness and happiness and noting any unusual sensations or experiences . The audience would be asked to fill out the questionnaire .
 Infrasound would be present during two of the four pieces and not during the other two . Infrasounds would not be present in the other parts of the project .
 At a later performance the infrasound pieces would be reversed, thereby establishing a control . The infrasounds pieces would then be reversed to establish a control of the control .
 The infrasound will be generated at a frequency of 17hz, rather than 17hz . Wiseman says infrasounds will not be audible at 17hz - disappointing those who’d come for the constipation cure .
 The music was essentially abstract, modem composition, aiming to fuse electronic with classically-derived pieces . The music is essentially abstract .
 The standout piece of the recital was Philip Glass’s ‘Metamorphosis Two’ It called to mind his successful adventures with strings and treated piano with Aphex Twin’ The highlight of the performance was Glass's Metamorphosis 2 .
 'Lo but Hi' by Hayden Parsey and ‘Toccare’ by Ton Bruynel. Well, I noted a tightness in my chest and an increased heart rate during the pieces .
 "I was slightly disturbed to discover after the event that these were the two compositions from which infrasound was completely absent," says the composer .
 My colleague, despite encouragement to note a desire to kill his father, was troubled only by “slight erotic fantasies about the pianist” during the solo piano piece ‘Techno Etude No 3’ by Karen Tanaka, during which infrasound was played .
 Research into the aphrodisiac qualities of low frequency sound urgently needs to be done .
 A further experiment will take place at the Science Museum IMAX theatre at a date to be confirmed .
 He thought that the moggy was a hybrid of cat and flying squirrel but rose up when she ran . He thought she was a flying squirrel, but she ran away .
 Joyce Harrigan knew of a big chubby black-and-white cat that sprouted wings from its shoulders . She was a teenager in Ashford, Middlesex, during World War II, she knew of it .
 The cat was owned by two pensioners, and was often seen in their garden . It attracted many people who would look at it over the wall over the garden wall .
 Passing a neighbor's yard, 1 saw an orange and white longhaired cat which was positively waddling due to large wing-like growths hanging from its midsection .
 It climbed the house porch and a man came out of the door, and I walked up to the door and asked about his winged cat . The man's cat climbed the porch and the man said it was a winged feline . The cat was found on the porch .
 He told me that this was the way the cat sheds fur in the summer, and that it happens each year . He said it was so natural and normal that I must have led quite a sheltered life not to have heard of such a thing . He told her that it happened each year
 The rectangular fur pads were at least five inches long and three to four inches tall . They were the first fur pads to be found in the U.S.
 They were attached to its torso nearest to the front two legs and felt like cardboard with fur haphazardly glued to it . The fur was attached to the torso of the animal, which was attached by its front legs . The animal was found to be in the shape of cardboard with
 I remember the man was saying something about how the pads fall off by themselves but I was so engrossed with the cat that I don't know if he said how long it takes . I remember him saying something to the man about the pads falling off .
 "I do remember him saying that it doesn't seem to hurt the cat, except for the way the weight makes him waddle," she said .
 "We moved to another town that winter so I never got to see if the same thing happened the next year," she says . "We didn't know what happened next year. We moved to a different town so I didn't see if it happened again"
 1998 was clearly the year of the cat . I also heard of a stuffed New World specimen, via Lynda Brooks of Bumham-on-Crouch .
 A stuffed stuffed stuffed cat is about the size of a year-old domestic cat . The stuffed animal is one of the world's oldest examples of stuffed animals .
 Dark reddish-brown in colour with black tabby-like markings, it had thick coarse fur, and was very slim and wild-looking, with a thin tail . But its most striking features were two bony structures, one on each side of its spine .
 Almost shoulder-blade-level, they were covered with flaps of skin that reminded her of the ear-flaps on a deerstalker hat . The woman's body was covered in flaps like those of her own .
 John Raggatt, a postman from Northwood, Middlesex, revealed to me that in 1998, he had twice spied a black winged cat while delivering mail to a private residential area called Moor Park, just outside Northwood .
 The first time he saw it walk out of a driveway, across the road, into a front garden, and down the side of the house . He saw it first in June, when it walked across a driveway and into a garden .
 The winged cats are still very much around, and have been for quite some time . Clearly, although they may not have made the fortean headlines much of late, they are still around .
 If any FT readers have details of additional cases, we’d love to hear from you .
 Janet Bord, Lynda Brooks, Joyce Harrigan, John Raggatt and Jay Allen Sanford for kindly sharing details of the above cases with me .
 KARL SHUKER returns to the subject of winged cats now known to be sufferers from feline cutaneous asthenia . He unearths some additional cases both old and new .
 Wiveliscombe kitten of 1899, the black-and-white individual on show at Oxford Zoo during the 1930s, and the Manchester builder’s yard moggy publicised during the 1970s, are among my favourite fortean creatures .
 Cats exhibiting FCA have abnormally flexible , fragile skin, which if rubbed or stroked can stretch out into long furry wing-like extensions along their shoulders, back or haunches . If merely rubbed, stroked, cats can stretch their furrows into long furrows . Cats exhibiting
 Because these extensions contain musculature, they can even be raised up and down a little, heightening their superficial resemblance to wings . And because they contain musmusature, the extensions can even raise up a little .
 If stretched too much, these extensions peel off, but without any bleeding, thus giving the impression that the ‘wings’ have moulted .
 In recent years, little new material concerning winged cats has been published, but I have continued collecting data concerning these purring paradoxes .
 Here is a long-overdue update, which contains a number of previously unpublished cases, or cases hitherto unpublicised in the literature .
 This book documents Thoreau’s two years of selfimposed solitary existence in a self-built cabin in a wood by the shores of Walden Pond, in Concord, Massachusetts .
 According to Thoreau, a “winged cat” lived in one of the farmhouses in Lincoln nearest the pond . A few years before he lived there, what he specifically refers to as a ‘winged feline’ lived in the farmhouse .
 A one-year-old cat ‘with wings resembling those of a duckling’ was being exhibited locally by David Badcock of the Ship Inn, in Reach, Cambridgeshire .
 Apparently, its wings had previously remained unnoticed until it had been roughly handled, whereupon the affronted felid had outspread them . Apparently, the wings had remained unnoticed .
 Its owner was now charging tuppence to viewers during the daytime . He has begun touring the nearby villages with his winged protege at night .
 Badcock’s lucrative winged cat had been stolen, since when nothing more appears to have been heard of it . A week later, however, the same newspaper reported that Badcock's lucrative wing cat was stolen .
 A double curiosity from Matlock was documented by a local Derbyshire newspaper in 1897 . The double curiosity was documented in a local newspaper .
 The incredible tom had “fully grown pheasant’s wings projecting from each side of its fourth ribs’ Witnesses claimed that it used, outstretched, when running to help it race along at a very fast pace .
 As if its ‘pheasant’s wings’ were not remarkable enough, this particular cat was described as being a male tortoiseshell .
 If true, it would have been an exceedingly rare individual . The tortoiseshell condition is due to a sex-linked mutant gene . The result of that gene is that virtually all tortoisehell cats are female .
 Ralph's mouth only caught Rimmer’s thick jacket sleeve, so the firefighter wasn’t hurt . Ralph’S mouth only catches Rimmer's thick sleeve, and the firefighter was unharmed .
 Ralph's owner says he probably got out through a hole in the screen of his open bedroom window . Ralph’s owner, Ryan Roy, said he likely got out of the house through the screen .
 Roy stopped home briefly Monday afternoon from his job as a school custodian and didn't see Ralph . Roy had stopped home from work and didn’t see Ralph. Ralph died in a car crash Monday .
 After a meal of veggies, an unharmed Ralph sat on his branch and relaxed Tuesday night under a heat lamp . Roy: "I don't think he was hurt, but he was very happy to have his eyes open"
 Greener’s iguana ran away one winter day at home at home in Lake Arrowhead, never to return . Greener's iguana is a rare species of iguana .
 Budget cuts force the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency to consider cutting hours at some state historic sites after Labor Day weekend . Budget cuts will force the state historic preservation agency to consider cuts .
 The agency's budget for historic site operations was cut by $1.1 million for the fiscal year that started July 1 . i. ilton, Massachusets, seems to be unlikely place for a miracle .
 White-collar town of 26,062 residents within sight of Bostons skyscrapers . Understated Colonial houses set amid lush gardens on quiet streets .
 It seems the embodiment of no-nonsense, strait-laced Yankee sensibility . It seems to be the embodiment .
 In the summer of 2003, the town of Fatima, Portugal, had more in common with 1917 Fatima than Puritanism . Yet in the summer 2003, it had more of a common theme with the holidaymakers than Puritans .
 Milton Hospital is a small, private health-care center surrounded by trees on a quiet hill well off the street . An employee of Milton Hospital happened to glance up at a window on the top floor of the three-story, brick office building behind the hospital .
 For the past five years, this window in an eye doctors office had been clouded by condensation, caused by a leaky seal between the window’s double panes that let in moisture . The leak was caused by the leak between the two panes, which let in
 It appeared that the vapor had somehow morphed into a recognizable image . But now it appeared that it had morphed into an image . The image of the vapor has now morphed into the image of a human vapor .
 The white-and-gray image looked to the employee like a full-length figure of Mary, the mother of Jesus, standing on the globe . The employee says the image looked like Mary stood on the world globe .
 The amazed worker called the local newspaper and reported the apparition on June 10 . The apparition is believed to have been the work of a local worker .
 The story went worldwide on the Associated Press news 62 ing on the globe of the Earth . The Boston Globe picked up the story, and shortly thereafter the story went global .
 It even looked to me like her gown was blown back against her lower leg by the wind . The wind was so strong that it blew back her gown .
 Many in crowd talked about how the image had been more detailed in the earlier weeks . Many in the crowd, obviously repeat visitors, talked about the image .
 A woman passes out Xeroxed sheets with lyrics to a hymn . Security guards stand around with a jaded air . The security guards stood around with an airless air .
 At 7.m. the rosary would be prayed in seven different languages . Information passed through the crowd that at 7m. they would pray in seven languages . The rosaries will be prayed at 7pm .
 It seems not only do people see what they need to see in the window, they also discern a motivation for the apparition according to their own concerns .
 Some hope the image is there to heal people, others think it’s to promote racial diversity . Some want to make the woman in the window into the poster child for the anti-abortion movement . Others hope it's to promote diversity .
 People of different races and ethnicities gathered quietly together, willing to open their minds to the possibility of a spiritual, even paranormal, manifestation .
 Janet Brennan is a newspaper editor in Portland, Maine . "As far as I’m concerned, that’s miracle enough," she says .
 Inventor Andrew S Hallidie successfully tested a cable car he had designed for the city of San Francisco . The cable car was designed to be a tourist attraction for the San Francisco city .
 Frontiersman ""Wild Bill"" Hickok was shot and killed while playing poker at a saloon in Deadwood, Dakota Territory, by Jack McCall . McCall was later hanged .
 The original Lincoln ""wheat"" penny first went into circulation, replacing the ""Indian Head" cent . Lincoln's original "wheat" penny replaced the "Indian Head"" cent .
 The sitting 29th president of the United States, Warren G Harding, died in San Francisco . Vice President Calvin Coolidge became president . Harding's death was the death of the sitting President Harding .
 German President Paul von Hindenburg died, paving the way for Adolf Hitler's complete takeover . Adolf Hitler took control of the German government in 1945 .
 Albert Einstein signed a letter to President Franklin D Roosevelt urging creation of an atomic weapons research program . Albert Einstein urged creation of a research program for atomic weapons . Einstein signed the letter urging the creation of the program .
 President Roosevelt signed the Hatch Act, which prohibited civil service employees from taking an active part in political campaigns . Civil service employees were prohibited from taking part in a political campaign .
 John F Kennedy, sank after being rammed in the middle of the night by the Japanese destroyer Amagiri .
 President Harry S Truman, Soviet leader Josef Stalin and British Prime Minister Clement Attlee concluded the Potsdam conference .
 USS Maddox suffered light damage during a skirmish with North Vietnamese patrol torpedo boats in the Gulf of Tonkin . The Maddox was hit by North Vietnamese torpedo boats .
 Former White House counsel John W Dean III was sentenced to one to four years in prison for obstruction of justice in the Watergate coverup . Dean III is the son of former President Richard Nixon . Dean was the White House's chief counsel during the Watergate scandal .
 President George W Bush urged creation of a national intelligence director to coordinate the war on terrorism . But without the sweeping powers for hiring, firing and spending recommended by the Sept. 9 commission .
 Turkish truckers stopped hauling goods for U.S. forces in Iraq after the shooting of a Turkish hostage was shown on the Internet . The shooting of the hostage was posted online and the shooting went viral . Truckers have been hauling supplies for the United States in Iraq since the
 Police in Salt Lake City arrested Mark Hacking, whose wife, Lori, had disappeared . Lori Hacking was found dead in the early hours of her husband's disappearance . Hacking's wife had been missing for more than two weeks .
 The remains of missing Navy pilot Michael ""Scott"" Speicher have been found . The remains were found in 1991 Gulf War . The pilot was killed in the Gulf War in 1991 .
 21 embassies and consulates closed across the Muslim world for the weekend . The U.S. issued an extraordinary global travel warning to Americans about an al-Qaida attack .
 Scotland’s Parliament abolishes papal jurisdiction and approves a Calvinistic confession of faith, thus founding the Church of Scotland . Scotland's Parliament abolished papal authority and approved Calvinistic confessions of faith .
 Henry III, the last of the Valois line of French kings, is fatally stabbed by a Jacobin monk while laying siege to Paris, occupied by Catholic rebels . Henry III was the last French king to die in France .
 The British Parliament moves to Oxford to save itself from decimation as the black plague rages through London . Thousands of people die each week from the plague, killing thousands each week .
 The first United States census is completed; showing a population of 4 million people . The first U.S. census was completed in 1940s . The population of the United States was 4 million .
 Britain’s Admiral Horatio Nelson destroys French fleet in Battle of the Nile . Napoleon Bonaparte and his forces in Egypt . Battle of Nile was the first of its kind .
 Jerome Bonaparte becomes King of Westphalia, created from former Prussian possessions west of Elbe River . He was the first king of the German kingdom . He became the first monarch of Germany in Germany .
 British troops land in Portugal to help oust French forces, succeeding a year later . British troops landed in Portugal in 1940s and fought to oust French troops .
 Germany declares war on Russia at the start of World War I . 1927 : Communists rise in Nanchang, China, and hold the city for a few days . 1927: Communist rise in China and hold city for days .
 The event is now celebrated as the origin of the People’s Liberation Army . The event was the birth of the P.L.A. Army .
 The Olympic games open in Berlin with a ceremony presided over by Adolf Hitler . Adolf Hitler presided over the opening ceremony in Berlin .
 The people of Warsaw rise against the Nazis, in the hope of liberating the city before the arrival of the Red Army . The Red Army arrived in Warsaw in 1944 .
 United States Defense Department begins to pullout almost 3,000 U.S. troops from Vietnam . United States will pull out almost 3-1,000 United States troops from the country .
 Leaders of 35 nations meet in Helsinki, Finland, to affirm a peace charter in Europe . Leaders meet in Finland to affirm the charter in a peace treaty .
 An explosion by the Irish Republican Army kills a British soldier at an army barracks in London . 10 others are wounded in the blast . The explosion is believed to have been carried out by a bomb by the IRA .
 The attack was the first by the IRA on the British mainland since 1984 . The attack is the first since 1984 on the mainland since the IRA took control of the UK in 1984 .
 Talks between Iraq and Kuwait over oil and border disputes break off, with 100,000 Iraqi troops massed on the Kuwaiti border .
 A Swiss woman, Bea Wyler, 44, becomes Germany’s first female rabbi since the Holocaust . Wyler is a 44-year-old Swiss woman . She is the first woman to be a rabbi in Germany's Jewish community .
 Rocket fire sends more than 7,000 refugees fleeing to Thailand as forces of coup leader Hun Sen attack rival bases along the border . Hun Sen's forces are attacking rival bases near the border with Cambodia .
 Serb doctor implicated in 2,000 deaths in concentration camps during Bosnia-Herzegovina war . Milan Kovacevic dies of a heart attack weeks after start of his trial on war crimes charges in The Hague, Netherlands .
 Palestine Liberation Organization leader Yasser Arafat meets with the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, a leftist Palestinian faction opposed to the peace process . Arafat is the leader of the Palestinian Liberation Organization .
 Britain’s Queen Mother Elizabeth is hospitalized for treatment of anemia . She is three days before her 101st birthday . The Queen Mother is being treated for anemia, which affects her health care .
 Azerbaijan switches to Latin alphabet from Cyrillic to reduce Russian influence on Azeri culture . Azerbaijan switched to the Latin alphabet to reduce the influence of Russian influence .
 Iraqi Foreign Minister Naji Sabri invites United Nations weapons inspectors to visit Iraq for the first time since 1998 . U.N. inspectors will be allowed to inspect Iraq's stockpile of weapons . Iraqi foreign minister invites UN inspectors to Iraq for first time in 20 years .
 A suicide bomber driving an explosives-laden truck in Russia smashes through the gates of a military hospital in the southern republic of North Ossetia and kills 50 people . 50 people died in the attack .
 Assailants trigger coordinated series of explosions outside five churches in Baghdad and Mosul during evening services . 11 people and more than 50 others were killed in the first major assault on Iraq’s Christian minority since the 15month-old insurgency began .
 Southern Sudanese riot in Khartoum, smashing cars and shops, blaming government for death of their hero . Vice President John Garang was killed in helicopter crash in Sudan .
 Bridge in Minneapolis suddenly breaks into huge sections and collapses into Mississippi River . Dozens of cars are pitched 60 feet into the water, killing at least four people . Bridge collapses into the river, pitching dozens of cars 60 feet in the water .
 Iran state TV confirms that Tehran has detained three Americans who crossed the border from northern Iraq . Iran says they failed to heed warnings from Iranian guards . State TV says the three Americans crossed into northern Iraq without warning .
 The death toll from massive floods in northwestern Pakistan rises to 1,100 . Rescue workers struggle to save more than 27,000 people still trapped by the raging water .
 U.N. chief urges some 1,200 Iranian exiles to follow orders to leave a camp in northern Iraq . The camp is the site of two deadly raids by Iraqi forces . The U.S. has ordered the camp near Baghdad to relocate .
 Russia grants Edward Snowden temporary asylum, allowing the leaker to slip out of Moscow airport . Snowden has been held up for weeks in hopes of evading espionage charges back home . Russia defies the United States and grants Snowden asylum .
 A monster crocodile has been pictured swallowing a four-foot bull shark whole on a riverbank in northern Australia . The 5 metre long crocodile forced the bull shark into the mangroves and devoured it .
 Brutus, an 18ft crocodile believed to be more than 80 years old, has been a popular attraction with tourists visiting Adelaide River . Brutus is believed to have been at the centre of the Adelaide River for more than 30 years .
 25 tourists on a river cruise got more than they bargained for when they spotted Brutus feasting on a shark . Brutus was spotted by Brutus eating a shark on the River Thames .
 "The shark was still alive. He then went back into the mangroves like he was," says the shark .
 Brutus is easily identifiable by not only his huge size, but by his missing front leg believed to have been lost in a shark attack many years ago . Brutus's front leg is believed to be lost in an attack on a shark in the past .
 In 2011, he made headlines after bursting out of the water right beside a river cruise . In 2011 he burst into the water and made headlines again .
 The two-tonne monster jumped out of the water, giving onlookers quite a shock . Lured by a dangling piece of kangaroo meat, the monster jumped from the water . The monster was caught on camera by a man in the Sydney Harbour Harbour .
 Simon Whipple's tombstone inscription mentions a ""vampire victim of an immortal blood-drinker"
 You may also be familiar with the stones involving the 1 figfrgate Vampire and the Vampire Of Croglin Grange .
 There have been a few other vampire related tales the fit right along with the more famous narratives . . Though these were part of law enforcement investigations .
 On May 1, 1932, a 32-year-old prostitute, Lilly Lindestrom, 32, was discussing plans for the evening’s May Day celebrations with her friend Minnie Jansson, 35, who lived on the same floor and made her living in the same way
 Lilly was nicknamed the “call girl’s” because she was the only person in the building with a phone . She was nicknamed “the call girl” for being only the person with a cell phone .
 Lilly received a call from a potential client, asking if he could come over to see him . Lilly says the client was a client who asked him to come over . Lilly: "It's a dream come true"
 Lilly was found dead in her flat in the Sankt Eriksplan district of Stockholm, Sweden . Lilly was one of the world's most famous women to be found dead .
 Minnie said Lilly had to borrow condoms from her apartment twice one evening to borrow them . Minnie had to go to Minnie's apartment twice to get condoms from Lilly's apartment .
 On the second occasion, around 9 PM, Lilly was totally naked beneath her coat . On the other occasion, she was completely naked .
 Minnie became concerned after ringing Lilly’s doorbell and getting no reply . Minnie rang Lilly's doorbell but got no reply. Minnie was worried about Lilly's disappearance . Minna became concerned about Lilly not answering doorbell .
 Lilly was found lying dead on the sofa, her clothes neatly folded on a chair nearby . Lilly's clothes were neatly folded in a chair near the scene of her death . She was found by police officers who found her body in her home .
 Further inspection revealed that the blood had been drained from Lilly’s body, and the killer had used the ladle to drink it .
 Eighty of Lilly’s customers were investigated, but no suspects were revealed . No suspects have been revealed .
 Minnie hadn’t recognized the voice on the phone from what she’d heard, but she commented that the man had seemed sober and polite . Minnie said the man seemed sober, polite .
 There didn't seem to be any fingerprints on any of the suspicious items at the scene . There didn’t appear to be fingerprints on the items .
 One theory was that the killer was a police officer who had bludgeoned Lilly with his truncheon and knew how to cover his tracks . The killer was believed to have been a local police officer .
 The body of Petre Toma had been unearthed six weeks later by his brother-in-law in the presence of several other members of the family, including his widow and her grand-daughter . The body was found in the house of his wife and daughter .
 According to several testimonies, they made an incision in the chest of Toma to extract his heart before burning it . Toma's heart was extracted from his chest before being burned .
 A local custom to protect against vampires, they dissolved ashes in water and drank it . One report states that, in accordance with a local custom, the ashes were dissolved in water .
 As soon as the exorcism ritual was performed the dead body “did not come any more to haunt” its family . According to her, as soon as she performed, the dead was no longer to haunt the family .
 In 1984 nine people were found dead in various sections of the French Quarter of New Orleans . They all had been murdered by having their throats out .
 Paramedics responding to the scenes were struck by the fact that there was no blood at the scenes . Something or someone had simply sucked all the blood directly from the victims .
 Police to this day do not have a suspect in this case . The murder spree ended as quickly as it had began . Police do not know a suspect .
 Rumors suggested it was the work of a rogue vampire that was destroyed by the elder vampire sect of New Orleans because of pressure placed by authorities on the known vampire community in city .
 In 1933, on two different nights, police were called to Royal Street where on each night young prostitutes were found laying in an alley with their throats tom out .
 Both women had been dead only a few minutes when they were found but no blood was found at the scenes . Both women were found dead only minutes after they were discovered .
 A local resident who lived above one of the murder scenes claimed a dark figure was observed leaning over one of its victims and people began to scream for police . A dark figure appeared to be seen leaning over the victim and people screamed for police, he said .
 A witness said the dark figure had climbed over a 12 foot wall at the end of the alley with little effort . The witness said it was a dark figure who climbed the wall with little difficulty .
 Witness says dark figure was a man dressed in a black cape and hat . Witness says it appeared to be a dark figure dressed in black cape . Witness: It appeared to the witness that the man was in a dark cape .
 The family name was Alfort and there were rumors that they had descended from royalty . There were rumors they had descent from royalty, but they were not royalty .
 They bought land by the river and built what was then a very nice large southern colonial home . The home was built by the family in colonial style .
 Alfort opened up an office and phannacy in a few rooms in the front of the house . Alfort has been in charge of a radio company in the past .
 The local people were at first really happy that a new doctor had arrived in their community . . But very quickly this attitude was about to change .
 Two men both who had gone to the new doctor to be treated for gout suddenly died . The two men both died suddenly at the same doctor's surgery .
 Both men had been well liked members of the tire community . The circumstances angered many of the residents of the community .
 The local minister brokered peace in the community and everything seemed to be fine . However in a short time the local minister had brokenred peace with the community .
 Fall the young daughter of the minister was found dead in her bed with puncture marks to her throat . The young daughter was found by the minister's daughter in Fall 2013 . She was found to have punctured her throat with a knife wound to her neck .
 The minister’s wife swore she had seen a dark form hovering over her daughter . She screamed but it was too late and the child quickly succumbed to the attack . The minister's wife swore .
 The incident caused a huge outcry in the town and the people of the area started to claim a vampire or a group of vampires was in their midst . The incident was the first time a vampire had been seen in the area .
 For many nights groups of men ventured out and searched but found nothing . The search for the remains of the fallen victims continues .
 Some men claim to have seen a large black bat-like creature fly over them . However some men claim they saw it in a strange way . The incident happened in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 A few nights after the sighting a young boy ran down the Ml to his grandfather’s house and proclaimed that something was up Hie hill in his house attacking his parents . The boy was able to get to the grandfather's house .
 The grandfather summoned other men and they ran to the house but only found the parents and then two young daughters, who were dead with puncture wounds to their necks . The grandfather and two other men were also found dead .
 Soldiers were called in and searched the area . The area was immediately alerted . Soldiers were immediately alerted.
 Black form of a human run from the house, run down the hill and into the Alfort house . Then one evening screams were heard and when men arrived they witnessed a black form of human run . The Alfort family lived in the house in Alfort, north of the town of
 Bodies of a young couple with bite marks to their throats found in village house . Villagers heard screams coming from the house where the screams had come from . When the village men went into the house they found the bodies .
 The murderer ran down the hill and into the Alfort house, Alfort said . Almost at once more men came and they were told that the murderer had escaped .
 The upstairs bedrooms each had beds but it was clear that no one had slept in them . No one had even slept in the upstairs bedrooms .
 Sheriff and search party went downstairs to find three caskets and Mrs. Mrs. Smith . Sheriff's search party found three casketets and three dead people in the basement .
 Alfort, who was dressed in black, lying in one of the caskets and very much alive . Alfort was wearing black when he was found dead in a casket in the hospital .
 The sheriff and the village minister announced to the crowff assembled outside the Alfort house that the Alforts and their son were vampires . Later that night the sheriff and village minister told the crowf assembled outside of the house that they had been vampires .
 The Alforts were summarily hanged and then placed back inside the house . The Alfort were then placed in the house again and hanged .
 The couple's 1 5 year old son was not found and never seen in the area again . However the couple’s 1 5-year-old son was never found .
 His household, his family, and his live stock, and possibly even the live stock of the whole village, die off rapidly . 2.2. 2.3.4.5.5 . His household and family, including his entire family, die rapidly .
 He may eat what he finds in dishes and knock things about, or he may help with the housework and cut wood . He may also help cut wood or eat what is found in dishes .
 There was a Hungarian vampire which could not be kept away, even by the priest and holy water . 3.2.3.4.5.5 .
 A hole about the size of a serpent may be found near the tombstone of the dead man . A hole may also be found in the grave of the deceased .
 If so, it is a sign of a vampire, because vampires come out of graves by just such holes . 5.5.5 . 5 years later, it's a sign that a vampire comes out of a grave by such a hole .
 Even in the daytime a white horse will not walk over the grave of a vampire, but stands still and snorts and neighs . 6.6.6: "Even in the daylight a white ... horse ... snorts, neighs. 6"
 If it has only spoilt and mined things at home, and eaten what it could find, the mouth will be covered with maize meal . The mouth is covered in maize meal.
 Two fungi infested violins bested a multi-million dollar Stradivarius . A recent sound test before about 1 80 people, the violins were bested by the fungi .
 Ninety nine percent of wood-attacking fungi create loose and soft wood that has strange acoustic properties . Ninety-nine percent of the wood is attacked by fungi .
 By measuring how sound echoes through a tree, scientists can get a good idea of how healthy the tree is . Scientists can also get a sense of a tree's health by measuring its sound .
 While using sound waves to check up on trees, Schwarze noted that a handful of fungal infections didn't produce widespread rot . Schwarze notes that a few of the fungal infection didn't cause widespread rot in trees .
 The density of the wood decreased slightly, but the speed of sound remained the same . The speed of the sound was also reduced slightly .
 The top and bottom plates of a violin are made using two different kinds of wood . The violin's top and top plates are made from two different types of wood.
 Physisporinus vitreus for the spruce, and Xylaria longipes Nitschke (also known as Dead Moll's Fingers) for the sycamore . Physporinus Vitreus is also known as "Dead Moll Fingers"
 The fungi grows from the rock slate into the wood, degrading the pit membranes on both sapwood and heart wood . The majority of the wood is unaffected by the fungi .
 Generally speaking, the wood sounds warmer, a combination of increasing the dampening factor that makes high notes more palatable to the ear, and an increase in the radiation ratio .
 Schwarze says treating the wood with fungi artificially recreates the structure of the wood that was naturally occurring during Antonio Giacomo Stradivarius's lifetime .
 The Little Ice Age, period of abnormally cool weather between 1645 to 1715, made trees create more uniform wood . The period of cool weather in 1645-1715 made trees grow more uniformly .
 Treating wood with the fungus artificially recreates wood similar to that which was created in the Little Ice Age . Wood can be recreated by treating wood with a fungus .
 Two violins were created using wood from the same tree but not treated with fungus . The violins are made from wood from same tree without using the fungus .
 Three violins were made from wood treated with the fungi for six, nine and 12 months . The wood was treated with fungus for six to nine months .
 Only violins treated for six and nine months were used in the testing . Violin violins were treated at the same time for six to nine months .
 Violin treated for twelve months developed cracks during production and was discarded . Violin developed cracks when it developed cracks in production .
 British violinist Matthew Trusler played for audience of more than 1 80 people at forestry conference . Using four violins, two treated and two untreated, and a Stradivarius valued at $2 million, he played for more than 80 people .
 More than 90 people ranked the bioviolin treated for nine months as the Stradivarius .
 Matthew Trusler's real Stradivarius came in second, followed by the violin treated for six months . The violin is a replica of the Stradivari by the composer .
 It takes a master violinist to bring out a violin's complete promise . Whether the violin is an original Stradivarius or made from fungus-treated wood, it's a master .
 A great violin ""cannot be accomplished with one or another secret chemical or biological application,"" said Wiebe . A great violist cannot be done with secret chemical, biological applications, he said . "A great violin cannot be accomplished by secret chemical applications," he added .
 The cows, calves and a prize bull were crowded together under crabapple trees when lightning struck . The cows were crowded under crab apple trees when the lightning struck, rancher Jean Taylor says .
 Cast iron pillar is 23ft high and weighs more than six tonnes . The cast iron pillar, which has never corroded, is 23 ft high . It is the largest in the world and has never been corroded .
 A thin layer of 'misawite' (iron hydrogen phosphate hydrate) has protected the monument, preventing the iron from reacting with oxygen to form rust . Theories explaining the mysterious properties of the pillar are legion .
 A film formed over the pillar within three years of its erection and has been growing ever since . After 1,600 years the layer is just onetwentieth of a millimetre thick .
 The film was formed by high amounts of phosphorous in the iron as much as one per cent against less than 0.05 per cent in modern iron . A report published in the journal Current Science suggests the film formed by phosphorous .
 In modern furnaces, iron ore is heated with coking coal and limestone to make pig iron . Iron ore was heated with coal, limestone and coking cokeke to create pig iron. Iron iron is heated in modern iron furnaces .
 The limestone helps to remove phosphorus, but the ancient Indian iron smiths didn't use limestone, so the phosphorus would have remained . The limestone is used to remove the phosphorus from an iron smith .
 Imagine Pinocchio becoming a real boy and then going back to being a puppet . The puppet puppet became a boy himself and then went back to a puppet again .
 You can see it just up the road from Roscoe and Rockland . You can also see it here, circled in blue . It's just up a road from the town of Cooks Falls, just up from the peak of Roscoe .
 In the 1930s, there was no town on that stretch between Rockland and Beaverkill — just a dirt road . The road is now a mainstay in the town of Beaverkill .
 Companies that create maps get their work copied all the time . Pirate-Protected maps are protected by the law . Maps companies get copied all over the world .
 You check spellings, you work on the colors, you get all the cities in the right place, and along comes a gas company, or a tourism agency . It takes what you’ve done, slaps its own name on it .
 Maps are going to be identical. Because there's a real world out there, obviously maps will be identical . The map is based on a map of the real world .
 We're only guilty of describing the same world the other map described . So we're only . guilty of . describing the . same world . The other map describes the world .
 Jurors think, "" Hmm sounds reasonable,"" and the pirates get away with it . Jurors say, "Hmm sounds reasonable" and get away from it .
 General Drafting Co. invented Agloe in the 1 930s . Inventing Agloe was a joint effort of two men .
 Rand McNally told the court that its designers went to the official map of that county, looked up the coordinates, and on the spot called Agloe they found a building . That building, they told the judge, is the Agloe General Store .
 The owners had seen Agloe on a map distributed by Esso, which owned scores of gas stations . Esso had distributed a map of Agloe to the owners of the stations .
 If Esso says this place is called Agloe, the store folks figured, well, that's what we'll call ourselves . The store's name is Agloe . Esso: "If Esso calls this place Agloe"
 A made-up name inadvertently created a real place that, for a time, really existed . The name of the place was made up of a fake name, but it was a real name .
 LLI Navigeren Jacobs says, "n arrow still lands in the spot where Messrs. Messrsrs. Jacobs and Ms. Jacobs were killed .
 Lindberg and Alpers placed it long after the general store there has gone, long after it has gone . Lindberg, Alpers and Alperger placed it in the building in the 1930s .
 Google was perpetuating an 80-year-old fantasy that for a short time turned real, then unreal . So, as of last week, when I wrote this post, it was Google perpetuating a fantasy .
 Instead of a Google Gotcha post, you are now attending an instant online funeral for a town that never was and then was, then wasn't and now isn't . And so, instead of an online funeral, you're now attending a Google gotcha post .
 Frank Jacobs: Think of the late Otto Lindberg and the late Ernest Alpers, who gave their initials so that Agloe might be . Think of proprietors of the Agloe General Store, and of the Somebody at Google, who, apparently, reads Frank Jacobs' blog, Strange
 How to know if you are dealing with a demonic entity? Exorcism and exorcism .
 Exorcism was based solely on a few Missionary stories and the movie ‘The Exorcist’ when in these sessions of power encounter I was a bit disappointed. Back then my experience was based only on a handful of Missionary . stories .
 I was expecting incredible paranormal phenomena with these incidents of Exorcism. "I'm expecting incredible Paranormal Phenomenon. I'm not going to be able to believe it was an exorcism," says author .
 There were no heads turning around, levitation or glowing red eyes . But no heads turned around or levitation .
 There were incidents of bizarre personality shifts, people speaking in foreign languages, and drastic temperature changes in the room as the ceremony was performed, while these were remarkable in and of themselves .
 Paranormal activity can manifest itself during an Exorcism or confrontation with a demonic entity, it is a rarity and not a common experience . As time went by and I was exposed to various other techniques for performing other ceremonies and other spiritual interventions .
 Today we live in a time of growing interest in the paranormal, with new investigative teams appearing on every front .
 Staged television shows that seem to produce dramatic encounters with the dark entities have given today’s generation an unrealistic view and the rare is now expected to be common place .
 Spiritualism movement of the 1800s saw a revival of interest in the paranormal . Along with this revived interest in paranormal have come the hucksters and con-men . Just as they had in the height of the movement of Spiritualism, they had also come back to con men .
 Self proclaimed professionals with limited or no professional training or experience have set themselves on a pedestal with internet degrees that any grade school kid could attain . Self proclaimed professional degrees are set on pedestal by people who have no professional experience or experience .
 Some self proclaimed experts on the demonic will gather a faithful following . Some claim expertise in the field for such a length of time that they must have been gifted toddlers when they were first trained in demonic deliverance .
 When questioned about their training they rely upon their degrees or nebulous credentials . When questioned they rely on their degrees to answer questions about training .
 If you question the credentials you are either accused of religious bias or self serving motives . If you doubt your credentials you will be accused of bias or of self-serving motives . This is not the first time you've questioned credentials .
 There are a lot of people out there in the paranormal community who are teaching others or performing rituals who have no idea what they are doing . There are also people who are performing rituals and teaching others .
 As a clergyman who has ministered in Evangelical, Mainline and Non-Denomi national churches I have to say from personal experience the same thing happens in the church. But hey, as a clergymen who has . ministered, I have said from personal . experience the
 I have met some ministers who had no formal training but can preach, teach and lead better than most who have had the training . I have also met ministers who can preach and teach better than anyone who has had the proper training .
 Ministers who had no formal training were often not only leading their flock astray with heresy, but were in it for the power of the position . But more often not those ministers who I have met who had . no formal . training .
 While demonologists and exorcists without formal training, many are self serving and self serving . Such is the case with the current crop of paranormal experts as well .
 Demonologist is also in it for the power of the position, in their everyday life they have no control or power . They find it in their role as a demonologist or exorcist .
 The problem in this happening in the paranormal community is that false assumptions can be codified just by positions of power . Such is life anywhere you might look, but the problem is that it is not just a myth .
 Paranormal investigators who actually might have a case of demonic influence might not understand just what they are encountering . Page 1 Untitled influence might be a demonic influence .
 The average team should be able to glean some useful information from my diatribes . Along with stories of the unexplained I will take one report a month and delve into the area of practical demonology .
 Please be advised that my worldview is from a historical conservative Protestant Christian perspective . I'm a conservative Protestant Protestant Christian .
 The Reformed theologian believes in a second act of grace that comes with the struggle to maintain personal piety .
 If you are not Christian, you can transpose these to your faith if you wish . If you want to be a Christian, these can be transposed to a Christian .
 Someone possessed by a demonic presence will not abide Scripture. Someone who is possessed by an evil spirit will abide by Scripture. The Bible is not to abide in Scripture.
 They will also show an aversion to holy items such as a cross, crucifix or holy water . They also show a dislike for holy items like holy water or holy items .
 There might be physical manifestations such as poltergeist activity or temperature change and auditory manifestations . There might also be physical .
 "They do not manifest themselves in the everyday life except for rare occasions," says the author of the book . "They are not manifested in the daily life except from rare occasions"
 More often this occurs with multiple personalities the demonic manifests . These personalities are not human characters but rather primal forces with intellect and malice .
 The person makes a very unusual and seemingly impossible voice . Sometimes the voice may seem to be coming from many places or from multiple people with an echo .
 Not always a ‘demonic’ bass voice like in popular fiction, this voice can be high pitched or whispery . Not always always a 'demonic' bass voice .
 The most common is the growl, but more than naught it is not a supernatural voice . It is not the most common growl in the world, but it's not the only one .
 Sometimes the possessed will eat something unimaginable and indigestible, or their tastes of cuisine will become dramatically altered . The possessed may have eaten something unimaginable .
 If there are Page 2 Untitled letters or words make sure that there is no evidence of tampering by the victim or others and that it is a real supernatural experience . Make sure that the victim is not tampered and that the experience is real .
 A physical manifestation seems to be extreme behavior and often by an extreme behavior . However all the above are indeed in and of themselves, a physical manifestation .
 It usually is a last resort by a less powerful entity which is itself frightened by the prospect of being once again disembodied . Contrary to popular thought it usually is the last resort .
 This is by no means a complete list, but the categories are the most commonly encountered by those who have had actual experiences in power encounters with malevolent entities .
 Russell spent four days searching the same area earlier this year, and was thrilled to hear a sound that he believes may have been the call of an ivory-bill . Russell spent the same time searching the area, and he believes it could be an ivory bill .
 Russell plans to mount a return expedition in October to pursue the ivory-bill mystery further .
 Cut marks indicate flesh, tongue and brains were removed from the skull, police say . The girl's skull and jaw were found with cut marks that indicate she was removed from her skull .
 Those were traditional cuts for animal butchery of the 17th century . Those were "all parts of the cuisine of the 16th century,"" he said .
 The starving time was a period two years later in which 80% of the colonists died . The starving period was two years after the colonists began to starve .
 The settlers had been joined by new colonists late that summer, among them women and children . Their main supply ship had disappeared in a storm, leaving them without food .
 Owsley reported on the forensic analysis of 1 7th century human remains and a reconstruction of her appearance made by forensic scientists . Cannibalism at Jamestown confirmed confirmed .
 The remains had been excavated by Jamestown archaeologists led by William Kelso in 2012 . The remains were part of a 20-year excavation of the James Fort site .
 A forensic fecial reconstruction was produced by StudioEIS of Brooklyn, N.Y., in consultation with William Kelso of the Jamestown Rediscovery Project . The reconstruction shows a forensic fecal reconstruction of the 16th century human remains .
 1/2 5/1/13 Jamestown cannibalism confirmed by skull from ‘Jane’ Smithsonian skull . Most modem accounts generally credited the accounts as reliable .
 Horn and Owsley argued the butchery marks on Jane Jane provide stronger evidence for the practice . Hornsley said Jane Jane was a victim of the practice and should not have been executed .
 The skull and shin bone of Jane Jane were found to show she had been cannibalized . The shin bone indicates she was cannibalized, a police official says .
 Four shallow chops to the forehead were attempted in a first, foiled attempt to open the skull . The first attempt was unsuccessful, with four attempts to cut the skull open .
 "The person doing this was not a very good, or experienced butcher,"" Owsley said . The final blow split the cranium opea . The person doing the butchering was "not very good," he said .
 Chop marks on the shin bone resemble more conventional butchers' marks seen on animal bones from the time . She was doubtless one of the newly arrived settlers, though still not definitively identified .
 It seems almost axiomatic that new technology is always an improvement on the old . But it's not always always a good thing, with new technology always improving on old technology .
 Archaeologists uncovered evidence at the site of the 1607 James Fort on Jamestown Island, Virginia . Evidence was uncovered that proves that, sometimes, the opposite is true . Archaeologists say the fort was built in 1607 .
 In 2005, a complete jack-of-plates was uncovered from a soldier's pit near the traces of a wall of the early fort . The remains of the fort were found in 2005 .
 Jack-of plates was a piece of body armor, in appearance like a jacket, that provided protection through the use of many small overlapping plates, as many as 1,000, made of iron and sewn between layers of fabric .
 By 1607 in Europe, the solid iron breastplate was the most commonly used succeeding technology . This form of body armor was used as far back as the 14th century . It was used by the early James Fort in North America .
 "Here in Virginia they were very effective against arrows,"" he said . But here in Virginia, "they were very ineffective against arrows"
 The solution was found in the more flexible and effective jack-of-plates . The solution to the problem was found to be more flexible .
 A suit of armor that included a typical single-piece iron breastplate was created by the Romans .
 An early 1 7th century jack-of-plates is an example of an early 1 . century jack of-plates .
 Gamble is at work carefully revealing and restoring the jack, a process requiring specialized tools, careful hands, and great patience . Gamble is working on the jack to reveal and restore it .
 The artifact is currently encased in a soil matrix that was lifted from the original location and brought back to the lab in 2005 . It will take more than half a year to see the full light of day to be revealed .
 Experts believe weather and water conditions in the breeding grounds, off the coast of China, have been ideal for the jellyfish in recent months .
 Namesake Japanese fishing village celebrates United States election result . The crew of the fishing boat was thrown into the sea when the vessel capsized, but the three men were rescued by another trawler .
 The local Coast Guard office reported that the weather was clear and the sea was calm at the time of the accident . The Coast Guard said the weather had been clear .
 One of the largest jellyfish in the world, the species can grow up to 2 meters in diameter . The jellyfish is one of the world's largest .
 The last time Japan was invaded on a similar scale, in the summer of 2005, the jellyfish damaged nets, rendered fish inedible with their toxic stings and even caused injuries .
 Last year there were virtually no sightings of Nomura's jellyfish on the Tsushima Current . Some years see thousands of the creatures floating across the Sea of Japan on the current .
 In 2007 there were 15,500 reports of damage to fishing equipment caused by the creatures . In 2007, 15,000 reports were made of damage caused by creatures .
 Experts believe that one contributing factor to the jellyfish becoming more frequent visitors to Japanese waters may be a decline in the number of predators, which include sea turtles .
 A river hag , similar to Peg Powler or a qrindvlow, would pull children or the elderly into the water and drown them . She would pull the elderly and children from the water .
 She was often described as green-skinned, with long hair, and sharp teeth . She was also known to have green skin, with sharp teeth and green hair .
 Folklorists have seen her as a memory of sacrificial practices . She is likely to have been an invention to frighten children from dangerous waters similar to the Slavic Rusalka .
 She is said to live at the fountainhead of largerivers in Jamaica sitting on top of a rock, combing her long black hair .
 She usually appears at midday and she disappears if she observes anyone approaching . She disappears if anyone approaches her if she is seen approaching .
 If an intruder sees her first and their eyes meet, the intruder will be killed . The intruder will also be killed if he doesn't see her first .
 The name is also used to describe pondweed or duckweed . It can form a continuous mat over the surface of a smallbody of water, making it potentially treacherous .
 Ginny 'had no known form, due to the fact that she never appeared above the surface of the pond' Another informant, however, said Ginny ‘had no . known form’ Another informant said Ginny had 'no known form' Ginny never appeared in the pond .
 A river hag , similar to Peg Powler or a grindylow, would pull children or the elderly into the water and drown them . She would pull them from the water or pull them over .
 She is called Jinny Greenteeth in Lancashire, but in Cheshire and Shropshire she is called Ginny Greenteth . She is also known as Wicked Jenny, Wicked Jenny or Peg o’ Nell .
 With this meaning the name is common around Liverpool and south west Lancashire . The name is often used in the city of Liverpool and the south west .
 Jenny Greenteeth is a well known figure that is part of the English folklore . Jenny is the most famous figure in English folklore. Jenny is also known as a well-known figure in folklore .
 The tradition says it lived in a river in Yorkshire, and that it was a very bad spirit of rivers . The spirit of the spirit is believed to have lived in the River Thames .
 The story tells that some time ago there was a family with a mother, a father, a son, a daughter and a grandmother who was crazy . The family lived in a house with a family of seven people .
 The mother and children were engaged to collect the vegetables from the fields, the father took care of the wood, to check the traps and collecting prey to take water from the well, and the grandmother had the task of tidying up the house and cook .
 During summer the family could get along without much trouble, but in winter the food was scarce and all went hungry . In winter the family went hungry and went hungry in winter .
 One day the son asked why it was not possible to fish from the river to have more food . His grandmother slapped him and replied that he was crazy and that nobody went into the river because here there was Jenny Greenteeth .
 The boy asked who this Jenny Greenteeth was and grandmother laughed at the ignorance of the young man and told him it was a creature that seized and drown anyone looking into the river . Grandmother said the creature seized and drowned anyone looking in the river.
 Once caught the evil creature killed the poor unfortunates and ate all their meat to the bone . Once caught, the evil beast ate all the meat .
 The young man laughed and denigrated her grandmother, who was even more angry and told him to be careful . Jenny Greenteeth was ready to be ready at all times, she told him .
 Its favorites preys were the young people and children because they are more tender and tasty to eat . Its favorite preys preys was to eat children and young people because of their tenderness .
 The boy paid no attention to what her grandmother had told him and as the winter continued to advance and the food scarce, he decided to take care of everything . The boy took care of the animals and took them to safety .
 He remained for some time on the shore, but strangely did not see any fish pass so while he was searching the waters saw one stranded in some green algae . The fish was stranded in the algae .
 He tried to take it and pull it out of the water, but it seemed anchored to the seabed . So he pulled harder and harder until he managed to detach the algae and the fish escaped .
 Long green arms with long nails are attached to a body under water . The arms were no algae, but they were attached to an underwater body .
 He also saw a grinning face and was pulled into the river where he drowned . He saw a smiling face and then saw a man's grinning face as he fell into the water . The man was pulled from the river and drowned in the river .
 Elsewhere in England, Ginny, Jenny Wicked o’Nell or Peg is also known by other names like Ginny, Wicked o'Nell . Elsewhere, Ginny and Peg are also known as Jenny and Peg in England .
 Its name is also used to identify a type of plant that can completely cover an entire pool of water and that makes it very dangerous, especially for children .
 Still today, mothers tell their children the story of Jenny Greenteeth to persuade them to stay away from rivers .
 The moral of all Jenny Greenteeth stories is to stay away from rivers and lakes . It is thought that she was the imagined creation of mothers who wanted to warn their children away from the water's edge with frightening tales .
 Her stories may have also derived from duckweed, aqueous plant that wraps its tendrils around one's leg and traps them under water . Duckweed is a plant that traps people under water, trapping them under the water .
 While most stories paint Jenny Greenteeth in morbid, unredeeming tones, some tales show a somewhat tender- albeit mislleading-side to the Greentoothed Woman .
 In these accounts she uses her long bony arms to embrace her victims, stroking them with her sharp fingernails until they fall into a deep sleep whereupon she devours them . The accounts show how she stroked her victims until they fell asleep before devouring them .
 Upon hearing the sad melody, sailors had one last chance to turn back before she would strike . Schlosser: "Sailors' last chance was to turn around"
 Superstitions regarding water have been passed down over centuries . We may take part in some of these customs without even knowing their origins . Superstition regarding water has passed down to centuries .
 Throwing coins into a well in exchange for a wish resembles the custom begun thousands of years ago . People tossed offerings into wells to appease the gods and ensure the continuance of the water .
 The Tweed River in Scotland was said to have been subdued by one casting salt over its waters with nets .
 There is a tradition of decorating wells with pictures of flowers that may have Victorian origins, or may even trace back to the days of the Black Death .
 Some villages credited their escape to their sweet water, and they dress their wells to protect it . Some villages still believe their escape was due to the water .
 There is no protection, though, against the wicked Greentoothed Woman once you are within her grasp . There are no protection from the wicked woman once you have her .
 Like the tale of Jenny Greenteeth, all these superstitions are messages used by our ancestors to warn us against the danger of water .
 Some people believe the Turin Shroud to have been Christ's burial cloth, but others believe it is a fake .
 The newly found doth has a simpler weave than Turin's, scientists say . The newly discovered doth also has a simple weave than the ones found in Turin .
 The body of a man wrapped in fragments of the shroud was found in a tomb dating from the time of Jesus near the Old City of Jerusalem . It is believed the body of the man was wrapped in the fragments of a shroud .
 The tomb is part of a cemetery called the Field of Blood, where Judas Iscariot is said to have committed suicide . It is believed Judas committed suicide in the field of blood, where he is believed to have killed himself .
 They say he was wrapped in a cloth made of a simple two-way weave, very different to the complex weave of the Turin Shroud . They say the cloth was made of something similar to the simple weave of Turin .
 Turin Shroud did not originate from lst-Century Jerusalem, say researchers . They conclude that the Shroud did . not originate in Jerusalem . As a result, they conclude that they . conclude that Turin . Shroud didn't originate from Jerusalem .
 Believers say the cloth bears the imprint of a man's face is an authentic image of Christ . Tests 20 years ago dated the fabric to the Middle Ages, but believers say it is authentic .
 The nightmarish forces that haunted the waking hours of ancient man were believed to be susceptible to iron’s magic power, whether it took the form of the horseshoe attacked to the cottage door or a knight secreted beneath it .
 Iron coffin nails on the lintel of the door provided protection against all wandering spirits . According to the Roman historian Plin, iron coffin nails were placed on the door .
 A form of white magic employed against suspected witches until well into the 19th century, consisted of filling a bottle with pins and heating it intensely . White magic was a form of 'white magic' employed by suspected witches .
 This had the effect of so tormenting the hag that she was compelled to relinquish her hold on her victim . The hag was so tormented that she relinquished her hold that she had to give up her victim's control .
 The custom of touching cold iron to counteract the Evil Eye is still observed in modem Italy . Touching cold iron is also seen as a way to counter the evil eye . The custom is still seen in modem Italian .
 A jettatore, an individual with the power to ‘fascinate’ or cast the Evil Eye, can also be overcome by the jangling of iron keys . To a devil the very sound of iron is anathema .
 Even in the 20th century, King Alfonso of Spain was embarrassed by the constant jangling of iron keys wherever he traveled .
 He eventually realised that he could do had th' a h , 1S father who to d hlm tbat a birthmark was a Three murderers . Three murderers who went to any lengths to satisfy their greed .
 Dorothy Puente, Michael Abdul Malik and acid bath slayer 'sz r ,otn a re,p “* bk “ label him a vampire. “” bk ' label him “a vampire.” “ “
 With the marriage on 6 July 1934. SZS dt^7by ^ ,h “ appearin8 ' bonkers ' an,i ssr’^-' 1 ” «*^»-« *<^-«*. b^ ta... with
 Beatrice gave birth to a baby officially wed because he already had a wife after the birth . Beatrice's husband already has a wife, but Beatrice was not officially wed .
 McSwan tufd his T TTT ** ™ by a ^ Willia ™ ‘Mac’ Donald sotry to see him leave when he decided he wanted glittering pries' dsewtefe" 8 ’ Pr ° m ° m
 Thousands of immigrant families in Kern County strived to exist during the 1930s . Kern was home to sea of shanties .
 Families lived in squatters camps, ranch-operated housing, city-sponsored camps and federal government camps . Families were forced to live in squatter camps, government camps and ranch-run housing .
 This camp was depicted in the book and movie “The Grapes Of Wrath,” where the Joad family heard the place was going to be burned out that night . The camp was shown in the movie and book “Grapes of Wrath”
 In reality, it wasn't burned and it increased in size as more families moved from the Midwest . "It's not burned," says author of the book, "It wasn't really burned"
 Kern County Public Health Department assessed the camp’s health conditions . Kern County public health department assesses health conditions at the camp .
 Residents were allowed to move to approved sanitary facilities such as Arvin, Shafter and Visalia Federal Camps . Residents were able to move into approved facilities .
 Another large camp, called “Little Oklahoma, was located at Brundage Lane and Cottonwood Road . The camp was also known as Little Oklahoma .
 It was surrounded by a slaughter house and stockyards, a tallow rendering facility, and a county sewer farm . The farm was also surrounded by slaughter houses, stockyards and tallow renders facilities .
 Dust Bowl Days is a celebration of the ‘Okie’ migrant experience, an integral part of Bakersfield and Kern’s history . Kern County established a transient camp at the old fairgrounds on North in the '30s .
 Weedpatch is just south of Lamont for the fun . This year is no exception, so get out of the of jalopy and head on down .
 Authors Gerald Haslaiti, Rick Wartzman, Jerry Stanley, Elizabeth Strickland and others will be there to meet the public and sell and sign their books . The widow of “Oklahoma Cookin’’s” author John Day will also be
 Beans and corn bread, biscuits and gravy, homemade cobblers and other Okie foods will be available for purchase . The event will be held at 8 p.m. Saturday in downtown Oklahoma City .
 Residents worked in exchange for room and board by clearing vegetation from Kern River bed for flood control . Residents cleared vegetation from the Kern Riverbed for the flood control effort .
 Kern County also purchased property near Weedpatch to build a transient camp . Kern County has purchased property in Weedpatch, California .
 In 1935, the federal government bought the Weedpatch Camp as an experiment . The camp was bought by the government as a federal experiment in 1935 .
 Dozens of these settlements were built in California by the Works Progress Administration . It was the beginning for dozens of California settlements built by the WPA .
 For 10 cents a day, a family received tent space, sanitary facilities, electricity, a garden plot and news of jobs . A family received 10 cents per day for tent space and sanitary services . For a family, tent space was provided by the government .
 We always had a grand time in their swimming hole and running and roller skating on the wooden dance pavilion . We were also roller skydiving, roller skating and running around the dance pavilions. We were very fond of the swimming hole, roller skateing and running .
 After World War II began, these government-funded communities were gradually eliminated .
 War time jobs became plentiful and nothing remained of the Great Depression and the Dust Bowl except in our memories . The Dust Bowl and Dust Bowl were the only thing left of the Depression and Dustbowl except from the memories .
 George Gilbert Lynch is a member of the Kern County Historical Society and writes about local history . Lynch: "The Kern County History of Kern County"
 Scientists postulate the existence of a massive octopus-like creature similar to the mythological Kraken .
 Mount Holyoke College paleontologist Mark McMenamin formulated the theory after exploring a Nevada site containing the remains of nine ichthyosaurs . The massive creatures once dominated the oceanic food chain .
 McMenamin wondered whether a larger, intelligent predator may have neatly organized the bones . The bones were found in a shallow grave in the area .
 The modern octopus is known to shuffle bones around purposefully, leading McMenamin to theorize that the icthyosaurs could have been stalked by an intelligent invertebrate like the kraken of lore .
 The proposed kraken would have been the most intelligent invertebrate ever . It was proposed in the 1970s as the world's most intelligent animal in the sea .
 McMenamin said there is precedent for a confrontation similar to a kraken-like creature attacking the dangerous icthyosaur . Staff of the Seattle Aquarium recently discovered their sharks were being killed by an octopus that shared their tank .
 The kraken is a recurrent figure in Scandinavian lore, usually described as a titanic octopus-like creature that preys on ships . The creature is a recurring figure in Scandinavia lore .
 It later made its way into some earlier scientific classifications of animals . It later appeared in some earlier animal classifications .
 Mariusz T. T., dubbed 'the Satan of Piotrkow' for raping and murdering four boys in 1988, was released from prison . The release from prison had Polish parents and commentators in an uproar .
 The current location of Mariusz T. T., now 52, remains undisclosed to protect his safety . The court will decide whether he still poses a threat to society .
 Karol Kot, known as the Vampire of Krakow, was the city’s own serial killer . Kot was known for his brutal killing spree in the city . He was also known for the 'Vampire of the Vampire' in the 1980s .
 Twenty years before Mariusz T’s, Kot ended his final interview by declining to give a message to his victims and their families . Kot declined to give any message to victims or their families in his last interview .
 In a way, Kot’s spree of violence, which had begun four years prior, reads like a grotesque twist on the tragicomic exploits of any awkward and over zealous teenager . Kot's rampage began four years earlier, in the autumn of 1964, in autumn of that year
 He had planned to wait in a church for an elderly parishioner, knife concealed in hand . He had intended to wait for the elderly in the church for him to hand over the knife .
 He stabbed her several times in the back and fled, licking the blood from the blade . It was only as he was leaving, frustrated, he chanced upon his first victim, 48-year-old Helena W .
 He finally succeeded with his third victim, another elderly churchgoer . He was the victim of a serial killer who targeted elderly churchgoers .
 He was only a child when, bored on a family trip to Pcim, he wandered into a local slaughter house, where they allowed him to assist in the killing . He watched in bemusement as he drank the warm blood from a cup .
 He then began abusing the family cat, as well as slaughtering frogs, chickens, crows, moles and calves for fun . The family cat was abused by the father-of-one, who then began to slaughter frogs and chickens .
 Dreaming of enlisting in the army, he learned knife throwing and karate and was the star of the local shooting club . Dreamed of joining the army and learning knife throwing, he also learned karate, knife throwing .
 Kot changed tack, experimenting with fire and poison . He didn't know that his son was on his execution list . Kot's son was also on the list .
 He frequented popular pubs on the weekend and left out drinks laced with lethal doses of arsenic, hoping someone would take the bait . Police say he left out the drinks at popular pubs in a bid to lure someone into the act .
 A similar attempt to tempt a girl he fancied with a poisoned bottle of beer left at her door was unsuccessful . Unsuccessful, too, was a similar attempt .
 Court experts testified that wounds far exceeded those necessary to kill . Court experts later testified that the wounds were far greater than those needed to kill. Court experts said .
 Terror of the 'vampire’ killer spread across Krakow, with some sleeping with boards beneath their shirts to protect against knives .
 Kot was ecstatic, showing a friend a copy of the news report and saying he would make it his wallpaper . Kot said he would be ecstatic to see a news report, showing it to a friend . Kot was delighted to see the report and said he'd make it wallpaper .
 No one took him seriously, and his parents never suspected a thing . Yet no one took it seriously, he says .
 He confessed his lust for blood to her and once even held a knife to her throat “to see the insane fear in her eyes,” she said . She dismissed it as a tasteless joke . He confessed to her that he wanted to kill her .
 He planned to dice her and plant her with glass shards to make it look like suicide, she said . She became concerned when he revealed shards of glass in his pockets, which he had planned to use as a weapon .
 Kot was swiftly arrested and charged with two murders, ten attempted murders, and four arsons . Kot was also charged with ten attempted murder attempts and four arson attacks . Kot is accused of killing two people and attempting to kill ten more . Kot has been charged with killing two and attempted
 He was allowed was to take his Matura exam, but only so that he would be unable to convincingly plead insanity . Oddly, he was allowed to take the exam only so he would not be able to plead insanity to avoid the insanity charge .
 Reporters noted his ‘sunny disposition” at the trial . The judge warned several times by the judge to take proceedings seriously .
 Nearly a year after his arrest, in July 1967, he was sentenced to death . He was sentenced nearly a year later to be executed .
 Kot showed little remorse for his crimes while awaiting his sentence . Kot has been sentenced to life in prison . Kot was found guilty of attempted murder and attempted murder of two women .
 He wondered if he might be set loose to remove ‘undesirable people,” as a good to society . He even wondered if it might be possible to remove people from society as good .
 Today, the city that once lived in fear of a 'vampire' remembers him as a minor celebrity more than anything . Today, he is remembered as a 'minor celebrity' in the city .
 You can enjoy arsenic-free beer for 5 zl on the Rynek at the Kotkarola pub, whose mascot is a grinning cartoon cat nestled up to Edgar Allan Poe . The pub's mascot is the cartoon cat, which is based on Poe .
 The ‘Macabre Krakow’ free walking tour advertises the legend for customers over 1.8 . The tour is available for customers aged over 1 to 1 .
 A real killer who, instead of posters, pasted articles on his wall like the one you hold in your hands . And a real killer . Instead of poster posters, he posted articles on walls like the ones you hold your hands, he did .
 In Slavic folklore, Lady Midday (Poludnitsa) was a demon of high noon, said to cause heatstrokes, neck pain, illness, and madness .
 Lady Midday appears in the middle of hot summer days and often takes the form of dust clouds, a beautiful young woman in a white dress, a pubescent girl, or a hag, and carries a scythe .
 She stops people in the field to ask them difficult questions or simply engage them in conversation . She asks them tough questions or just to simply talk about themselves .
 Those who fail to answer her questions or try to change the subject are decapitated or blighted with sickness, she says . Those who don't answer questions or change the subjects will be decapitated, she adds .
 She was usually pictured as a young woman dressed in white that roamed field bounds . She was often seen as a woman who roamed the field bounds.
 Pscipolnitsa, who makes herself evident in the middle of hot summer days, takes the form of whirling dust clouds and carries a scythe or shears .
 She will stop people in th efield to ask them difficult questions or engage them in conversation . She will talk to them about their experiences .
 If anyone . tries to answer a question or tries to . changethe subject, she will cut off their head or strike them with illness . She will cut them off or kill them if they try to change the subject, or she will .
 She may appear as an old hag, a beautiful woman, or a 12-year-old girl, and she was useful in scaring children away from valuable crops .
 A mythological spirit appears to be the R oggenmuhme that makes children disappear when they search for f lowers in among the tall grain plants on hot summer days . Farther north and west in formerly predominantly Slavic-speaking areas of Germany, a related mythological
 Fears held for Russian scientists exploring ""alien” Antarctic lake, Vostok . Russian scientists preparing to explore the ""most alien lake on Earth" Russian scientists have reportedly not been in touch with U.S. colleagues in over five days .
 Lake formed from melting snow near Cape Folger on the Budd Coast in the Australian Antarctic Territory .
 Russian scientists preparing to explore the ""most alien lake on Earth,"" Lake Vostok, have reportedly not been in touch with American colleagues in over five days . The lake is believed to be the largest in the world .
 Vostok is buried over two miles — or 13,000 feet — beneath the great Antarctic ice sheet . It is one of the world's largest lakes, buried over 2 miles beneath the ice sheet in Antarctica . The lake is the largest lake in the world .
 Some lakes existed in warmer times, when the continent was connected to Australia . Some of the lakes existed during warmer times .
 Vostok is thought to harbor conditions similar to those of Jupiter's moon Europa and Saturn's moon Enceladus . The discovery of life in the lake's inky depths would significantly strengthen the prospect of discovering life on either of these icy bodies .
 Geothermal heat from the Earth's interior warms the lake's bottom keeping it in a liquid state . However, the lake is "characterized by extremes"
 Because there is no light, nutrients can only exist in small quantities . However, because there is not light, any nutrients must be found in the dark .
 Frank Buckles, the last living U.S. World War I veteran, dies . Buckles died Sunday, a spokesman for his family said . He was a World War II veteran .
 Frank Buckles, the last living U.S. World War I veteran, has died, a spokesman for his family said Sunday . Buckles was a World War II veteran who served in World War One. Buckles' family said .
 Lawmakers move ahead with proposed resolutions that would allow his casket to be displayed at the Capitol Rotunda . Plans were already in the works for his burial at Arlington National Cemetery .
 Buckles ""died peacefully in his home of natural causes"" early Sunday morning, family says . Buckles died peacefully in a home, family said in a statement sent to CNN .
 Buckles marked his 110th birthday on February 1, but his family had earlier told CNN he had slowed considerably since last fall . His daughter Susannah Buckles Flanagan says Buckles has slowed since last year .
 Buckles was a U.S. Army ambulance driver in Europe during the ""Great War" Buckles rose to the rank of corporal before the war ended in Europe .
 His assignments included that of an escort for German prisoners of war . He was one of the most famous escorts in the war .
 Michigan portrait photographer DeJonge came to prominence in recent years . He had undertaken a project to document the last surviving WWI veterans of that war .
 His death leaves only two verified surviving WW1 veterans in the world, both of whom are British . He was one of two verified WW1 vets, both British .
 President Obama issued a statement Monday on Buckles' passing . He said he and first lady Michelle Obama were ""inspired"" by his story . Buckles died Monday at the age of 92 .
 Buckles told CNN in 2007 he accepted the responsibility of honoring those who had gone before him, and to be their voice for permanent, national recognition after he was gone . Buckles: "I accept the responsibility to honor those who have gone before me" Buckles said he accepted responsibility
 DeJonge found himself the spokesman and advocate for Buckles in his mission to see to it that his comrades were honored with a monument on the National Mall . He pushed for improvements to a neglected, obscure city memorial nearly in the shadow of the World War II memorial .
 War Memorial is a marble gazebo built in the 1930s that, for now, honors only his comrades from D.C. War Memorial .
 His call was to elevate the designation of the site to join U.S. honors accorded to those who served in World War II, Korea and Vietnam . His call is to elevate it to join United States honors .
 Ted Poe, R-Texas, is a sponsor of legislation to upgrade the DC War Memorial . Poe is a member of the House of Representatives from Texas . Poe says he wants to improve the memorial .
 The ""Frank Buckles WWI Memorial Act"" passed the House but had not cleared the Senate before Congress adjourned . The act had not passed the Senate . The bill was passed by the House of Representatives .
 Poe on Monday restated his support for a House resolution that would allow a public display for Buckles in the Capitol Rotunda . Poe: Buckles is a "legitimate reason" to be displayed in the Rotunda of the Capitol . Poe says he supports a resolution to allow a
 Buckles, after World War I ended, took up a career as a ship's officer on merchant vessels . Buckles served as an officer during World War One .
 He was captured by the Japanese in the Philippines during World War II . He was held prisoner of war for more than three years before being freed by U.S. troops .
 During a visit to the run-down, neglected site a few years ago, he went past the nearby World War II memorial without stopping . Younger veterans stopped and saluted the old soldier in his wheelchair .
 Renovations to the structure began last fall, but Buckles, with his health already failing, could not make a trip to Washington to review the improvements . Buckles could not travel to D.C. to see the improvements in place of his health .
 The National Park Service is overseeing efforts that include replacing a neglected walkway and dressing up a deteriorated dome and marble columns . The project includes replacing a deteriorated walkway, dressing up marble columns and replacing walkways .
 Details for services and arrangements will be announced in the days ahead, the family statement said . Details will be released .
 Flanagan, his daughter, said preliminary plans began weeks ago . The military district of Washington is planning an honors burial at Arlington, Washington .
 Buckles in 2008 attended Veterans Day ceremonies at the grave of Pershing, the commander of United States troops during World War I . Buckles also met with then-President George W Bush at the White House, and United States Defense Secretary Robert Gates at the Pentagon .
 Buckles' family asks that donations be made to the National World War I Legacy Project to honor Frank Buckles and the 4,734,991 Americans he served .
 More than 1 16,000 Americans were killed, and more than 204,000 wounded, in the 19 months of U.S. involvement in the war . The Congressional Research Service says more than 200,000 were wounded .
 The overall death toll of the 1914-18 conflict was more than 16. million, including nearly 7 million civilians, and more than 20 million wounded . More than 7 million people were killed in the conflict, including 7 million civilian civilians .
 Chester Crandell was found dead Monday afternoon after he didn’t return from a horseback ride near Heber-Overgaard . He was found by authorities after he disappeared from his ride .
 Chester Crandell, who was found dead Monday after setting out on horseback, cannot be replaced on the primary ballot . Secretary of State Ken Bennett says he cannot replace him on the ballot .
 Crandell, 68, was found dead near Heber-Overgaard, where he had been riding a colt . He was found by the authorities after he was found riding a horse .
 The Navajo County Sheriff's Office is waiting for medical reports to shed more light on the cause of death . The sheriff's office is waiting to hear from medical reports for more information .
 Crandell was running unopposed to hold his District 6 seat and is the only candidate eligible to win the primary . He was running to hold the seat and was running for the first time .
 Posters explaining that votes for Crandell will still count for him will be placed at polling places for the Aug. primary . Posters will still be placed in place for the primary .
 Republican precinct committeemen from Crandell's home county — Navajo — will nominate three people to fill the position for the rest of the current term .
 The county Board of Supervisors will select the temporary replacement from the three nominees . The county board of supervisors will then select a temporary replacement .
 Republican precinct committeemen from Coconino, Gila, Navajo and Yavapai counties will select a name to replace Crandell's on the general-election ballot .
 Jose Garcia died during his campaign for the Corporation Commission and is intended as a sign of respect for the deceased .
 The Legend of Springheeled Jack was the terror of London in the mid-1800s .
 It all started in 1837 with the attack on Polly Adams in Clapham churchyard . Later in the year another woman was attacked in the churchyard. Polly Adams was the victim of the 1837 attack .
 The sightings and attacks of this figure that could leap over fences in a single bound began to start in 1838 .
 Sir Cowan made the letter public, only to receive dozens of other letters by witnesses of the creature . Cowan received dozens of letters by more witnesses of creature .
 Late at night there was a furious knocking at the door of Jane Alsop and her two sisters . Jane and her sisters lived with their father in their father's home .
 Jane answered the door, and standing in the shadows was a man claiming to be a police officer . Jane was knocked down by the man pretending to be an officer . The incident happened at the home of Jane and her family .
 He asked her to bring a candle, saying that he had captured Spring-heeled Jack . The couple was married in 2006 .
 The stranger took the candle but then grabbed Jane and began to claw at her face . Jane was attacked by a stranger who grabbed her face and clawed it out of her head .
 He ran off into the shadowy darkness when one of Jane's sisters came outside and called for help . Jane's sister came outside to find out what happened to the boy .
 Jane's attacker allegedly wore a helmet and a white costume similar to oilskin and wore a black cloak over everything . Jane was attacked by a man in a white outfit similar to an oilskin costume .
 His eyes were like raging fireballs, blue flames shot from his mouth, and his fingers ended in claws . He was like a man with a raging fireball, his eyes looked like fireballs .
 A similar attack happened to 18-year-old Lucy Squires a few months after she was attacked . Lucy was attacked in a similar attack on a young woman in October 2013 .
 While walking with her sister through Green Dragon Alley in Limehouse, she was blinded with blazing blue flames by a tall cloaked figure .
 A strange figure was seen atop the spire of a church and even on the Tower of London . The figure is seen atop a church spire and even the Tower .
 Throughout the 1850s and 60s, this strange creature was seen all over England . It was seen around the country throughout the decades .
 Its descriptions varied from a winged and horned creature, not unlike the Jersey Devil, to the ""spaceman"" that attacked the two girls in 1838 .
 In the 1860s, one of the mobs cornered the creature, but it jumped over a hedge and escaped . One of the mobsters cornered it, but the creature escaped .
 In 1877, people tried to shoot him, but he was not shot . Springheeled Jack was the Jersey Devil, but was not killed .
 A century ago people believed him to be the Devil himself . Springheeled Jack is believed to have been an extraterrestrial, judging by his ""space traveler"" attire .
 The legend of Springheeled Jack is one of the most terrifying paranormal events in British history .
 Aly Julian is the webmaster for Stranaeworld. one of the most all-inclusive encyclopedias of cryptozoology on the Internet. Anomalies: Springheeled Jack Aly Julian .
 Brazilian companions moored their boat to a tree on the open-tapajos side of the long flat island .
 The author was sick of Indians, trees, trees and the green river out of the Matto Grosso, of bloodsucking flies, mosquitoes, my companions and myself . We were heading down river from Barra .
 "I couldn't budge anybody, hadn't authority enough to compel my crew to continue on. I couldn’t budge anyone," he says .
 The pilot pointed eastward, across the hogback of the island, and shrugged . He said, "I don't know what's going to happen," the pilot said .
 A river, the River of the Red Man, Crepori, came out of the unexplored east there, out of . the land of the borduna-wieldmg Guaiapos . A river of the . Red Man came from the . land of Guai
 The Guaiapos had bashed out his partner’s brains with a war club, only the day before . I had just come from the jungle store on the island where the proprietor had told me he was selling out and leaving because the Guaapos, only
 The mainland here was a rich rubber area and Brazilians were trying their best to make their two-fifty a day, cutting and cooking rubber . Brazilians tried their best, making their two fifties a day .
 Between the Crepori and the das Tropas rivers, south, the Guaiapos had killed 20 rubber cutters during the past year . The Guaiapoos are believed to be responsible for the deaths .
 Rubber cutters covered their estradas in pairs, one man carrying a shotgun . One man carried a shotgun, one of them carrying a gun . One of the men was carrying a pistol .
 The diminutive Guaiapos tricked them and struck from behind without warning . Still, they tricked them into believing they had no idea what was going on .
 I was invited to swing my hammock ashore just before dark, in a native dwelling occupied by several families of rubber cutters . The hammock was in the native dwelling of several families .
 All rubber cutters who worked on the east bank of the Tapajos between the Crepori and das Tropas kept their families on islands because the Guaiapos did not swim or make boats .
 Following the estradas by day was like making a dash with a reconnaissance patrol . Following them by day is like following a clandestine mission to find out what happened .
 Men and women exchanged strange, oddly wild glances, and spoke the word, scarcely above a whisper . The word was spoken in a low whisper .
 "I would have cried out, but a palm covered my mouth, and the first hand held me down," she said . "I was held down, but I would have been able to cry out," she added . "The first hand covered me down. The first hand stopped me
 I nodded against the palm, which smelled of sweat and rubber, sat up, shook out my shoes in the dark lest scorpions or tarantulas might be sleeping in them, donned and tied them . I nodded, "Yes, yes"
 Tamara, I had noticed before dark, was the only pretty woman on the island, in the little cringing settlement . Tamara was the first pretty woman to be seen in the island .
 The eyes of all men followed her lithe figure, and she walked much that they might . The eyes were followed by all men .
 'I’d have thought her a light of love if she hadn’t worn dirty work dresses that proclaimed her respectability.’ She said: ‘She’ll have been a light-of-love if she had worn dirty dresses that proclaim her respect
 I followed the girl onto a trail leading east, out of the woods that covered the island, onto a flat area of sand which stretched toward but did not quite reach the mainland .
 More men and women than I knew to be on the island . Other people and women were appearing out of the trees . More people were appearing .
 Visitors from up and down river, from the Indianless west bank, landed 40 Fate /May 2002 on the island while I slept .
 That was the first impression I had of the odd exodus from Ilha do Crepori . That was first impression of the strange exodus from the city .
 Tamara and Tamara seemed to be the only two people who walked close together and she held me as if I were a prisoner . She held him as if he was a prisoner, he said .
 Other men carried old flintlock rifles, muzzle-loaders, shotguns, bows and arrows, tridents used in spearing fish in shallow water .
 I could now see the stretch of green water which separated the sand from the mainland . It was the first time I'd seen a stretch of the green water separating the mainland from the sand .
 I got another bright idea, though it didn’t fit in with a midnight visit to Indian territory . I got a bright idea: "I'm going to go to the Indian territory. It's not a good idea."
 She hesitated so long before she said yes that I knew it wasn’t the correct answer, at least not quite . She hesitated too long before saying yes, but it was the right answer .
 The Brazilians, of course, could see further than I could; they were jungle people . "The Brazilians," says the author, "were jungle people"
 The Guaiapos, I knew, could see even further, and we were now almost within bowshot of the mainland . We were now within bow shot of the main island, but it was still within a distance .
 I gulped and said yes, though I am deathly afraid of piranhas, the fierce flesheating fish of those rivers . I'm not afraid of the fierce fish, but I'm afraid of them .
 She stepped out of her own as if all her garments had been trick stuff . She stepped into her own clothes as if she had been tricked out .
 Some Brazilian men and women were going into the water with all their clothes on, some were disrobing, and some were going in with no clothes on . Brazilians would no more disrobe before one another than they would walk naked down a city street . Some of the amazing thing
 "They are, virtually without exception in my experience, the most delicate and modest of people," she says . "I'm sure they are very sensitive and modest," she adds .
 Whatever the urge that drove them all now, it transcended modesty — yet allowed them all somehow to retain their dignity . Whatever it was, they all somehow managed to keep their dignity, the urge drove them .
 "Starshine gave her an ethereal quality that set the mood for whatever was to come," says Starshine . "She was ethereal. She gave her a beautiful, ethereal look," she says .
 I was just her current responsibility, which someone had assigned her to her, she says . I'm not the person she was assigned to, but I'm just the person assigned me to her .
 Tamara swiftly rolled her clothes with her own, to be carried in a bundle on her head . She walked down a steeply slanting bank into the water .
 To our left was the silent, gaping mouth of the River of the Red Man, running out of the east and southeast . No one knew from how far distant it was from the river .
 I bumbled against the smooth body of Tamara as we swam, but if she were aware of it she gave no sign . Tamara was not aware of the fact that she was in the water .
 Tamara, now a white shadow amid black ones, tendered me a cloth . Tamara said: "Tamara was now a . white shadow." Tamara was the last of her comrades to die in the battle .
 She rubbed her back with her towel, bade me perform the same service for her . She rubbed my back with a towel, then asked me to do the same thing again .
 Brazilians laugh easily because they are a happy people — though they claim to be forever sad . I had the urge to laugh — and stifled it for no Brazilians were laughing, and they laugh easily .
 Now and again I could see the black surface of the Crepori to our left . The plane was flying over the Mediterranean Sea at the height of its height .
 We turned aside, stooping, brushing away lianas that drooped over our faces, and presently I saw a glow of flame . We were struck by the light of the flame, and I saw it again .
 Tamara and I, after all, were among the first to reach the cleared area of flame, so I never knew who set the fire . I made a good guess before the strange evening ended .
 The fire blazed brightly in the middle of a flat stone, roughly square, about 12 feet on each side . The fire was set alight in the center of the stone .
 There was a new-to-me, aromatic odor in the clearing and all around the edge of the rock, carefully arranged, were tasseled smoking pipes . Dozens of May 2002 /Fate 41 them were found .
 I had spent much time among the Mundurucu and had never seen one smoke a pipe; they smoked hand-rolled cigarettes . They smoked hand rolled cigarettes, not a pipe .
 But I had seen pipes they had used before ‘civilization’ taught them cigarettes . “Civilization” taught them how to use them cigarettes, he says .
 Civilization hadn't reached the Guaiapos and this was Guaiapo territory . Civilization hadn’t reached the  Guaiapo and this was . This was . civilization .
 The pipes were already filled, and men and women, walking like people in a trance, some of them still nude from the swim, walked steadily, wide-eyed, up to the rock and hefted a pipe .
 It struck me that this must be strange tobacco indeed that made men and women forget nudity and not walk, but run . I would have smoked, Guaiapos or no Guaapos .
 Some men with gnarled hands caught up coals from the fire in their fingers, dropped them into the pipes, tamped them down with thumbs, began smoking . Others caught up the coals and dropped them in the pipes to smoke .
 "Once I had smoked, so I knew what I was doing and did not expect to be sick," he says . "I didn't expect to get sick. Once I smoked, I didn't think I would be sick"
 Men and women backed away from the fire and settled down in all sorts of postures . The fire was set alight in front of the crowd .
 Tamara drew me away to an open space, pulled me down to a sitting position, right side to the fire which crackled as if in glee . The fire crackled in the open space as Tamara sat in front of the fire .
 Tamara did not sit beside me, but behind me, her back against mine, the back of her head touching mine . Tamara's back against me was her back and her head against mine .
 I shuddered, for I had seen crawling things in the hair of even good-looking jungle women, even good looking jungle women . The jungle was full of bugs, crawling things and eating insects, the author said .
 Others were whispering, none talking aloud, and some of the pipes gurgled . Others were talking, none of them talking aloud . Some were whispering and some were whispering .
 Small, dirty, smelly, stark naked Indians, men and women, came silently out of the jungles, walking gingerly as if in terror . Think, see y feel /”
 Some of the men carried very short bows aud bundles of arrows . Some carried bordunaSy war clubs of hardwood which must have required months of patient effort to carve with rock and bone .
 A quick glance at my companions told me that the Guaiapos could kill every last one of us without rousing even one to resistance . A quick look at his companions told him that they could kill all of them without arousing resistance .
 "I saw birdlike words issue from their mouthsy hang in the air y vanish," says author . "Birdlike words" hang from the air and vanish, she says . "I'm not sure what's going on," she says. "It's like a birdlike word
 "There is no explaining that, I know, but I could compare it with other speech and did so," he said . "There was no explanation that, it's not easy to explain," he added .
 To my left, a young man and woman, clearly newlyweds all wrapped up in each other, were making love talk . To my right, a man and a woman made love talk to each other in front of the camera . To the left, the young couple were clearly newly
 I didn’t hear them, either, but I saw the words they spoke in the air before their faces . The words were gentle and beautiful . I saw them, but saw them .
 "Eerie contact of Guaiapos and Brazilians didn't make any sense whatever. Now I was positive I knew what was coming, though this eerie contact ... didn’t make sense."
 If the island Brazilians had told me the truth, Guaiapos had murdered a rubber cutter . Yesterday, if the island . had told the . truth, if . told me . Brazilians, Brazilians have told me Brazilians murdered a . rubber cutter, I said .
 Not one Indian had been seen by any Brazilian — unless there had been other meetings like this . The meeting took place in Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo .
 She moved away from my back, twisted around to my side, lay down with her head on my knee . Then she moved away to my back and lay down on my side .
 1 scarcely thought of it until I began to analyze it all later. Neither was 1.1.1 . Neither were 1.2 .
 I knew some queer plants, like the deadly matacalada y amapaima y nhandu y catipi . I knew    some queer plants like matacalaada yamamamu yamu .
 Each person present had an ethereal double, through which or whom one could see the fire, the forest, the Indians . Men tasted its juice and could see things at a distance, could read the future — I began to look about me .
 Material entities did things, smoked, talked, huddled together, while the doubles watched everything with a lofty tolerance . Material entities smoked, smoked and talked, but the doubles did everything with the utmost tolerance .
 Caapi — no, Tamara had called it liamba! — mixed with tobacco, caused us all to see visions and dream dreams . So Caapi, no. Tamara, had called Itiamba, mixed with Tobacco, caused visions and dreams . Caapi .
 I tried to recall what drug I knew that caused men to see such visions and dream such dreams, but found the effort too much . I was unable to remember what drug caused the visions and dreams .
 "None need ask me how I knew how a god would feel for then I knew everything," says the author of the novel .
 "In no time from now I would find myself in the midst of such an orgy as no one has ever dared write about," says the author . "I would be in no time . from now," he says .
 As minutes passed and no Apollo, red or red-white, took advantage of any Aphrodite, I tried some lazy tests, using whatever came to mind . But as minutes passed, no Apollo took advantage, I could scarcely be bothered thinking about it, but only remembered that there
 The historical Chinese characters on the tablets are clear to my eyes and understandable . Instantly I saw all 60 tablets, spreading out from a pile as expert shufflers of cards spread a “hand,” standing .
 John himself himself told the meaning of Revelations in the first chapter of Revelations .
 As far as I am concerned, yes, yes; for the eerie explanation I saw that night makes sense, good sense, such good, simple, uncluttered sense . I shall write of it in detail only when the world has time to spend on what will be an endless controversy
 Now the Guaiapos, each with his double, moved among us, refilling our pipes, lighting the liamba-tobacco mixture . Now they moved among each other to refills their pipes and lighting the mixture .
 My comrades began to fall asleep, though each clung to his or her pipe . My comrades fell asleep, but my comrades clung on to their pipes . "I'm not going to be able to see my comrades fall asleep," she says .
 I turned around so that we were head to head, sprawled so that I could keep on smoking . I turned to turn around so I could continue to smoke. I turned .
 Tamara was asleep, the firelight making her face more beautiful than ever . Tamara had fallen asleep in the nightmarish bed .
 The Guaiapos moved among the sleepers — robbing them of rifles, shotguns, bows, arrows, knives, knives . They nodded to one another, moved among them, robbing them .
 I saw my own words rise into the air like smoke eddies, show themselves clearly, then vanish . I told myself, and saw myself . I saw myself and saw my words rise to the air, then disappear .
 With or against their will, the Brazilians traded weapons for liamba . From the drug they derived “psychic ability,” ‘second sight,’ ‘clairvoyance,‘ “clairaudience,“ “clairsent
 I’d heard whispers of renegade Brazilians among the Guaiapos, keeping them stirred up to make rubber hard to get and to keep the price up . I'd heard whispers that they were keeping the rubber stirred up .
 'I looked around at men and women gone utterly mad,' she says . 'I wanted to smash and break Tamara,' she writes . 'Just as I wanted to break and smash Tamara', she says.
 She caught me by the hand, a clasp I couldn’t break, and dragged me onto the trail, raced me back to the Tapajos . She caught up with the trail and dragged him onto the track .
 'I felt like a pariah when she turned and left me, going back to whatever they did when I wasn’t among them. I felt like she left me,' he says .
 A French botanist who did a great deal of plant classification in Brazil, seems to indicate. Liamba and hashish were one and the same — as my only ‘authority,” a French botanical expert .
 The “record” seems to show that hashish is well known in the more “civilized” areas of Brazil . Smoking is a sub rosa practice in some areas of the country .
 People who might be presumed to know insist that hashish will not produce the effects I have indicated in this document . "Hashish" is not a form of hashish that produces the same effects as hashish," he says .
 What I saw, felt, and experienced may in no wise have resembled the visions, feelings, and experiences of the men and women who went through the above incidents . That puzzles me a little, and excites me even more; for I realize that .
 Paul Le Cointe may not be the hashish of his book authority, says author . Also that the liamba they know may be the . also that the . knowledge they know are not the . hashish they know .
 I'm not sure I like being — as far as I know — the only foreigner to experience a drug which might conceivably fill the world full of psychic wonders . I’m not sure he like being – as far from I know – the only foreigners to experience such a drug
 Let there be no rush, however, to imprison the Brazilians on the island in the mouth of the Crepori, for they have fled from it . Let's not imprison them, but let's be optimistic about their chances, says President Obama .
 Let none send expeditions against the Guaiapos, for in this tale 1 have altered people and places deliberately to protect the people . Let none sent expeditions .
 Hammerkop is most often indentified as the Lightning Bird . The real bird is a mythical creature in African folklore .
 It's curved bill and long, shaggy crest on it’s lead resembles a hammer . The curved bill is curved bill with a long, curved crest and a shag-like crest .
 Women can see it in it's true form but for ithers they see only the lightning . t s fat is a vital component of traditional African medicine .
 Lightning Bird can be collected if it is caught just as it hits the ground . Lightning Bird is collected if you catch it as it's hit the ground in the air .
 It s egg is said to bring bad luck to the surrounding area, and must be destroyed . The egg must also be destroyed in order to keep bad luck .
 David Frum: War on Christmas a reaction to perceived threat to folkway, not religion . Frum says Lincoln, like many in 1834, didn't observe Christmas as an official holiday . He says in late 19th century, Americans began observing Christmas as a public holiday .
 In 1834, Illinois voted whether to adopt Christmas as a legal holiday . Frum was a special assistant to President George W Bush from 2001 to 2002 .
 In 1834, Lincoln had not yet grown out of his atheist phase, but the young Lincoln's lack of faith in God does not explain his vote . Lincoln's lifelong disbelief in the divinity of Christ is not the reason for his vote in 1834 .
 In 1 834, a vote against Christmas was a safe, even a conventional vote . In 1.834, the vote was a vote for the first time in a year .
 Not a single state in the Union closed its offices for Christmas on December 25 in 1834 . In 1834, not one state was closed for Christmas in the United States .
 Lincoln marked his first Christmas as President, in December 1861, by holding a Cabinet meeting in the morning and a dinner party in the evening . Lincoln's first Christmas in office marked by Cabinet meeting and dinner party .
 Lincoln family never had a White House tree and sent no Christmas cards . Lincoln family sent no White House Christmas cards and never sent any White House trees . Lincoln died in 18th century .
 The public Christmas as Americans know it today did not take form until late in the 1 9th century . Public Christmas was first known as a public Christmas in the early 1800s .
 The first state to recognize Christmas as a holiday was Alabama, in 1836 . The North and especially New England resisted, but Alabama did .
 S. Cupp says she disagrees with Phil Robertson's view on homosexuality but says it was ungracious of A&E to suspend him over his religious beliefs .
 The peculiar history of the Pledge of Allegiance . Bob Greene writes on this day .
 The best week for privacy in a long time . Judge, NSA review panel and president signal surveillance programs may be reined in .
 Benjamin Harrison was the first president to allow a Christmas tree inside the White House in 1889 . Harrison allowed the tree to be planted in the Oval Office . The tree was planted by the president in 1889, according to the Smithsonian .
 The tradition of lighting a tree on the White House grounds commenced with Calvin Coolidge in 1923 .
 Phil Robertson is free to speak his mind but that doesn't mean Ns TV network needs to put him on . Don't be fooled by Putin's decision to free political prisoner Mikhail Khodorkovsky .
 In its first century, the national government practiced a separation of church and state . The separation was far sharper than what Americans would accept today .
 From its founding in 1775, the federal post office delivered mail on Sundays . The federal postal service delivered mail from Sunday to Sunday .
 As evangelical forms of Christianity spread after 1 800, the new denominations demanded an end to this desecration of the Sabbath .
 Congress voted in 1 81 0 to require all postmasters to work at least one hour on Sunday, on pain of losing their positions . In response to the vote, Congress voted to require that postmasters work an hour a day .
 Americans of the founding generations insisted upon separation of church and state not because they were irreligious, but precisely because so many of them were so very intensely religious . The separation of state and church is due to the fact that so many Americans were so intensely religious, the founding generation insisted upon
 Religion mattered so much to early Americans, so did religious differences . Early Americans were more likely to be religious than those who were not religious .
 The grandest Boston rector and the rawest frontier preacher disagreed, sometimes to the point of outright violence . Calvinists and Baptists, Methodists and Catholics, the grandest . Boston . rector .
 Anti-Catholic riots ripped apart Boston, Philadelphia and Bath, Maine, between the 1830s and 1850s . Anti-Catholics rioted between Boston and Philadelphia in the 1800s and 1800s .
 These contending denominations could agree at least that they did not want a remote government in Washington favoring some religious practices .
 Better to deliver the mail on Sunday than debate who was right about the Sabbath .
 Christmas is celebrated near the date of the old Roman holiday of Saturnalia . It is celebrated during the Roman holiday when Saturnalia was celebrated .
 The Christmas tree, hanging of wreaths and house-to-house caroling hark back to the pre-Christian German holiday of Yule . Yule is a pre-Christmas German holiday .
 Many Protestant denominations retained a lingering suspicion of the holiday until deep into the 1 9th century .
 The fading of distinctions between Christians and the decline of theology within Christianity within Christianity . The fade of distinctions among Christians .
 The once-vivid mistrust of trees and tinsel has vanished, as American Christianity evolved away from a creed in which people believed and into a set of practices that people did . if Christians decorate trees, then tree decorating must be Christian .
 Devout Christian believers can still be counted in the millions of Christians . Devout Christians can still count in the thousands of people .
 What was once a faith has become a folkway . Surrounding them, however, is a larger and more nebulous group of people .
 A Christmas tree or a nativity scene is less a declaration of individual belief than it is an expression of group identity . For them, a Christmas tree is less an individual belief . For some, it is a statement of their identity .
 Many Americans feel this group identity to be under threat by changes in recent years . The group identity is under threat to many Americans' identities .
 That is why we have eruptions such as last week's flap over the whiteness of Santa Claus . That's why we've eruptions like last week, such as Santa Claus whiteness .
 If your Christmas celebrates the appearance of God Himself in the form of a human baby, it won't have a tot of room for a gift-giving elf and flying reindeer .
 Santa is at most tangential to the Christmas of faith, but is central to folkway . He is utterly central to the . Christmas of folkway.
 The Christmas of Santa and Rudolph began to be most publicly celebrated in the U.S. only after and only because -the religious impetus for the holiday had already dwindled away . Santa and Christmas trees and stockings, and candy canes and candy . canes .
 Mark Coleman says the group’s new release likely has more to do with extending the copyright than anyone's need to hear obscure, unpolished tracks . Coleman: The group's new release is more likely to have more than a reason for it .
 LZ Grander son says GOP leadership wants to rein in tea party . Tea party, GOP need a divorce .
 David Frum: President Obama has a chance to win the White House in 2016 . Frum says the president's term will be extended to 2020 . He says Obama's term is due to be extended into 2016 .
 The howls of the vegetable kingdom could be harnessed in the battle against their parasites . The difference between damage caused by crushing and munching insects .
 Crushed beans released chemicals, but the other plants ignored the signals, somehow realising there was no threat . The other plants ignore the signals and realise there is no threat to them .
 Research in the last five years has shown that many types of plants, such as maize and tobacco, send out chemical warnings to their neighbours .
 New Scientist, 8 Mar 1997; Irish Times, 3 Aug 2000; [APJ 16 Mar 2001 ; Times 3 May 2002. New Scientist . New Scientist: "I have been in touch with the world since 1997"
 When a leaf or a stem is sliced, the plant signals pain (or dismay) by releasing the gas ethylene over its entire surface . The plant releases ethylene when it is sliced or sliced, it signals pain .
 The gas molecules are collected in a bell jar and bombarded with calibrated laser beams, which makes them vibrate . They are then bombarded by laser beams to vibrate with a vibrator .
 The resultant sound waves are amplified in a resonance tube, then detected with a sensitive microphone . The resulting sound waves can be amplified in resonance tubes and then detected using a microphone .
 An apparently healthy cucumber was virtually shouting with agony when it was found to be in agony . The cucumber is a cucumber that is virtually shouting out with agony .
 A closer study showed it had developed mildew, though the symptoms were not apparent . The symptoms of mildew are not apparent, but it is thought to be mildew .
 Eavesdropping on plants could be of great benefit to farmers as an early-warning system to detect pests and disease . It could be an aid to efficient storing and transporting .
 Apples emit high levels of ethylene, increasing with ripeness and causing neighbouring fruit to wilt . Apples, for instance, emit high . levels of the ethylene that causes the wilt of neighbouring fruit .
 Invisible differences of ripeness can be detected acoustically, enabling fruit to be separated into batches and prolong its freshness . Invisible differences can also be detected in the sound of fruit being picked up .
 The first injured plant released a chemical that changed the plant’s flavour, making it less attractive to the mites . The plant released the chemical to make the mite-loving mites less attractive .
 Other chemicals emitted as a distress signal, causing adjacent plants to emit the same chemicals before any more mites arrived . Other chemicals were emitted as an attempt to contain the mites .
 Some spider mites acted as a spider mite repellent, others attracted a predator mite that enjoyed lunching on them . Some of these mites were used as repellents, while others were used to attract a predator .
 Ken Burns: History is best understood by walking the ground where it happened . The Desert Desert is the best place to learn about history in the desert .
 Visitors to Mark Twain's house can sense the author’s presence, Burns says . Visitors to Twain's home can feel Twain's presence, he says .
 U ’ R""““"" prehen 'i the American Revolution, visit these Bostonarea towns .
 Revolutionary War reenactors get into I 1 the spirit 8 of 1775 at yf Lexington f and Nf Concord outside % Boston . Get into the spirit of the war at Lexington and Concord .
 This year marks the 150th anniversary of the act signed by Abraham Lincoln that first preserved the area . Abraham Lincoln signed the act in 1863 to preserve the area of Lincoln's birthplace .
 The DecJ aration of Independence applied to a landscape. It demonstrated that while our stillyoung country didn’t yet have great cities or cathedrals it had unparalleled natural be a “ bon nf t^ S ' U 7 aS the DecJAration of
 Voters can feel cultures clashing, meeting and merging in New Orleans . Visit fn° mt m American history. Visit the site to find out more about American history .
 Visit to see New Orleans’ archiSdtheM 5 wrou S ht iron fences, and the Mississippi River “hrincrthf hint he i f °H dS and products of the hinterlands out to the Gulf of Mexico, Burns says
 More than 50,000 soldiers were killed, wounded, captured or went missing during the war . Burns calls it the "the greatest TF! e f er fought on American soil" Burns calls the war the greatest moment of American history .
 The museum and visitors center offers a comprehensive preview of the museum . Morgan Freeman narrates a film narrated by Morgan Freeman at the center .
 Professor Yoshinori Imaizumi, of Japans National Science Museum remarked, “It’s a reptile, and the sketch looks very much like a plesiosaur.” The sketch was created by a Japanese artist .
 A fleshy carcass from 65-plus million years ago was found in a fossil from the same time as petrified fossils . The carcass was found to be a fleshy, non-petrified carcass .
 Tissue samples were taken, and the carcass unceremoniously dumped back into the sea . The carcass was then dumped back in the sea lest it contaminate mackerel catch .
 The blue shark’s fin is found to yield the same ratio of the amino-acid tyrosine to other amino acids as does the blue shark's fin . Later, these samples were found .
 It seems that shark bodies decompose in such a manner that they come to resemble a monstrous plesiosaur . This sort of identity has occurred on many occasions, and this sort of .
 Plesiosaurs were sea-dwelling reptiles about 15 to 40 feet in length . They had long to very long necks on flippered, seal-like bodies with short paddle-like tails .
 They were fish-eaters, and swam the seas until around 65 million years ago . They swam in seas until about 65 million ago . The fish-eating creatures are thought to have swam around the globe .
 According to many monster-seeking “cryptozoologists,” plesiosaurs are common to this day . They inhabit seas and suburban lakes seemingly less primordially suitable as a habitat than the South American “Lost World” jungle of Arthur Conan Doyle’
 In 1933, sightings of a lake serpent were interpreted by many as evidence of a herd of plesiosaurs . Loch Ness made worldwide news after the opening of a new highway to the region .
 Legendary legends do not stretch back for centuries, say historians . However, contrary to inevitable media pronouncements, such legends do .
 During the 1800s the legend was that a huge fish haunted the loch . Naturalist Robert Shine looked into the region’s back issues of newspapers and found the legend .
 The theory holds that Loch Ness, once an arm of the sea, was pinched off by movement of the land, and so trapped the monsters . In 1968, the journal Nature remarked that “The plesiosaur theory’s”
 Sturgeons reportedly come to Loch Ness from the sea . However, sturgeons are believed to have lived there for 65 million years . Plesiosaurs are thought to be the most ancient creatures in the world .
 A bobbing log, viewed from a distance, can appear disconcertingly like a living water serpent or a plesiosaur . Maurice Burton, of the British Museum, followed the Nessie phenomenon from its 1933 beginning .
 "I can only regard the monster as the most versatile animal I have ever met in color, shape, and general behavior," he said .
 The alleged skeleton of a monster in the loch near Urquhart Castle turned out to be a sunken log . In one case a group of people watching “Nessie” from the shore were enlightened by someone armed with binoculars .
 In North America, the Okanakane Indians believed that a dragonlike creature haunted Okanagan Lake in southern British Columbia when they were first visited by whites in 1770 . The lake was a lake popular with the Native Americans .
 The tribe even carved the likeness of the creatures on ceremonial canoes . The tribes even carved likeness of them on ceremonial canoe canoes.
 The phantom is now likened to a freshwater plesiosaur by believing cryptozoologists or a serpentine dragon by fanciful park statues . Later dubbed ‘Ogopogo’ after a fictional African king in a parlor song, the phantom is called “Og
 Indian tales tell of a dragon-like, seven-foot serpent capable of growing wings and walking on land as well . Such Indian tales told of a seven-year-old dragon--shaped serpent .
 LeBlond, who has co-authored a book on Caddy, believes the source to be a plesiosaur-style (and size) survivor from dinosaur days .
 Schoolteacher Joseph Zarzynski believes “Champ’s” to be a twoor three-humped, 25to 30-foot-long plesiosaur . Zarzynski has searched relentlessly for the phantom since the mid-1970s .
 One photograph taken by a couple from the shore in 1977 does show a very plesiosaur-like humped, long-necked image in the lake's waters .
 Lake Champlain is hardly ideal habitat for an airbreathing plesiosaur, for its waters freeze over during the winters . But the lake is not ideal habitat, for it is frozen during the winter, and it's not ideal for the animal .
 Mokele-mhemhe y is said to inhabit swampy Lake Tele in the People’s Repub22 Fate .
 Biologist Marcellin Agnagna specifically sought the creature in a camera safari in 1983 . The creature is believed to have lived in the wild for over 30 years .
 It seems he had forgotten to adjust the camera s settings, and so he had to be content with only an eyewitness sketch of the ultimate big one .
 Eyewitness descriptions of lake monsters tend to be less similar to a seal-like plesiosaur than multi-humped dragons . Eyewitness accounts of the lake monsters are more likely to be based on the description of the creatures .
 But plesiosaurs — unlike dragons — did once exist, so those who believe in such watermonsters have found it more assuring to contend that their quarry is a survivor from the past rather than a figment of mythology . But unlike dragons, unlike dragons .
 Large jellyfish and squids do exist, and gobs of vegetation on lakes or seas could just as easily be mistaken for them with a little stretch of the imagination .
 It should not be surprising that humans exhibit a fear of serpentine water images given the terror which many exhibit towards snakes .
 For millions of years our ancestors were grubbing about in tropical lands in search of small edible creatures from termites to toads where venomous snakes also dwelled . Our ancestors were searching tropical lands for small edible animals .
 Any hominid who grabbed such a snake for a meal would have been bitten in defense and so eliminated from the family tree . Hominid would have bitten the reptile in defense .
 Those who fearfully avoided snakes were the ones who survived to pass their loathing on to future generations, including today's often-cryptozoologist humans . Those who avoided snakes, on the other hand, were those who survived .
 Humans and other creatures exhibit a seemingly morbid fascination directed towards threatening situations such as wildfires, a charging bull, or a falling tree . Such riveting attention keeps them on guard in case the threat spreads .
 It is possible that such trepidation of potentially venomous snakes, operating at a subliminal level below overt fear, may be the source of these lake monster legends .
 The serpentine image of a bobbing log, a family of otters, aquatic birds, or solitary waves may trigger such primeval trepidation and be interpreted as monsters as a result of the mysterious loathing they unleash . The image allows us to experience something of what our pre
 This view does not disprove the existence of serpentine water monsters, nor require that they not exist . This view doesn't disprove that they are not there .
 Cryptozoologists might wish to argue that such serpentdreading ophiophobia may account for the apprehension and obsession which many harbor towards such serpentine phantoms . Cryptozoologist may argue that the fear of such a phantom may be the reason for such an obsession .
 Mark Sunlin was raised in the lake country of Minnesota . He has written for BBC Wildlife magazine and the RSPCA .
 Police were called to the studio apartment of car park attendant Ronald Huff in Newark, Delaware, after he failed to turn up for work . On 16 JANUARY, POLICE WERE called to his studio apartment .
 Huff's body was on the floor, with his pet Nile monitor lizards feeding on his flesh . Huffs body was found by police officers on the scene of the shooting .
 The cause of death was not immedb ately known; but infection from a lizard bite could have contributed to the death if not treated . The death could have been a result of a bite from the lizard bite .
 One of Huff's cats was also removed, along with three containers of 2 in Madagascar hissing roaches, which serve as lizard food . Three containers of Madagascar roaches were also removed .
 One lizard was acting aggressively, “actually going towards you, mouth open” said John Caldwell, director of the Delaware Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals . One lizard is acting aggressively towards the man, he said .
 Nile monitors have small but very sharp teeth and muscular, whip -like tails that can cause serious injury . Nile monitors can be injured by Nile monitors with a whip-like tail and small teeth .
 In the wild, they eat eggs, birds and other animals, while in cap"" tivity, they are fed raw chicken and liver, and the occasional hard""boiled egg . The animals eat raw chicken, liver and eggs .
 The DSPCA hoped to place the lizards with zoos or educational groups; barring that, they would be put down . The lizards would be placed in zoos and educational groups .
 Sanford treasure hunters find priceless Spanish artifact off Fort Pierce beach . Treasure hunters from Sanford have struck it rich .
 Eric Schmitt spotted the lost piece of history shining in the sand of a Fort Pierce beach . "I looked down and I could see the comer of the piece," said Eric . Schmitt .
 Sand could be worth maybe $600,000, maybe a million maybe a lot more . It sank with a Spanish r e r h “rc f „y^; d h e P * d d d "" •"" Sand * 3 .
 NASA's twin STEREO probes are entering a mysterious region of space . They are looking for remains of an ancient planet which once orbited the Sun not far from Earth .
 If they find anything, it could solve a major puzzle -- the origin of the Moon . The Moon may have been the source of the moon's origin .
 Theia hypothesis is the brainchild of Princeton theorists Edward Belbruno and Richard Gott . The hypothesis is based on the theory of the "Theia hypothesis"
 Many astronomers hold that in the formative years of the solar system, a Mars-sized protoplanet crashed into Earth . Many astronomers believe the crash happened in the early solar system .
 Debris from the collision spun out into Earth orbit and coalesced into the Moon . The Moon was formed from a mixture of material from both bodies . Earth and the Moon collided in 2004 .
 This scenario explains many aspects of lunar geology including the size of the Moon's core and the density and isotopic composition of moon rocks . It explains the density of lunar rocks and composition of rocks .
 Lagrange points were populated mainly by planetesimals, asteroid-sized building blocks of planets . When the solar system was young, Lagrange point was dominated by asteroids and planetesims .
 Belbruno and Gott suggest that in one of the Lagrange points, L4 or L5, the planetesimals assembled themselves into Theia, nicknamed after the mythological Greek Titan who gave birth to the Moon goddess Selene . Theia is the name of a planet
 Solar observatories often park themselves at LI while deep space observatories prefer L2 . L2 is more popular with solar telescopes in the solar system .
 If this idea is correct, Theia itself is long gone, but some of the ancient planetesimals that failed to join Theia may still be lingering at L4 or L5 . If this is true, some of Theia's inhabitants may still remain at L5 or
 Astronomers have looked for Theiasteroids before using telescopes on Earth, and found nothing . But their results only rule out kilometer-sized objects . Astronomers say they have found nothing in the past .
 By actually entering L4 and L5, STEREO will be able to hunt for much smaller bodies at relatively close range . The new version of the spacecraft will be called STEROERO .
 A dynamical simulation shows how asteroids linger in the gravitational well of a Lagrange point of the Sun-Jupiter system .
 New comet Itagaki was imaged just a couple of days after the announcement of its discovery . Amateur astronomers found some known asteroids and new asteroids in the first images .
 Hunting for Theiasteroids is not STEREO's primary mission, he points out . Hunting for theiasteroid is not the primary mission of the space agency .
 Two probes are flanking the sun on opposite sides to gain a 3D view of solar activity . The two probes will be flanking each other to gain 3D views of the solar system .
 We just happen to be passing through the L4 and L5 Lagrange points en route to the world's most famous Lagrange Islands .
 Lagrange points are not infinitesimal points in space; they are broad regions 50 million kilometers wide . Lagrange point points are 50 million km wide, scientists say .
 Closest approach to the bottoms of the gravitational wells comes in Sept-Oct.09.09 . The closest approach to Earth's gravitational wells is expected to be in the next few months .
 The STEREO team is inviting the public to participate in the search by scrutinizing photos as they come in from the spacecraft . The public will be able to view the images from the space telescope .
 If you see a dot of light moving with respect to the stars, you may have found a Theiasteroid . If you find a moving light, it could be a moving object . It is not the first time you have seen a moving moving object in space .
 Links to the data and further instructions may be found at sungrazer.nrl .nrl.mil.com .
 The historic rug spent the past 70 years at Pleasant Banks, Evandale, the home of the Fosters . The rug was bought from the Stevenson family for three pounds and five shillings .
 The rug was kept in Tasmania when it was bought for $270,000 (roughly £95,000) by two state museums and Federal Hotels .
 Professor Mike Archer, director of the Australian Museum in Sydney, announced on 28 May that his team had succeeded in replicating some fragments of DNA and that a Tassie clone could be born within a decade . Most other scientists are sceptical of the claim .
 James Malley received a call about a thylacine sighting on a bush road on 18 June . Malley is famous for having spent almost half a century searching for thylacanines .
 The supposedly extinct predator stared at him from about five metres away before following two wombats it was hunting on a track near Circular Head . The witness, who wished to remain anonymous to avoid ridicule, said he had stared at the supposedly extinct creature .
 "I still get calls from all over Tasmania from people wanting me to come and have a look at tracks," says singer . "I'm still getting calls from people all over the state from all around Tasmania," she says .
 It would be more useful spending millions of dollars on a full-scale search rather than trying to clone a tiger . The tiger is more likely to be found than a tiger clone .
 Rock art appears to show a hunter fending off a large predator, likely Thylacoleo . Rock art is the first direct evidence of human-megafauna interaction .
 Its massive jaws and teeth look lethal on a cast skeleton at Adelaide’s South Australian Museum . The South Australian museum is home to the largest collection of skeletons .
 The situation parallels the situation of mammoths in Siberia and giant sloths in the Americas, which also found island refuges and survived for thousands of years after the broader extinction spasms on the mainland .
 This line of argument relies on the lack of fossil evidence for a prolonged human-megafauna overlap . The argument is based on fossil evidence that humans and megafauna overlained .
 If we find evidence that human beings and megafauna lived side by side for many thousands of years, then the role of humans in the extinctions would become blurry at best . If, however, they lived side-by-side for tens of thousands years, it would be blurry
 It would disprove the notion of a rapid-fire, Martin-Flannery-style blitzkrieg . Certainly it would prove that such a thing is possible .
 There may be such evidence in the Australian outback where there may have been such evidence . As it happens, there is one place in Australia where such evidence is found .
 Which extinction hypothesis the evidence supports is still a question . But which extinction hypothesis is still in question .
 Way back in 1878 a farmer sinking a well turned up megafauna bones at Cuddie . The bones were found in a well dug up by a local farmer .
 In 1991, Field discovered megafauna bones adjacent to stone tools . Field was a graduate student at the site . The find was headline-making .
 She says there are two layers showing the association, one about 30,000 years old, the other 35,000 . She says the layers are thought to be 30,00 years old . The layers show the association .
 If that dating is accurate, it would mean humans and megafauna coexisted in Australia for something like 20,000 years . It would be the first time humans have lived in Australia in more than a century . If that dates back to 20,500 years, it means humans
 Fossils have been moved from their original resting places and redeposited in younger sediments . They say the fossils have been redepoited in young sediments in the region .
 Bert Roberts, co-author of a 2001 paper that argues for some kind of human causation in megafauna extinctions, has examined grains of sand at Cuddie . Roberts says he has found very young grains mixed among the fossils .
 It’s possible that the artifacts and the megafauna really do go together . It's possible that it's possible the artifacts are artifacts from the same species .
 Field says critics are too wed to a human impact hypothesis for the megafauna extinctions . Field vigorously disputes that interpretation and argues that her critics too are too wedded to that interpretation . Field says her critics have been wrong to her interpretation .
 Field and I decided to drive instead to another famous boneyard in the same general region . Wellington Caves is a place where the boneyards are located .
 We drove for five hours across the Blue Mountains from Sydney to central California . The pastoral country looks much like the rolling coastal lands of central California, California .
 When we pulled into the Wellington Caves parking lot, we found it guarded by a fiberglass Diprotodon . It guarded by the fiberglass creature .
 Diprotodon was most mega of the megafauna, the largest known marsupial ever to tread the Earth . Diprotododon was the largest marsupials known to have lived on Earth .
 It’s a wide hole in the ground, a curving vertical shaft through a limestone hill, covered with a metal grate . The shaft is a narrow vertical shaft covered in a metal grat, covered in metal .
 In 1830 a local official named George Rankin lowered himself into the cave on a rope tied to a protrusion in the cave wall . Rankin is believed to have been the last person to enter the cave .
 A surveyor named Thomas Mitchell arrived later that year, explored the caves in the area, and shipped fossils off to Richard Owen, the British paleontologist who later gained fame for revealing the existence of dinosaurs .
 Owen recognized that the Wellington bones belonged to extinct marsupials . Owen recognized the bones as those of an extinct species of species . The Wellington bones were found in the Wellington area .
 JUDITH field makes a key point about her scientific data . There's not enough of it, not enough searching for the encoded narratives of the past .
 Amateur paleontologists play a crucial role in finding the bones of megafauna bones . The bones were found in the remains of the extinct species of the dinosaur .
 Hatcher is an easygoing fellow I met near the town of Margaret River, about a four-hour drive south of Perth . Hatcher's easygoing nature means he is not afraid to go near Margaret River .
 Hatcher made one of the most significant fossil finds in recent years at Margaret River . Hatcher's fossil finds were found in the area of Margaret River in the 1970s .
 Hatcher took the path often used by spelunkers and found himself working his way right through a bunch of fossils . Hatcher worked his way through the fossils in a series of different locations .
 A hole in the floor of the cave turned out to be the eye socket of a huge kangaroo . The hole was found in the cave is believed to have been the eye of a giant kangaro .
 More than 10,000 megafauna bones have since been hauled from Tight Entrance Cave . The bones were found in the cave's tightest entrance to the cave .
 Bone hunters fly ultralights over the Nullarbor Plain, the treeless underbelly of Australia along the Southern Ocean . They use GPS to map the locations of cave entrances they see from the air . Bone hunters use ultralight to fly over the vast wasteland known as the
 Hundreds of caves have been found recently in the Nullarbor . Four in particular have produced abundant megafauna bones .
 Hatcher has also found caves with primitive boomerangs that he believes were used for hunting bats . Hatcher believes the caves may have been used to hunt bats .
 megafauna and humans aren't found in the same places — except in a tantalizing few . But again, they aren’t found in same places, except in some tantalizing places .
 Mammoth Cave has become a popular tourist destination near Margaret River . The cave is located near the town of Margaret River, north of the city of Sydney .
 Cave sediments that contained fossils were hauled out and examined in a haphazard manner that no scientist today would approve . Between 1909 and 1915 the cave sediments containing fossils were pulled out of the cave and examined . No scientist would approve such a haazard manner today would .
 When he looks at Mammoth Cave, he sees an obvious human habitat, he says . Mammoth cave was a great shelter during the Ice Age, he adds .
 The biggest ones reached over six feet tall at the shoulder and ten feet long, their furry, pillar-like legs supporting three tons of weight . The biggest of the furry creatures reached over 6 feet tall and 10 feet long .
 Diprotodon occupied a niche similar to the African elephant, browsing on shrubs and collecting at water holes . The species was found in the wild in South Africa . It is thought to be the largest elephant in the world .
 Its SUV size and lack of agility would have made it a tempting target for marsupial lions and human hunters . The car was found in a cave in the cavern of the caverns of the cave .
 Hatcher will keep searching, doing his part to solve the continent’s greatest mystery . the earth preserves its history haphazardly .
 Bones disintegrate, artifacts crumble, the land erodes, the climate changes, forests come and go, rivers change their course . And the past, if not obliterated, is steadily obscured .
 Australia’s first people expressed themselves in rock art found on outcrops across the continent . Rock art is found in rock outcroppies across Australia's continent .
 Peter Murray is a paleontologist based in Alice Springs, Australia . He says he has never seen a dinosaur in Australia before . He has been in the wild for more than 30 years .
 Red sandstone south of town is adorned with circular and serpentine symbols . The red sandstone is covered in circles and circles .
 Rock painting in Arnhem Land, in far northern Australia, shows what looks very much like a megafauna marsupial .
 Palorchestes had a small, mobile trunk and a long tongue like that of a giraffe . Often compared to a tapir, Palorchestras had a mobile trunk, a long, mobile tongue and a small tongue .
 In Western Australia another ambiguous rock-art site shows what appears to be a human hunter with either a marsupial lion or a Tasmanian tiger . The distinction is a major distinction between the lion and the much smaller Tasmanian Tiger survived into historical era .
 Murray, over an Alice Springs dinner of camel with beet sauce and some smoked emu, said of his profession, “Every step of the way involves interpretation.” Murray says of his career: “It's a job that involves interpretation."
 The blitzkrieg hypothesis paints the alarming picture of human beings rapidly wiping out a great number of animals . “The data doesn’t just speak for itself. It’s the data,” the scientist says .
 The extinctions don’t happen quickly because of anything that resembles overkill but rather through a very incremental sequence of events, including climate change . The people involved could not fully discern what was happening to their environment, the author says .
 We are only gradually figuring out how we’re changing our world, and the extent to which our efflorescence is harming or even driving to extinction countless species . Yet we are still only slowly figuring out the extent of how we're changing the world .
 Judith Field reviewed Australia's caves in three different states and hiking the outback . Field is the author of the book, which is published by Judith Field .
 The slow-moving behemoth had been crossing a volcanic plain 1 00,000 years ago, when megafauna still walked tall . Cuddie Springs is the site of the controversial stratigraphy of the region . It is also the site where the layers of the layers where meg
 "My chin was cradled in my hand — I guess I looked as though I was about to put my head down on the table," she said . "I guess I'm not going to be able to do this again," she added .
 Science is a laborious process, and sometimes progress comes only with many stumbles and blind alleys . Science is laborious, but sometimes progress is only a result of many mistakes and stumbles .
 Rod Wells in Victoria Fossil Cave had to crawl through passages so narrow that he had to turn his head sideways to squeeze forward . Wells was in the cave at the time of the cave's discovery .
 "Sometimes we will strike an impassable obstacle and have to back up the way we came. Sometimes we will have to go back the way they came," says coach Mark Hughes .
 The grapevines thrive in red soil that sits like a layer of icing on porous limestone . The red soil is like icing icing on limestone and sits like an icing on the limestone .
 Ground is pocked with holes, many no wider than a cafe table, known as pitfall traps . The ground is covered in holes that can only be seen around the edges of a cafe chair .
 Pitfall traps have gobbled up many a kangaroo bounding through the night . Pitfalls trap traps have been used to trap kangaroos in the past .
 In 1969 a fledgling fossil hunter named Rod Wells came to Naracoorte to explore what was then known as Victoria Cave . Rod Wells was a budding fossil hunter . Wells was able to find the cave in 1969 .
 It was an old tourist attraction, with steps and handrails and electric lights . It was a popular tourist attraction in the 1930s, when it was built .
 Wells and half a dozen colleagues ventured beyond the tourist section . Wells and colleagues clawed through dark, narrow passages . Wells: "I'm not afraid to go on this trip. I'm not scared"
 When they felt a suggestive breeze wafting from a pile of loose rubble, they knew there was a chamber beyond . They felt a hint of the chamber beyond the pile of rubble . When they found the chamber, they felt the air waft of a breeze .
 Victoria Fossil Cave, as the cavern is now known, warehouses the bones of something like 45,000 animals . The cavern is thought to be the largest in the world and is home to around 45,500 animals .
 Some of the oldest bones belonged to creatures far larger and more fearsome than any found today in Australia . The bones are believed to date back to pre-historic times when they were alive .
 The ancient Australian megafauna roamed the continent during the Pleistocene epoch . They were the ancient Australian giant animals that roamed it's Australia . The animals were huge animals that lived in the ancient Pleistacial epoch .
 In boneyards across the continent, scientists have found the fossils of a giant snake and a huge flightless bird . A wombat-like creature the size of a rhinoceros; and a seven-foot-tall kangaroo with a strangely short face . The fossils
 The remains of a tapir-like creature, hippo-like beast and 20-foot-long lizard are found . They’ve found the remains of several creatures, including a hippo, and a lizard, 20 feet long .
 The Australian megafauna dominated their ecosystems . They were gone in an extinction spasm that swept away nearly every animal that weighed a hundred pounds or more . Nearly every animal weighing 100 pounds or over weighed more than 100 pounds .
 Scientists are finding abundant remains of animals that fell into the caves . The cave is home to the largest cave system in the world .
 Megafauna of the Pleistocene had the dual virtues of being dramatically large and co-existing with humans . It's a wonder that even more has been devoted to the megafauna .
 Prehistoric humans never threw spears at Tyrannosaurus rex, except in cartoons . The dinosaurs were big enough to have had spears thrown at them, except for cartoons .
 The disappearance of American megafauna happened relatively soon after the arrival of human beings, about 13,000 years ago . Mammoths, camels, giant short-faced bears, giant armadillos, stag moose, glyptodonts, sabertoothed cats
 Paleoecologist Paul Martin developed what became known as the blitzkrieg hypothesis in the 1960s .
 Modern humans created havoc as they spread through the Americas, wielding spears tipped with stone points to annihilate animals . AUSTRALIAN MEGAFAUNA 95 faced a technological predator.
 North America kept its deer, pronghorn, black bears, and a small type of bison . Newly arrived elk and moose expanded their ranges .
 What happened to Australia's large animals is one of the planet’s most baffling paleontological mysteries . It is not known what happened to the animals that were found in Australia .
 Australia has been drying out for a million years or more . The megafauna faced with a continent that became increasingly parched and denuded of vegetation .
 Australian paleontologist Tim Flannery suggests humans used fire to hunt to hunt . Fire led to deforestation and disruption of the hydrologic cycle, he says .
 Something dramatic happened to Australia’s dominant land creatures around 46,000 years ago . The invasion of a toolwielding, highly intelligent predator was strikingly soon after the invasion .
 Flannery advanced the antipodal version of Paul Martin’s blitzkrieg hypothesis . Flannery published a book called The Future Eaters in 1994 .
 Amy Toensing covered the drought in Australia’s Murray-Darling River Basin in April 2009 . Toensing: Drought is the worst in the country's history . She says the drought is the only thing to get out of the water .
 Dutch twin brothers and artists, Adrie and Alfons Kennis, specialize in paintings and models of extinct animals and humans . one prone to ruining ecosystems and destroying their own futures .
 Some viewed it as critical of the Aborigines, who pride themselves on living in harmony with nature . Some viewed the move as critical . Some view it as an insult to the Aboriginal people .
 Flannery’s thesis is that there is no direct evidence that human beings killed any of the megafauna — not so much as a single animal . Flannery: The more basic problem with Flannery's thesis is there is not direct evidence of human being killing any of these
 It would be helpful if someone uncovered a Diprotodon skeleton with a spear point embedded in a rib— or perhaps a pile of Thylacoleo bones next to a human campfire .
 A population of animals dispersed in a wide variety of habitats and refuges across an entire continent . Relatively few people, maybe numbering in just the thousands, would have had to kill a population .
 The debate about megafauna pivots to a great degree on the techniques for dating old bones and the sediments in which they are buried . By definition there can be no survivors. By definition, there can't be any survivors.
 If scientists can show that megafauna died out fairly quickly and that this extinction event happened within a few hundred years, or even a couple thousand years, of the arrival of humans, that’s a strong case — even if a purely circumstantial one — that the one
 P goliah, the largest kangaroo ever, thrives as a browser in open forests . Long clawed fingers and forelimbs that could extend upward like human arms allowed P. goliah to thrive in open forest .
 The seven-foot tall marsupial with hooflike toes was one of the last of the megafauna to go extinct . Two-thirds of all large animal genera in the world, from mastodons to giant kangaroos, disappeared between 50,000 and
 Approximate extinction dates* 70,000 YEARS AGO . 60,000 50,000 40,000 Procoptodon goliah 45,000a.
 Extinction of a majority of megafauna genera appears to coincide with human settlement over a 5,000-year period . Extinction appears to have been a result of human settlement .
 Contributing factors included hunting and changes in vegetation caused by fire . A falling population of giant herbivores was also contributing factors .
 North America once harbored an array of large mammal species rivaling Africa’s . The U.S. once had a large mammal population rivaling African ones .
 Most megafauna in North and South America were gone about 13,000 years ago . A major influx of hunters from Siberia brought most of the species back to North America . It was a few millennia of hunting from Siberia .
 A century or so after the arrival of Polynesians, who became the Maori, hunting and land clearing eliminated giant birds . Most notably the wingless moa and its main predator, Haast’s eagle, the world's largest known eagle, was the world’
 Perhaps the largest known bird, D stirtoni never left the ground . Dromornis Stirtoni is a large bird that never leaves the ground. Perhaps the biggest known bird of its kind .
 Ten feet tall and weighing a thousand pounds, it belonged to a family of giant flightless birds, the dromornithids . The bird weighed 1,000 pounds and was 10 feet tall .
 Stirton’s thunderbird lived about eight million years ago in the late Miocene, when Australia was drying out . It was found in Australia's wetest time .
 Genyornis newtoni lasted into the Pleistocene . Smaller, less specialized species, such as GenyORNis Newtoni, lasted until the last few decades .
 A changing climate long before human arrival probably doomed Palorchestes painei . It gave way in the Pleistocene to Palorchesteres azael, better suited to dryland vegetation . The climate changed long before humans arrived .
 After 70 years, one of the world's most elusive mammals has been tracked down in Tanzania . Camera trap was set on the eastern side of Udzungwa Mountains National Park . The elusive mammal has now been found in Tanzania, Tanzania .
 Gaul doesn't rule out the idea that other beings exist, “I believe there’s life on other planets,” he said . Gaul doesn’t think a bunch of E.T.s are walking the Earth, but he believes there are other planets .
 Photo of a Flying Saucer taken bv the Brazilian Navy, is similar to the one seen hovering over Joshua Tree .
 In the past, the media would laugh at tbe subject, poke fun and make jokes about “little green men,” he said . In the future, media would poke fun at the subject, he said.
 The reality is, most people, we have normal lives, but we just happen to be interested in unusual subjects . We have a normal life, but most people are interested in strange subjects, we say .
 Mami Wata is represented as one of the most powerful goddesses in the African religion of Voudun . She is today celebrated as a goddess that must be both loved and feared .
 Colors of Mami Wata's attire carry great significance in African people . She is often portrayed as a long haired beautiful mermaid, half human and half fish .
 Red symbolizes the color of blood, violence and death, and white symbolizes spirituality, beauty and female body . Red is a symbol of death, violence, and death .
 In the mermaid form she is always represented naked, sometimes combing her long hair and looking at herself in the golden miiror .
 Stories of encounters with Mami Wata are widespread across Africa . Stories of the encounters with the Mami were widespread across entire Africa . The stories are said to be widespread across the continent .
 In most common version, she stalks the shores of the ocean and abducts men and women while they are swimming or traveling in a boat . Most common version of her is that she abducts people and women .
 If the captive is worthy of her attention, she will return them to the shore, dry and with changed attitude toward spirituality and religion that can often make them rich, attractive and famous .
 Other encounters tell the story of her leaving her comb and mirror in the presence of sailors . Her comb was found in the hands of the sailors .
 After they took the items she would haunt their dreams, she would request the return of the items in an exchange of eternal sexual favors . She would haunt them in their dreams .
 Since 1980, scientists have monitored geologic unrest in Long Valley Caldera and at adjacent Mammoth Mountain, California, California . Invisible CO z Gas Killing Trees have been planted in the area .
 Large volumes of carbon dioxide gas were seeping from beneath Mammoth Mountain in 1989 . After a persistent swarm of earthquakes beneath the mountain, geologists discovered that large volumes of . carbon dioxide was seeping beneath this volcano .
 This gas is killing trees on the mountain and also can be a danger to people . The gas is also killing trees and can also be a threat to people in the area .
 The United States Geological Survey continues to study the C0 2 emissions to help protect the public from this invisible potential hazard . The U.S. Geological Survey is still studying the emissions .
 Mammoth Mountain is a young volcano on the southwest rim of Long Valley Caldera, a large volcanic depression in eastern California . It is located in the southwest part of the volcanic depression . The volcano is located on the west coast of California . Mammoth
 Long Valley has been volcanically active for about 4 million years . The Long Valley area is well known for its superb skiing, hiking, and camping .
 The United States Geological Survey operates an extensive network of instruments to monitor the continuing unrest in the Long Valley area . Because of this, the U.S. Geological Survey is monitoring the area .
 Numerous small earthquakes occurred beneath Mammoth Mountain from May to November 1989 .
 A small body of magma was rising through a fissure beneath the mountain . Data collected from monitoring instruments during those months indicated that the magma had been rising through fissures .
 U.S. Forest Service rangers noticed areas of dead and dying trees on the mountain . During the next year, the trees were found to be dying trees .
 After drought and insect infestations were eliminated as causes, geologic explanation was suspected . Geologic explanation for drought was also considered possible .
 USGS scientists then made measurements and discovered that the roots of the trees were being killed by exceptionally high concentrations of carbon dioxide gas in the soil . The roots of trees were killed by the high levels of the CO2 in soil .
 The town of Mammoth Lakes, just east of this volcano, has not been affected by the volcano . The town is just east east of the volcano, but it is not affected by this eruption .
 Mammoth Mountain is a young volcano in eastern California . It sits on the southwest rim of Long Valley Caldera . The volcano is located in the southwest of California .
 In 1994, scientists detected high . concentrations of C0 2 gas in the soil on Mammoth Mountain .
 This invisible gas, seeping from beneath the volcano, is killing trees on the sides of the mountain . It can pose a threat to humans . The invisible gas is seeping beneath the mountain and killing trees in the area .
 Large areas of dead and dying trees are visible near Horseshoe Lake, on the southeast flank of Mammoth Mountain . The area is on the southeastern flank of the mountain .
 U.S. Geological Survey scientists discovered that trees are being killed by high concentrations of C0 2 gas in the soil . C02 gas is found to be in high concentration in soil .
 The seepage of C0 2 gas from below Mammoth Mountain and the continued occurrence of local earthquakes are signs of the ongoing geologic unrest in the area .
 Leaves of plants produce oxygen from C0 2 during photosynthesis, but roots need to absorb 0 2 directly . Roots absorb oxygen directly from the roots of plants . Leaves produce C02 from photosynthesis but roots absorb it directly .
 The high C0 2 concentrations in the soil on Mammoth Mountain are killing trees by denying their roots 0 2 and by interfering with nutrient uptake . Trees are also being denied nutrients by denying roots and blocking nutrient uptake in soil .
 When C0 2 from soil leaves the ground, it normally mixes with the air and dissipates rapidly . C02 from soil usually mixes with air and dies rapidly .
 C0 2 is heavier than air, but it can collect at high concentrations in the lower parts of depressions and enclosures . It can collect in high concentrations, posing a potential danger to people, experts say .
 Breathing air with more than 30% C0 2 can very quickly cause unconsciousness and death . Breathing water with over 30% of C02 can quickly kill . Breathalysants can also kill if they inhale enough of the air to breathe .
 Poor ventilated areas above and below ground can be dangerous in areas of C0 2 seepage . C02 seepages can be found in areas with poor ventilation .
 Where thick snowpacks accumulate in winter, the C0 2 can be trapped within and beneath the snow . The C02 2 can also be trapped in thick snowpack .
 C0 2 gas seeping from the ground at Mammoth Mountain is likely derived from magma beneath the volcano . The gas is thought to be derived from the magma under the mountain .
 In 1989, rising magma may have opened cracks, allowing large amounts of trapped C0 2 gas to leak upward along faults . In 1989 the cracks may have been opened, opening magma cracks in the region .
 C0 2 gas is heavier than air and can collect in snowbanks, depressions, and poorly ventilated enclosures, such as cabins and tents, posing a potential danger to people . When it leaks from the soil, it can collect .
 In 1989-90, trees in this area on the south side of Mammoth Mountain volcano began dying from high concentrations of C0 2 gas in the soil . Trees in the area on this side of the mountain began dying .
 High C0 2 concentrations in the soil kill plants by denying their roots 0 2 and by interfering with nutrient uptake . High C 0 2 concentrations also kill plants .
 In the areas of tree kill at Mammoth Mountain, C0 2 makes up about 20 to 95% of the gas content of the soil . C02 makes up 20-95% of soil content .
 Geologists have detected C0 2 emissions on the flanks of other volcanoes . Kilauea in Hawaii and Mount Etna in Sicily have also detected emissions .
 Measuring the total rate of C0 2 gas emissions on the flanks of volcanoes or within calderas is difficult and labor intensive . It is commonly done using portable infrared C0 . 2 detectors . Measuring C02 gas emissions is difficult .
 This value varies on both short (days to weeks) and long time scales because of changes in atmospheric conditions and in the rate at which gas is being released from beneath the volcano .
 Carbonisotopic analyses of the annual growth rings in trees near the margins of the treekill areas imply that the gas-emission rate reached a peak in 1991, and then declined . The rate has been relatively stable since about 1996 .
 C0 2 and other volcanic gases, like helium, seeping from Mammoth Mountain appear to be leaking from a large reservoir of gas . The reservoir is supplied by repeated intrusions of magma .
 Tree-ring evidence from near springs on the mountain's flanks shows some C0 2 gas was leaking before 1989 and dissolving in the ground-water system .
 It is likely that the latest intrusion of magma opened deep fractures, increasing the rate of gas seepage . The latest intrusion is likely to open deep fractures in the region, say experts .
 The continuing occurrence of small earthquakes and C0 7 seepage beneath Mammoth Mountain are only two of the many signs of volcanic unrest in the area .
 Earthquakes and ground uplift are also occurring within the central part of Long Valley Caldera, only a few miles east of Mammoth Mountain . Mono-Inyo Craters volcanic chain to the north has had small volcanic eruptions every few hundred years .
 USGS Volcano Hazards Program is closely monitoring C0 2 emissions and other geologic hazards at Mammoth Mountain . Scientists with the USGS volcano Hazards program are closely monitoring .
 Anthony Stallard was seen kicking a football around with a friend after the two had been drinking . Stallard is believed to have been drinking at the time .
 Authorities say the two were shouting, singing, and being disrespectful . Authorities say they were shouting and singing, but were not being disrespectful.
 I'm assuming he was pretending to be a ghost,"" Tim Concannon, prosecuting at Portsmouth Magistrates' Court, said .
 Stallard was undergoing testing for autism at the time of the incident . Stallard had been undergoing tests for autism when the incident occurred .
 Mysterious sightings of lights turning . tf f on and off, and wisps of smoke in the . m Scf' 5 . 0 firefighters crossin w* Atrium Building on Commercenter Street .
 Haberfelde Building haunted, on Things have been seen moving by 17th and K Street . The Vaudeville Express is located on the Chester Avenue & China Grade Loop .
 Marconi experimented with wireless telegraphy in his native Italy, before transmitting signals across the English Channel in 1898, and the Atlantic in 1901 . Marconi transmitted signals across English Channel and Atlantic in 1898 .
 His company established a world-wide radio telegraph network . He won the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1909 for his work on the radio network .
 His status as the Father of Radio, however, has long been under attack . He has been accused of being a radio pioneer .
 In Russia, Alexander Popov is often named as the true begetter of wireless, in 1896, while many Americans (not all of them Net-dwelling conspiracy buffs) champion Nikola Tesla . In the United States, Nikola Tesla lost out to Marconi in patenting battles
 Tesla is Marconi's most famous rival, but the full list of those with credible claims to have achieved radio transmission pre-Marconi is a long one . Tesla is one of the most famous radio transmitters to date .
 Marconi was certainly the first entrepreneur to properly understand and exploit the new technology . Whatever his scientific debts, he was certainly first to exploit the technology . Marconi's invention was the invention of radio technology .
 Legend states that if the shutters were not closed on the painting at night, the patients who fell asleep under the painting would fall ill, some even died as a result . Some of the patients fell ill and some of them even died after falling asleep .
 The painting was stolen in 2001 and the whereabouts of the painting are unknown . The painting is believed to have been stolen in the early 2000s .
 King, however, remained on the fringe, playing a now-you-see-him-now-youdon’t game with ufology . King is still a big name in the game, but he's not a big fan .
 In the 1990s he re-appeared again, this time announcing that he’d been working for a top-secret psy-ops unit which had infiltrated British ufology in order to spread disinformation . He claimed to have worked for a unit that had infiltrated the British u
 King’s other claims included his detailed knowledge of alien/ government bases in the UK and a host of other tantalising fragments of information including mind control and activities of the secret state .
 King is the closest UK ufology has to a Bob Lazar figure, and just as weird . King is closest to the UK's Bob Lazars and is just as odd as Lazars .
 Research has revealed that Britain had its own ‘flap’ six months before Arnold’s report was splashed across the world’�s media . But research has also revealed that the report was published six months earlier .
 Formerly secret files reveal how radar stations detected 'unidentified aircraft' approaching England’s east coast from the direction of the North Sea .
 One Mosquito crew chased what was called a "ghost plane" for nearly one hour before it disappeared . Fighters scrambled and one crew chased the plane for nearly an hour .
 Condon team were unable to debunk the photographs British press, but were played down by the Air Ministry . These early military encounters were briefly mentioned by the Condon Team .
 Paul Trent and his wife Evelyn saw one of the ‘flying saucers’ they had read so much about in the newspapers . It was on a tiny farm near the Oregon town of McMinnville on an evening in May 1950 .
 Evelyn was feeding rabbits when it appeared and alerted her husband . He had enough time to retrieve his camera from the house and take two photographs of the object .
 The story goes that the couple feared they had seen some secret experimental aircraft . The couple said nothing, fearing they had been seeing some secret aircraft .
 When news leaked out to the local newspaper the couple searched their farmhouse and found the pictures . The pictures had been stashed in a desk drawer . When news of the pictures leaked out the couple's farmhouse was searched for them .
 Trent’s photos were the biggest news story ever to hit McMinnville, and when they appeared in Life magazine the story went global . Life magazine's Life magazine coverage of Trent's photos went global.
 McMinnville Telephone-Register, which had a circulation of just 4,000, received so many inquiries it was forced to put out a special press run of 10,000 copies . The tiny local newspaper received so much inquiries it had to issue a special edition .
 Experts from the Condon team looked at the photos in 1969 but were unable to debunk them . They concluded the couple were too dimwitted and unimaginative to perpetrate a hoax .
 The house where the photos were taken has long since been torn down . We will never know as the couple died in the late 1990s .
 For the 50th anniversary a local historian revived the story to coincide with the opening of a new hotel in McMinnville, Oregon . The story was revived for the first time in 50 years .
 One of the visitors was retired journalist Bill Powell, who broke the story .
 He said thel950 headline “At Long Last Authentic Photographs of a Flying Saucer "" should be read carefully . He said it should be taken to account for the significance of the photograph .
 Bakersfield Californian John Suhrhoff turned in the Louis Vuitton bag . The bag was found and turned in by Suhrhhoff, who turned it in .
 John Suhrhoff found the Louis Vuitton bag on a park bench during a lunch stop in the scenic city following a weekend hike .
 The respiratory therapist returned the bag to Sausalito police headquarters on Monday afternoon after failing to track down the owners . The bag was returned to police headquarters after police failed to find its owners .
 The bag is en route to the Ghannadian family of Toronto, Canada, who were in Northern California for a daughter’s wedding . The bag was sent to a daughter's wedding .
 Ghannadians told the Marin Independent Journal of Novato that their flight to Toronto was scheduled for Sunday evening, so they decided to visit Sausalito . They said they were going to fly to Toronto, but their flight was scheduled to be Sunday evening .
 The town is known for its waterfront views of San Francisco and is a tourist hub . It is also known as a tourist destination .
 Shahla Ghannadian briefly left her husband in charge of the purse . The purse contained jewelry she wore at the wedding, according to the paper .
 Ghannadian started crying when she returned to her San Francisco hotel and realized the bag was gone, the paper said . She started crying as she realized she had lost her bag .
 The family went to Sausalito police headquarters and didn’t have any luck . The family was told chances were slim the bag would be returned .
 Kurtis Skoog said it’s rare to find someone so honest that they’d pass up a bag of expensive loot . Kurtis said it was rare to see someone pass up expensive gifts .
 Many others would have tried to pawn off the contents off for a fraction of their value, he said .
 Suhrhoff is happy the bag is headed back to Canada but couldn't help wondering why the family was taking such pricey items on day trips to begin with . The bag is now heading back to the U.S.
 There’s a core of ‘Apollo Moon flight’ disbelievers even within the United States perhaps 10 per cent of the population, and up to twice that in specific demographic groups . D.E. D.C. may be among the most disbelievers in the
 Overseas, the results are similar, fanned by local attitudes toward the United States in general and technology in particular .
 Some religious fundamentalists Hare Krishna cultists and some extreme Islamic mullahs declare the theological impossibility of human trips to other worlds in space .
 Many Cuban schools, both in Cuba and where Cuban schoolteachers were lent, such as Sandinista Nicaragua, taught their students that Apollo was a fraud . Resentment of American cultural and political dominance fuels other 'disbelievers'
 The ‘Moon hoax’ theme had been lingering beyond the fringes of mainstream society for decades . Like a counter-cultural heresy, the 'Moon hoax' theme has been lingering . It was a countercultural heresy .
 A self-published pamphlet here, a ‘B-grade’ science fiction movie there, or a radio talk show guest over there for many years . For many years it all looked like a shrivelling leftover of the original human inability to accept the reality of revolutionary changes .
 In the last 10 years, an entirely new wave of hoax theories has appeared on cable TV, on the internet, via self-publishing, and through other ‘alternate’ publication methods .
 These methods are the result of the technological progress that Apollo symbolised, now ironically fuelling the arguments against one of the greatest achievements in human history .
 NASA’s official reaction to these and other questions was both clumsy and often counter-productive . NASA's response to these questions has been clumsy, often counterproductive . The agency has been criticized for its handling of the space program .
 The poor TV impression he gave a know-it-all ‘rocket scientist’ denouncing each argument as false but usually without providing supporting evidence may have been due to deliberate editing by the producers to make the ‘NASA guy’ look arrogant and contemptuous .
 The disappointing results of participating seemed to strengthen the view within NASA that the best response was no response avoid anything that might ‘dignify’ the charges . NASA has been criticized for its lack of response to the allegations .
 Dr Roger Launius, then the chief of the history office at headquarters, was an excepius . NASA's overall unwillingness to engage with the project was to blame for NASA’s overall unwillingness .
 As an amateur space historian and folklorist, I had been discussing with him for years the need for NASA to fulfill its outreach charter . NASA should issue a series of modest monographs on various widespread cultural myths about space activities .
 Launius, nearing retirement in early 2002, decided it was time for a detailed response to the Apollo hoax accusations . Launius offered him a sole-source contract to write a monograph that analysed why such stories seemed so attractive to so many people. Launius was nearing retirement and decided
 Launius departed NASA soon thereafter, leaving the project in the care of a junior historian, Dr Stephen Garber . Launius left NASA soon after, leaving his project behind him .
 My requests for input from various NASA offices and public educational organisations soon reached the ears of news reporters . Some print stories appeared in late October .
 NASA officials were at first inclined to defend the project on educational grounds . NASA officials are somewhat taken aback by the publicity .
 Plait had actually said that he felt it was proper for NASA to respond, but that it did seem ""beneath their dignity” to be forced to do it .
 Contrary to Jennings's account, Plait fully supported the monograph contract . Plait's account was published by the same publisher as Jennings .
 Their dignity was called into question, and fearing angry telephone calls from congressmen returning to Washington after the election, they decided to revoke the contract . They feared angry phone calls from Congressmen returning from Washington .
 They paid for work done to date, and washed their hands of the project . The project will be completed in the fall of 2018 .
 The Moon hoax controversy was not a bothersome distraction, but a unique opportunity . And to me, the moon hoax controversy wasn't a distraction, it was a chance to learn from it .
 Localised success of the hoaxist arguments provides us with a detection system to identify just where these resources are inadequate . And the localised success gives us a system of detection system, such as the detection system .
 "I intend to complete the project, depending on successfully arranging new funding sources," says the author .
 The popularity of this particular myth is a heaven-sent opportunity to address fundamental issues of public understanding of technological controversies . The myth is not only a myth, it is also a chance to address the public's understanding of technology .
 Knowles wrote in the cancellation notice . The reaction “is crystal clear and has brought to our attention of you and other conscientious friends of ours to the exhibition,” Knowles said .
 LVtatt Sender, the gallery's creative director, resigned in protest . The 6-foot sculpture was the victim of “a strong-arming from people who haven't seen the show," Sender said .
 The hotel and the gallery were overrun Thursday with angry phone calls and e-mails about the exhibit . The hotel was overrun with angry calls and calls from angry people on Thursday .
 Sender said the calls included death threads over the work of artist Cosimo Cavallaro . Artist was described as disappointed by the decision to cancel the display .
 The sculpture was to debut Monday evening, the day after Palm Sunday . It was just four days before Christians mark the crucifixion of Jesus Christ on Good Friday . The sculpture is to debut on Monday evening .
 The fine art of torture and out and out, they became unbearably hot during the day . They became unbearable to the rest of the world .
 The plank that served as a bed was at a 20-degree angle, making it impossible to sleep without falling to the floor . The plank was at an angle of 20 degrees, making sleeping on it impossible for sleep .
 If the prisoner tried to walk around, he would stumble over bricks and other objects scattered on the floor . The prisoner would have to stumble over objects scattered around the room to walk .
 The only option left to prisoners was staring at the walls, which were covered with optical illusions, cubes, coloured circles and spirals . The walls are covered in optical illusions and coloured circles .
 Lighting effects gave the impression that the dizzying patterns were moving . Lighting effects were used to give the illusion that the patterns were actually moving .
 Laurencic told the military court that he had been commissioned to build the cells by a prominent anarchist . He said he had heard of similar ones used elsewhere in the republican zone during the civil war .
 A jail in Murcia in south-east Spain forced prisoners to view the scene from Dali and Bunuel’s 1929 surrealist film Un Chien Andalou, in which an eyeball is sliced open . Also said to have been forced to view a scene from Un
 Milicua has uncovered what is alleged to be the first use of modern art as a deliberate form of torture . As a supporter of Franco, he was an of so-called “degenerative SPANISH ART HISTORIAN JOSE MILicua’s
 In the Barcelona jails constructed by the CNT (Confederacion Nacional de Trabajadores) during the Spanish Civil War, new ways were devised of making prisoners crack up .
 Bauhaus artists were said to have inspired a series of secret cells built in 1938 under the direction of a 37-year-old Frenchman of Austrian parentage called Alfonso Laurencic, a double agent posing as a CNT supporter .
 He swindled both sides in the war, making huge amounts of money by smuggling people out of the Republican zone . He made millions by making millions of dollars smuggling people from Republican zones .
 Milicua's information came from an account by RL Chacon of Laurencic’s trial before a Francoist military tribunal in 1939 .
 Laurencic so-called “coloured cells’ were hidden from foreign journalists who visited the makeshift jails on Vallmajor and Saragossa streets . The makeshift jails are hidden from journalists who visit them .
 His ‘psychotechnic’ torture techniques were allegedly inspired by ideas of geometric abstraction and surrealism . The torture techniques are said to have been inspired by avant garde art theories on the psychological impact of colours .
 Green produced melancholy and sadness, which was why this was used for the glass in the cell windows . It was used to produce sadness and melancholy for the windows in prison cells .
 Covered with tar inside enemy art’s work includes the output of the Bauhaus and surrealists .
 The old cryptozoological yarn of the moha-moha may have arisen from a real aboriginal tradition argues ULRICH MAGIN .
 ULRICH MAGIN has written books on ufology, geomancy, cryptozoology and Charles Fort . Three views of the moha-moha, 1890, according to Miss Lovell .
 Miss Lovell was standing on the beach of Fraser Island, Queensland, Australia, when she saw a most mysterious beast . She saw the beast on a beach on Fraser Island .
 The story can be read in a number of classic books on sea-serpents, from Rupert Gould’s The Case for the Seaserpent to Bernard Heuvelmans’ classic In the Wake of the Sea .
 She claimed that the natives she asked had seen the creature previously and were very much afraid of it, as it had been known to attack people . She said the natives were very afraid of the creature, and that it had attacked them .
 The tale of the moha-moha is a cryptozoological classic, but it is also a controversial one . It is also controversial one, with some calling it a "controversial" story .
 Gould thought the story authentic, but Heuvelmans was sure it was just a hoax based on Indian legends . Gould thought it was authentic . Gould was sure the story was based on an Indian legend . Gould believed it was genuine .
 The sighting report is full of inconsistencies, the measurements do not fit, the creature behaves in a fashion that defies normal biology, and it has features (such as horizontal lines of large overlapping scales) that, from a mechanical point of view, simply won't do .
 The moha-moha was never ever seen again it remains a unique sea-serpent, a one-off, something never repeated . What’s more than a moha moha, it was never seen again. What's more important is that it was a unique
 There is evidence overlooked as far as I am aware that the natives knew their moha-moha well . But there is also evidence that there is evidence that they knew the natives .
 Whether their moha-moha was identical to the sphinx-like composite observed by the Australian schoolteacher is another question .
 Miss Lovell wrote several (not completely consistent) letters about her encounter .
 Smith's book is also discussed in Smith’s book, although he doesn’t notice any connection . Enter the “mochel-mocohel” which is also mentioned in the book, but he doesn't notice it .
 In the 1850s, Thomas Hall reported on this Queensland version of the bunyip, a local Australian lake monster, when he heard rumors of it in the Darling Downs . The local lake monster is believed to have been a local legend in Queensland .
 It was a water creature the natives were very afraid of, and they alleged it had eaten all the fish in a waterhole . It was alleged that the creature had eaten fish .
 There were probably other white witnesses on other occasions, but their descriptions have not come down to us . There are probably other witnesses, but they have not been down to .
 There might actually be a genuine aboriginal mythical beast behind Miss Lovell’s sighting in June 1890 .
 Australian tradition of a water beast which is called moka-moka or mochel-mochel . This doesn't explain what she saw, but it means that at least there appears to be a genuine Australian tradition .
 Miss Lovell did not pluck her adventure out of thin air, but based it on something she would have heard from the natives . Lovell based her adventure on what she would've heard from natives .
 Miss Lovell's moha-moha from Heuvelmans’ In the Wake of the Sea Serpents .
 Now they have been unchained from their chain; they salivate; they are merry . Now they are unchained, they have . Now . They have . unchained . They salivated, they salivated, they were merry .
 Jamukha, the stepbrother of Genghis Khan, said of the bloody Universal Ruler and his fellow fighters . This is what he said of his stepbrother and the other fighters .
 Jamukha, a relative and clan chief, helped Temudjin free his family when it was kidnapped . The family was kidnapped by a local clan chief in the early 2000s .
 Jamukha rebelled against Genghis Khan, and they murdered him . Years later the “hounds’s” captured him, and he was murdered .
 Genghis Khan did Jamukha the honor of killing him by rolling him up in a carpet and crushing him with boulders . The blood would remain in the body, so that the blood would be left on the body .
 In the years that followed, the hounds also killed millions of people throughout the world and crushed thriving civilizations, for their conquest . The conquest was a terrible disaster of the Middle Ages .
 Mongols of the 13th century laid waste to nations, cities, towns, and villages . The Mongols were known as the Mongols, the most powerful of the world's medieval rulers .
 Their cruelty was but a part of the comprehensive strategy of conquest, says the author . The cruelty was part of a comprehensive strategy, he says .
 Mongols instilled fear and sought to convince the world that resistance was futile . The Mongols were the only people to resist resistance in the world .
 "They made sure that the tales of their savagery and merciless slaughter had preceded them," says CNN.com .
 Mongols carried their tents on four-wheeled carts . They also used twowheeled carts covered with black felt thoroughly treated with tallow .
 Mongols carried their families, belongings, supplies, and provisions in the carts . The carts provided them with enhanced and rapid mobility, for the Mongols . Mongols used the carts to transport their belongings and supplies .
 Ancient Mongol records tell that Subudai Bagatur, one of the “hounds,” had a habit of resting in a special vehicle .
 This vehicle was made of a special metal, and no arrow could penetrate its walls . No arrow could be fired at the vehicle, and it was protected by the walls .
 Not long ago, a twowheeled, covered, metal vehicle was unearthed during archaeological excavations in the vicinity of Pusan, South Korea .
 A chemical analysis of the metal indicated that it was alloyed steel, with an admixture of molybdenum and tungsten . The metal was found to be an alloyed alloy of steel and molydenum .
 I made inquiries about this vehicle, writing letters to archaeologists in South Korea and others in the U.S. who study Korean archaeology . The vehicle is believed to be one of the most important vehicles in the world .
 I received no replies and have not been able to ascertain the veracity of the find . I have not received any replies from the BBC .
 The conquerors from the steppes borrowed technology from the conquered nations, from the Chinese, Arabs, and Persians . The Chinese, Arab, and Persian technology borrowed from the conquerors .
 Their armies were accompanied by wise and learned foreigners, as well as forcefully conscripted soldiers from among the vanquished people . Their armies included wise, learned foreigners and forcefully conscripted soldiers .
 Tungsten and Molybdenum are the metals that were admixed into the alloy . Let us look at the materials that were used to create the alloy.
 A well-known Nazi artillery piece, “Big Bertha,” contained molybdenum as an essential component of its steel . Molybondum was used in the construction of the famous artillery piece .
 Native molybdenum does not occur but is obtained principally from molydenite . Molydenum is obtained mainly from the mineral molybinite, which is used to make molybenite .
 Metallurgists dissolve the oxide in ammonium hydroxide to make ammonium molybdate . They then reduce the moly bdate with hydrogen to form the metal .
 China is reported to have about 75 percent of the world s tungsten resources . China is believed to have 75 per cent of the tungststen resources in the world .
 Tungsten has the highest melting point and lowest vapor pressure of all metals . At temperatures of more than 3,000°F, the highest tensile strength of the metal .
 Tungsten has excellent corrosion resistance and is attacked only slightly by most mineral acids . It has been used in a wide range of applications .
 Tungsten compounds are used for cutting tools and high-temperature lubricants . They are also used in high temperature lubricants and cutting tools . The material is also used to make lubricants, cutting tools, and to create lubricants.
 The first attempts to produce tungsten steel were made in 1855, but industrial use was not possible because of the high price of the metal . Tungsten metal was used for industrial use in the early 1800s .
 Tungsten occurs in the natural state only in the form of chemical compounds with other elements . It is usually mined underground and is usually kept in the underground .
 The ore is first crushed and milled to liberate the tungsten mineral crystals . It is then milled and crushed in order to extract the crystals .
 Tungsten carbide is, quantitatively, the most important tungsten compound in the world . It is also known as "Tungsten Carbide"
 Because of its hardness, it is the main constituent in cemented carbide . The hardness of the material is the most common form of cemented carbide .
 Main constituent is tungsten monocarbide, with a hardness close to diamond . Main constituent of the material has a hardness similar to that of a diamond .
 The most promising area of growth for tungsten demand in the military arena is in the manufacture of armorpiercing projectiles, particularly for smallcaliber ammunition .
 Mongolia was a horse-based culture, and the Mongolian steppes and deserts were not centers of advanced metallurgy . Mongolia was not known for advanced metallic technology .
 Mongolia was one of the most powerful states in the world in the 13th century . Mongolia was a powerful state of power .
 Temudjin, one of the most famous conquerors of history, extended his empire across Asia to the Adriatic Sea . He was one of Asia's most successful conquerors, extending his empire to the Mediterranean Sea .
 Genghis Khan used the military prowess of his united tribes to create a nation that spanned from China to Turkey and Iraq . Khan's nation spanned China, Russia, Egypt, Egypt and Russia, all the way to Korea and Vietnam .
 Their warlords, cruel but brilliant military leaders, created the largest empire known to man . Their brutal but brilliant warlords created the world's largest empire .
 The Mongol military machine is the basis for every military in the world today . Mongol military machines are the basis of the world's most successful military systems .
 Of all the commanders who arrived from Mongolia, Subudai Bagatur was the greatest, he says . Of all of the commanders . Mongolia, he said .
 He led the Western onslaught of the Mongol army against Russia, Europe, and the Caucasian countries . The Mongol army fought against Russia and Europe .
 Subudai outlived Genghis Khan and continued to serve his people under Batu Khan and Ugedey . He was the second son of Genghi Khan and was the third son of the Khan .
 Genghis Khan conquered the northeastern part of China in the years 1211 through 1215 . The Mongols conquered northeastern China in 1211-1215 .
 Subudai and another trusted general, Chupe Noyon, each with a battal16 Fate / April 2003 ion-size military unit, terrorized the Chinese countryside .
 Mongol detachment led by Jebe and Subudai attacked the kingdom of Georgia several times in the early 1220s . The detachment of the Mongol army had made war on Muhammad and his son Jalal-ad-Din .
 In 1221, a reconnaissance detachment of 15,000 Mongols separated from the Central Asian expedition . They traveled around the Caspian Sea, exploring the lands on its western shore . The Mongols were the first to explore the region in 1221 .
 Subudai led the Mongol horsemen when they met with a superior Russian force and their Kipchak Cuman allies . He led them to a victory over the Russian forces .
 Batu Khan sent Subudai to quell a revolt led by Jiku and Baian in 1238 and 1239 . Subu Khan was defeated by the Jiku, Baian and Jiku .
 Subudai s forces descended upon the Ukrainian steppe, conquering Polovtsy in 1239 and Kiev in 1240 . His forces conquered Polovtsia and Kiev, then Kiev, in 1241 .
 In 1241 the Mongol invaders charged into central Europe and defeated the combined armies of Germany, Poland, and Bohemia in the battle of Liegnitz . The Mongol invasion of 1241 was the result of a battle between Germany and Poland . The battle was the first Mongol invasion to invade
 Other parts of Subudai’s force descended into Hungary from the Carpathian Mountains from several directions . The force is said to have entered Hungary from a number of directions .
 The Hungarian king fled, and the Mongols conquered the country . The Mongols established garrisons to enforce their control of Hungary .
 Only the news of the death in Mongolia of the Great Khan Ugedey saved Western Europe from Subudai Bagatur and his merciless, disciplined, fearless Mongol hordes . Only the death of the . Great Khan . of the Mongol hordes saved Western . Europe .
 Mongols Invade Korea Korea is an ancient country with a history of more than 5,000 years . Korea is one of the most ancient countries in the world .
 Mongol invaders caused one of the most bloody periods in the world . The Mongol invasion was one of many bloody periods during the Mongolian era .
 In 1231, the Mongols invaded Korea, forcing the Goryeo royal family to flee to Kanghwa Island near Seoul . The Mongols were forced to leave the country in 1231 . The royal family was forced to hide in the midst of the Mongol invasion .
 After the death of the last Mongolian Emperor Mongke in 1259, the Mongol Empire broke up into the Golden Horde of Batu Khan, inhabiting the Russian lands . The Kingdom of Ugedey had conquered East Turkestan and Uzbek lands, and the Yuan State of Kub
 Once Kubla Khan had pacified China, he turned his sights on other countries of Asia . He conquered the empires where Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, and Indonesia are located today .
 He invaded Korea and used it as a base in an attempt to conquer Japan, but he failed . He tried to invade Korea and use it to try and conquer Japan .
 Unlike Genghis Khan’s, his army consisted mostly of infantry, with little cavalry, and he was also the first Mongolian ruler to have a navy . The Mongolian leader also had a navy, the first of its kind .
 Subudai’s two-wheeled, covered vehicle made of molybdenum and tungsten . Perhaps he also had in his possession Subudia’ed vehicle . The twowheeled vehicle is made from molysdenum, tungst
 The Mongols brought the mysterious metal vehicle from China to the Mongols, author says .
 Subudai shed enough blood and spent sufficient time in China to loot the country of its treasures . He spent most of his time in the country looting the country's treasures .
 At the same time, we need to remember that the Mongols did not persecute people for being Muslim, Buddhist, or Christian . The Mongols were not persecuted for being Christian, Muslim, or Buddhist .
 Genghis Khan's capital of Karakorum contained a Muslim mosque, Buddhist temple, and quite possibly a Buddhist temple . Donne P Crane gifts were presented to Khan by Russian dukes .
 Theirs was a ruthless, merciless empire, yet it assimilated other cultures and tolerated other faiths, unlike some of the modern nation states . Theirs were ruthless but tolerant and tolerant of other cultures .
 At one time in its history, China was the world’s most technologically advanced society . China was one of the most advanced societies in the world .
 For much of ancient times and the Middle Ages, China was significantly more advanced than Europe . Indeed, for much of the ancient times, Europe was significantly advanced than China .
 Many innovations were developed in ancient China, such as the mariner’s compass, papermaking, the clock, the wheelbarrow, the crossbow, the animal harness, the printing press, ink, playing cards, gunpowder, and paper money .
 Ancient Chinese scientists possessed knowledge of protochemistry and alchemy . Ancient Chinese scientist had alchemy and protochemistry knowledge .
 Chinese geologists discovered world-class mineral deposits in what used to be part of an ancient Silk Road, the Hexi Corridor, in northwestern China .
 The actual reserves of nickel, copper, cobalt, platinum, tungsten, and gold in the corridor could be twice as much as the verified discoveries .
 Luoyang, one of the seven ancient cities in China, lies in the northwestern part of Henan province . The ancient city is one of China's most ancient cities .
 Jiangxi Province in southeast China also has rich mineral resources, including tungsten, selenium, tellurium, rubidium, and lithium . Jiangxi province also has a rich mineral resource, such as tellerium, lithium and tungststen .
 The ancient Chinese developed methods for the manufacture of steel that have only recently been matched in the West . Ancient Chinese methods were only recently matched by the West.
 The Chinese developed a method for converting cast iron into steel by blowing air on the molten metal . The air reduced the carbon content of the cast iron, reducing it to less carbonate .
 The ancient Chinese developed technologies that were fantastically advanced for the time . Ancient Chinese technology was far more advanced than any modern technology .
 Chinese surgeons were able to perform a craniotomy, the surgical opening of the skull — difficult even in modern times — as early as 4,000 years ago .
 The ancient Chinese possessed a device capable of seeing inside human bodies, non-intrusive, and made of special glass . Such great minds of Soviet science as Ivan Efremov lend credence to the legends of the ancient Chinese .
 We have yet to find evidence of the ancient production of tungsten alloys . We have found no evidence of ancient production .
 The mystery of Subudai’s impenetrable vehicle will be solved . If we do, then we will find out why the mystery of the car is unsolved .
 There is another interesting episode of Subudai’s biography that involves a search for the treasures of Genghis Khan . There is also another episode that involves the search for a treasure trove .
 Kyrgyzstan is nestled between Uzbek deserts, Kazakh steppe, Tajikistan, and the outback of Western China . A Pearl of Central Asia, it's nestled among Uzbek deserts and the Kazakh steppies .
 Tian Shan and Pamir mountain ranges stretch across this country . Tian Shan is one of the most famous mountain ranges in the world .
 Lake Issyk-Kul, a turquoise, unspoiled water reservoir, is located at an altitude of 5,291 feet . The lake is surrounded by the snowcapped Kungey Ala-Tau and Teskey AlaToo mountain ranges . The reservoir is located
 This vast lake lies in northeastern Kyrgyzstan, near the borders with China and Kazakhstan . It is one of the world's largest lakes .
 It doesn't freeze in winter; its waters are surprisingly warm and exceptionally transparent . It doesn’t freeze in winters; it’s incredibly transparent .
 Lake Titicaca is the second largest highland lake in the world . It is the world's second largest lake, after Lake Titicaaca in Peru .
 The lake’s length is 1 10 miles, its width is 40 miles, and it has a maximum depth of 1,1 10 feet . The lake is 1.10 miles long and has a width of about 40 miles .
 Neanderthal camps, ancient burial mounds, clusters of cave drawings, mysterious dolls made from stones, and the ruins of strange settlements, towns, and graves hidden beneath the warm waters .
 There are more than 100,000 petroglyphs on the shore of Lake Issyk-Kul dating back to the Neolithic period . The lake is the largest lake in the world and is popular with tourists .
 Different nomadic tribal cultures that dwelt in the area left artifacts of their vanished ways of life . The artifacts were found in the region .
 Archaeologists of Central Asia are aware of more than a dozen ancient and medieval sunken settlements on the bottom of the lake . Archaeologists say the settlements are believed to date back to pre-history .
 The town of Chigu, capital of the once powerful state of the Usuns, was once the most powerful in the country .
 Investigators have discovered ceramics, earthen pottery, and bronze and copper artifacts, coins, and items from the Mongol period . Investigators have also found ceramic, bronze, copper artifacts and coins dating back to Mongolia .
 The latter had their own name for Lake Issyk-Kul; they called it Lemur-u-nor . The latter called the lake Lemur, or Lemur .
 The Great Silk Road functioned as an extremely important trade route from China to the Roman Empire in the second century B.c. It functioned for centuries . The Mongols were one of the world's most important trade routes .
 The road was about 4,300 miles 18 Fate / April 2003 . Fishermen on Issyk-Kul lake in Kyrgyzstan. long .
 Before the discovery of the sea route to India, the Silk Road was the most important connection between the Orient and the West . The Silk Road is now the world's most important link between the east and west .
 The most valuable commodity imported from China was silk; hence, the entire transcontinental trade route was named the Silk Road . Silk Road was named after the Silk Silk Road, the route of the world's most valuable commodities .
 Buddhism came to China from India from India along the northern branch of the trade route . Religion, too, was a precious commodity of the great Silk Road, for Buddhism . Buddhism was also important in China's history .
 The ruins of Zoroastrian, Buddhist, and Nestorian Christian monuments are scattered throughout the mountains and valleys of Kyrgyzstan .
 Kyrgyzstan assured its significance on the Great Silk Road . The geographic location of the country assured its importance on the Silk Road.
 From the very beginning, three branches of the road ran through the area . Thus, from the very . beginning, the . very beginning of the . history of the area, the road runs through three branches .
 Mongol warriors under Genghis Khan invaded and devastated Kyrgyzstan in the 13th century . The Mongols invaded and destroyed the region in 13th Century .
 They destroyed irrigation systems, laid waste to towns, and turned farms into dust . They destroyed water systems and laid waste of towns, destroying farms .
 There were settlements and caravanserai on the shores of Issyk-Kul, along the Silk Road, from the seventh century B.c. c.c., from the 7th century to the 9th century .
 The towns prospered, the trade thrived, but then came the vicious and merciless Mongol hordes . The Mongol hordes were mercilessly brutalized by the Mongols .
 The devastation inflicted on Central Asia was so harsh that the populations and cultures of Central Asia did not begin to recover until the Russian expansion there in the 19th century . The devastation was so severe that the population of the region did not recover from the devastation .
 Before their prosperous towns were annihilated, the rich inhabitants hid their treasures, either in the soil or on the bottom of the beautiful lake . The rich inhabitants of the prosperous towns hid their treasure in the ground or the soil, or the lake .
 The search for the treasures has never stopped since the Mongols arrived on the shores of the lake ages ago . The Templars on the Lake have never stopped searching for treasures .
 Subudai Bagatur searched for the treasures in Issyk-Kufs waters . He searched for treasures in the waters of Issyk Kufs .
 The legends had it that the Nestorian Christians had reached the lake and founded a monastery on the northern shore . The legend of the lake is believed to have been a Nestorian Christian monastery .
 Ancient cemeteries discovered in the area cover the period from the middle of the 13th to the 14th century . They cover the time between the 13 and 14th Century .
 The plague did not enter the Silk Road at the time of the Subudai s sojourn at the lake . The first victims were recorded in 1338 .
 Nestorians were aiding the Templars in building a castle somewhere on an island in Issyk-Kul . The Nestorians are believed to have helped build the castle . The Templars are said to be building the castle on the island .
 Here, supposedly, was the place where the Templars brought their fabulous treasures . The Templars were said to have brought their treasures to the city .
 Knights Templar were a tremendously influential and powerful religious monastic military order that was formed as a result of the Crusades . The Knights Templar was formed in the early medieval Crusades and was the most powerful military order .
 Their wealth, limitless powers, and influence caused them to have prominent enemies . Their wealth and power made them famous for their influence .
 They were destroyed by Philip IV of France and Pope Clement V, and by 1314, they were gone, but not forgotten, from the European scene .
 It would be of great interest to historians to find out what Mongol commander knew about Templars . We will not explore the countless myths and legends about the order .
 The knights were no match for the Mongol armies . They did meet on the Polish battlefield of Liegnitz, but the Mongol army was no match .
 Perhaps one of the imprisoned knights knew too much about the treasures hidden by his order in the Issyk-Kul and revealed the information under torture . Perhaps he was tortured by torture .
 Nestorian Christianity flourished in China for several hundred years . The Nestorian Christian faith was founded in China in the early 1800s .
 The sect s followers spread out from Syria and founded colonies in the cities along the Silk Road through Central Asia . Followers spread from Syria to Central Asia where they founded colonies . The sect was founded in Syria and spread across the world .
 Emperor Constantine made Christianity the official religion of the Roman Empire in the middle of the fourth century . He suppressed Hellenistic teachings and alchemy, among other things, as being pagan .
 Nestorians smuggled out forbidden manuscripts to Persia . The Nestorians, a sect of dissident Christians, smuggled out banned manuscripts .
 In 1218, Genghis Khan sent his “hound” Jebe and a large military detachment to the Chu Valley . Jebe was sent to the region by the Khan in 1218 .
 Ugedey, one of the sons of the Ruler of the Universe, was a participant in the military operation . Uedey was a member of the Royal Family .
 This town appeared in the ninth to eleventh centuries and became the capital of the Karakhanid Kaganat of Central Asia . This town became known as the city's capital in the 9th to 11th century .
 Local Christians, together with monks of the Suyab Abbey near Balasagun, knew quite well the enemy that was coming their way and fled, taking their treasures with them . Local Christians and monks fled, along with monks .
 This place is 4200 feet above sea level in a cul-de-sac formed by the Tian Shan, Pamir, and Kunlun ranges .
 The Christians never reached it, because another Mongol detail was approaching from the Santash mountain pass, over the watershed between the Ili and Issyk-Kul basins . The Christians were unable to reach it because of the presence of a Mongol detail .
 There was a river that ran into this cave, and the Christians were able to divert its waters for a while . The Christians had to divert the water from the cave for a time .
 They hid the treasure in the cave, probably underground; then they placed stone slabs over the hiding place . The treasure was probably underground, then they hid it underground . They hid it in a cave .
 They marked one slab with a cross and then covered everything with soil . They marked another slab with cross then covered it with soil. They covered it up in soil .
 The river was again allowed to run into the cave, and the treasure was saved or lost, depending on ones point of view . The treasure was eventually lost .
 Genghis Khan was severely injured and died shortly after falling from a horse in 1227, 1227 . In 1227 he died after a horse accident .
 Some legends have it that he was buried on the Ordos Plateau (Inner Mongolia) of China and that a shrine was built there . Some legends say that he may have been buried there .
 There are conflicting accounts of why the Universal Ruler chose the area . The Universal Ruler is believed to have chosen the location of his first city .
 Some state that because of its beauty, he chose it as the place to be buried . Some say because of the beauty, it is the place he chose to die .
 There were to be no tombs for Mongol noblemen after their death, but imperial temples were built in order to permit commemoration of royal ancestors .
 The exact gravesite of Temudjin is one of archaeology’s lasting mysteries . The exact grave site of the Japanese remains remains a mystery in Japan .
 Virgins (their precise quantity undetermined) were entombed with the Mongol leader . Virgins were encrassed in the tomb with the leader .
 The Mongols rode horses back and forth over Temudjin's grave to hide it, and the treasures buried with him . The grave was hidden by the Mongols .
 As a rule, when any Mongolian nobleman died, his burial immediately became a taboo subject, but not to the extent of Temudjin’s . The burial of the nobleman was a taboo topic for Mongolians .
 There have been reports recently that American scientists have found a possible Temudjin gravesite in Mongolia, but could not proceed with their investigations because of problems with Mongolian authorities . There have also been reports that U.S. scientists have discovered a possible gravesite .
 China has had a special relationship with the legacy of the Universal Ruler . Universal Recognition China has always been proud of its relationship with China .
 Most rulers of China, including the Ming and Qing Dynasties, gave official recognition and support to the founder of the Mongol Empire . Even after the collapse of the Yuan Dynasty, most rulers gave official support to founder .
 The Red Guards of the Cultural Revolution destroyed important artifacts from Genghis Khan’s times . The Cultural Revolution had no such respect and destroyed some important artifacts .
 Even today, one can learn much from the visit to Dongsheng, China, and Genghis Khan’s mausoleum . The visit to China can be a good way to learn about the Khan .
 Experts in China discount Mongolia as a burial place 20 Fate / April 2003 of the Ruler of the Universe .
 Luo Xinyou, a professor at the Institute of Minorities at China’s Academy of Social Sciences in Beijing, is skeptical of the idea . He says he is concerned about China's treatment of minorities .
 Scientists in Kyrgystan believe that the body of the Universal Ruler was hidden at the bottom of Lake Issyk-Kul . Scientists believe the treasures and the body were actually hidden in the lake .
 There are old Kyrgyz legends about how Ugedey, one of the sons of Genghis Khan, prepared a coffin made of a very hard and durable material .
 His father’s body, along with treasures of gold and jewels, was put into a coffin and buried on the bottom of the lake . His body was put in the coffin and is now buried in a lake on the shores of the island .
 The son of the Mongol leader hid his son's Mongol treasures . But there were more Mongol treasures to hide, and that is precisely what he did .
 He placed the jewels and gems in a mountain cave that was later flooded . He placed them in the cave in a cave that later flooded.
 There are reports that the KGB and the Geological Council of the Kyrgyz SSR were engaged in the search for Genghis Khan’s treasures .
 Pravda , the well-known Soviet newspaper, ran an article on August 24, 1975 .
 The Soviets were searching for Genghis Khan's treasures in Lake Issyk-Kul . Titled “Return to the Secret,” it informed the Soviets that the Ministry of Internal Affairs was searching for the treasures .
 The map was based on a map the Red Chinese gave to their Soviet allies . It was conducted by the Geological Department of the Kyrgyzstan Soviet Republic .
 It is unclear whether the treasure the Soviets were trying to find was that of the Nestorians or the Mongols . The people who hid it were described as being chased by nomads .
 The map was very poor and nothing was discovered, probably because the local inhabitants secretly and skillfully sabotaged the work . Nothing was discovered .
 The area was surrounded by barbed wire, and guards were placed to protect the treasures .
 Stalin’s death in 1953 was the biggest obstacle, however, was the turmoil that followed . The biggest obstacle was the death of Stalin in 1953 .
 In 1973, a popular Soviet newspaper, Trud, published an article about treasures hidden throughout the Soviet Union .
 Tyup was mentioned as the location where Genghis Khan’s treasure was buried . Tyup has been mentioned as a location where the treasure was found .
 The information was based on Soviet secret police files from the 1930s . The information is based on information from Soviet secret files from that time .
 Some hushed-up activities, conducted by Kyrgyz geologists, took place in 1976 and 1977 . Other fascinating developments can be found at www.agatfreenet.kg/agat .
 Geologists researched ancient legends and looked for treasure in the area of Kurmentu Canyon . The geologists looked for the treasure in an area of the canyon .
 There were once gold and silver mines, but the geologists were looking for treasures . They apparently found some proof, but they needed input from archaeologists .
 The Civic Code of the Kyrgyz Republic states that anyone who finds the treasure has the right to 50 percent of the treasure’s value . There have been free-lancers as well, especially after the fall of the USSR, as well .
 Whatever one’s opinion of the Mongol conquests may be, I think we can all agree that looting or disturbing sacred ancient graves is not the answer to finding out the truth about the past .
 Mongolians will not look kindly at anyone who would disturb the burial ground of their ancient leader . Modern Mongolians are not looking kindly at the burial site of their ancestor .
 This is their tradition — no one is allowed to lay hands on the bones of their ancestors — and their obedience to the will of Genghis Khan . This is the tradition of the Mongolians .
 "He did not want any sign of his grave to be left after his death lest his everlasting peace be disturbed," he said .
 T Paul Stonehill is a California-based writer, lecturer, researcher and consultant . He is a former lecturer, lecturer and consultant and consultant.
 The popular view of the Mesolithic era as a time when humans lived on a diet of nuts, berries and shellfish may need revising . A thighbone in the River Trent in Nottinghamshire of a woman who died about 7,700 years ago .
 Nitrogen levels in the bone were measured at 9,3, on a scale running from 6 for herbivore cattle to 10 for wolves . Nitrogen was found to be in a range of levels ranging from 6,3 to 10 .
 Mesolithic woman's diet contained no marine food at all, contrary to the cliche of the seashoredwelling Mesolithic hunter gatherer . Additional tests carried out on the thighbone indicate that the woman had no marine foods .
 Brazil-based Dutch zoologist Dr Marc van Roosmalen continues his extraordinary success at discovering and describing new species of Amazonian primates . Two additional finds of the furry kind a pair of lately-revealed titi monkeys .
 Callicebus stephennashi, or Stephen Nash's titi, is predominantly silver in colour, but with contrasting red sideburns, chest, and inner limbs, plus a black brow . The titi is mainly silver, but has contrasting red sidesburns and black brow
 Prince Bernhard's titi monkeys were discovered in the 1970s . They were named after their distinctive red sideburned sideburns . The two newly discovered and named titi monkey monkeys are Prince Bernardhard's .
 John Holmes shot this video footage of what might be Morgawr while filming his wife . Holmes shot the video footage while he filmed his wife.
 John Holmes of St Austell, Cornwall, was in the Gerrans Bay area, on the Cornish coast south-east of Truro, filming video footage of his wife .
 Long-necked creature was first seen by a basking shark or a killer whale . It was an unfamiliar long necked creature, the photographer said .
 He estimated the length of the head at 25 cm , with a mid-neck diameter of 21cm . The mid-head diameter became much broader where the neck entered the water . The head was estimated to be 25 cm .
 The creature appeared serpentine, with a flattened and very mobile reptilian head .
 Mr Holmes only filmed a short sequence before the creature dived out of sight . The creature was filmed by Mr Holmes in the early hours of filming .
 Slow motion footage shows the head and neck arch over to the side, followed by what appeared to be a rhomboid anterior flipper .
 One suggested it might be a floundering oarfish, but couldn't be sure because the video was too indistinct .
 Two experienced seamen believe they may have seen Morgawr this year near the Manacles off The Lizard .
 Dan Matthew was on a small boat travelling from the Manacles towards Maenporth at around 10.30am on 8 May when he saw something strange . Dan Matthew, co-founder of the St Piran patrol boat, was on board at the time .
 I've boated in the Fal for many years and I've never seen anything like this. I’ve boated with many years. I've seen nothing like this,’s never seen this.’
 Four days later, Mike Bedford, chief engineer aboard the patrol boat, was at the quayside in Falmouth chatting to 82-year-old fisherman George Vinnicombe, who said he had also seen something strange .
 Mortsafes were contraptions designed to protect graves from disturbance . For more on Morgawr, see FT 16:17 -19 , .
 The necessity for medical students to learn anatomy by attending dissections of human subjects was frustrated by the limited allowance of dead bodies . The corpses of executed criminals were granted by the government .
 There had been bodysnatching close to the anatomy schools of anatomy in Scotland since the early 18th century .
 Many people are determined to protect the graves of newly deceased friends and relatives . Many people were determined to . protect their graves .
 The rich could afford heavy table tombstones, vaults, mausolea and iron cages around graves . The rich were able to afford heavy tables tombstones and vaults .
 The poor began to place flowers and pebbles on graves to detect disturbances and dig heather and branches into the soil to make disinterment more difficult .
 Large stones, often coffin-shaped, were placed over new graves . Large stones were often the gift of a wealthy man to the parish .
 Friends and relatives took turns or hired men to watch graves through the hours of darkness . Friends and family members took turns, hired men watched graves in the dark .
 Watching societies were often formed in towns, one in Glasgow having 2,000 members . One in Glasgow had more than 2,500 members of a watching society .
 These were iron or iron-and-stone devices of great weight, in many different designs . Iron and stone devices were made of iron and stone .
 Padlocked together examples have been found close to all Scottish medical schools . Often they were complex heavy iron contraptions of rods and plates, padlocked together . Examples of the contraptions have been discovered near all Scottish hospitals .
 A plate was placed over the coffin and rods with heads were pushed through holes in it . rods were pushed into holes in holes in the coffin . The coffin was then placed over a plate and a coffin was placed under it .
 These rods were kept in place by locking a second plate over the first to form extremely heavy protection . The rods were locked in place with a second rod locked over the other .
 They were placed over coffins for about six weeks, then removed for further use when the body inside was sufficiently decayed . The coffins were placed in coffins over six weeks then removed again .
 The man will remain a quietly anonymous fixture of the landscape, camouflaged to the point of near invisibility . He will remain an anonymous fixture in the landscape .
 That description relies on a few 7 unknowable assumptions, obviously, but they’re relatively safe . It’s relatively safe to say: “I’m not sure what I’ve done.” But it’ll be interesting to see if
 The man’s isolation has been so well-established— and is mind-bendingly extreme— that portraying him silently enduring another moment of utter solitude is a practical guarantee of reportorial accuracy .
 Brazilian officials have concluded that he is the last survivor of an uncontacted tribe . He's an Indian, and Brazilian officials say he's the last Indian to survive uncontacted tribes .
 They became aware of his existence nearly 15 years ago and launched numerous expeditions to track him, to ensure his safety, and to try' to establish peaceful contact with him . For a decade, they have tried to find him but he has never been found .
 In 2007, government officials declared a 31-square-mile area around him off-limits to trespassing and development . Government officials declared the area off limits to development .
 History offers few examples of people who can rival his solitude in terms of duration and degree . The solitude of a man is rare in history .
 The one that comes closest is the ""Lone Woman of San Nicolas’’— an Indian woman first spotted by an otter hunter in 1853, completely alone on an island off the coast of California .
 Catholic priests who sent a boat to fetch her determined that she had been alone for as long as 18 years, the last survivor of her tribe . Catholic priests say she had lived alone for 18 years .
 Last tribesmen and -women have succumbed unobserved throughout history, the world unaware of their passing . The world is unaware of these last tribesmen or -women .
 The government is aware of the existence of the man in Brazil . But what makes it unique is not the extent of his solitude or the fact that the government knows of his existence .
 Advanced societies have subsumed whatever indigenous populations they've encountered, determining those tribes’ fates for them . Advanced societies invariably have subverted indigenous populations, determining their fates .
 If peaceful contact is established with the lone Indian, they want it to be his choice, they say . The lone Indian is believed to be the only person in the area .
 After years of often-tragic attempts to assimilate into modern life the people who still inhabit the few remaining wild places on the planet, the policy is a step in a totally different direction . The policy is the first attempt to integrate the wild with modern life .
 Government field agents specializing in isolated tribes soon found one of his huts . The tiny shelter of palm thatch, with a mysterious hole dug in the center of the floor, was found .
 The man was on the run, moving from shelter to shelter, abandoning each hut as soon as loggers or agents got close . The man is believed to have built a hut in the area .
 No other tribes in the region were knowm to live like he did, digging holes inside of huts . The holes were more than five feet deep, rectangular, serving no apparent purpose .
 He was unclothed, appeared to be in his mid-30s (he’s now 7 in his late 40, give or take a few years) He was always armed with a bow-and-arrow .
 The Indian delivered a clear message to one agent who pushed the attempts at contact too far . Peaceful contact proved elusive, but those encounters helped the agents stitch together a profile of a man with a calamitous past .
 In one jungle clearing they found the ruins of several huts, each featuring the exact same kind of hole — 14 in all — that the lone Indian customarily dug inside his dwellings .
 They concluded that it was the site of his village, and that it had been destroyed by land-hungry settlers in early 1996 . They concluded .
 Agents made peaceful first contact with two other tribes that lived in the same region . Just months before the agents began tracking the lone Indian, they made peaceful contact with other tribes .
 The rest of the tribe, explained the chief, had been killed during a raid by men with guns and chainsaws . The chief said the tribe had been attacked by the men with chainsaws and guns .
 If you go to Rondonia today, none of the local landowners will claim any knowledge of these anecdotal massacres . The local landowners are not likely to have knowledge of the massacres .
 Most aren't afraid to voice their disdain over the creation of reserves for such small tribes . But most aren’t afraid to loudly voice their disapproval . The reserve is the largest in the United States .
 They will say it's absurd to save 31 square miles of land for the benefit of just one man . A productive ranch potentially could provide food for thousands of people .
 Thousands of square miles of already-cleared forest throughout the Amazon remain barren wastelands, undeveloped . That argument wilts under scrutiny, in part because of the fact that already cleared forests are barren wastels .
 The only economic model in which increased production absolutely depends on increased clearing is a strictly local one . The only model of increased production is that of local clearing, the government says .
 The government agents know this, which is why they view the protection of the lone tribesman as a question of human rights, not economics . The protection of a lone tribeman is a question human rights not economics, not economic .
 He eats mostly wild game, which he either hunts with his bow-and-arrow or traps in spiked-bottom pitfalls . He hunts with a bow and an arrow and traps in spikes-bottom traps .
 He often collects honey from hives that stingless bees construct in hollows of tree trunks . He grows a few crops around his huts, including com and manioc, and collects honey .
 Some of the markings he makes on trees have suggested to indigenous experts that he maintains a spiritual life . Indigenous experts have speculated that might help him survive the psychological toil of being the last man standing in a w r orld of one .
 I get Facebook updates telling me what people half a world away are eating for breakfast . I get updates on what people in the U.S. eat for breakfast from around the world . I also get updates about what people are eating on Facebook .
 Corporations are pushing deeper and farther than ever in search of bankable resources . Corporations and governments are pushing deep and far beyond in search for bankability .
 Some Brazilians believe that the rapid spread of technology itself might protect his solitude, not threaten it . Brazilians think that the spread of tech itself might help his solitude .
 Agents who have worked on the lone Indian’s case since 1996 believe that the wider the story of his isolation spreads . They say he's safer from the sort of stealthy raids by local land-grabbers that have decimated tribes in the past .
 Technologies like Google Earth and other mapping programs can assist in monitoring the boundaries of his territory . Google Earth is a tool to monitor the borders of his territories .
 Brazilian officials will experiment with heat-seeking sensors attached to airplanes flying high enough to cause no disruption on the ground . Instead of launching intrusive expeditions into tribal territories to verify the Indians' safety, officials say they will use the sensors . The sensors will be attached to planes flying high into
 He mentioned the man as an aside, giving me a rundown of the latest attempt to force contact with him . The expedition ended with an agent getting shot in the chest with an arrow .
 I traced a huge star and three exclamation points in the margin of my notebook as he moved onto another subject . I traced the star and exclamation point in the margins of his notebook .
 Those flags were pointless, because 1 couldn’t stop thinking about the lone man and those daredevil expeditions to contact him . Don't forget to come hack to this!
 Maui, Kanaloa and Kaneapua, Waha-nui, and Makali‘i are the mythical names belonging to his period . Maui is the mythical name of Maui and Kanaloi .
 The names Pua-Nawao and Ku-ma-menehune refer to him as ancestor of the Nawao and Mene-une people . He was the first person to be found in the area .
 The name Kane-hoa-lani is the name given to the phallic stones called ""stones of Kane"" set up at the place of family worship, where prayer and sacrifice are offered to an ancestral deity for help .
 A legend is told of Lua-nu‘u to explain why the highest peak rising cone-shaped from the ridge back of Kualoa on the north side of Oahu has the name Kane-hoa-lani . The two lower peaks those of Ku-pul
 He sails in his canoe with his son Ku-pulupulu and his servant Pili to the ridge back of Kualoa on Oahu and here performs the sacrifice . The sacrifice was performed by Ku-upulu on the back of his canoe .
 Those who go to the upland forest for tree felling and by the multitude at the ohia-ku procession when bringing down a tree for the god of a newly dedicated heiau. Mu .
 "Any man who comes into the path of such a procession may be seized for sacrifice," says the king . Any man who . comes into such a . procession may . be seized .
 O Ku-a-mu, go thou to , Enter him, head and tail, Let him become your bread and meat, Return not again until he is devoured of worms . O.A.mu: Go thou to . Enter him .
 During this period and under Lua-nu‘u, according to Fomander, the use of incision was introduced, s and from such a reference to the rite as occurs in the Palila legend it is at least possible to infer that incision began during this time to
 Ku-pulupulu, the son of Lua-nu‘u, is Kolo-i-ke-ao or Laka on the Kumuhonua genealogy . The name itself refers to the wild fem growth of those damp forests of which Laka is patron
 Pili is a term applied to an indirect relation, a sort of hanger-on . The word pili is used to refer to a relative or a hanger on .
 The Kumuhonua genealogy descends from Pili to Papa, the Kumuuli from Laka to Wakea, husband of Papa Wakea . The family of Wakea is from Wakea and Pili, who married Wakea to Papa .
 Stokes thinks that Wakea's infidelity to Papa in the affair of Ho‘ohoku is a misplaced episode belonging to Tiki in the south islands and should be related of Ki‘i, who appears twelve generations down the line on the Wakea genealogy as father
 It is in fact likely that the whole Kumuhonua line down to Wakea is a mere threefold duplication . The Wakea line is likely to be threefold duplicated of the Wakea .
 Kolo-i-ka-po and Haloa the son, bom from the unfortunate affair of Wakea with Ho‘ohoku, from which, however, sprung the line of ruling chiefs . The taro plant and the son were bom from Wakea's affair with Ho
 Wakea's sin was not one of incest, but of breaking the tapu upon intercourse with women . Wakea was not the incest of the god, but the sin was of having sex with women during the god's tapu .
 This may be the explanation of the ""excellent laws"" made by Kumuhonua, alluded to by Kamakau, which were the cause of his being driven out of the land . This may have been the explanation for the disappearance of the 'excellent' laws made by
 Kane's laws were laws of Kane and as such any infringement of them would be punishable by death . Kane was the only person in Kane's reign to break the law .
 Stories of the Mu and Menehune forest livers, who are placed by genealogists among the early generations of Kumuhonua' s offspring, also include a legend of migration away from their home to some mysterious other world of the gods .
 Mu and Menehune people live in upland forests in Kauai and Oahu . Many of these people have been introduced from abroad as aborigines but more often as introduced .
 The Menehune are called ""human"" as distinguished from the ""wild"" Nawao people, most of whom they are said to have exterminated . Most of the people they exterminated were said to be the Nawao, who they said killed .
 To the Menehune, or sometimes to the Mu, is ascribed the building of old heiaus, fishponds, and other stonework found about the island .
 The legend of the Kauai chief Ola is connected with the Oahu chief Ka-hanai-o-ke-akua, the ward of Kane and Kanaloa at Waolani .
 "It is hazardous to attempt to untangle from these legends the actual interweaving of fancy and fact which has gone to their shaping," says author .
 The ""wao"" is that part of the mountainside inhabited by spirits alone . The Mu and Wa of the Nawao family are nature spirits represented in the silent and noisy living creatures who dwell there .
 Aumakua creatures had their human offspring as well from whom Hawaiian families count descent . It is possible that certain short, stocky family types of very primitive culture were referred to such ancestry .
 Hawaiians speak of eepa spirits who are tricky rather than helpful to mankind . On the other hand, Hawaiians say eepas are tricky spirits .
 A family story told in Kau district on Hawaii illustrates the benevolent activities of the Menehune spirits . Many examples occur in old legends like those of Laka, Hainakolo, and Kawelo .
 Ke-ahi-aloa is adopted by an older sister of her mother and taken to Kauai, where she is neglected . She is taken in by an aged couple who find her nibbling raw potatoes in their garden patch and pity her .
 When she arrives at marriageable age her parents in Kau are made aware of her aunt's neglect . The father goes to seek his child, encouraged by a propitious dream in the form of a guardian shark who assures him of protection .
 The land agent of the district has chanced to see the beautiful girl and fallen in love with her . Meanwhile, the land agent has fallen for her .
 The Menehune people, her family gods, are preparing a sumptuous marriage feast . Her family gods are preparing an elaborate feast .
 Her father arrives in time to give his blessing, and she decrees that never again shall an older sister be allowed to adopt a niece, but only a younger sister . This rule is observed in the family to this day .
 After the deluge there were left three peoples who made their home on Kauai, the Mu , the Wa , and the Menehune . The Mu and the Wa were left behind three people who lived there .
 Kualu-nui-kini-akua and his son are chiefs of the Mu people in Kahiki . They are the two sons of the same name .
 Ola is bom. They travel from Ka-paia-ha 4 a to Ka-ma-wae-lua-lani . Ola means bom .
 The Mu are banana-eating people of Kuaihelani, one of the divisions of the floating land of Kane-huna-moku . The Mu people are one of many of the people who live on the land .
 A few of the Menehune at Pele-iholani on Kauai travel over the ridges to a rocky gulch called Laau in the mountains of Wainiha where they live .
 They are dwarf people, banana planters and hairy, with round stomachs . They are distinguished from the Menehune, who are smooth people with distended stomachs. They are hairy, hairy and hairy .
 After the work is completed for their chief Ola, all return to the floating land of Kueihelani and never return . But two Mu are left asleep under banana leaves, jj.
 When Paao comes to Hawaii he first visits Kahiki and brings the Manahune-nuku-mu-ai-maia (Bugmouthed Menehune banana eaters), so called because of their small mouths, and they land .
 The Mu-ai-maia are aborigines of Kauai, already there when ’’the first people"" come to the island . The first people came to Kauai when ‘‘the first-person"" come .
 They are a short stocky race with bushy hair, beards, and eyebrows, active runners, and with a guttural way of talking different from the Hawaiian . The race is called 'Hawaiyan' and 'Halei'
 They live at Laau at the headwaters of the Wainiha where the wild bananas still grow which were their food . They live in Laau where they still eat wild bananas .
 Campers must be on guard lest these little people steal up and make off with food that is cooking by piercing it with sharp sticks . Campers have to be on their guard lest they steal up .
 Hawaiians still fear to camp on the small plateau above the valley where the Mu made their home . Hawaiians believe it is still haunted by their spirits .
 Kauai's trails along the Kauai cliffs can still be seen and the hollows where they planted . The Kauai cliff walkers planted their plants in Kauai, Kauai .
 The sports in which they indulge are top spinning, quoits, shooting arrows, hide-the-thimble, foot races, sled races, hand wrestling and diving off a cliff .
 Kahunas, soothsayers, astrologers belong to the company of the chief ""Story-tellers, fun-makers, minstrels, and musicians"" furnish him amusement. Kahuna .
 The nose-flute and the ti-leaf trumpet, the ukeke stringed instrument, and the shark-skin drum are their accompaniments .
 The Menehune migrate under their chief Maoli-ku-laiakea with Hema to New Zealand, hence the name Maori for the New Zealanders, and Raiatea for a place there . The name of Maori is the name of the Maori
 Ola returns to Kauai as expert builders and craftsmen when he becomes ruling chief in Waimea . The grown men can form two rows from Makaweli to Wailua, and increase in numbers that increase in such numbers that such numbers can form .
 A ""bowlegged, deep-voiced"" Menehune named Weli is sheriff for the chief and planted breadfruit trees on the plain of Lumahai . Weli planted the breadfruit .
 A Menehune named Maliu lingered in a Hawaiian house and was missed from work, but escaped punishment because he was able to report the discovery of a new spring of fresh water . Maliu escaped punishment for being missing from work because he reported the discovery .
 After living some time in the Lanihuli valley the Menehune are commanded to migrate because they are being troubled by thieving . The men are taking wives among the Hawaiians and destroying the purity of the race .
 Leaves of leaves are still made to certain rocks which mark the petrified body of one or another of their number who was so changed because of disobedience or folly .
 Mewa-lani has two sons, Lonohoonewa, father of Paumakua, and Kahano-a-Newa, uncle . He also has two other sons, Lonohooniwa and his uncle .
 Ku-leo-nui is their leader ""whose voice was heard all over the island"" summoning them to work . The leader of the group is Ku-Leo-Nui .
 Waha-nui, ruling chief of Honua-ilalo, oppresses the Menehune, and their god Kane sends Kanaloa and Kaneapua to lead them away from Kapakapaua-a-Kane . The original continent which once connected
 Ola is the son of Kualu-nui-pauku-mokumoku and the chiefess Kuhapu-ola from Pe 4 ape 4 a on the Waimea side above Hanapepe, whom the chief meets clandestinely . The chiefess
 He was advised by his kahuna Pi to proclaim a tapu and summon the Menehune people to his aid . Desiring to bring water to the taro patches of the Waimea flats, he was told to proclaim the tapu to his people .
 They camp on the flats above called Kanaloa-huluhulu, plant taro (which is still growing on the cliffs of Kalalau) and build a big oven . They camp in the flats and plant the taro .
 Sticks also make a road of sticks through the swamps of Alakai to the height above Wainiha .
 The chief priest of Ola's father's time is a powerful and designing man who causes any nominee from the chiefs party to be assassinated . Ola was assassinated by the chief priest in the time of his father's death .
 Ola is brought up in retirement as if under the displeasure of his father . Only at the age of twenty-four when he is able to defend himself by warlike skill is he publicly elected for the succession . Ola was brought up as if he had been brought up under the
 The chief priest recognizes the youth as he appears before the people and hurls at him the sacred javelin, but Ola wards it off and the priest takes his own life . The youth was killed by the chief priest .
 Pi is the chief of Waimea who gets the Menehune to construct for him a dam across the Waimei river and a watercourse leading from it to a place above Kiki-a-ola . Pi is a member of the tribe .
 Hulukuamauna the priest hears from Kane that only through Kanehunamoku and his people can the dam and water-course of Waimea be constructed . The priest tells Kane the only way to build the dam is to build it is through his people, Kane .
 Kanehunamoku receives from Kane a branch of red fruit as a token of the god’s consent and grants the request . Kaneunamoku received the fruit from Kane as a gift from Kane .
 Waimea chief also asks for the sacred chiefess Namaka-o-ka-hai for his wife, but this request is refused . The Waimean chief also requests for the chiefess for his own wife .
 After the completion of the work, Namaka and Kanehunamoku depart with the Menehune and the Mu from Laau to the floating land of Kueihelani and never return . Namaka is believed to be the last person to leave Laau .
 A curious resemblance between some of the incidents in these Kauai stories and episodes in the legend of Umi on Hawaii may be merely fortuitous or may point to interchange of legends between the two islands .
 The story of the birth of Umi, although more fully elaborated, resembles that of Ola. Umi was born in Ola's home .
 On a journey into the country, Liloa finds a beautiful woman at her bathing pool and makes her his wife . UMI STORY: Liloa makes his wife after finding her in the country .
 He gives her his loincloth, whale-tooth necklace, and war club as tokens for the child . He also gives her a war club and a whale tooth .
 Umi becomes a nuisance to his supposed father because he gives away food lavishly . His mother sends him to Liloa wearing tokens to send him back to his mother .
 The chief makes him a favorite and eventually usurps the place of the legitimate heir . Umi usurps his place in the throne and becomes a favorite of the chief .
 Ola’s father has an affair with a chiefess from Pe‘ape‘a on the Waimea side above Hanapepe . He leaves his malo and whale-tooth necklace for the child who is to be born .
 The child grows up mischievous and the mother sends him to the father living in Waimea, Hawaii . The mother and father live together in the state of Hawaii .
 An incident in Rice’s story of the M Bird-man of Wainiha"" who handles invaders at a narrow pass resembles the account of how Nau held back Umi when he came to invade Hilo .
 Seeing the water muddied as it flows into the sea, Nau goes up into the hills to investigate . Nau goes to the hills in search of the mudded water in the hills .
 Pf imaiwa c a leaps down from above and kills him . There he hides at the defile and thrusts each man with his spear . There is no easy way to kill him. Pf imiwa c  a leaps from above to kill each man .
 Lahi and his uncle Kane-alohi live in the Wainiha valley and go up to Kilohana to catch uwa‘u birds . A kind of bird that seeks its nest in the cliffs by day, blinded by the light .
 Their next is the chief with ""four hundred"" soldiers who objects to the depredations among the birds . The chief of the chief is also the chief of a group of soldiers who object to the depredations among the birds.
 The boy hides at the pass and throws all four hundred men over the cliff . The boy throws them over, throwing them over .
 The chief comes last and, recognizing Lahi as his own son, invites him to the village . Lahi is the son of the chief, who recognizes him as his son . The chief invites Lahi to his village .
 Mu and Menehune People People Page 7 trap trap, but this the boy discovers and, burning down the house with his treacherous father and followers within, takes over the rule of the land . The boy takes over from his father to take over the land and take over .
 A bird catcher from the village below becomes friendly with them and marries a pretty banana eater . The bird catcher and the banana eater marries each other in the village .
 Their beautiful daughter is sought as wife by the chief from her father’s village . But she is too wild to consent to leave her old home . The film is set to be released in cinemas in India on October 31 .
 Her father, who desires the match, conceals the chief in the house, rolled up in a mat . Her father wanted the match to be kept secret .
 In a cave below a waterfall at Holua-manu in the mountains above Makaweli, a mo‘o lives in a cave .
 The family however wish to recover her and . succeed in trapping her in a net . The family want to trap her in net .
 She is carried to Waimea where she becomes gradually reconciled, grows into a beautiful woman, and marries the ruling chief . She is eventually reconciled with the chief and eventually marries him .
 Kahanai -o-ke-akua is brought from a foreign land and reared by the gods Kane and Kanaloa . Heiau of Kaheiki built by the Menehune and presided over by the kahuna who founded the priesthood called Mcfo
 The Menehune get the work done first, hence the Na-mu-na-wa leave their canoes in the ditch, where they long remain . The Na-nu-wa get the job done first .
 On his return, both classes of little people welcome him with shouts, the eepa in the uplands, the Menehune at the shore to lift the travelers from the canoe and later to prepare them houses . On his . return, he says, "Both classes of
 When the fish tree Makalei is brought to Oahu the little people shout so loud that the tree falls where it stands and cannot be brought up to Waolani .
 Mataiteite comes seeking a husband and finally finds one to her liking . Mata-iteite finally finds a husband in her quest to find a husband . Mataite is the first Mataite to be born in Mataite .
 She begs to have a boat built and asks Tagaloa to send her boat builders . She begs for a boat to be built .
 One day, when they bring them food, they slip in upon them secretly and they fly back to heaven . One day the women slip in on them secretly . They slip into them and fly back into heaven .
 Heiau said to be ""built by the Menehune"" are to be found among the oldest temple structures on each island . They are naked and have no axes but work with their teeth .
 On Molokai they built a heiau on the cliff at Waikolu valley near Kalaupapa which no one has been able to reach either from above or below . Luakini Iiau of Pakui between Ualapue and Manawai,
 On Maui the Pihana heiau at Wailuku was built by the Menehune ""in a single night"" from stones brought from Paukukalo beach . The Pihan heiaua was built from the stones brought by the Maui Mene
 Mu and Menehune People Page 8 much like our own bam raisings in pioneer life . Mu's life is like that of a pioneer life.
 The time element is important in these Menehune structures, especially as the workers themselves become purely mythical beings and night is the time of their activity . The workers become mythical beings, and the workers are mythical beings .
 Those manahune who remained agriculturists later formed the lowest social class of plebeians and were used for sacrifice . Manahune were used to be used as a sacrifice .
 The warriors became chiefs and their families intermarried with the royal family of Opoa in Ra'iatea . The warriors were chiefs and families became chiefs .
 Archaeological remains preserve the records of these changes in population . Archaeological records preserve the remains of the population .
 In the western Tuamotus the ""Manahune"" are known as ancient people of Tahiti, and former adversaries of the Tuamotuans, say the eastern Tuamotsuans . In the west the "Manahunisis" are ancient people
 Tatakoto and Vahitahi are sometimes spoken of as giants, as well as giants . They are sometimes referred to as friendly giants, but they are also friendly giants . The two sides are known for their friendly relations in the region .
 In New Zealand the Patu-paierehe are a wild race of spirits who inhabit the mountains . They are a race of wild spirits who live in the country's mountains .
 Maui fished up the south island of New Zealand when he left Kui in charge . Maui was left in charge of the fishing operation in New Zealand .
 The Turehu, a fairy-like people, came over the ocean and annihilated the Tutu-mai-ao people . The Tutu, a tribal people, were annihilated by the people .
 The descendants of Maui now came to the island and lived among the Turehu . After ten generations exterminated them and today they are the Patu-pai-a-rehe dwelling in the mountains . The descendants now come to Maui and live among the island .
 They have reddish skin, hair with a golden tinge called uru-kehu . Their eyes are black or blue and they have reddened skin, with reddish hair .
 They are full-sized, dress in white, are not tattooed, and nurse children in their arms . They are also full-size and nursing children in arms .
 They are merry and cheerful, singing like crickets. They are a very numerous people, merry, cheerful, cheerful . They are the people you meet in the streets of London .
 Moorea in the Tahitian group is the island of ""fairy folk"" with golden hair . Mu and Menehune People are known for their golden hair and their fairness .
 The little lizard called mo‘opuapua lives on flowers, is the shadow form of these spirits among the flowers .
 In Mangaia, ""fairies"" of the underworld associated with Miru come through special apertures from Avaiki to take part in a dance performed in honor of Miru' s son Tautiti .
 They bathe at sunset in the stream Aupara or Vaikaute in the northern part of the island . They dress their hair on the height above .
 When they dance upon the fresh-cut banana leaves prepared for them at one end of the dance floor the leaves are not disturbed . The leaves were prepared for the dancers at the end of their dance floor .
 The Tapairu or ""peerless ones"" are the four daughters of Miru, sisters of Tautiti . They are the daughters of the four sisters of Mira . The tapairu are known as the "peerless sisters" of the tribe .
 Ngaru learned from the fairies of the underworld the art of ball playing which he taught in Mangaia . He learned the art from fairies .
 In Fiji, spirit people, invisible save to worshipers, live in the woods and caves on wild bananas and kava .
 Young people of Fiji formed a sect who were supposed to become votaries of these spirits and learn song and dance from them . The sect was supposed to be a sect of young people who learned to dance from spirits .
 At their dance places a votary would sweep the place with fans and hang garlands in hope of a vision . At their dances places a candle light would be lit by candleliters .
 The Kakamora are said to be from six inches to three or four feet in height, from fair to dark, go naked with long straight hair to their knees . They are strong as 3 or 4 men, and fond of dancing and singing, according to reports . They're said
 They are described as harmless but tricky, or as malicious and dangerous . Differently named all along the coast . They are different names all along coast .
 The Masi are strong and stupid, easily tricked, but otherwise like people . They are strong, stupid and stupid but also like people. They are like people, but not strong or stupid. They're not stupid, they're just stupid and easily tricked .
 Their descendants are skilled craftsmen and canoe makers and carvers in stone . Their descendants have been skilled canoe makers, canoe carvers and stone carvers .
 Their work may be left unfinished because the craftsmen are called away by some trivial matter . The craftsmen may be called away because of some trivial matters .
 Medical tests fail to pinpoint any causes for their malady . They were rushed to hospital, but tests failed to find out what caused them to get ill .
 Two 14-year-old girls also needed medical attention in March last year after visiting the museum . Two months later a school party of 10, plus their teachers, also felt unwell while visiting the art museum .
 Many complained of a strange pungent smell coming from the exhibits before fainting . Many fainted from the exhibit before they fainted .
 The theme of the mummy’s curse has been traced back to Jane Loudon Webb, 25, who witnessed the unwrapping of an Egyptian mummy near Piccadilly Circus in 1821 .
 Set in the 22nd century, it featured an angry, vengeful mummy who came back to life and threatened to strangle the book’s hero, a young scholar .
 Mummies were set alight and used by intrepid explorers as torches to illuminate the interior of an Egyptian pyramid . This was followed in 1828 by an anonymous English children’s book, The Fruits of Enterprize .
 Not surprisingly, the mummies were portrayed as looking particularly vengeful .
 This work was itself lost and only recently rediscovered in the periodical collection of the Library of Congress . It was itself rediscovered by the library .
 Back in the U.S. he presented the seeds to his fiancee who planted them .
 Inhaling their scent, she fell A CAME FROM THE EXHIBITS into a coma and became a living mummy .
 This literary motif of the mummy’s curse was copied by several other novelists in Britain and America for some 30 years from the 1880s .
 The death of Lord Carnarvon, the chief intruder into the tomb, made the curse concept front page news . A so-called “ancient Egyptian” inscription “Death shall come on swift wings to him that toucheth the tomb of Pharoah”
 Only six of the 26 people present at the opening of Tutankhamun’s tomb died in the decade following the discovery . No known genuinely ancient Egyptian curses related to opening tombs or removing objects from them .
 Independent on Sunday, 31 Dec 2000; D Express, National Post , 18 Jan 2002; . Independent on . Sunday Dec Dec 2000 .
 Egyptian authorities have asked for the return of two ancient mummies . The mummies are buried in the foundations of a McDonald's restaurant in Tamworth, Staffordshire .
 Rev William McGregor travelled to Egypt in 1885 to improve his health . He returned with a large number of antiquities, which he exhibited at his house, Bolehill Manor, near Tamworth .
 McGregor buried them in his back garden after they started to deteriorate . After a few years in the damp Midlands climate, they were buried in the back garden . McGregor buried the items in his garden .
 The foundations of the Palace Cinema, which was being built in Tamworth in 1935, looked like the kind of burial sites that McGregor had seen in Egypt . McGregor asked the building foreman if the mummies could be deposited in the foundations .
 McDonalds bought the building a decade ago, but the presence of the mummies has only recently been revealed by the former owner of the cinema . The presence of mummies was only recently revealed by former owner .
 Isaac H. Davis was murdered in Smith county, Smith county .
 Some persons near the road hearing cries for help, ran towards the place, when the murderer left, when he left, but not before he was recognized as a man named Wm. Wm .
 Davis was found dead when he was found, having been cut in thirty-four places . Davis was cut in 34 places in his body, according to the coroner .
 Officers were in Nashville on Saturday, in pursuit of Hale, according to an informant . Hale was arrested in Nashville, Tennessee, on Saturday morning .
 The Proclamation of the Governor, offering a reward for his apprehension, will be found in another column .
 In July 2010, construction workers halted the backhoes when they uncovered something unexpected just south of where the World Trade Center once stood .
 At 22 feet below today's street level, in a pit that would become an underground security and parking complex, excavators found the mangled skeleton of a long-forgotten wooden ship . The skeleton of the ship was found in the pit that was excavated to become a security and
 Tree rings in waterlogged ribs show the vessel was likely built in 1773, or soon after, in a small shipyard near Philadelphia .
 The ship was perhaps made from the same kind of white oak trees used to build parts of Independence Hall, where the Declaration of Independence and United States Constitution were signed . The study was published in the journal Tree-Ring Research .
 Archaeologists had been on-site throughout the excavation of the World Trade Center's Vehicular Security Center . TSee Photos of the Ship and Its Tree Rings .
 The 32-foot-long partial hull of the shin emerged from the dirt . They had found animal bones, ceramic dishes, bottles, bottles and dozens of shoes .
 The vessel was quickly excavated, to prevent damage from exposure to the air . The vessel has been removed from the surface of the surface .
 Piece by piece, the delicate oak fragments were documented and taken out of the rotten-smelling mud . Pieces of the oak fragments have been documented and removed from the mud . The oak fragments are now being preserved in a museum in California .
 The timbers were sent to the Maryland Archaeological Conservation Laboratory . They would be soaked in water to keep them from cracking and warping .
 Regional ring patterns arise from local rain levels and temperatures . Wetter periods produce thicker rings and drier periods produce smaller rings, he said .
 Martin-Benito and his colleagues at Columbia's Tree Ring Lab narrowed their search to trees in the eastern United States . The keel of the ship contained hickory, a tree found only in eastern North America and eastern Asia . The tree was found in the ship's keel
 The ship's signature pattern most closely matched with the rings found in old living trees and historic wood samples from the Philadelphia area, including a sample from Independence Hall .
 Historians still aren't certain whether the ship sank accidently or if it was purposely submerged to become part of a landfill used to bulk up Lower Manhattan's coastline . Historians aren't sure whether it sank accidentally or if the ship was deliberately submerged .
 Oysters found fixed to the ship's hull suggest it at least languished in the water for some time before being buried by layers of trash and dirt . Oysters also found in the hull suggest the ship was buried in layers of dirt and debris .
 Previous investigations found that the vessel's timbers had been damaged by burrowing holes of Lyrodus pedicellatus, a type of ""shipworm"" typically found in high-salinity, warm waters . The ship, at some point in its life, made a trip to
 Martin-Benito speculated that the infestation might have been one of the reasons the ship met its demise just 20 or 30 years after it was built .
 There is something mighty queer about that old quarry on Bredon Hill, yonder . The quarry is a quarry in the Yorkshire hills .
 More than one man who has done so has felt something take him by the throat and try to push him over the edge of the field into the quarry . More than a dozen people have felt something try to take him over .
 The speaker was a farmer in the vale of Bredon, on the borders of Gloucestershire .
 I was talking to him last summer in an old-fashioned inn just above a deep cut through which roar the expresses on the main line of the Midland Region of British Railroads .
 It was about three miles away across a vale of fruit farms and pasture lands . It was three miles from the site of the incident .
 These remains include a weird stone, like a squatting elephant, used for a purpose which is no puzzle to those who have seen similar ancient remains in Mexico and South America .
 My father, 40 years ago, was on an inquest into a mysterious death in that same quarry . He was on the inquest into the death of a mysterious man in the quarry .
 I can't remember when stone last was cut there, for it’s been abandoned for years . I can’t remember when stones last were cut .
 I did not know then that the mysterious quarry would prove to be linked with my objective on top of Bredon Hill . The quarry is now located on the top of the hillside .
 My brother was with me and as we set out along the quiet country lanes, with the June sun shining warmly, it was hard to associate that vividly green hill with mysteries and tragedies .
 As I walked I took from my pocket one of several newspaper clippings which I had collected in regards to strange deaths in the quarry .
 Margaret Wilson said death was caused by asphyxia, due to pressure of collar and tie . Margaret Wilson: Asphyxia was caused due to asphyxiation due to the pressure .
 He apparently stood on top of a large boulder to have a look around and slipped . The incident took place in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 I later met this coroner’s officer, who is a pretty hefty policeman . He is certainly not unduly imaginative or given to nerves .
 He said, “I fell twice there, when the coroner was with me, and I’m a man used to pretty rough walking.” He said he fell twice while walking in the hospital .
 He quit to take a position as a clerk and accountant on the staff of the town clerk of the municipal borough of Tewkesbury, which he had held for 26 years .
 He was an athlete and for years had played on local football, hockey and cricket teams . He was also a member of a local hockey and hockey team .
 His wife pointed out at the inquest that he enjoyed very good health and had no motive for committing suicide .
 One of his legs was a little shorter than the other, due to a slight displacement of the cartilage in an accident while playing football . But as often happens with Rugby football players, one of them is a little short .
 It is a steep ascent of two miles, requiring an able body and good wind in the climber . It is also a steep climb of two .
 From the hilltop there is a wonderful view, in which it might be noted that stone age folk always selected the most beautiful sites for religious rites and monuments .
 Dean was so fond of this hill that he had planned to camp there with his wife in the summer of the year of his death . So fond was Dean, said his wife, that, she said, he had intended to camp with her in the year he died .
 Instead of going home he boarded a bus running from Tewkesbury to Evesham . He boarded the bus to go home, instead of going to his home town, he went to a bus stop . The bus took him to Tewesbury, Tvesham, but
 A steep ascent led in a climb of two miles to the summit of Bredon Hill . It put him down at the hamlet of Woodmancote, from which a steep climb led in two miles .
 His wife became alarmed when he did not return home that night and went to the local police, who with people in Tewkesbury, organized a search party .
 From midnight until dawn they roamed the hill, which extends for miles . It would take a man the best part of a day to cover the hill in a day . The hill is one of the largest in the world and stretches from midnight to dawn .
 Police found Dean lying dead at the foot of a boulder in a quarry in May 1939 . Dean was found by police in the quarry at dawn on Wednesday, May 10, 1939 . Police say Dean was killed by a single gunshot wound .
 The boulder is a large one and stands on the level floor of the abandoned quarry, about four feet from a nearly sheer cliff wall . “Seems as if something tripped me up.”
 The wall is studded with rock ledges and bushes and its edges are ringed with pines . It is also ringed by pines and is surrounded by a wall of rock and bushes .
 The local coroner held an inquest into the death on Friday, May 12, 1939 . The inquest sat at Tewkesbury, Tewesbury, on May 12th 1939 .
 Their job is a salaried one, to which they are appointed by the Lord Chancellor of the British House of Lords .
 With very rare exceptions, coroners are unimaginative men, who pay little heed to testimony that touches on the supernormal . Coroner's office: "Coroner's job is to make sure that the truth doesn't get lost"
 Witnesses who give such testimony are regarded as merely fanciful or superstitious . Witnesses who say such things are believed to be superstitious or fanciful . Witnesses are considered to have been superstitious by their testimony .
 Two local men gave testimony about queer experiences which they had near the quarry . At the inquest two local men said they had had queer experiences . The inquest was held at an inquest into the death of the woman .
 The quarry has high walls, with ledges and sides covered with bushes and brambles . The quarry was built in the 1930s and is located in central London . It is believed to be the largest quarry in the world .
 "I was walking close to the edge in the circle of pines and on a sudden something took me round the neck, tried to choke me and pushed me toward the edge, where there is a drop of 30 feet to the quarry floor"
 "I struggled with all my might, tore my throat free and got out of its grasp. I struggled to all my . might," she said . "I tore my . throat free," she added .
 He said folks around in the vale of Bredon say the place has a bad repute . He added that folks around around the town say it's a bad place .
 Margaret Wilson said she had examined the body of Dean Dean and supposed his death was consistent with his having apparently climbed a big boulder in the quarry, perhaps to look around, when he may have slipped, and in falling was choked by his tie .
 Inquest heard Dean did not fall more than three feet from the ground . For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details .
 He had no doubt slipped off the boulder, displaced the cartilage of his knee and fainted, whereupon his collar and tie had choked him, in the unfortunate position in which he fell .
 The jury who are impanelled to serve at coroner’s trials get not a cent for their time . They are usually not of the highest intelligence and regard service as a nuisance .
 Dean fell only three feet from a boulder, falling only three “...on a sudden something took me round the neck ” He was in the highest degree unlikely to have been accidentally choked to death .
 The two witnesses, Moore and Maynard, suggest a supernatural and evil entity at work in the quarry in May . Moore: "The two witnesses" suggest an evil entity is at work .
 Coroner suggests Dean should have climbed boulder in order to look around when cliff walls 30 feet high shut out view . Another improbability is why Dean should, as suggested by the coroner, have climbed the boulder . Dean's body was found at the scene of his death .
 I have photographed the boulder, have even climbed it, and I have no hesitation whatever in asserting that the coroners suggestion is absurd . The coroners' suggestion that the boulder beached is absurd is absurd, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 Dean was found lying dead near the foot of the boulder, but it is highly probable that he was choked to death before his body fell at the foot . Dean's body was found near the boulder but he was likely choked before he fell, police say .
 Dean, who knew Bredon Hill well, had ascended to the summit, where stands the ancient human sacrifice or slaughter stone, locally called the Bambury stone . Dean had climbed to the top of the hill, where he found the stone .
 It is significant to those with a knowledge of prehistory that the name ‘Bambury’ has sinister meaning . The name Bambury has a sinister meaning, according to experts .
 In this case, ‘anointed’ with the blood of human victims in ancient fertility rites . The ritual is a form of fertility rites in ancient rites .
 Dean walked two miles of steep ascent from where he got off the bus . Dean walked the two miles from the bus to get to the top of the hill . Dean says he is proud to be able to walk the steep climb .
 In the dusk, he returned the way he came, along a very ancient path in the turf . The path runs past numerous still unopened tumuli, or barrow graves of the early Neolithic age .
 He may have been looking around for a suitable place for a camp he planned later in the year . He planned to set up a camp later this year .
 In May dusk, as the evening stars came out, Dean wandered through the pines at the edge of the hill, where some diabolical entity took him by the throat . Dean, unknowing or not believing in the sinister repute of the quarry, wandered .
 Dean was caught by surprise, and in the struggle was precipitated into the quarry 30 feet below . Dean was captured by surprise .
 This appears borne out by the fact that his death took place in the month of May . This appears to be a significant fact that he died in May .
 After a stiff climb of about an hour, I stood in the mysterious quarry . The quarry is the largest quarry in the world and is believed to be at least one of the world's largest .
 The flat floor is situated in a deep glen on the hill and has a completely flat floor . It is situated on a hillside and has been completely flat for more than 30 years .
 One would think that it had been paved with flagstones, except that wild flowers and bushes were growing there . The road is paved with wild flowers, bushes and bushes .
 Four boulders stood on this flat floor, oriented almost north, south, east, and west . The boulders were located on a flat floor .
 One of them resembled a huge capstone and might have been an ancient altar . One of the images is thought to have been of an ancient monument .
 One of the four boulders could have fallen from the sides of the quarry, or been placed there by modern quarry-men . Not ... some diabolical entity took him by the throat. Not ...some diabolically entity took .
 This was the stone of the mysterious and fatal accidents — a series of them in 10 years — always happening in May . This was one of the series of fatal accidents in May, always happening at the same time .
 It seemed incredible to me that a healthy and active man could have died in falling from it . "It seemed incredible that he could have fallen from it," says the author .
 One had to leave the old quarry by the same route as that by which one entered . The quarry is located in the same place as the quarry used to be .
 Outside the quarry was a pathway in deep turf which led from the quarry, across the shoulder of the hill, and to a weird stone resembling an elephant with a flat back .
 50 j skeletons of young men with hands, legs and heads removed have been found in an ancient camp or fortified hill stockade . They are all barbarously mutilated, mutilated and with hands and legs removed .
 They appear to have been the defenders of peaceful ancient folk who lived below the hill and who, when attacked by enemies, stockaded themselves inside this ancient fort .
 It is ages older than the fort and must have been an object of awe and mystery to the old hill men . It is a mystery to those who saw it as a wonder and mystery .
 It is strongly reminiscent of the flat stones on the tops of teocallis, or pyramids, on which Aztec priests cut open the hearts of sacrificial youths and maidens .
 The Bambury stone undoubtedly was the center of bloody rites which took place on the dawn of May Day . It is believed to have been the site of the bloody rites .
 These rites were performed to propitiate the dark gods of harvest and fertility . These rites have left behind them an aura of evil .
 Memories of these grim rites lingered for ages afterward in the vicinity of Bredon Hill . The grim rites were carried out in the area around Breden Hill .
 Until about 1860, the puppet was carried around at harvest festivals by farmers . It is a puppet made of wheat straw made from wheat straw, which until about 1860 was carried by the farmers .
 It is a substitution for the original victim of the human sacrifice on the Bambury stone . It is, of course, a substitution .
 At five inquests in some 10 years up to 1939, substantially the same story has been told . The same story was told at five of the inquests since 1939 .
 I point to the sinister history of this hill and to the facts disclosed at the inquests. I point out the facts . I point . to the fact that this hill has a sinister history, it is said .
 No coroner has advanced any theory to explain these oddly identical tragedies . Coroner has not advanced any theories to explain the deaths .
 The only theory that could cover all the facts is that in May, the time of the ancient rite of human sacrifice, some evil, unseen entity, is actively dealing in death in the quarry . Marlborough .
 There were many tragedies and losses in the old sailing days, when a voyage across the world from England to New Zealand was a great adventure for some . There were also many tragedies, losses, and many tragedies in sailing days .
 Others, not so fortunate, were battened below decks for their own safety . Others were forced to dodge large icebergs in the Southern Ocean under reduced sail .
 The ""Marlborough" was a beautiful ship which had made 14 successful passages with immigrants from London to New Zealand during the period of 1876 to 1890 . The ship was the first ship to sail from New Zealand from London with immigrants .
 Under Captain Anderson from 1876 until 1883, she carried a crew of twenty-nine . The ship returned to London with cargo's of frozen meat and wool .
 Launched in Glascow in 1876, she was subsequently sold to the Shaw, Saville & Albion Company .
 Captain Herd took over command of the vessel in 1884 and was on the vessel at the time of her voyage back to London from Lyttleton in 1890, when she disappeared without trace .
 The vessel left New Zealand waters on the 11th January and two days later was hailed by a passing vessel . The ship was hailed two days after leaving New Zealand on January 11 .
 Lyoyds shipping in London posted her as ""missing", presumed sunk by icebergs after rounding Cape Horn . No news of her came and so after many months, she was presumed sunk .
 This coastline is notorious for violent storms and freezing conditions . It is also notorious for the winter storms that hit the coast .
 A British vessel homeward bound from Lytleton, New Zealand, told the story . Why the incident was never reported at that time seems strange, but corroborates the story.
 The sailing was difficult and dangerous...with jagged rocks on the landward side . The coves were deep and silent and the sailing was dangerous .
 The stillness was uncanny and it was a weirdly wild evening with the sun low and setting over the horizon . The stills were uncanny and the stillness of the stills was uncanny .
 There was no movement aboard and not a living soul appeared to be around . Not a single person was aboard the ship .
 With their eyeglasses they could see that the masts and spars were green with decay and that the vessel lay between rocks where she was held fast as if she was lying in a cradle .
 Treading warily on the rotting decks, which cracked and broke as they walked, they encountered three more skeletons . They encountered three skeletons .
 The first mate was sent forward to examine the still faint letters on the bow of the derelict vessel . In the messroom were the remains of ten more bodies and six others were found, one alone, possibly the captain, on the bridge there were mouldy, dank smelling books
 Captain Burley recalled to mind a happening which he had personally experienced, telling the story to one of the skippers of the Shaw Saville liners later in the same year .
 In it he was able to give a good description of the wreck that they saw . The wreck was a wreck of the Titanic .
 Captain Burley recalled that in his youth and early days at sea, he was aboard a ship that had been wrecked off Staten Island, near Cape Horn . He and the only other survivor had set off to look for a whaling station, thought to be on the island .
 Lying nearby were the skeletons of twenty men and heaps of shellfish which told how they had tried to fight off starvation . Lying near were skeletons of 20 men and shells of shell fish .
 The captain saw the wreck and heard of the newspaper article . This story did not come to light until many years after the captain saw it and heard the story .
 He had not reported what he had seen as there were no survivors, but his story is likely to be close to the truth . The ship was almost certainly the same ship .
 Another vessel, the Marlborough, was lost two months later and possibly under similar circumstances . Although her disappearance was not so dramatic, another vessel sailing from New Zealand to London was lost .
 Dunedin left Oamaru for her return passage to London with a crew of thirty-four and a cargo of wool and frozen meat in March, 1890 . The barque and well-known immigrant ship Dunedin was left for London in March .
 Seen once, before reaching Cape Horn, it is believed that she foundered in a storm off the rocky coast of the Cape .
 One of the worst disasters in the history of sail, struck a crowded immigrant ship bound for Auckland, New Zealand, in the year 1874 . The ship was carrying immigrants bound for New Zealand .
 Fifteen sailing ships a year plied the route between New Zealand and England in the year 1860 . The passage took between four and five months to complete .
 This period of time was shortened in later years as the iron steamships, Crusader, Helen Denny and the Margaret Galbraith came into service .
 The Shaw Saville company bought the barque Cospatrick in the year 1873 . She was sent on a second voyage under their flag, to the Port of London .
 The Cospatrick sailed from the river Thames dockyards, under the command of Captain Elmslie, on the 11th September, 1874 .
 Cape of Good Hope, South Africa, was sighted on the 19th November . The vessel was making headway in light northwesterly winds .
 Henry Macdonald, the ships second mate, went below after keeping his watch and was alerted by a strong smell of smoke . Macdonald went below to keep his watch at the time of the fire .
 Fire broke out in bosun's store, where oakum, tar, paint and ropes were stored . The bosun raised the alarm after the fire broke out .
 The crew were immediately called to rig the fire engine, while the Captain turned the ships head before the wind to take the smoke and flames forward and try to contain the fire .
 In the confusion that followed in fighting the blaze, the ship drifted back to her previous course, allowing the flames and suffocating smoke to be fanned back towards the vessel’s stern .
 In less than an hour and a half, the hull, masts, yards and sails were alight and burning fiercely . The hull was alighted in less than a half .
 One of the lifeboats capsized before it could be launched, pitching passengers into the sea below . Meanwhile, panic had spread rapidly among the passengers, who rushed to get into lifeboats .
 The longboat was gone, aflame from end to end, while to add to the panic, the main and mizzen masts crashed in flames onto the crowded immigrants gathered on the stern . The main and main masts of the longboat crashed into the crowd .
 Two lifeboats managed to get away containing about forty passengers each . But they found they had no oars or sail, both lost overboard in the confusion . Two life boats managed to escape, but both lost oars and sail .
 The boats were forced to drift in the vicinity of the ship, watching the stricken remaining passengers jump overboard into the sea through the dense smoke only to disappear beneath the waves .
 Captain Elmslie was the last to be seen from the boats, gasping in the sea . He was seen trying to keep himself and his wife afloat while hanging onto a blackened spar .
 Two days later a strong wind sprang up and the two lifeboats became separated from each other . Strong winds separated the lifeboats, and they became separated again .
 As the days wore on, thirst claimed some of the men and women, others went mad and threw themselves overboard . Some of the people died of thirst and some went mad, throwing themselves overboard.
 After ten days adrift in the burning sun and without water, many of the survivors had died . Many of them had died after being stranded for ten days .
 British ship Sceptre, bound for Dundee from Calcutta, spotted the lifeboat drifting aimlessly in the swell . The lifeboat was finally spotted by the British ship, bound to Dundee .
 A boat was sent to investigate, when they found the remaining three survivors and brought them on board . They were rescued by the boat and taken to hospital .
 The second mate and two seamen were later landed at the island of St. St. John's .
 St. Helena, where they were to obtain final passage back to Auckland to tell their story . They were to return to New Zealand after regaining their health .
 There was no news of the second lifeboat and its passengers and all were presumed lost . All the passengers and crew of the other lifeboats were believed to have perished .
 Thought to have been discovered during General Sully s expedition of 1864, two solitary granite boulders now rest in a modern shelter . Each carved with mysterious symbols may have been the work of prehistoric man or possibly early explorers .
 The larger is locally known as “Writing Rock,” or Hoi-Waukun (Spirit Rock) by the Sioux and Assiniboine tribes . Referred to as petroglyph rocks by archaeologists and considered sacred by Native Americans, the larger is known locally as
 It's about five feet high, three and one and one-half feet wide and two feet thick, weighing approximately ten tons . It is about five ft high, 3.5 ft wide and 2 ft thick and weighs approximately 10 tons .
 Deposited on a high ridge by a glacier, it is ideally placed for monument purposes . The glacier is located in the north of the world's largest glacier .
 It is considered to be of an earlier origin and the symbols, although similar to Writing Rock, are somewhat different and are badly eroded .
 Outlines of the bird, showing its wings extended and surrounded by abstract designs, appear on both rocks . The bird's wings are shown extended and covered in abstract designs .
 In Plains Indian mythology, such beings as the Thunderbird often combat snake-like water monsters, but since the rocks are many miles from any significant body of water, we can only guess its true meaning .
 The Thunderbird motif is not only common, but very ancient . It is also interesting to note that the motif is also common, and very ancient, .
 It is found throughout the northern plains on bone pendants, pottery, and shells dating from before the time of Christ . It is often found on bones and pottery dating back to Christ's time .
 Writing Rock is an example of what may be the random chiseling of prehistoric nomads . Scholars have proposed some interesting theories about the rock .
 The stones were known variously as “elf cups” or “self-bored stones” by country folk . One theory points to the similar 30 Fate / June 2002 .
 Their otherwise-inexplicable appearance associated them with elf-lore rather than whirlpools . Meaden and crop-circle mystics see more than just Nature as being responsible for such doings .
 In some cases, it was believed that one could see into the elfin world by looking through these “potholes” as portholes .
 The elf-cup tradition itself seems to have been the actual underlying origin of the good-luck horseshoe custom . After shod horses and their worn shoes became more common, such similarly rounded, moreavailable iron horseshoes took the place of the rare, hard-to-
 “elf cups” or “potholes” sometimes occur on small, coconut-size stream stones . In any case, "elf cups or potholes" sometimes occur .
 Streamsmoothed stones can be found among the supply of rounded stones sold as yard decorations for arid Western front yards .
 Residents are probably unaware of their origin — and of the good luck which such stones were once believed to bring to their households .
 California Indians carved pothole-like mortars in boulders for grinding acorns . California Indians used the mortars to grind acorns and grind acorn .
 Unlike the whirlpool-caused versions, these are always deeper than they are wide . Yet, unlike the whirlingpools, these versions of this type are more likely to be caused by water .
 Small, coconut-size ""elf-cup" stones were once looked upon as good-luck charms in British folklore . Small coconut-sized ""elf cup" stones once looked like good luck charms .
 Ities between symbols on Writing Rock and an ancient class of carvings known as “cup sculptures” linked to a people who practiced sun worship .
 These carvings are found in Ireland, Scotland, Wales, England, Denmark, Germany, Brittany, Brittany and Sweden .
 If this is true, these early settlers would have had to make friends and intermarry with the local Indians in order to survive in such a hostile land .
 Some historians believe the ancestors were discovered 45 miles north of present-day Bismarck, North Dakota, by the Verendry Expedition of 1738 . They may also have migrated into the interior of the continent, as some historians believe .
 Early explorers were surprised to find bearded, light-skinned Indians living in large buildings surrounded by fortress walls with drawbridges, long before the American Revolution . These early explorers found bearded and light-skin Indians living .
 Fairskinned people were fairskinned, with light hair and blue eyes, and their language contained words similar to Welsh . Not only did they live in huts and communities that “were not Indian,” they were fair skinned and had blue eyes .
 Mandan Nation nearly destroyed by smallpox and the migrating Sioux, virtually becoming extinct when they were forced to unite with the Arikara Nation . In the late 19th century, the Mandan nation was forced to unify with theArikara nation .
 There are many clues to support the conjecture that Vikings migrated to the interior of the continent via Hudson Bay many years prior to the possible arrival of Prince Madoc . Of course there is many clues that the Vikings migrated .
 Evidence of early Norse settlements tends to be found in the eastern part of North Dakota and western Minnesota . Early Norse settlements tend to be closer to the Red River of the North, closer to Minnesota .
 Carvings on Writing Rock appear Scandinavian in nature, but there is little evidence that Vikings travelled this far to the west .
 Writing Rock has always been regarded as sacred by the Indians . Neither the Indians nor white men have been able to decipher the lines, dots, bird symbols, or circles containing dots .
 Legend of the Eight Warriors tells of eight warri( who stopped for the night near the rock and heard a voice calling in the distance as they were ready to sleep .
 Fearing an attack by neighboring tribes, they investigated the sound but found nothing . Fearing a possible attack on them, they found nothing. Fearing attack by nearby tribes .
 The following morning, they heard a womans voice in the distance and again searched in vain for the source . The next morning, the pair again heard the same voice .
 While searching, they came across the larger rock and found it engraved with a picture of eight warriors with their packs on the ground and realized it was themselves . The rock was engraved with an image of the eight warriors .
 Later, returning home, they again passed the rock and saw that the in'iption had changed . The in-iption changed .
 The village of the myste>us rock was shown a picture showing a village of tepees . Upon returning nome, they told the villagers of the rock, and the whole village moved near it, only to find it again .
 The rock was believed to foretell the future and became an object of mystery and worship . From that time on, the rock became a symbol of the future .
 Eventually, white men settled the area and moved the smaller of the two Writing Rocks, allegedly dissipating its power . White men moved the small of the Writing Rocks to dissipate the power .
 North Dakota Historical Society purchased Writing Rock and developed a park on ten acres donated by local farmers in 1936 .
 A shelter was built in 1956 to protect Writing Rock and picnic facilities were added later . The shelter was added to Writing Rock in 1956 .
 Writing Rock symbols stand silent now . Once thought to foretell the future by changing their shape, the Writing Rock symbol stands silent .
 Native American shamans no longer make pilgrimages to the site for ceremonial purposes . People of all cultures gather at Writing Rock State Park each season to ponder the mystery of the stones at the park .
 The first impression one gets is the peculiar sensation that these carvings do not belong to North America . The first impressions one gets are the peculiar impression one . one . gets a peculiar sensation . that these are not North America. One .
 Carvings resemble tenth-century runic carvings found in Scandinavian countries . Yet appear to have Celtic motif, yet appear to be Celtic .
 Modern scholars agree that the Celts at one time inhabited much of Western Europe and influenced Nordic culture to a great degree . The Celts are thought to have lived in much of the continent and influenced much of it .
 Viking explorers are unlikely to have visited this area . However, as I mentioned earlier, it is unlikely that Viking explorers visited the area .
 Carvings on these rocks appear much older and cause us to marvel as to how many times North America was discovered, and by how many different peoples . Besides, the carvings . appear to be much older, they appear to show how much different peoples.
 Whatever their origin, these symbols struck an important chord, not only with Native Americans, but with the Scandinavian and German settlers as well .
 These mysterious symbols seem to connect with some primitive awareness in each of us . Even today, these mysterious symbols connect with each other .
 Through them, we can bridge the eons and touch the hand of our ancient kinsmen . Through them we can also find out who our ancestors were .
 "On this solitary hill, we can share the same unchanged horizon, feel the same prairie wind, and touch the same earth as those nameless travelers from the distant past," author says .
 We are all spiritual warriors seeking our own personal grail of enlightenment, and Writing Rock has something significant to tell each of us . Writing Rock will be released in September .
 It may well be a site of great power or merely a signpost for the weary traveler, but it is for each of us to decipher the symbols as they apply to our own quest . It may be a great site of power or just signpost to the weary travelers .
 I Don Kaufman and Nan Belknap are freelance writers currently residing in Estes Park, Colorado . They are also known for their work on the cover of the Colorado Rockies .
 Years of investigating the trade in rhino horn has produced no evidence that it is prescribed for any sexual purpose . Such applications are absent from the traditionalist's pharmacopoeia .
 Conservationists say mistrust caused by the perpetuation of this Western myth is an obstacle to field work . Conservationists fear that the mistrust will hinder field work in the wild .
 In traditional Chinese medicine, rhino horn is used as an aphrodisiac . It is not for us, you understand it's for a friend . It's not for ourselves, you understood it was for a mate .
 Prince Charles's populist campaigns against political correctness and red tape have raised several juicy hares worth Mythchasing . Prince Charles campaigned against red tape and political correctness .
 A regulation requiring care homes to strengthen the auto-closing mechanism on internal doors has resulted in residents being unable to open their doors . In one unnamed home the doors are now so strongly sprung that the residents cannot open them .
 A subsequent BBC Radio investigation failed to uncover either the home or the ruling . A subsequent investigation by the BBC found the home and ruling had been ruled out .
 Charlie heard an urban legend at a dinner party, swallowed it whole, and promptly wrote to his MP about it .
 Zimbabwean man stunned to silence after he came face to face with naked old woman sucking his daughter's breast .
 Masunda’s area, Chivi district, Masvingo has been left dumbfounded and horrified . The shocking incident has left people in headman Masunda's area dumbfounded . Masunda is a headman in the headman's area in Masvingu .
 Headman Chinodya Jongore Masunda confirmed the incident and said he presided over the matter at his community court last week . Although the case was not reported to the police, the headman confirmed it to the community .
 Headman Masunda told our correspondent during a visit to the district last week that the man claimed to have come face to face with the witch who then vanished into the thickness of the night .
 Headman Masunda claims his daughters were always complaining of breast pain . He decided to visit a prophet who gave him holy water that he sprinkled in the house before they retired to bed .
 Holy water was meant to give him power to see the witch when she came into the house . The holy water was given to him in order to see her when she entered .
 The man claims to have seen the woman stark naked going into his children’s bedroom and he followed her . They then went to sleep and at midnight the man said she was stark naked .
 He claims to have seen the woman kneeling down sucking the breasts of his teenage girl . The girl had allegedly been complaining of breast pain . He claims the woman had been sucking his teenage daughter .
 The man claimed that he moved closer but the woman felt that something was wrong . She quickly got up and vanished into the dark night leaving the man stunned in horror .
 In the morning, headman Masunda said, the man got up early, took his axe and went to the forest . He cut a branch of a tree known in Shona as ""chizhuzhu” that he took to the woman’s house and blocked
 The branch of the tree had a cultural significance that meant that the man was convinced that the woman was a witch . The headman told the our correspondent that the branch of a tree had cultural significance .
 The headman said the man was therefore accusing the woman of witchcraft . He said the woman was accused of witchcraft by the headman . Headman said he was accusing the man of witchcraft in court .
 The village head referred the matter to the village head who in turn referred the case further to the headman’s court . The woman was well aware of the significance of the branch of the tree that had been put by the man .
 Headman Masunda, however, said the man failed to prove his allegations when he was brought to the headman’s court and was charged for witchcraft accusation . Masunda said despite talking with so much conviction, the man did not prove his claims .
 The man failed to catch the alleged witch in the act so this presented a problem to the court . He said the problem was that the man failed . The court said it was a problem for the court because the man did not catch the . alleged witch .
 The headman said the man, who believes that he was being punished unjustifiably, had not yet paid anything . Headman said he believes that the man is being punished unfairly .
 The man, however, failed to prove his case against the woman and my court convicted him . The man was sentenced to life in prison for assaulting her .
 He was alleging that he had so much faith in the prophet who gave him the holy water . He was so convinced that he saw the woman kneeling and sucking the breasts of his teenage girl .
 Attempts to get a comment from the man were fruitless as he was said to have gone to Mashava . Attempts by our correspondent to get him to comment on the incident were fruitlessly .
 Orwell gave the name O'Brien to the character in 1984 who wins the confidence of Winston Smith before betraying him . Since Orwell was oblivious to this, it is very curious that he gave the character the name 'O'Brien' Orwell .
 Leskernick Hill on Bodmin Moor, Cornwall, is a large boulder raised partially off the ground by smaller boulders wedged below it .
 With no precedent for the undated monument, it was noted as an interesting anomaly . The monument is an undated, unclassified monument with no precedent .
 Fieldwork carried out on the moor over the last decade has shown that the monument is far from unique . However, further fieldwork has shown it is not unique .
 Similar monuments have been identified on Bodmin Moor and on the Scilly Isles and Dartmoor . Similar monuments are tentatively dated tentatively to the Early Neolithic period .
 Many of the monuments appear to have been astronomically orientated or aligned to significant natural features visible from the sites . The monuments are located in various locations around the world .
 Prof. Adams experiments with the telephone, manipulated by some exceedingly interesting and instructive experiments . Professor Adams' experiments with telephone .
 Lovewell conducted experiments at the other terminal on the line, which was the spacious gallery in front of the residence of Mrs. Mrs. Lovewell .
 The connection was established by a delicate copper wire stretched across Union street . Polk-the connection having been established by the wire . Polk was the first to connect Polk with Polk . Polk .
 Speaking through the mouth-piece or tube— speaking trumpet fashion- the vibration produced by the voice forces the delicate wire coil against the sensitive metal plate which surmounts the magnet . The vibration of the voice causes the wire coil to be placed on the sensitive plate .
 TliL esta kli s hes the current, and the corresponding battery at the other end of the wire is similarly effected . The sense vibrations produced and the utterances repeated at a distance of a whole block, or some two or three hundred yards off .
 By holding the mouthpiece close to the ear after sending a message, in an instant the response is heard, quite distinctly, though not loud . In an instant, the response can be quite distinctly heard .
 Pieces of music played on the piano at Mr Adams’ were easily recognized at Mrs. Adams' home . Pieces of piano pieces were easily recognizable at Mrs Adams' house .
 The battery had first been placed upon the wire over the sounding board of the instrument . Polk’s and vice versa-the little battery had been placed on the wire .
 Mrs. Fall and Miss Sadie Fall presided at the piano at the latter point of the play . Mrs. and Mrs. F. Fall also presided over the piano .
 Gwynn and Miss 1 /-""i 1 le y< in cc ur ca Telephone Call Adams at the residence of Mr. Adams . Call Adams: "Gwynn, Gwynan and Miss Adams"
 Mrs. Polk sucrried in getting an intelligible mesmgm . She then requested some music . 7re music came .
 Polk could re-r it. like the distant strains of a music x but could not make out the air . Polk could not re- r it. Polk could hear the sounds of the air. Polk was unable to hear the music .
 "That’s not very respectful. I S— ""," said battery owner . 7re distant battery promptly apologized .
 "It was played distinctly and very artistically — equal to any operatic music," says the composer . "It's played distinctly ... equal to opera music," he says .
 The music and conversation was kept up for some time, attesting practically to all who enjoyed the experiment, the great success and wonderful possibilities in the not distant future . The music, conversation and conversation were kept up to some time .
 Mummified remains of 27 women were found in a flat in Nizhny Novgorod, police source says . Police source: Remains found in the flat were of 27 mummified women .
 He is believed to have dug up the remains of young women at various cemeteries and put dresses on them . He is thought to have used dresses to dress up the bodies of women in cememeteria .
 Official statement on the case is not expected until after Friday, a public holiday in Russia . An official statement is expected after Friday's public holiday .
 Remains believed to have been stolen from local graves in Nizhny Novgorod, a city on the Volga . The remains are believed to be stolen from a local graves .
 The suspect may be charged with desecrating human remains . Rossiyskaya Gazeta: Suspect may also face charges of desecration of remains . The suspect is believed to be in custody in Moscow .
 He apparently specialised in exploring cemeteries and was planning to publish a guide book, it adds .
 Differing figures for the number of sets of remains found in the flat were given by Russian media, ranging from 20 to 27 .
 The dozen scratchings were uncovered during a three-week excavation at Nevern in Pembrokeshire . They were found during the excavation of the site in the area .
 Archaeologists think the stars and other designs were made by a serf, labourer or soldier . They were made between 1170 and 1190 when the castle was built . Archaeologists believe the stars were created by a labourer .
 They say they also give an insight into the beliefs of medieval working men .
 Work is under way cleaning, revealing and recording the images . Further research is being carried out by the university’s department of archaeology .
 Pembrokeshire Coastal National Park Authority's head of archaeological heritage said it hoped to keep the slates in Nevem. Phil Bennett said it was hoped it would be kept in the area .
 The drawings connect us with the lives and beliefs of masons or labourers who built the castle . It was the fourth year that the site has been excavated .
 A round tower thought to have imprisoned Lord Rhys in 1194 was also the quarters of high status members of the castle household . The dig also unearthed information about the phased building of parts of Castle Castle .
 It was the fourth year that the site has been excavated in a partnership project between Dr Caple, the National Park Authority, Dyfed Archaeological Trust and Nevem community council which owns the site .
 While flying over the famous Nazca desert recently, pilot Eduardo Herran Gomez de la Torre spotted some geoglyphs .
 He believes recent sand-storms carried away soil that was covering them . He believes the geoglyphs or Nazca Lines were exposed after recent sand storms .
 Nazca Lines have become world famous, showing up in paintings, movies, books and news articles . The Nazca lines have been used in paintings and movies .
 They exist on the floor of the Nazca desert in a southwestern part of Peru, near the ocean . They are found on the bottom of the desert in the southwest of Peru .
 Natural objects include animals such as birds, camelids, or snakes . The natural objects include birds, snakeids and snakes .
 The lines were created by removing ironoxide coated pellets to a depth of four to six inches . That left the lighter sand below in stark contrast to the surrounding sand below .
 In fact, they can be seen quite easily when standing on nearby mountains or hills .
 The newly revealed figures are of a snake, a bird, a camelid (perhaps a llama) and some zig-zag lines . The figures were discovered by de la Torre .
 They are actually on some hills in the El Ingenio Valley and Pampas de Jumana near the desert floor . The hills are actually in some hills and are on the edge of some of the desert floors .
 The reason for the creation of the geoglyphs is still uncertain, though a host of possible explanations have been offered, many centered around religion and or water .
 All of the figures are believed to have been created using a single line that never crosses itself . Similar to how a picture might be drawn with a pencil, never lifting it from the paper .
 Archeologists have found evidence of wooden stakes used to help create the images . It has also been noted that many of the images depicted by geoglyphs also appear on pottery made by people over the same period .
 As many as 10,000 new species of plants, animals and insects are discovered each year . Usually they are isolated individuals or small clusters of specimens hidden away in forests or areas .
 Mats Thulin discovered a new species of tree in Ethiopia that covers an area of more than 3,100 square miles . The tree is the size of the island of Crete and covers more than a million square miles of land . The new species is a tree species that covers 3,
 Botanist David J Mabberley of Britain’s Royal Botanic Gardens in Kew described the new tree in a report Friday in the journal Science/noting that it probably has been overlooked by botanists . Few have visited the region where Ethiopia’�
 The area is also difficult to get to, he said, and the trees can't be seen from drivable roads in only a few places . The trees are also hard to see, he says .
 The Acacia fumosa tree grows to about 18 feet to 20 feet tall, with a canopy that spreads 24 feet to 30 feet in diameter . The newly identified tree, called Acacia Fumosa, grows to 18-20 feet tall . It has a canopy of 24 feet
 It differs from closely related species in the color of its flowers and in its gray, smooth bark, among other things .
 The total number of trees in the region “must be in the millions,” Mabberley wrote . The total tree count must be “in the millions”
 Champagne reception, three-course dinner and midnight viewing of planetarium show . Planetarium show at planetarium event .
 Tell your friends ‘you slept under a blue whale and watched the birth of the universe/’ says the museum’s Brad Harris . Tell friends “you . slept under the blue whale/” ‘I watched the . birth of . the universe’
 Tokyo launches samurai and ninja tour . Japan's largest travel agency is launching a tour of samurai and ninjas .
 Bus tours Japan's historic Asakusa entertainment district . Street performers dressed as samurai warriors and ninjas leap out of the shadows .
 JTB travel agency and the SGRS events planner say that at one point there will even be a fight between the historical characters . The SGRS event will take place in London, London and London .
 Samurai warriors and ninja spies and saboteurs are iconic figures from the Sengoku civil war period in 15th Century Japan . Samurai warriors, ninja spies, and sabotesurs were iconic figures in the 15th century .
 Contrary to their popular image ninjas did not routinely dress in black, but rather were masters of disguise . Contrary to popular image, ninjas were master ninjas who wore disguises .
 Travellers along one of Kenya's busiest highways warned not to give alcohol to baboons, it is reported . Travellers told not to drink alcohol in Kenya .
 Kenya Wildlife Service says it is "irresponsible and careless" to offer intoxicating drinks to primates . Kenya Wildlife Services says it's irresponsible to offer drinks to the primates .
 He was speaking in Naivasha, a town on a motorway linking the city of Nakuru with the capital, Nairobi, Kenya .
 The area is sandwiched between several nature reserves, where wildlife abounds . Wildlife abounds in the area, including wildlife .
 It is not clear how common it is for people to give alcohol to monkeys . Up to 7,000 baboons are believed to live outside nature reserves in the country .
 Locals have been complaining about the nuisance tipsy animals are causing .
 One year after the post office was established naming our town Bakersfield, the entire town was sold by its owners .
 Bakersfield and 100,000 acres south of town were sold for about $5 per acre . They sold Bakersfields and about $50 per acre for $5 each acre . The town sold about $100,000 of its land south of the town .
 The California Cotton Growers and Manufacturers Association purchased Bakersfield, California . The association was composed of Californians and Englishmen . After examining the San Joaquin Valley, the association selected the area as the site of operations .
 Horatio and Charles Livermore, wealthy San Francisco drug wholesalers, had accumulated countless thousands of acres of southern valley property . Downtown Bakersfield was part of their holdings .
 The grand idea was to create a Southern cotton plantation type of operation, but instead of using slaves, the plan was to hire Chinese laborers to plant and harvest 1,000 acres of cotton the first year .
 The railroad was used to transport cotton, wool and manufactured goods to national markets . These pioneers of industry were banking on the new railroad to transport their goods .
 Many cotton fields lost by too much or too little water and failure to plant tire seed at the proper time . The hired management was ineffective, and many cotton fields were lost by water and too little .
 After six years of failure, a San Francisco investor was sent to Bakersfield as trustee of the corporation . The company has been in the hands of an investor for six years .
 After finding the company’s books in a mess, he began dissolution of the corporation . The company's books were a mess .
 In 1878, Tevis and Haggin’s Kern Land Company purchased the property from the dissolved corporation . They began selling it as small farms to immigrants from England and the East Coast . The property was sold in 1878 as a small farm .
 The administration banned sales of the products citing concerns over English-only and poor labeling . It said the products were attracting young sippers .
 CFD A statement: “It misleads customers and damages the health of youth” The CFD said it was “misleading” and “damaging” youth .
 The administration also called for strict monitoring of similar products . The administration called for stricter monitoring of the products .
 U.S. shows such as “The Vampire Diaries” and “True Blood” are readily available in China on popular video sites Sohu and Youku . Chinese teenagers’ fascination with vampires and supernatural characters has spurred Chinese teenagers' fascination .
 One vampire-themed cafe in Liaoning, northeast China, serves red wine and soda in blood bags . Staff dressed as doctors and nurses in the cafe dressed as nurses and doctors .
 Nyami Nyami is believed to protect the Tonga people and give them sustenance in difficult times . The Tongan people are believed to have been protected by Nyami .
 Nyami Nyami is seen as the god of Zambezi Valley and the river before the creation of the Kariba Dam . Variously described as having the body of a snake and the head of a fish or a river dragon .
 Barack Obama fell deathly silent in the middle of a speech on education before the Wisconsin Teachers Union Tuesday . His failure of words reportedly a result of the Democratic nominee's forward-looking tendencies .
 Spokespeople from the Obama camp have suggested that his recent comments about magnets being ""our Clinton Bias only hope for survival"" were taken out of context . They did confirm that he has canceled all future appearances in New Mexico, Slamming f especially those taking place during the month of
 While he can find his way in and out of the jungle where others get lost, he does not live there . While he finds his way into the jungle, he doesn't live there, he can't be lost .
 He is an urban orisha and lives in Obatala’s castle as his personal hunter . He is also an orisha who lives in the castle of Obatalala .
 He is an orisha of high moral and ethical standards . He encourages his worshippers to be law-abiding, upstanding citizens .
 He helps followers to ‘hit the mark’ when they strive to attain goals, and to do so with integrity . He helps his followers to "hit the marks" when they achieve goals .
 He is considered the patron of police officers and court officials by many followers . He is frequently called upon for issues of injustice and for court cases and legal issues .
 Mayor Kasim Reed says the massive Atlanta Cyclorama painting will be moved to the Atlanta History Center in Buckhead . The massive painting has been on display in Grant Park for the past century . Reed says it will be on display at the History Center .
 OLD NEWS is published bimonthly, for $17 a year, by Susquehanna Times & Magazine, Inc. Inc.
 Second-class postage paid at Landisville, PA 17538 and additional mailing office .
 A woman in western China claims to have just celebrated her 128th birthday . That would make her the oldest person in recorded history .
 Almihan Seyiti, from the Xinjiang region, lives in a village near the city of Kashgar . He says he is proud of his family's achievements in Xinjiang, China .
 A member of the Uighur Turkic minority, she is vigorous, and enjoys singing, playing the dutar musical instrument and occasionally helping out on the f arm . Xiniiang TV-2 reports.
 No one outside China is likely to accept Mrs Seyiti's claim at face value . But no one outside the country will likely accept the claim at any level .
 Birth records in the outlying regions of the 19th Century Chinese empire were sparse and unreliable, especially for the ethnic minorities . China has reported Uighurs living into their 120s before without any solid evidence .
 The oldest verified person was Jeanne Calment, who died in 1997 aged 122, but Mrs Seyiti enjoyed her party nonetheless .
 Noelle Pikus-Pace competes in the USOC Media Summit in Chicago, Illinois . She competed in a skeleton competition in 2009 .
 Pikus-Pace keeps a picture of her 2-year-old daughter in her helmet and a tracing in marker of the child’s hand prints on her sled . She keeps a photo of her daughter and tracing of her hand prints .
 Olympic superstitions include lucky undies, socks and lucky underwear . Years of training, special diets and elite coaching may not enoU gj 1 to ^ Olympic medal .
 Superstition runs deep in humans, even those jocks seeking to represent the U.S. in the Vancouver Olympics . The Olympic jocks will be representing the United States in Vancouver .
 Many are looking for a slight edge, and sometimes they look for it in some strange places . Many people look for edge in places where they can find it .
 He tends to keep the fortunes he likes, with a supply of 25 to 30 on hand . As a result, he tends to have around 25 fortunes per day .
 You have baseball players who refuse to discuss a no-hitter in progress . See Olympic, L.> Olympic Continued from D I .
 Skeleton racer Noelle Pikus-Pace keeps a picture of her 2-year-old daughter in her helmet and a tracing in marker of the child’s hand prints on her sled . Noelle also keeps a photo of her daughter and tracing of her hand prints .
 Skier Michelle Roark wears the same perfume to each race, and makes the scent herself . Roark makes the perfume herself to compete in the Olympics .
 Her sports psychologist suggested she visualize skiing well with all five of your senses before events . That was after she was told by her sports psychologist that she could ski well with the five senses .
 She found she could hear, see, taste and feel success, but not smell it . She started her own perfume and cologne manufacturing company Phinominal which are all-natural .
 Sports psychologist says superstitions don't really help performance . Sports psychologist Jerry May of Meadow Vista, California, said superstitions are not helpful .
 Superstitions also can be a hindrance, Maniar said . “If your superstition is you only perform well on a sunny day, that’s a problem,” he said .
 Cross country skier Liz Stephen solves that by rotating a couple pairs of lucky socks, but wears the same gloves for races . Stephen: "I'm not going to be surprised if I'm going to have to rotate socks"
 In order to believe in omens a specific prior belief is absolutely necessary . In other words, that everything that is to be has been foreordained, he says .
 From far back in recorded history many changing aspects of nature have been noted as harbingers of good . or ill . It is interesting that most forebode ill. Most forebodes ill .
 The probable origin of superstitions of this kind was mankind’s attempt to know the future and perhaps, through fore-knowledge, to avoid disaster, to . avoid disaster . It is possible that the origin of such superstitions was mankind's attempt to predict the future . The probable
 Omens have always formed a basis for action rather than an indication of inexorable fate. Omens form a basis of action, rather than a symbol of fate, say experts . Omens are always an inspiration for action, not a sign of fate .
 In ancient world an omen did not have to be an extraordinary happening, like a comet foretelling misfortune . In the ancient world it did not need to be extraordinary happening to predict a good omen .
 7 as the direction from which a sign first came; it was this that indicated whether it predicted good or evil . Very important w 7 was the direction of the sign from which it first came . The direction indicated whether a sign predicted evil or good .
 In Ancient Greece an owl hooting on the left was an unlucky omen; in Roman society the values were reversed . In Roman society an owl on the right was lucky; in Ancient Greece it was unlucky for an owl to hoot in the left .
 The anomaly could have arisen from Rome’s early national struggles for power in the Mediterranean, leading to the belief that an omen that was bad for Greece was necessarily good for Rome . The anomaly may have been caused by Rome's struggle for power .
 In the Western w r orld belief in omens has survived down the centuries and is still with us today, linking us to our distant magical past . The Western w orld believes omens are linked to the past and the future of omens .
 Many find it hard to shrug off belief in prognostic signs that for thousands of years were part of the survival strategy of human beings . Omens are frequently presented in pseudoscientific guise in today's scientific world .
 ‘sky at night’ means sunset in the west, and “sky in the morning” means sunrise in the east . In Britain and the northwestern U.S. the prevailing winds come from the west .
 At sunset if the sky is sunny and bright in the west, the clear, moisturefree air between the observer and the horizon is scattering predominantly red light .
 The weather will remain dry for many hours whilst the wind moves towards the east . This means the weather will stay dry for the next few hours . The wind will continue to move towards the north of the coast .
 At sunrise, however, when the red sky is in the east, there is no guarantee that these conditions will remain for long . The prevailing winds will soon blow the clear air away, and the next weather front carrying rain clouds will likely blow in from the west .
 Red sky in the morning is not as reliable a shepherd's warning as red sky at night . But rain clouds might not come in from the west, so red sky is not reliable .
 A police officer in Uganda has reportedly shot a tortoise dead after being attacked by the ""aggressive" creature .
 Incident happened in Nebbi district in the north of the country near the Congolese border . The incident happened in the Nebbi area near the border with the Congo .
 Charles Onegiu was attacked while enjoying a post-work cup of tea . The animal entered his home and attacked him while he was enjoying a drink . The officer was attacked by the animal in his home .
 "I took a stick to chase it but it instead became more violent,"" he told the paper . He said he was chasing it with a stick when it became violent .
 After attempting to fend off the tortoise with a plastic chair, he said he ""instinctively"" drew his firearm and shot it dead .
 Mwesigwa appealed for calm ""from the residents and police officers, maintaining that their lives are not in danger as they may have assumed""", New Vision reported .
 Theory relates the development of an individual to its biological past . Theory that relates the . development of the individual to their biological past. Theory . Theory .
 The phrase ‘ontogeny recapitulates phytogeny’ was, during the 19th century, one of the main arguments of scientific racism in the Western world . It was used as an argument for scientific racism .
 Individuals of a species do seem to develop characteristics associated with other animals, such as other animals . Individuals seem to have a tendency to mimic other animals in their species .
 Human embryos, for instance, develop gill slits on their necks, a three-chambered heart (which expands to four chambers) and a tail . Human embryos also develop gills slits, a heart, a tail, and a heart .
 These characteristics seemed to prove the 19th-century idea that evolution was a ladder of progress with humans at the top of the ladder . These characteristics proved to prove that evolution .
 Recapitulation theory even placed human races in a biologically determined hierarchy . The theory was based on race relations between humans and other races .
 Some races were ranked superior to others; white Western Europeans and Americans were placed on top . White Western Europeans were placed top .
 Scientists theorized that other human races could be understood by studying the behavior of white children . The behavior of other races could also be studied by white children, scientists say .
 20th-century biologists replaced the model of evolution as a ladder with one of a manybranched bush . They no longer had a place for recapitulation theory and it was discredited .
 Among the animals of folklore being considered by CRYPTOZOOLOGY but yet to be officially recognized by biologists is the onza .
 The jaguar and puma are the better-known and recognized large cats from the same area . They clearly distinguished it from both the jaguars and the puma, the best known large cats .
 Europeans first saw the animal in the Aztec emperor Montezuma’s zoo . It was distinguished from the puma by its wolfish appearance . The animal was distinguished by its appearance .
 Dale and Cecil Lee, and a client, oseph K Smirk, killed a strange cat on a jaguar-hunting ixpeditior. in Mexico . Dale Lee, Cecil Lee and Cecil . Smirk killed the strange cat in Mexico on a ix
 When they described the animal to J.S. zoologists, their story was ridiculed . The animal's description was ridiculed by zoologists . The story was later ridiculed .
 The story’ was included in the 1961 door The Jnzc, bv Robert Marshall . They received ittie attention until the story was published in 1961 . The story received it’s attention until it was included .
 A complete specimen was obtained for dissection by ISC secretary J Richard Greenwall in 1986 . Within a few years, ;everal skulls had been located in various collections .
 The specimen fit the traditional description of the onza, with distinguishng long ears, body, and legs . The specimen was found in a zoo in the early 1900s .
 What remains to be established is whether the onza is a totally new species or nerely a local variation of the puma .
 It clearly iemonstrated that the descriptions of indigenous people can be quite literal and accurate . It clearly demonstrates that the description of indigenous peoples is quite literal .
 The story of the onza has given cryptozoologists hope that specimens of some of the other mysterious animals reported to exist in remote corners of the world also will eventually be located .
 He is the ‘eleripin’ — the witness of destiny — who knows everything that awaits us as part of our fate . He is also the witness to destiny, who knows what awaits us, as well .
 Eleggua intercede on behalf of humanity to alter people’s destinies, ward off death and other misfortunes . He has a very close working relationship with Eleggerua and together, together they help people to be good people .
 His worship is primarily centred around the Ifa tradition, both in traditional African worship and in the African Diaspora in the new world . His initiated priests, called awos, babalawos, iyanifas or oluwos, act as diviners for
 He has petitioned for help with making wise descisons, opening roads, healing and protection from evil . He is petitioned with help with opening roads and healing .
 He is a powerful wizard, master of all spell craft and is found out in the wild, untamed areas of nature . He is often found in nature .
 Without Osain, none of the ceremonies in the religion can happen . It is his magic that is used to conjure the shrines of the orishas .
 Osain is commonly understood to be Shango’s godfather who taught him how to spit fire and throw lightning . Osain also taught Shango how to throw lightning and spit fire .
 He is petitioned for any purpose where unconquerable magic is required . Consequently he is petitioning for any . purpose where . unconquirable magic required .
 He has one eye, one hand, one foot, and one tiny ear that can hear even a pin drop . One ear larger than his head that hears nothing .
 She is often depicted as a mermaid that resides in the river Oshun in modem Nigeria in the Osun state . She does, however, have a horrific temper, one which she seldom ever loses .
 During her yearly festival she is said to choose one or more young women to represent her in the dance of the sister of the waters .
 The Ouija was invented as an oracle game in 1892 by Elija J Bond . Elija Bond invented the Ouija as a game of oracle oracle games . Bond invented Elija in the 1892 .
 The name is derived from the French and German words for ""yes,"" oui and ja. The name means "yes" or "Ja" in German and French .
 The user asks a question, places fingertips on the pointer and then allows the pointer to spell out the answer . The question is answered by the user using the pointer .
 Most likely, the user moves the platform subconsciously without realizing it, but many people feel the movements are directed by discamate beings and spirits of the dead .
 Ouija enjoyed great popularity due to interest in Spiritualism and to the thousands of bereaved people after World War I who tried to find ways to communicate with their loved ones who had been killed in the war . Shortly after its invention, Ouija became popular .
 Since then, its popularity often has coincided with popular interest in the occult .
 Since 1966 the Ouija has been marketed by the Parker Brothers game company of Beverly, Massachusetts . Parker Brothers states that it is a game for entertainment purposes . Ouija is marketed by Parker Brothers .
 In experimenting with the Ouija, some users find that they can do automatic writing with it . The Ouija can be used to communicate with a Ouija .
 Skeptics contend that such writings really come from the user's own subconscious . Skeptic says such writings come from a user's subconscious .
 Others theorize Ouija users may have natural mediumistic abilities . Ouija has enabled them to contact discamate beings or spirits of the dead, some say .
 Some critics contend that such contact is inherently dangerous, and that any beings who communicate through such a device are likely to be demonic and attempt to possess the user .
 Ouija use in automatic writing and alleged communication with spirits of the dead have been benign, even productive, in nature . Many cases of Ouija using automatic writing have been found to be benign, or even productive .
 The entity Seth, popularized by the writings of Jane Roberts in the 1960s and 1970s, initiated his communication with Roberts through a Ouija board . Seth initiated his contact with Roberts using the Ouija . Seth was popularized in the writings by Jane Roberts .
 Seth allegedly used Roberts' vocal cords to speak . The communication then progressed to direct automatic writing with a pen and then trance mediumship . Seth allegedly wrote with Roberts' voice using his own vocal cords in trance .
 Ouija also served as the initial means of communication with alleged spirits of the dead in 1913 for Pearl Curran and 1919 for Stewart Edward White and his wife, Betty .
 Betty began using automatic writing and then trance mediumship, in which the spirits allegedly used her own vocal cords . After initial contact was made through the Ouija, Betty then used automatic writing .
 Pablo Escobar assembled a private zoo assembled in the 1980s by the drug lord . Escobar was shot dead by police in Medellin in 1993 . The zoo is all that remains of the private zoo created by Escobar in the 80s .
 Most of the animals were confiscated, but the hippos remained and became naturalised . The hippos are now naturalised in captivity in the wild .
 Italy's Padre Pio used carbolic acid to cause bleeding wounds on his hands that he claimed were replicas of Christ's, according to a new book . Padre used carbololol acid to create bleeding wounds in his hands, the new book says .
 Pio, a former monk who died in 1968 aged 81, wore gloves because his hands bled constantly .
 He became Italy's most loved saint after he was canonised by Pope John Paul II in 2002 . He is the most popular Italian saint in Italy .
 A new book has heaped more scorn on the claims that his wounds were duplicates of those suffered by Jesus during the crucifixion . New book heaps scorn on claims that Jesus suffered similar wounds .
 Italian historian Professor Sergio Luzzatto has discovered documents including a letter from a pharmacist who arranged carbolic acid for Pio Pio . Pio. Pio is believed to have been the world's first person to have taken the drug .
 The corrosive acid that caused the bleeding on the saint's hands is thought to have caused the blood on his hands . The acid was used to cause the bleeding in the hands .
 Pope Francis canonised Pio real name Francesco Forgione because of public pressure . He also said many Popes had expressed doubts and suggested the Vatican only canonised him .
 His claims were dismissed by the Catholic Anti-Defamation League in 2007 . His claim was dismissed in 2007 by the League of the Anti-Semitism .
 Masked gunmen stole two paintings from a museum, including a work by surrealist Salvador Dali, officials say . The paintings were stolen from the museum in a bid to steal money from the owner of the artworks .
 Police said several robbers threatened a guard at the Scheringa Museum for Realism in Spanbroek with a gun . They made off with two paintings before making off with the paintings .
 O III ® e-% 0*0 2 3j£ o B o o 3 3 73 SS3 o ^ 3 I 3 O So 3 o o s:o 0 S 2 00 33 o 0^3 Ilf1 ""s o .cr 4 ^ 0^0
 O 3 3 Jrt>a O-tC^ ^ g O a’ 3 <« o c/d^h o • CfQ L* a ™ 3 ft, P ^ tr r-. 2 d3 o ct ^ 5. O 3 . O
 3 a P ^ 3 era ft P* 73 2 o os € >o o 03 3 era r+ cc oq 31 O03 3 r^ 3 a a o o o-crq 2 P -03 B ^ o o cr WB f -2 O 3 * 03
 Pancawara is the five-day week of the Javanese calendar . Pancawarara is a five day week in the five days of the calendar .
 In Bahasa Jawa is also called pasaran hari, or the “market day” cycle . This system structures time around trade and commerce, and in Jawa it is also known as pasaran .
 The chart shows the ngoko names of the days, each of which are associated with certain images, colors, and directions . The chart is based on the names of each day, with some of them associated with images and colors .
 Evening evenings where Kliwon coincides with Friday are considered sacred . For example, evenings where evening coincides with Saturday are sacred .
 The General Patton Memoriil Museum in Chiriaco Summit just off Interstate 10 near lesert Center, about 30 miles :ast of Indio — is home to nunerous artifacts collected from he nearby training grounds .
 World War II-era photos and WWII-era news clips cover the walls of the building .
 The collection includes artifacts from World War I to the present war on terror . Artifacts from other wars are also included in the collection . The collection also includes World War II artifacts .
 The history of the General Patton Memorial Museum begins with the Chiriaco family . The museum was founded by the family of General Patton soldiers .
 Joe Chiriaco came west from Alabama to see the Crimson Tide play Stanford in the Rose Bowl in Pasadena in 1927 . He came west in 1927 from his home state of Alabama to watch the game .
 The game ended in a 7-7 tie, the last Rose Bowl game to finish in a draw . Incidentally, it was the last game to end in a tie . The Rose Bowl was held in Pasadena, California, in 1964 .
 Chiriaco never returned to Alabama, opting to remain in Southern California . He found a job as a surveyor with the Los Angeles Bureau of Water and Power .
 He made his first trek to the desert when his work brought him to an area known as Shaver Summit . The name was changed to Chiriaco Summit in 1958 when a rural branch of the United States Post Office was opened .
 With rumors of a new paved road between Indio and Phoenix, Joe began constructing a building, and on Aug., 1933, he opened a gas station and general store .
 The new two-lane blacktop, United States 60, opened in front of Shaver Summit . That same day, the new two lane blacktop opened, passing through the area .
 Joe married his wife, Ruth, in 1934, and the couple worked 18hour days providing service to the traveling public . Joe and Ruth worked 18 hours a day providing 18 hours of service . Joe married in 1934 .
 Patton established the Desert Training Center, with its headquarters at Camp Young, adjacent to Shaver’s Summit . The only place of its kind ‘on limits” to the soldiers for many miles was Camp Young .
 The availability of water to the Desert Training Center was one of the main reasons Patton selected the area and placed camps accordingly . Patton's camp camp is located in the desert area .
 The center is considered the largest military training facility in the history of military maneuvers . It stretches over 18,000 square miles of rugged desert terrain from Southern California into Arizona and Nevada .
 From 1942 to 1944, more than one million soldiers trained at the center, populated by thousands of tanks, trucks and selfpropelled artillery units . Thousands of tanks and artillery units were trained there .
 Almost all the facilities at the camp were non-permanent tent cities . Almost all of the facilities were tents, tents and tents .
 The museum was established next door to Joe Chiriaco’s original establishment, which is still in operation . Seventy years later, vestiges of the camp remain and mementos of its historic past are preserved .
 The museum was first conceptualized in 1985 by Margit Chiriaco Rusche and Leslie Cone of the Bureau of Land Management, the agency that manages the land upon which the training center existed .
 Patton Memorial Museum in Chiriaco Summit . Patton Memorial . Patton Memo_£ *7 A1 / vlao ‘ I ao/ George Patton .
 Rusche: “The first year was spent orizing and trying to find locas to house and process the facts,” Rusche said . Rusche says the first year spent ‘orienting’ and ‘trying to process and process’ the facts
 In 1986, five re modules were purchased, ating a 7,000 square foot a to serve as the museum lding . In 1987, the museum was purchased, and it has since been expanded .
 Construction folks nt to work converting the dules into one cohesive ucture . Construction folks are still working on the project in the works .
 One of the museum's first exhibits was the donated jtropolitan Water District tographical map, featuring the regions of Southern Calirnia where it was installed .
 World War I and World War II veterans purchased bricks that make up the two half-circle remembrance walls at the base of the Gen. Gen. George Washington . The museum's expansion was financed by WWII veterans .
 Only United States president to resign Nixon resigned on Aug. 28, 1974 . Margit Chiriaco Rusche, Michael Pierson, Margit Rusche and Michael Parson attended the U.S. summit .
 Today is Friday, August 8, the 220th day of 2014 . Today is the day USA TODAY erence celebrates the start of the year .
 During the Second Sino-Japanese War, Japan completed its occupation of Beijing . The Japanese occupied Beijing during the war .
 President Harry S Truman signed the United States instrument of ratification for the United Nations Charter . The U.N. Charter was ratified by Truman in 1945 . The United States ratified the UN Charter in 1947 .
 Britain’s ‘Great Train Robbery’ took place as thieves made off with 2. million pounds in banknotes . The robbery took place on a London-bound train at the time of the robbery .
 The Republican national convention in Miami Beach nominated Richard Nixon for president on the first ballot . Richard Nixon was nominated on first ballot at the Republican convention . The convention was held in Miami, Florida .
 President Richard Nixon announced his resignation, effective the next day, following damaging new revelations in the Watergate scandal . Richard Nixon's resignation was effective the day after Watergate scandal broke out .
 Sonia Sotomayor was sworn in as the United States Supreme Court’s first Hispanic and third female justice . She is the first female and first Hispanic justice on the high court .
 A study in the Journal of Applied Social Psychology found that students who have read the Potter books are less prejudicial toward traditionally stigmatized groups, such as immigrants, gays and refugees . The study also found students who read the Harry Potter books were less likely to be prejudicial to immigrants,
 Arabs launch attacks on Jews in Palestine over disputes on Jewish use of Wailing Wall in Jerusalem . Wailing wall in Jerusalem is considered holy by both Jews and Arabs .
 Allies inform Japan that its surrender offer is acceptable as World War II in Pacific nears end . Allies tell Japan it is acceptable to accept surrender offer as WWII ends in 1945 . Allies say surrender offer acceptable as WWII in Pacific approaches end .
 Prince Hussein proclaimed King Hussein of Jordan on termination of King Talal's reign . Prince Hussein was proclaimed king of Jordan in 1953 . Hussein was King of Jordan .
 RacerionDeginHrHhe Watts section of Los Angeles, United States, lasted six days . The Watts Watts section was part of a six-day race in Los Angeles .
 United States officially ends combat involvement in Indochina, same day the Viet Cong charge that 71 prisoners of war turned over to them by South Vietnam are not Communist supporters but want to return to Saigon . The Viet Cong say 71 prisoners turned over by South Vietnamese are not Communists but want
 George Washington created the Order of the Purple Heart, a decoration to recognize merit in enlisted men and noncommissioned officers . The award was created in 17th century to recognize the best in the war .
 The Hatfields of West Virginia and the McCoys of Kentucky erupted into full-scale violence . The McCoys were the Hatfields and Hatfields in the early 1900s .
 Peace Bridge connecting Buffalo, N.Y., and Fort Erie, Ontario, Canada, was officially dedicated . The already opened Peace Bridge connects Buffalo, New York, to Fort Erie . Peace Bridge is already opened .
 The Explorer 6 satellite sent back images of Earth . Explorer 6 was launched by the U.S. satellite Explorer 6 in 2009 .
 First lady Jacqueline Kennedy gave birth to a boy, Patrick Bouvier Kennedy, who died two days later of respiratory distress syndrome . Patrick died in hospital two days after his birth .
 Congress passed the Gulf of Tonkin resolution, giving President Lyndon B Johnson broad powers in dealing with reported North Vietnamese attacks on U.S. forces . The resolution was passed by Congress .
 CSS Arkansas was scuttled by its crew on the Mississippi River near Baton Rouge, Louisiana, to prevent capture by the Union . CSS Arkansas is the Confederate ironclad CSS Arkansas and CSS Arkansas .
 Austria-Hungary declared war against Russia and Serbia declared war on Germany . Serbia declared the war against Germany in 1918 .
 Gertrude Ederle became the first woman to swim the English Channel in 14/2 hours . She arrived in Kingsdown, England, from France in 14-2 hours.
 During World War II, the U.S. dropped an atomic bomb on Hiroshima, Japan, resulting in an estimated 140,000 deaths . The United States dropped the bomb in 1945 .
 DuMont television network went off the air after a decade of operations . DuMont TV network was the first network to go off air in the 1960s .
 Soviet cosmonaut Gherman Titov became the second man to orbit Earth as he flew aboard Vostok 2 . Titov was the first man to enter the orbit of the Earth .
 A court found two former top East German officials guilty of failing to stop the killing of people trying to escape across the Berlin Wall . They were sentenced to probation after being found guilty of the killing .
 Funk legend Rick James, whose life and career was marred by cocaine addiction and a prison term for assault, died in Los Angeles at age 56 . James' career and prison time for assault included assault, assault .
 Russia granted temporary asylum to Edward Snowden, defying U.S. demands that he be sent back to face espionage charges . President Barack Obama said he was “disappointed” that Russia granted asylum to Snowden .
 On this month in 1909 the Lincoln penny mode its debut the first . co,n bearing a real person's irnage . Sticking with Lincoln* BOWt .
 There have been heated debates in recent decades about whether to get rid of the coin . The public has remained steadfastly opposed to eliminating it .
 Polls in 1992, 1997 and 2006 showed more than two-thirds of the public want the penny to stick around . Polls show more than three decades ago that the penny was still popular .
 China says it may try to create a theology based on Christianity that integrates the religion with Chinese culture and is compatible with the country’s socialist beliefs .
 China supports the development of Christianity within the country . Wang zuoan, a senior official for religious affairs, says China supports Christianity . Wang says China is committed to developing Christianity in China .
 His comments came at a conference for Sinicization of Christianity in Shanghai in China .
 Each year, about 500,000 people are baptised as Protestants each year in China . It is thought there are about 23 million to 40 million Protestants in China 1.7% of the total population .
 It cites experts and church leaders saying they believe authorities are alarmed by the quick growth of Protestantism in the area . The authorities are trying to suppress it, it says .
 A 120pound bell that went imssrng from a local church has been returned . A 120 pound bell went missing from a nearby church . A local church bell was returned to the church .
 The Kingman Daily Miner reported tod the brass bell was brought oack to St. Mary's Cathedral . The bell is believed to have been brought to Kingman .
 The shooting occurred at St. Mary Catholic Church on Wednesday . The victim was shot by a man who wished to remain anonymous . The shooting happened at a Catholic church .
 Church bell was caked in dirt, indicating it had been buried . Church parish coordinator Donna Wicker says it was buried .
 Today is Sunday, August 10, the 222nd day of 2014 . I I DESERTSUN.COM will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Newsquiz . In the U.S. newsquiz, please share your photos of the day's featured news stories .
 French forces under Cardinal Richelieu begin siege of La Rochelle, held by Huguenots . Siege was the first of its kind in France since 17th century .
 Three-quarters of its inhabitants die of starvation during the 15month siege . The siege lasted for 15 months .
 The Swedish warship Vasa capsizes in Stockholm harbor on its maiden voyage . The ship capsizes on its first voyage .
 Truce of Vasvar ends war between Turkey and Holy Roman Empire, whereby rival armies are to withdraw from Transylvania . Turkish and Roman armies will withdraw from the region .
 Lord Ashley's Mine Act prohibits women and children under 10 from working underground in Britain . The act was passed by Lord Ashley in 2010 .
 Leo Daft opens America's first commercially operated electric streetcar in Baltimore . Daft: "America's first commercial electric streetcar, in Baltimore, is now in Baltimore"
 Felix Hoffman first synthesized acetylsalicylic acid, aspirin's active ingredient . Hoffman was a young researcher at German chemical firm Bayer .
 Bulgaria gives up its claim to Macedonia in a peace treaty signed in Bucharest, ending Second Balkan War . Bulgaria was defeated in the war, ending with a victory in a treaty signed by Romania .
 France declares war on Austria-Hungary at the start of World War I 1919 . 1919: Anglo-White Russian forces defeat Soviet forces in North Dvina . France declared war on Germany at the end of the war in 1918 .
 Japan offers to surrender in World War II if Emperor Hirohito is permitted to keep his throne . Japan offers surrender in WWII if Emperor is allowed to keep the throne . Emperor was assassinated in March 1945 .
 Someone surprised the parks department by leaving a mystery piano in Shoreview Park . The mystery piano was found in Shore View Park .
 The piano is not authorized in the , i park and has no weather protection . The piano was not authorized to play in the park .
 Police say thieves have made off with hundreds of ears of com from two farms in Connecticut . Hundreds of ears were stolen from farms in the state of Connecticut .
 Green Acres Farm workers went to pick corn to sell at a market Sunday and discovered that the stalks had been picked clean .
 Another official begged for calm on November 2, saying there was plenty of toilet paper for everyone in the country . Another official said there were plenty of toilets paper for all of us .
 The Japanese are worried about a toilet paper shortage, and the entire country began hoarding as much toilet paper as they could . The nation hoarded toilet paper in Japan .
 By the time the crisis came to an end, most people had stocked up on at least a year s worth pf the stuff .
 They do, as they drink stuff they need, they must get rid of the old stuff so they are new and the vampire stays healthy . As they do, they do . They do .
 Blood is their source of food, and only blood much like the vampire bat . Blood is the source of the bat's food . The bat bat bat is also known as a vampire .
 Vampires are not a species like the vampire bat is but rather a mutation caused by a virus, which is the best explanation I’ve been able to find, which also explains why vampires can’t have children but are able to infect others .
 I do not think that simply being bitten by one is enough to infect you, but you must drink vampiric tainted blood . You must drink tainted blood. You must be bitten by a vampire.
 Some ancient coins were returned to the government of Greece on Monday after the New ork prosecution of a prominent collector from Rhode Island . United States officials returned some ancient coins to Greece .
 The main criticism of this method is that it is too gruesome for the American public . It is not the first time the method has been used in the U.S.
 Only law enforcement, other prisoners and victims will be allowed to witness execution . The execution should be limited to law enforcement and other prisoners, he says .
 For prisoners who do have hope of becoming better citizens, sentences should be reduced for good behavior . The new startup Pigeonly was the subject of an article in the Sunday USA Today .
 Little could have predicted, from those fragile early shoots, that the whole wild continent would be tamed in just a few short centuries . But little could have guessed, from little could they have guessed that they would .
 The tree did outlive all witnesses to its planting as well as generations and generations that followed . The tree has outlived all witnesses and generations of generations .
 By 1763, colonists noted that the tree, dubbed the Endicott pear tree, was already “very old” and showing signs of decay . The tree was dubbed Endicot pear tree by colonists .
 President John Adams is said to have received a special delivery of pears from the tree in 1809 . In 1809, the tree had such notoriety that even John Adams received special pears .
 Such a wonder you may see, For the patriarchal tree Blossoms still, the patriarchal Tree Blossom still, still, says Endicott . Such a great thought, he says. Such a good thought, says the Governor Endicot .
 Through several strong hurricanes and even a vandal attack in the 1960s, the tree never stopped bearing fruit . Through several more strong hurricanes, it has continued to bear fruit .
 The tree's pears have been described as ‘medium in size, unattractive, and coarse textured’ The tree’s shortcomings have been more than made up for by its resilience a legacy .
 The USDA’s National Clonal Germplasm Repository, a seed bank, successfully produced a clone of Endicott's pear tree . The seed bank successfully produced the clone .
 There are few surviving remnants of the earliest days in American history, when European settlers arrived to the wild lands of the New world .
 As their centuries-old headstones have weathered and crumbled with time, it’s reassuring to know that history is rooted by more than human memory .
 Stencilled images of what looks like a panda appear on two billboards in Malta .
 It is not clear why the ""artist"" in question juxtaposed the bears with the Pope .
 The organising committee was alerted yesterday morning and it plans to erase the images . Organisers say they will erase the pictures of the event .
 That is a significant figure, and a message to the Catholic Church . Christian cachia .
 Perth man who didn’t ’mind the gap’ 1 August 6, 2014 Freed l Read later Brail article .
 Passengers push carriage to free a man whose leg was caught in the gap at a Perth train station . The man's leg was trapped in a gap at the Perth station . Train passengers push a train carriage to help free the man .
 Dozens of passengers had to rock a train carriage back and forth to free a man whose leg was caught in the gap at a Perth station . The incident happened at the Perth station on Monday morning .
 Public Transport Authority spokesman David Hynes said the man was boarding the train into the city at Stirling Station on Wednesday morning when he stepped awkwardly, causing him to slip down the gap .
 The gap between the train and platform was less than five centimetres . He said it was an impressive feat because the gap between them was just 5cm .
 Passengers were asked to stand to the other side of the carriage to push the weight away from the man . But it was not enough to free him, Mr Hynes said .
 The man was lifted to safety by other passengers once the gap widened . He warned people to 'mind the gap' and not to stand near the doorways of trains .
 Paramedics treated the man but he was not badly injured and caught a later train . The man was treated by paramedics but was not seriously injured by the incident .
 The Hermitage Museum is located in St. Petersburg, Russia . It is located on Nevsky Prospekt, along the river Neva .
 This is a big house containing old statues, old paintings and old furniture . This is the first time the family has lived in a large house in its history .
 Many European monarchs collected strange and grotesque things, but Peter’s is perhaps the only collection which is still open to the public . Peter's collection is one of Europe's most bizarre collections of bizarre objects .
 He was travelling around Europe, studying ships and engineering, and contemporary Western customs . He also indulged a fascination for the natural world .
 He haunted auction rooms and markets, buying old, once-living things like sea-shells and stuffed animals . He bought sea-hells, stuffed animals and sea-Shells .
 Frederik Ruysch was renowned as the greatest embalmer in Europe . In 1697, in Amsterdam, he visited the workshop of Frederik Rysch, who was renowned for his work .
 St. Peter’s idle curiosity and casual curiosity led him to buy the entire collection . He paid 20,000 gulden and had it transported to St. Petersburg .
 The Kunstkamera is the first public museum in Russia . It became the foundation of the museum he commissioned . It was the first of its kind in Russia.
 Ruysch, who was then 79 years old, immediately set about assembling a new collection of photographs . Ruyshch, then 79, is now the world's leading photographer .
 In 1718 he issued his famous ‘monsters decree’, obliging his subjects to bring 'monsters’ and ‘ugly ones’ from all over the empire to his museum .
 For 10 years, monsters were delivered to the Kunstkamera . Peter’s collection came to include live dwarves and mutated animals as well as dead ones .
 People who, for whatever reason, attempted to conceal their ‘monsters’ were subject to a hefty fine . People who tried to conceal 'monsters' were faced with hefty fines .
 Visitors to the museum could see an eightlegged lamb, a three-legged infant, and a sheep with two mouths and two tongues . Visitors could also see a sheep who has two mouths, two tongues and a lamb with eight legs .
 Foma Ignatiev, a dwarf who lived in the museum, was the most celebrated of all Peter’s freaks .
 In 19th and 20th century carnivals he would have been billed as a lobster boy . The lobster boy was billed as the lobster boy at carnivals .
 For those who wondered why Peter was putting such horrors on display, his stated goal was “to instruct and teach about Nature living and dead and dead .” “Shopping for the inanimate was about to enter a new, darker, much more obsessive level”
 He looked at the corpses of children and saw that they were terribly pretty . He then looked at them and said they were very pretty .
 So he dressed them in lace, placed them in little coffins adorned with beads, flowers and small candles and made them beautiful . He dressed them up in lace .
 He looked at the skeletons of foetuses and thought they would look wonderful mounted in dioramas illustrating allegorical themes . The skeletons would be mounted in a diorama illustrating allegory themes .
 So he took the little bones and stuck them together in morally instructive combinations . The bones were made of morally teachable combinations .
 Ruysch opened his workshop twice a week so the public could marvel at his handiwork . Ruysh opened his work to the public twice a day to marvel at the work .
 St. Peter’s was only one of many famous signatures in the guestbook, but his fascination with what he saw there was profound and intimate .
 He was so affected by the beauty of a dead infant “embalmed so masterfully that it seemed the child was merely sleeping” that this giant of a man could not help but kiss her .
 Legend has it that visitors to the museum were offered a free glass of vodka and a slice of salo (salted pig's fat) as an incentive to come inside and learn .
 There are no live exhibits now, and what survives of Peter’s collection is divided between two rooms . Peter's collection now consists of two rooms in the museum .
 Circular, with multiple exits and entrances, its walls are lined with wooden cabinets which contain (among other things) a stuffed, two-headed lamb and the skeleton of Peter the Great’s giant footman .
 There’s a severed hand made curiously elegant by the addition of a lacy frill, and a child's head with the cap of the skull sawn off . There's also a child’ head made from the skull of a child with the top of its skull sa
 Children peer out through the aged, yellow glass as hordes of curious schoolchildren look down into the twisting coils of its brain .
 Drained of all colour, they float there, pale and soft and squishy, as if in suspended animation, awaiting the day they will be woken . They float there as if they are suspended animation waiting for the next day .
 There is a wide variety of abnormalities for the connoisseur of such things, such as microcephalies with tiny heads to macrocephalics with great, swollen, balloon-skulls .
 There is a child born with his brain outside his skull, and infants whose faces appear to have collapsed in on themselves . Infants have been born with their brains outside their skull and their faces have collapsed .
 There are creatures from mythology also, including a fleshy mermaid, labelled a ‘siren’ and a cyclops .
 The grimacing Siamese twins appear locked in a deadly struggle to wrench themselves free of one another . And then there are the grimacing twins, who appear to be locked in deadly struggle .
 It's impossible not to imagine the grief and terror of the mother when she saw the monster that had come from her womb, or to wonder how she was treated by her community .
 There are more Siamese twins babies joined at the face, at the waist, end to end, scalp to scalp . Siameses twins babies join at the head, waist and end to the scalp .
 There are piles of skulls, elongated skulls, a mummified baby, and etchings of Ruysch’s foetal skeleton dioramas .
 This room is sometimes included in the overall price of the museum ticket . Sometimes charged as an extra, sometimes included as part of the ticket .
 The babies occasionally go on tour around Russia was included in the overall price . On my most recent visit it it was included .
 The nearest metro station to the Anthropological Museum is Gostiny Dvor/Nevsky Prospekt . Even then a mile long walk is inevitable .
 The museum also operates the less than enlightened practice of charging non-Russians a higher rate of entry (approximately $3.00, compared to 75c) Non-Russian visitors can also be charged a higher entry rate of approximately $3,000 .
 The babies occasionally tour Russia and can sometimes be seen in other cities .
 I have stumbled upon them in a tent in Moscow’s All-Russia Exhibition Centre and in a little building near the Kremlin in Kazan, capital of Tatarstan .
 Daniel Humphries continues his tour of St Petersburg's odder museums with a visit to the Zoological Institute .
 Currently based in Moscow, he's working on various projects, among them a book about some of the more bizarre republics .
 Police investigating a reported crash find a wreck and a decomposed body . Two motorists called police report seeing a car veering off the A3 with its headlights blazing at Burpham, near Guildford in Surrey .
 A Vauxhall Astra was found nose-down in a ditch 20 yards from where the car had been reported leaving the southbound lanes of the busy dual carriageway . At first nothing was found, but a more thorough search uncovered a wrecked maroon Astra .
 The lights were off the car’s battery had long since died and the driver’�s body was badly decomposed . The car was driven by a man believed to have been killed in a car crash . The man was found dead in the crash .
 Surrey police say they believed the crash happened five months earlier . Surrey police said they believed it was five months before the crash .
 Christopher Chandler, 21, from Isleworth, was being hunted for an alleged robbery . The driver, who appeared to be trying to escape from the wreck, was identified as Christopher Chandler .
 He had been reported missing by his brother David after last being seen in London on 16 July . He was last seen in the capital city of London in July .
 Monitor lizards or goannas, as they are popularly termed in Australia, are not readily associated with the colour pink, or so herpetologists thought . Herpetologists found that monitor lizards do not associate pink with pink .
 Scholars say Poe looked far more vigorous, perhaps even dashing, in his earlier years than he does in the well-known series of daguerreotypes taken in the final years of his life .
 The portrait is expected to fetch tens of thousands of dollars at auction . It is one of just three surviving portraits of the author . It will be shown publicly for the first time Saturday .
 Poe sits at a desk with pen and paper in hand, seemingly at the height of his creative powers . Poe sat in a chair with a pen, paper and a pen at hand . Poe's work was published in 18th Century England .
 While the portrait has been authenticated, much of its history remains unknown . The details of its creation is a mystery that even Poe's famed detective, C Auguste Dupin, would have trouble unearthing .
 Poe sat for the watercolor in 1843 or 1844 — five or six years before his death . Smith was a miniaturist who worked in Philadelphia and Baltimore, where Poe also lived .
 Smith drew another sketch of Poe around the same time that served as a model for an engraving that was printed in Graham's Magazine in 1845 . Smith drew the sketch in the 1845 issue .
 It is unclear what Poe thought of the finished watercolor — though he was not fond of Smith's sketch .
 In 1844, he wrote to James Russell Lowell, "You inquire about my own portrait. You inquire about your own portrait," he wrote .
 It has been done for some time now — but is better as an engraving, than a portrait . It's better as a portrait, but as a picture, rather than a picture .
 It's unknown who paid the artist, and the painting's whereabouts before 1978 are unknown . The painting is believed to have been commissioned by the artist .
 Krainik bought the portrait from a collector's vast estate in Charlottesville, Va. That's when he bought it from a private estate .
 He knew immediately that it was Poe and paid only a few dollars for it, he said . Poe was the first person to find the body of Poe .
 Krainik plans to sell the Smith portrait at auction, and he's picked an auspicious time . Smith's portrait is expected to be auctioned at auction .
 A rare copy of Poe's first book, ""Tamerlane and Other Poems,"" sold in December for $662,500, a record for American literature . The record-breaking record for a copy of the book sold for a record amount of money in December . Poe's
 The portrait will be unveiled in conjunction with Poe's birthday celebration in Baltimore . It will be auctioned in June at Cowan's Auctions in Cincinnati .
 Tuesday is the 201st anniversary of Poe's birth . The portrait will be on display Saturday and Sunday at Westminster Hall, the former church adjacent to Poe's grave .
 The portrait is expected to sell for at least $30,000 and perhaps more than $50,000 . Krainik claims money is not his goal in unveiling the portrait, but auctioneer says he expects it will sell for $30K .
 Mr Uzuk was puzzled because there hadn’t been any caribou reported in the area for nearly a century . He said he was puzzled as there hadn't been seen for nearly 100 years .
 Dung from caribou herds had been frozen in glacier for thousands of years . Only recently exposed as glacier retreated as it retreated .
 Slovenian archaeologists claim an ancient wheel is the oldest wheel in the world . The wheel was found in a prehistoric marsh settlement near the Slovenian capital of Ljubljana .
 “General consensus’s places the invention of the wheel in Mesopotamia, at least 15,000 years ago . However, “general consensus” places it at least at the time of invention . The wheel is believed to be the oldest wheel wheel in the world
 President Mugabe of Zimbabwe questioned the legitimacy of President Bush's election victory . Speaking at the Non-Aligned Movement summit in Kuaia Lumpur in February without a hint of irony, Mugabe questioned Bush's legitimacy .
 A group of artists in Kazakhstan has come up with a novel way of highlighting potholes on the streets of the country's former capital, Almaty .
 Guerrilla creative house has placed fake legs sticking out of 10 holes around the city . The fake legs give the impression someone has fallen in head-first .
 The aim is to alert pedestrians and also lets drivers see the hole from a distance, the artists told the Tengrinews .
 The artists dressed the legs in brightly-coloured socks to make them more visible .
 They are made of papier-mache, and so can't cause pedestrians many injuries . The papier machees can't be seen by pedestrians, so they are not likely to cause injuries .
 "This should solve the problem after a while,"" a Guerrilla activist said, perhaps optimistically . Guerrilla activists say .
 Artists drew bullseyes around litter bins to help people dispose of rubbish accurately . The artists scored a hit with an earlier campaign, when they drew a bullseye .
 NG Wilson ( Photius , Duckworth, London, 1994, pp54-78) provides a generous English sampling of his books .
 While his Persian History is sober, with the odd weird moment (e.g. man crushed by falling hailstones), his India is non-stop avalanche of amazing stories .
 He wrote just before Greeks went there with and after Alexander the Great . Alexander was Alexander's first king, Alexander's last king .
 Livy himself could sometimes rise above this level, while insisting that what people believe is always important in context; cf. Livy . Livy: "What people believe, always important to context"
 Pliny addressed his Natural History to Prince Titus . FB Krauss, An Interpretation of the Omens , Portents and Prodigies recorded by Livy, Tacitus, and Suetonius Pliny .
 Pliny enjoys lambasting ‘Greek credulity’ regarding werewolves . This ‘lunatic enterprise’ serves up fortean fodder alongside mundane fare .
 Aulus Gellius exemplified the contents of some dilapidated Greek volumes of Mirabilia acquired in Brindisi . Cannibals, dog-faced and one-legged men, hermaphrodites and sex-changes from female to male in modern tabloid spirit .
 His emphasis is on giant bones, human freaks, multiple and monstrous births, and sexual oddities, especially women becoming men .
 Known technically as Paradoxography, it is compared to Ambrose Pare’s Renaissance tract On Monsters and Marvels and to supermarket tabloids . Hansen compares the work to the works of On Monsters .
 The Byzantines had their paradoxographical cake and ate it, perpetuating the pagan material whilst subordinating it to the Christian strain . The Byzantine empire had its paradoxical cake and eat it .
 Gellius, Livy, Obsequens, and Pliny are all translated in the Loeb Classical Library series . Pliny is all translated .
 He was buried a short distance from the grave of a younger man, who, according to tests, probably came from the Bristol Channel region . The younger man was buried in the same place as the younger man .
 The two men shared a rare genetic trait, but one which was probably unknown to them . It is not known why they shared the trait .
 Bones at the top of the instep that are usually unarticulated were found to be articulated in both men, suggesting that there was a family link between them . Bones are found to have been articulated in the both men .
 Amesbury Archer may have been a prehistoric pilgrim to Stonehenge . The two incredibly rich graves have led to suggestions that the archer may have travelled a considerable distance to get to the monument .
 The influence of Stonehenge in antiquity extended far beyond the bounds of central southern England . Whatever the outcome of these latest findings, it is clear that the influence of the site extended beyond its borders .
 More details about the ‘Amesbury Archer’ [see FT163:22] have been revealed by post-excavation analysis . The Archer was discovered in the early 1960s .
 The most plausible hypothesis is that they were made by a giant, alien-looking slug .
 A rock found in central India, bearing tracks of a complex animal, had been radiometrically dated to 1.2 billion years . However, a team reporting in the journal Geology last year announced that a rock bearing tracks was dated 1.3 billion years ago .
 All these fossils just go to show how little we know about life on Earth . Fossils show little of what we have known about life in the past .
 A slab of fossil footprints from Argentina poses an interesting puzzle for palaeontologists . The footprints were found on a slab of footprints in Argentina .
 The footprints, an inch or two across, come in clusters, impressed in what was once wet sand or mud on the margins of ponds and streams . The footprints come from the edges of ponds or streams .
 The three main toes are widely spaced, sometimes with the impressions of narrow claws, and the occasional trace of a “big toe” touching the ground, pointing in the opposite direction to the other digits . The toes are wide-spaced, with the impression of narrow, narrow
 The prints are reminiscent of waders and shore birds paddling along, looking for worms and other food . The prints were similar to those of the waders who were paddling in the water .
 While the prints look very like those of birds, there are no signs of holes made by beaks probing for worms . There are other features that seem unbirdlike, such as other features .
 These long, ribbon-like impressions can extend for several feet and have a fairly consistent width of an inch or two . The impressions are made of ribbons that have a consistent width .
 Today is the seventh of July according to the Chinese lunar calendar, it’s a special day for single women and couples alike .
 Qixi celebrates the love, loyalty and commitment between lovers, as well as every single lady’s right to wish for her own Prince Charming to enter her life . Literally meaning ‘The Night of Sevens’, the show celebrates love and loyalty between lovers .
 Qixi has become known as Chinese Valentine’s Day, but it is by no means the exact equivalent of the Western day of romance . In recent years, it has been known as 'Chinese Valentine's Day'
 As you may already have guessed, the couple are realty just personifications of two stars that lie on either side of the Milky Way . The couple are just people who are just realty personifications .
 For observers in the northern hemisphere, face south and took up right above your head around 10m local time . Face south and face south .
 The Milky Way should appear as a glowing band scorching the sky from north to south . It should be visible from north-to-south from the time of year .
 Look for a bright bluewhite star to the west of and above the Milky Way . This is Zhinti Xing (£K'ic M, the Weaving-girl Star), the wife of the love story of the Xing .
 The Queen Mother of Heaven wangmu niangniang is furious to discover this forbidden celestial-mortal love and separates them on either side of the river . They swiftly get hitched and have two children on earth .
 If you happen to see a meteor shoot across the Milky Way tonight, it is said to be a lantern held by one of the couple as they cross the bridge to meet the other .
 Niulang Xing’s left and right are two slightly dimmer stars, representing two children . The couple's two children were born in China in 2011 .
 In modem astronomy, Zhinti Xing is known as Vega, the brightest star of the constellation Lyra . Vega is brightest star in the constellation of Lyra and is the brightest in the world .
 Vega is the second-brightest star of the northern celestial sphere, after Arcturus . Vega should be feirty easy to spot in the Northern Hemisphere .
 Niulang Xing is known as Alpha Altair, the brightest star in the constellation Aquila . The star is the brightest in Aquila and is the second brightest in the world .
 The supposed children of Niulang and Zhinii are Beta Altair and Gamma Altair . They are supposed to be the children of the two Altair brothers .
 The truth about Zhinii and Niulang is nothing like the Qixi legend . Take a took at the picture and see if you can find the triangle for yourself .
 The two stars are approximately 16. light years away from each other and show no signs of getting closer . The stars are currently 16.5 light years apart .
 Traditional Chinese astronomy operates under an entirely different system of stars and constellations than that recognized by the International Astronomical Union .
 As tong as 4,300 years ago, an astronomical officer was already regarded as an important position in a tribe . The position was already an important role in an important tribe .
 His duty was to observe and record the movements of celestial objects, and formulate a calendar to guide the daily lives of his people, especially their agricultural activities . He was born in China .
 The sky was divided into 3 1 regions, each consisting of a group of stars . As early as the Shang Dynasty (2070 B.C. 1600 B.A.C.), the sky was split into three 1 regions .
 The Three Enclosures formed the centerpiece of the northern night sky, and can be observed all year around . The Three enclosures are located in the Northern Hemisphere .
 Ancient Chinese thought of them as the residence and work place of the Jade Emperor and his ministers, as well as the busy downtown streets they governed . Surrounding these central three regions are the remaining 28 star clusters known as the TwentyEight Mansions .
 They were forther divided into four groups of seven, one for each of the four cardinal directions . The cardinal directions were divided into groups with seven cardinal directions each of them .
 The Four Symbols were used by ancient Chinese to represent the four main points of the compass . Collectively, they are known as the Four Symbol . They were used to symbolize the compass compass .
 Niulang Xing and Zhinii Xing are important stars in officials record, too . Besides the folk story, they are important figures in official records .
 Both belong to the region of the Black Tortoise, though they appeared under different names . Both were found in the same region, but they are believed to have been the same .
 Together with the two nearby stars, they were thought to be the ■ v drums used by the heavenly troops as they rested by a river . Together with two other stars, it was thought to have been the drums used to play with the heavenly forces .
 A 45-year-old man was found murdered in central Delhi on Saturday morning . He was found dead in the early hours of Saturday .
 The incident took place near a park in Jhandewalan, close to the Videocon Towers . The incident was reported to have taken place in the area .
 The body has been sent to Lady Hardinge Hospital mortuaiy where it will be preserved for identification . The body is being preserved in hospital mortuary for identification purposes .
 "We are questioning some locals and eunuchs for leads,"" said a police officer .
 Shackleton could not cheat that he was really using esp and not arithmetic to score his ‘hits’ Soal should have made sure that, at any point in the sequence, the chance of any one of the card symbols being next in line was the same as that of
 The mathematical definition demands that vou use a mechanical method, independent of human bias . The definition of the definition of this definition is that it is not based on human bias, but it is based on a mechanical basis .
 The easiest way to play is to throw a die repeatedly and record the number on the uppermost face each time . The number is recorded on the face of the die and the number is on the top of the face .
 This is a slow and laborious method and, besides, a die has only six sides . But this is a laborious way, and it's not the only method .
 In laboratory experiments standard lists of random numbers, generated on computers by a variety of methods, are often used . ernih selects Premium Bond numbers by translating the haphazard motion of electrons in a diode into random numbers .
 Logarithmic tables were used to obtain ‘pseudo-random’ sequences . In the days before it was possible to use computers to generate long sequences of random numbers, logarithms were used .
 On one of his first visits to Seattle, my roommate and I decided to visit the grave of Jimi Hendrix . The grave is located in Seattle .
 As we drove toward the cemetery, we turned the radio to an oldies station and ‘Purple Haze’ blared through our one good speaker as we cruised .
 The majority of the graves are of the flat marble variety, impossible to read as we drove slowly around . The majority were of the marble variety .
 We had no idea where Jimi's grave was, but we noticed that each time we drove past a certain spot, the radio went dead . We noticed each time they drove past the grave, the phone went dead.
 Jimi’s grave was found a short distance away from his grave . Jimi's grave is located on the edge of a road in the city .
 There were no nearby wires or anything that would have interrupted the radio signal . No nearby wires were used to transmit the radio signals .
 Rhias K Hall recalls an oddly creepy story that happened to him in San Francisco in 1995 .
 My wife and I, along with our five-year-old son and our new baby, shared a single bedroom and loft near the beach . We shared a one-bedroom and loft in a single room and loft .
 The author's wife was cooking dinner at the time of her death . She was shocked to discover her husband's wife had been murdered .
 As I passed the bedroom, I noticed a new addition to my wife’s collection of stuffed animals .
 A large, at least three foot tall Raggedy Ann doll sat on the bed, facing the bedroom entrance . The doll was a three-foot tall, three-inch tall tall doll .
 After a moment or two, I asked where she had gotten the new Raggedy Ann doll . She said yes, yes .
 I repeated myself, but she still didn't understand, so I dragged her to the bedroom doorway to show her the doll . She still didn’t understand .
 Less than five minutes earlier, a rather large Raggedy Ann doll had been there, and no one could have moved it, as they would have had to walk past me .
 "The more I thought about what had happened, the more freaky the whole scenario seemed," she said . The more she thought about it, she said, "The most freaky thing was that the whole thing seemed."
 The doll had been looking right at me, with those big, black, empty Raggedy Ann button eyes, and smiling in the way for which that type of doll is famous . The doll's eyes were empty, empty and smiling, and the doll was looking at me .
 Raggedy Ann dolls have a distinctive look, and are not easily mistaken for another doll . The dolls are sold in the U.S.
 I have never been able to look at Raggedy Ann (or Andy) in quite the same way since then . I've never looked back at the character again since then, and I'm not sure what happened to Andy .
 Three times a week, I would commute back to the U.S. using United States 35 . I used to commute back and forth using the phone .
 Just east of there, on the south side of the road, were the remains of an old farm . The remains of the old farm were found in the area .
 Five or six trees were still standing on the lot, so I could tell where the house had been . However, because the trees are still standing, I could see where the home had been.
 "Because of my interest in buildings, I was curious about the house that had been there," she says . "I wanted to learn more about the history of the house," she adds .
 The next spring, I was taking a trip to Columbus, Ohio, and decided to go that route even though it was longer, because I needed to pick up a transcript from Ball State on the way . The next year, I decided to take the longer route to Columbus and go to
 As it worked out, I was travelling through Economy about 8:30 that night that night . I was flying through Economy at 8:45pm .
 As I passed the farm, I was excited to see that someone had built a house on the lot where the old house had been . The house is now a house .
 The windows were lit up, although the curtains were drawn so I couldn’t see inside . The curtains were pulled out of the windows, but I couldn't see inside. It was the first time I had seen the windows lit up .
 It was very simple a basic rectangular shape, front door in the middle, two windows on either side, five windows along the second floor, very close to what I would have assumed to be there originally . It was a very simple rectangular shape .
 As I was running late, I continued on and didn’t think much more about it . I continued to run the route .
 On Sunday afternoon, I was returning home the same way and was glad that it was daytime so that I would be able to see more of the house . It was also the first time I had seen the farm in daylight .
 As I got closer, I realised that there was no house on the lot; just the barn and the trees . However, as I got . closer to the lot, I noticed that there were no . houses on the . lot .
 I’m very sure I wasn’t dreaming or imagining the house as I had just stopped to put my top up (not an automatic one, I had to get out and physically put it up) and was wide-awake .
 Toxicology tests show Cotton had 10. nanograms of LSD per milliliter of blood in his system . Cotton was 10 times what is considered potentially toxic and twice what's considered potentially fatal, coroner says . Cotton died in Humboldt County, California .
 The official cause of Cotton's death will be determined by Ken Falconer, the doctor who performed Cotton's autopsy . It will probably be released next week, Jager says .
 "I've never seen someone overdose on LSD, so this is pretty unusual, if that's what it is," Jager says .
 LSD is rare in Humboldt County, and overdoses are exceptionally rare anywhere, experts say . Humbumbumbt County officials say overdoses are extremely rare anywhere .
 Cotton died in custody just hours after being involved in several altercations in front of the Eureka Rescue Mission, including one with police officers . Cotton was arrested in custody hours after the incident . Cotton died from a self-inflicted gunshot wound to death .
 Cotton was agitated and combative from the moment he arrived at the mission, according to many accounts . Cotton is known for his combative ways of dealing with the Taliban .
 The Eureka Police Department was criticized by some for not taking Cotton directly to the hospital after the altercation . Cotton was taken to a local hospital, but Cotton was not taken directly to a hospital .
 Some have also alleged that officers on the scene used excessive force . Some have accused police of using excessive force during the incident .
 Toxicology report reaffirms police chief's view that officers acted appropriately . Eureka Police Chief Garr Nielsen says Cotton's death was tragic, but police say officers acted properly .
 Legend has it that one of Robin Hood's many exploits involved evading capture by the Sheriff of Nottingham by escaping through an underground tunnel . The tunnel led from Saint Mary's church in Nottingham to a prison which stood on the site of the city's Galleries of Justice .
 Archaeologists have found evidence that there may be something to the tale . Archaeologists say the discovery of the remains of the Bronze Age is a mystery .
 A survey of the Galleries of Justice and cave system that lies underneath the city discovered a previously unknown tunnel . Archaeologists accidentally broke through a rotten wooden floor when they broke through the floor .
 The tunnel led all the way to Saint Mary's church as suggested in the Robin Hood legend . The tunnel is believed to have led to the church of Saint Mary .
 Their hair color is caused by a mutation in the skin’s melanocortin-1 receptor gene . The gene may ""inadvertently activate” similar receptors in the brain that process anxiety and pain, experts say .
 Redheads required 19 percent more gas for general anesthesia, researchers found . Redheads require more gas than other redheads for general anaesthetic .
 They're also more sensitive to thermal pain and more resistant to local anesthesia . They’re also more susceptible to local anaesthetic .
 In the paranoid environment of the Cold War, anything seemed possible . In the incredibly overheated, paranoid environment, anything was possible .
 Senator Joe McCarthy saw Communists hiding in every broom closet . The Federal Bureau of Investigation launched COINTELPRO, a series of covert actions spying on and disrupting political organizations, including civil rights leaders and Vietnam war protesters .
 FBI spent several years quietly looking for the bomb . FBI received a flimsy tip from an unnamed informant in Brazil . FBI spent years looking for bomb in Brazil, Brazil .
 It's a treasure trove of government materials, some dull, some hilarious, and some just plain weird . The government materials are a collection of government material .
 A redacted version of the document was declassified and released to the public in 2010 . The document was released in 2010 and declassified in 2012 .
 In the summer of 1950, an FBI informant whose name we still don't know arrived in Brazil . The FBI informant's name is still unknown .
 The informant received the tip, which he relayed to the agency . While he was there, the informant received a tip from the informant .
 The bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki by the United States are the only time a nuclear attack has actually been carried out . The U.S. bombed the two cities in 1945 .
 The U.S. government was understandably preoccupied that such a thing could happen here . But the United States government was preoccupied with the possibility it could happen in the U.K.
 The tip from the Brazil-based informant set off a mad hunt through the city . The tip led to a mad search through the streets .
 The Soviet Mission to the United Nations sat in a stately home on Park Avenue until 1965 . The Hungarian Consulate, the Polish Consulate and the Czechoslovakian U.N. Delegation were all clustered along East 67th Street .
 The Amtorg Trading Corporation was set up in the '20s to bolster trade between the U.S. and the USSR . It may have been stealing trade secrets from American companies . The company may have stolen trade secrets .
 Tass, a Soviet news agency with an office at Rockefeller Plaza, had also been infiltrated by informants . The Soviet Mission's diplomatic retreat on Long Island, a country estate called Killenworth, was also infiltrated .
 The FBI began asking informants at each of these places whether they'd seen anything that looked like atomic-bombmaking materials . The FBI then began asking their informants whether they had seen anything resembling atomic bombmaking material .
 None of them had seen anything of the sort, except for the person at the Hungarian Consulate, who wasn't entirely sure . None of the people at the Consulate said they'd seen anything .
 They also asked the Atomic Energy Commission to let them know what a disassembled atomic bomb might look like .
 The FBI learned that the Polish Consulate had recently ordered some armor-plated cabinets . From the start, the FBI wasn't sure whether the tip from the Brazilian informant was real or just a Communist plot .
 The information may be true, in which case we have a major security menace on our hands, or the information is false . Or the information may not be true .
 The possibility exists of it having been disseminated from a Communist source for the purpose of producing panic . In the latter case it could be disseminated in order to produce panic .
 It is even possible, if the information is false, that it was disseminated in the hope of finding out what we would do in such a situation . It is possible that the information may have been disseminated to find out what the government would do if it is true .
 Soviet submarines were supposedly going to covertly drop the bombs off in a bay off the west coast of Mexico . The bombs were supposed to be dropped by Soviet submarines off the coast .
 70 Marrd Drive is located in Wim-lioter. H>W>W >W>A Request Rec Rec<mV)ntnrmaii<m Diewmination Section 1 . H>V.H>W <mV.N.R.R:
 His focus is less on fighting crime than on making the city a better place by feeding the homeless and doing other good deeds . He says he wants to feed the homeless, feed them and make them a better city .
 He's holding a recruitment drive Saturday at Capes Kafe, a Des Moines comic book shop . He says he's holding recruitment drive at the shop .
 Larry Crane is the Red Shadow . He wears a red mask, black motocross gear and a cape while doing his work . Crane is 18-year-old Larry Crane, who wears a black mask and a black cape .
 Crane agreed to reveal his identity and meet for an interview on the porch of his Des Moines home . Crane said he would reveal the identity of the man he spoke to .
 Like Superman Crane dons a pair of glasses while in his civilian identity . Crane wears the glasses when he is in civilian mode . Crane is a former spy for the CIA . Crane was born in New York City .
 P ‘’ Crane said he mostly gets weird looks from people driving by, along with occasional honks and waves . Crane said when he first visits an area he hopes to help, it isn't in costume . Crane: "When I first visit an area I hope to help
 Crane reached out to the group's founder — a man calling himself Mr . treme . He started safety patrols, homeless outreach and public safety services in San Diego . Crane says he started the Xtreme Justice League with a homeless man .
 The group has more than 25 members, with names like Blue Buzzard, Crimson Crow and Shadowstar .
 Larry Crane aka the Red Shadow Mr Xtreme responded to questions from The Register about Crane's efforts . Crane responded to the questions through an email listed on the Facebook page of the Justice League Facebook page .
 Jason Halifax said he hasn't heard of the Red Shadow . Crane's actions aren't breaking any laws, but what he does isn't breaking no laws .
 You need to be really clear with yourself what may or may not happen if you take these roles on. You must be clear of what may happen to you if you are taking these roles .
 You also open yourself up to litigation if you use force, as well as injury . You can't use force in order to prevent injury or injury, it's a mistake .
 Crane carries a stun gun and pepper spray, but stressed they're only for self-defense . Crane: "I'm not going to be afraid. I'm not scared. I want to be scared," Crane said .
 He has called police to report gunshots and fights, but has not made any physical interventions himself . He has not been involved in any of the incidents .
 With the formation of Des Moines' Extreme Justice League, Crane said he isn't looking for a posse to back him in battles . Crane: "Extreme Justice League" is a team that's formed in Des Moines, Iowa .
 The plan is to conduct safety patrols around the city, similar to a neighborhood watch group . The plan to conduct patrols is similar to the city's neighborhood patrols .
 The costumes serve as a visible deterrent to crime . XJL members would call police to report any suspicious activity . The costumes would be a deterrent to crimes .
 Crane doesn't expect potential superheroes to show up with costumes and fully formed personas . Crane says he's not expecting them to come up with fully-formed personas and costumes . Crane: "I don't expect superheroes to come out with costumes"
 "The more people that join up will find it to be a fulfilling thing in its own way," he says . The more people who join up "will find it a fulfilling way," the author says .
 "Even if we can't save the world, we could save someone's day or their life," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "We could save a day or a life"
 East Delhi, India, is home to the largest city in the world . The city has been home to more than 1,000 people a year .
 In May, just such a creature was repeatedly spotted, instilling terror and claiming two lives . The creature was spotted repeatedly in May .
 The craze got to a point where vigilante groups armed with sticks patrolled the streets at night on the lookout for the creature . Police announced a 50,000 rupee reward for information leading to its capture .
 Reports of the "Monkey Man,"" as the press baptized it, first reached the local police office on May 13, 2001 .
 The masked man appeared in the village of Ghaziabad around 8:30m. and had remained there till 4:00m. According to one report, the masked man had appeared in a village around 8.30m., terrorizing the residents . According to the reports, the
 Vineet Sharma, grandson of the first victim, said that that night, when he and his brother were sleeping with their grandmother, a masked man had entered the veranda and attacked the old lady and pushed her . Vineet said that the masked man then pushed her to the ground .
 The assailant went into a neighbor's house and injured a child, then disappeared in the dark lane before villagers could be aroused . The assailant then went into the neighbor's home and injured the child, before disappearing .
 Dozens of individuals in a number of areas in East Delhi claimed to have been hurt in subsequent attacks . Pictures of scratched victims started to appear in daily newspapers after first blitz .
 Some said it wore a skin-tight costume, while others said it was a bandaged figure with a helmet . Some said the figure was a skin tight costume .
 Two people died because of this creature- or at least because of the panic created . What’s certain, however, is the fact that two people died due to this creature .
 Pregnant woman in East Delhi fell down some stairs after being awakened by neighbors saying that the Monkey Man had arrived . Neighbors said that the monkey man had arrived in Delhi .
 She died in a hospital, as did another unfortunate soul, who died in similar circumstances . She was found dead in hospital .
 During the past century there have been tales of strange creatures or men with properties similar to this Monkey Man, such as the ability to suddenly disappear in front of witnesses .
 The Spring-Heeled Jack as depicted by one of Victorian London's so called 'penny dreadful' newspapers .
 First reports of a strange leaping figure sighted in London date back to 1837 . Some descriptions tell of a half-man half-bat, complete with wings and horns . Jumping Jack Flash is said to have been sighted around London in the early 1800s .
 Others refer to a powerfully built man in a shiny suit with a helmet and cloak, spitting fire . Others say he is a powerful, powerful man in shiny suit and cloak .
 Anonymous citizen writes to Lord Mayor Sir John Cowan about attack by mysterious "Spring-Heeled Jack" Anonymous letter was written by anonymous citizen .
 Cowan's acceptance of rumors led to a flood of letters from individuals reporting their own previous encounters with Jack . Cowan drew public attention to the letter and his acceptance of the rumors led .
 Young Jane Aslop told the press that one evening she answered a violent knocking at her front door . Jane told the media that she had been attacked by a violent man .
 Jane fetched a candle and hurried it out to the gate but nobody could be seen . She fetched the candle out and rushed it out but nobody was seen .
 Two arms grabbed her neck and began to rip up her dress and body . Suddenly, two arms began to grab her neck . She was attacked by the arms of two men .
 It was only thanks to the arrival of Jane's sisters, alarmed by the struggle, that she was able to break free wearing only a few scars on her neck and arms . Jane's sister, Jane's mother and sister were able to save her daughter's life .
 Lucy Scales was returning home with her sister . Two months later, another girl, Lucy, returned home with sister . Lucy was returning with sister, Lucy .
 As they entered a dark, empty alley, a tall, cloaked figure leaped from the shadows, belched blue flames into Lucy's face, blinding her, and then disappeared again . Lucy was blinded by the light of the flames .
 In the 1850s and 1860s he was spotted all over England . Spring-Heeled Jack was a popular attraction all over the country .
 The few times when he was cornered he was able to escape thanks to one of his fabulous leaps . He was often cornered when cornered thanks to a few of his leaps .
 In both cases a mysterious character, half-man and half-something else, attacks defenseless people unprovoked and then disappears in an impossible way .
 No traces of his passage can ever be found but there are many who claim to have seen it, or at least have felt its presence .
 Two people jumped off a roof after feeling that the attacker was pursuing them . It is only on the basis of a feeling that they were pursuing them that two people jumped .
 Statements from the victims change overnight and are vague and often contradictory, often contradictory . Victims' statements often change overnight, often vague and contradictory .
 Jack sightings of Jack Jack continue to occur . Jack sightings have been reported in the past .
 Dark and foggy alleys in Victorian London yesterday, degraded neighborhoods with unrepaired street lights and scarce drinkable water in New Delhi today-something unusual happens .
 It is possible that some street assaults actually took place, since there have always been similar assaults anywhere in the world . But it was only following an anonymous letter that the culprit was identified as Spring-Heeled Jack .
 In New Delhi, it may be that some aggressive, roaming monkey got too close to some people sleeping and scared some child . The monkey may have scared some sleeping people in New Delhi .
 In Victorian London the imaginary exploits of Spring-Heeled Jack were soon forgotten and replaced in popular culture by the real and horrible ones of another Jack, the Ripper . The Ripper was a notorious serial killer who committed the murders in 1888 and 1888 .
 In New Delhi, panic resulted in street lights being turned on, plentiful buckets of water being distributed, and better police-guarded streets . In Delhi, street lights were turned on and water was distributed . The panic was followed by a wave of panic in New Delhi .
 Hindustan Times, Mainichi Shimbun, 2 May 2001; Daily Pioneer, 16 and 20 May 2001 . Times of India, 17 May 2001, 19 May 2001. Times of Japan .
 Massimo Polidoro is an investigator of the paranormal, author and lecturer . He is co-founder and head of CICAP the Italian skeptics group . Massimo is a lecturer, investigator and author .
 Tony Williams found the knife among the possessions of his distant relative Sir John Williams . Sir John was a chief suspect in the murders of the victims . The knife was found in his relative's possessions .
 Sir John was working as a surgeon to Queen Victoria at the time, but left London soon after the slayings . He was working for the Queen Victoria when he was assassinated .
 Tony, Sir John's great-great-great great nephew, has now written a book to explain his theory . Tony, Tony, has written the book about his theory, which he believes is true .
 Tony believes the blade he discovered also fits the description of the one used in the attacks . Sir John Williams is a distant relative of the late Sir John and his wife, who died in 2003 .
 Sir John moved to Aberystwyth after the murders, and later founded the National Library for Wales . Sir John later moved to Wales and founded the library .
 Tony discovered the knife after stumbling across an archive of Sir John's belongings . Tony found the knife in the archive of his late father's possessions . The knife was found by Tony in an archive found by Sir John in his home .
 River in China mysteriously turns bloody red overnight . River in eastern China mysteriously turned blood red .
 The really weird thing is that we have been able to catch fish because the water is normally so clear,” one villager commented on China’s microblogging site Weibo .
 Inspectors from the Wenzhou Environmental Protection Bureau said they have not found the cause of the incident . Water samples seem to indicate the suspicious color was a result of illegal dumping in the river .
 Xiao said there is a paper manufacturer, a food coloring company and clothing-maker a long the river . Xiao said the river is also home to a paper maker, food coloring and clothing makers .
 Roanoke was located in the crux of sociopolitical friction between the Secotan and Chowanoke . The Secotans and Chowans controlled the nearby waterways .
 Tensions were especially high between the colonists and the Secotan tribe . Tensions between colonists and Secotans were high .
 There was fighting between tribes and the English settlers . Some of the native peoples and some of the settlers were killed .
 It didn't help that the English attempted to explore the area multiple times . The English explorer attempted to visit the area several times .
 The group that arrived prior to the lost colonists were driven back to England . Some sour feelings remained when the ill-fated third group showed up .
 Secotan tribes are known to be wary of what they see as interlopers . Whether groups of Secotans banded together to rid themselves is anyone's guess, he says .
 The area does seem to hold clues to contact between local tribes and European colonists in the 16th and 1 7th centuries .
 Remote-sensing techniques have unearthed clues to the fate of settlers who mysteriously disappeared . Remote sensing techniques have uncovered clues to settlers' fate in remote areas .
 Theories about the disappearance have ranged from an annihilating disease to a violent rampage by local Native American tribes . Theories have range from a disease to an attack by local tribesmen .
 Previous digs have turned up some information and artifacts from the original colonists but very little about what happened to them . Previous digs turned up artifacts and artifacts but little about the colonists .
 The lost colonists were the third group of English arrivals on North Carolina’s Roanoke Island, settling near the modem-day town of Manteo .
 The first group to arrive, in 1584, came to explore and map the land for future groups . First group of explorers came to the area to map and map it for future generations .
 A second group, which arrived in 1585, was charged with a military and scientific mission . The second group arrived in the 1580s and 1585s, charged with their military, scientific missions .
 Second group was driven out in 1586 by local tribes angry that the colonists were taking up good land and resources .
 Entire families came with children — 17 women and 1 1 children accompanied a party of 90 men . 17 women were accompanied by 17 children and 1 children .
 The group wanted to settle in the New World and was not a military excursion, which would have included only male explorers . That would have been a military expedition, not an excursion .
 A clue uncovered in a long-forgotten, centuries-old map of the area called ""La Virginea Pars"" — drawn by the colony's governor John White — kicked off a reexamination of the fate of the lost colonists .
 White was an artist and employee of explorer Sir Walter Raleigh . He was later appointed governor of the new lands . Virginia Dare was the grandfather of Virginia Dare, the first English child born in the New World .
 Two patches on the map made Brent Lane of the First Colony Foundation wonder if they might hide something beneath . The group is a National Geographic grantee and a group behind the trip .
 Scientists at the British Museum looked into the patches and discovered a tiny red-and-blue symbol . The symbol was discovered by scientists at the museum in London .
 The research team thinks that when the crisis — whatever that may have been — hit, the colonists split up into smaller groups and dispersed . Researchers think the colonists may have dispersed after the crisis hit .
 The prevailing theory has been that the colonists abandoned Roanoke and traveled 50 miles south to Hatteras Island . It was then known as Croatoan Island .
 Archaeologists have identified the nearby site of a small Native American town named Mettaquem, which may have adopted some of the colonists . Archaeologists also identified the site of the town of Mettaqem .
 Klingelhofer, along with the First Colony Foundation, proposed a return trip to the area . The map's secret was revealed after it was revealed .
 The process began earlier this year with a satellite survey of the site . The site is expected to be used for the first time in 20 years .
 Researchers look for similarities between the old maps and the current geography of the area . Researchers look to find similarities between old maps to current geography .
 Mapmakers lay out a grid and systematically search it with their GPRs . Once they identify where the spots on the map correspond with today's landscape, they search for them .
 The technology emits radio waves into the ground and measures the echo as the signal bounces off of various things buried underground . The technology can be used to send signals from underground sources .
 It measures the depth that signals travel before hitting something that causes a measurable bounce back . The bounce back is measured by the depth of the impact of a hit .
 In other words, signals potentially indicate a hidden object underground . Signals could indicate an object that could be underground .
 Graves and coffins are also detectable, because they contain voids with different densities and poorer conductive properties than the surrounding soil . Graves also detectable because of their denser densities .
 LeCompte and his colleagues found a previously undetected pattern that may indicate the presence of one or more structures, possibly made of wood, under about three feet of soil . The pattern suggests that one of the structures may be made out of wood .
 Perhaps the wood of the structures collapsed over time, leaving impressions in the surrounding soil . LeCompte speculated that the wood may have collapsed .
 The device can spot objects buried about 13 feet underground . Much more sensitive than a metal detector, the device can detect objects buried 13 feet deep .
 Hie device measures distortions of the Earth's magnetic field due to the presence of various objects buried underground . The device was created by the University of California in 2007 .
 Swindell thinks there may also be remains of palisades that would have been used by farmers to keep wild animals away from crops .
 The presence of the buried structure and the fence strongly indicate that there was some sort of colonial presence in the area . It is believed that the fence and buried structure indicate there was a colonial presence there .
 Later colonial sites were found in the area through the 1700s . What complicates the story further is the presence of later colonial sites .
 Neither piece of technology has shed light on the role of Native American populations in the area . Unfortunately, neither piece of tech has shed .
 Relations with the local Native Americans were mixed in the days of the Roanoke Colony .
 D3 Roxy’s ‘Poe’ captures minds, hearts of students . Play being staged for 2 shows only on Halloween .
 “‘Poe Unearthed’ is 99. percent pure Poe,” said TnLn A/f/->nnmW OT+ictrr> rlivv licit uuoy ci ju »i sc;c;ii.
 The show that students raved about is being staged for the public for two shows only, 2 and 8 m.m. on Halloween, of course .
 Teachers often send out e-mails to teachers asking what the Roxy can do to help further education of their students, McDonald says . McDonald and Thayer, managing director of Roxy, often send e-mail to teachers .
 The play is being staged for the public for two shows only, 2 and 8m. on Halloween . The play will be staged in London for the first time on October 2 .
 This past summer McDonald and a crew of volunteer interns workshopped the play . Thad Wallus “added his expertise to this,” McDonald said .
 Northwest student DeSean Saine says the end result "was really awesome" Northwest students say the project was "really awesome"
 “They didn’t have to do this, but it made better,” said Diana Roberts-Santiago . “It made better. They didn't have to . do this. It made better," she said .
 All agree that the most riveting scene in ‘The Tell-Tale Heart’ is when the murderer (Jay Doolittle) goes berserk and confesses his sin . The film is set in New York City, New York .
 McDonald is pleased that his adaptation of Poe’s writing has inspired these students . McDonald hopes to inspire some adults this Halloween .
 The Queen Mother's death attracted a huge amount of media coverage, but only GARRICK ALDER was prepared to delve into some of the odder corners of her life .
 Growing up in a stately pile like Glamis Castle, haunted by no less than nine ghosts, the Queen Mother came from a lineage that, in time-honoured fashion, had a skeleton in the closet .
 Charlotte, the wife of Thomas Lord Glamis, gave birth to a child that was recorded as “born and died” on the same day . Charlotte was born on 21 October 1821 .
 The child survived, but was so deformed that he could never inherit the title and estates . The child was deformed enough to never inherit his estates . He survived but was never able to inherit his title or estates .
 He was confined to a secret room, 10 ft by 15 ft in the ly thick castle walls . However, he had been baptised as a Christian and so was not surreptitiously disposed of .
 He was unseen anyone other than a trusty keeper fed him through an iron grille . His chest an enormous barrel, hairy as a his head straight into his shoul ders and his arms and legs toy-like; became a source of family dread, defying expectations .
 In the 1870s, a workman at Glamis came upon “a door opening a long passage,” and was “alarmed” by what he found there . The discovery of the door was made in the 18th century .
 He told the Clerk of Works, who immediately cancelled the repairs, and informed the 13th Earl (the Queen Mother’s grandfather) and the family lawyer . The Queen Mother's grandfather, the Queen Mother, is the Queen's grandfather .
 The Abdication of King Edward VIII in 1936 propelled his reluctant younger brother, Albert, Duke of York, onto the English throne . As we know, Edward VIII was forced to step down from the throne .
 Lilian Bailey conducted a seance to establish contact with the dead King . The seance was conducted by the noted medium at Clarence House .
 What King George’s spirit had to say remains unknown, but in life of otherwise orthodox Christianity it must have been a pressing problem that drove the Queen Mother to such unorthodox methods .
 The stresses of such a high-profile life and the responsibility of acting as figurehead and father of the nation during the dark days of World War II had increased the King's addiction to cigarettes .
 This feud touches on the second, non-paranormal but still fortean, aspect of the Queen Mother’s life . Her role in the parapolitical life of Britain is almost second to none .
 The Duke and Duchess of Windsor claimed they were the victims of persecution emanating from Buckingham Palace . They were driven by the implacable hatred of the Queen Mother .
 The Earl and Countess of Dudley's country home was burgled in 1946 . It was the country home of the Earl, Countess and Earl and Earl of Dudley .
 The Duke and Duchess of Windsor were houseguests at the time, and the intruders made off with the contents of the Duchess’s jewel case . The emeralds were left to the Duke by his grandmother, Queen Alexandra, on condition that they should be worn by his
 The Windsors were sure that the jewels had “been stolen by the British Secret Service, acting on the orders of the King and Queen,” they said . The jewels were believed to have been stolen in order that the Royal Family might regain possession of the disputed emeralds
 YCTiile no proof of intelligence involvement has ever emerged, but one may feel that an ex-King’s suspicions of just how far a Royal order for direct action might go are not simply wild fantasies .
 Adolf Hitler christened her “the most dangerous woman in Europe” — and he should have known she was dangerous . Adolf Hitler called her ‘most dangerous’ and “most dangerous woman” in Europe .
 Sir Walter Monckton was a close friend of both the Queen Mother and the Duke of Windsor . He was head of Churchill's private intelligence taskforce during World War II .
 Speculation was that the missing items had been suppressed because of strongly-worded disapproval of the Duchess of Windsor . Speculation among historians was that they had suppressed them because of her disapproval .
 The Queen Mother’s desire for the preservation of the monarchy in the event of a Nazi occupation, according to a senior government figure . But the Queen Mother's desire to preserve the monarchy was not mentioned .
 How these papers were ‘weeded’ for such incriminating evidence of Royal quislingism remains a mystery . The obvious conclusion is that it was carried out by MI5 or MI6 at the behest of the Palace .
 Peter Wright’s Spycatcher refers to a mysterious assignment undertaken by Anthony Blunt on behalf of the Palace, possibly to recover minutes of the meeting between Edward VIII and Hitler on 22 October 1937 .
 In 1998 Princess Margaret persuaded the Queen Mother to bum several refuse sacks full of decades worth of correspondence — to the understandable horror of historians . Some Royal insights are not for public consumption, says historian .
 Andrew Roberts, 'Sitting on secrets for a daft amount of time', Sunday Times, 31 Jan 1999 . Andrew Roberts: 'I'm sitting on secrets. I'm not sure what I'm doing'
 The death toll from the latest attack in Russia has reached 30 . A number of towns from Chelyabinsk in central Russia have suffered from the attack .
 He was struck by the manner of the killings ripping the sheep’s back tendons to cut their arteries and suck out their blood a trademark of the legendary Chupacabra, a blood-sucking carnivore rumored to inhabit North America .
 Most of the rest Velikodnev had to relieve of their suffering with his own hands after calling the authorities . Most of them had to call the authorities to relieve their suffering .
 The head of local administration, Svetlana Telnova, dismissed some of the wilder speculation . She said stray dogs were the most likely culprits .
 "All the sheep had a working heart muscle, so there is no Chupacabra," she said . All the sheep were healthy enough to survive, she added .
 Aleksandr Velikodnev believes that the vets have not delivered the final word on the savagings . However, the shepherd believes that stray dogs have not been responsible for the savages .
 Attacker merely bit each sheep in the same spot . Dogs or lynxes would have eaten at least one of the sheep, while the attacker in question merely bit one .
 No signs of an unauthorized entry were found at the farm . As for the migrant workers there were no signs of unauthorized entry .
 A significant quantity of blood — 30 creatures were virtually drained! — vanishing without a trace . Locals concluded that the unknown attacker had consumed it on the spot, which would have taken a healthy chunk of time .
 The sheep were kept in a spacious fold, so catching each would have taken at least two to three minutes, Velikodnev says . The intruder was present for more than an hour, which means catching each sheep would have been more than two minutes .
 A rabbit cage was attacked in a small town near Chelyabinsk, where an unknown attacker broke into a cage and tore its inhabitants apart . A similar case was reported in the small town of Kolomna region, where a rabbit was attacked .
 Rabbits have been dying in dozens following two similar attacks in Chelyabinsk region . Rabbits are dying in their dozens following attacks in other small towns in the region . Two similar attacks have taken place in small towns of Chelyaabinsk .
 The first reports of the Chupacabra vampire being spotted in Russia appeared as early as April 2006 .
 Other reports of similar incidents in various parts of Central America came to light followed by more in other regions of the world .
 According to some, it is a reptile-like creature with a pronounced spinal ridge . It is believed to have been found in the form of a snake .
 Others say it looks like a hairless dog bred with a kangaroo, with the latter’s ability to jump up to six meters . Others say the hairless dogs look like hairless animals bred with kangaro .
 The Chupacabras are believed to drain the prey’s blood and/or internal organs and never touch the flesh . Unlike conventional predators, they are said to drain blood and internal organs .
 All the carcasses examined by scientists were found to be coyotes infected with a parasite that left them with little fur and thickened skin . The parasite left coyotes without fur and with thick skin .
 Ronaldinho was nicknamed Chupacabra for his unusual appearance in the early days of his career .
 Russia’s witches and wizards face ad ban to protect cancer victims . Concerns that they are giving false hope to cancer sufferers .
 MPs warn Russians are risking their health and possibly their lives by trusting in quackery . One report claims almost one in five Russians have consulted occult 'healers' MPs have warned they risk their health by trusting such quacks .
 Cancer specialists complain that many patients have already spent their life savings on trying to cure the disease with a witch or a wizard .
 When the money runs out, they say the mystic informs the unfortunate patient that it is “God’s will” and tells them there is nothing more that he or she can do . The mystic told them there was nothing more to do .
 The bill needs to pass two more votes before it can become law . It would also oblige anyone claiming to be able to solve people’s health problems to prove their claim and get a licence from the health ministry .
 MPs say such licences would only be conferred upon genuine practitioners of alternative medicine . MPs say nobody would be licencing witches or wizards .
 The Salton Sea began with the formation of a great shallow depression, or basin, which modern explorers have called the Salton Sink . It is now the world's largest seater, and the most important part of the sea system .
 Several million years ago, a long arm of the Pacific Ocean extended from the Gulf of California to the present-day Imperial and Coachella valleys . The arm extended northwesterly through the Sacramento and San Joaquin valleys .
 Mountain ranges rose on either side of this great inland sea, and the whole area came up out of the water . Mountain ranges came up from the water, and mountain ranges rose from either side .
 Oyster beds in the San Felipe Mountains, on the west side of Imperial Valley, are located many hundred feet above present sea level . Oyster bed is located on west side side of the Imperial Valley .
 The area south of the San Gorgonio Pass sloped gradually down to the Gulf . Slowly the land in the central portion settled and the land settled .
 California’s Overlooked Treasure, in a 1995 issue of The Periscope, a publication of the Coachella Valley Historical Society, in Indio .
 The river deposited vast quantities of silt into the Gulf, creating a delta, from Yuma to the rampart of the Cocopah Mountains, that separated the region from the Pacific Ocean . The delta became a great salt water lake, covering almost 2,100 square miles .
 The depression was about one hundred miles in length by thirtyfive in width . It was one hundred and thirtyfive miles long by thirty-five in length .
 It’s unknown how long the ancient sea-bottom remained dry, but many thousands of years ago, the Colorado River proceeded to refill the dry basin . The Colorado River then filled the sea bottom with water .
 The river cut a channel to the Gulf through the eastern part of the delta plain . Then the river changed course, cutting a channel through the east . The river is now a national park in Louisiana .
 From 1824 to 1904, Colorado River flows flooded the Salton Basin no fewer than eight times . The Salton basin was flooded eight times between 1824 and 1904 .
 An 1840 flood created a salt lake three-quarters of a mile long and a halfmile wide . In 1891, another outpouring of Colorado River water created a lake 30 miles long, 10 miles wide .
 It is uncertain as to how many times water has filled the basin over the centuries but human intervention is responsible for inundating the basin only once . Human intervention has only inundated the basin once .
 In 1901, the California Development Company dug irrigation :y of overflow i the Colorado River to stop the water from flowing into the Salton Sink. canals from the Colorado river .
 Heavy silt loads, however, inhibited the flow of the river . New residents of the valley became worried about the silt .
 Engineers created a cut in the western bank of the Colorado to allow more water to reach the valley . This prompted the engineers to create the cut in order to save water from the Colorado .
 Heavy flood waters broke through the engineered canal in 1905, and nearly the entire volume of the Colorado River poured into the sink, unimpeded, for over 18 months .
 The raging river flooded thousands of acres of farmland and destroyed large portions of Calexico and Mexicali . Thousands of acres were flooded by the raging river .
 Approximately 11,000 acres of Torres Martinez Desert Cahuilla Indians tribal land was flooded . Approximately 11.000 acres were flooded . The land was covered by water .
 The Southern Pacific Railroad was forced to move its lines several times as the sea rapidly grew in size . The railroad had to move lines to accommodate the growing population of the sea .
 Four separate projects were started to try and stop the hemorrhaging river all ending in failure . Four separate attempts to stop the bleeding river have failed .
 The last trainloads of rock were dumped, cars and all, in a lastditch effort to quell the flow of the river . The last trains were dumped in an effort to stop the flow .
 On Feb., 1907, 2 million cubic feet of rock and $3 million later, Southern Pacific closed the breach . The river once again headed toward the Gulf of California .
 Agricultural drainage from new farms in Imperial Valley to the south kept water flowing into the newly christened Salton Sea . Agricultural drainage in the Imperial Valley keeps water flowing to the sea .
 A black monster with green glowing eyes and a spike beard from Japanese mythology . Samebito 6/13/99 .
 On the Long Bridge the monster encountered the hero Totaro, but instead of attacking him, he entreated him to give it food and shelter . Instead of attacking the hero, the monster entreated the hero to give him food .
 Totaro took the monster with him and gave it a lake near his own palace where he fed it . Totaro then took it to his palace and fed it with his own lake .
 Some time later, Totaro fell in love with the beautiful Tamana and intended to marry her . Tamana died in childbirth, but Totaro survived .
 Tamana's father had set the bride price at 10,000 precious stones . The bride price was set by the bride's father .
 Unable to come up with such an immense fortune, Totaro went home and lay ill until he was dying . He lay ill and died in Japan .
 Samebito learned of what happened to its benefactor, it shed tears of sadness until the monster discovered that its tears had turned into pearls, rubies and emeralds .
 With these precious stones Totaro was able to pay the bride price and marry the lovely Tamana .
 Krampus is a boozy goat-horned menace that whips children around Europe . Now meet the goat-horned menace .
 Clay Risen meets a group of Krampuses and learns why they’re great at a party . The Krampus party is a great way to spend time at parties .
 Santa Claus may be a wonderful symbol of the holiday spirit, but time and consumer society have warped him to the point where he makes little sense . Santa Claus is not the perfect Santa Claus, but he is a symbol of Christmas .
 The idea behind Santa, originally, was to carrot-and-stick little boys and girls into good behavior . If you fall under the ‘naughty’ category it’s switches and coals for you .
 Santa’s beneficence is a fait accompli. Spock and Mattel are high on the list .
 While the jolly old elf delivered the goods, an evil, goat-homed spirit called the Krampus brought switches and bad dreams to the boys and girls of Austria, southern Germany, Switzerland, and far northern Italy .
 Many regional European traditions are giving way to international consumer culture . The fat, red-bedecked Santa is in fact quickly replacing the rad-thin St. Nicklaus .
 His success is certainly thanks in part to the lack of a parallel in American society . His success has been thanks to his success in the U.S.
 Krampus Fest, like most holidays in alpine Europe, is a beloved excuse for small towns to get together and drink their brains out . But he has stuck around mostly because he has stayed around .
 According to Mannfred Kapper of the Austrian Cultural Forum, the Krampus was initially a side note to the St. Martin Luther Luther . The St. Luther was the last of the Luther Luther to arrive in the U.S.
 A while back I spent a year in Jennersdorf, Austria, teaching English at the local high school . I spent that year teaching English .
 Jennersdorf is a southeastern village of 3,000 people a few miles from the Hungarian border . The village is a stone’s throw from nothing, a few minutes from nothing .
 The Krampustage was a weekend of drunken merriness and satanic symbology that is the Krampusage . There I experienced a host of unimaginable traditions, but nothing quite compared to the weekend .
 A few men in each town dress up in furs, heavy boots, and a ghoulish mask topped with horns . With a switch in hand, a few men dress up with a switch .
 They go to all the houses with small children, and when the parents open the door they run in and act menacing . They act menacing, growling and cracking switches . Then they run into the homes of small children and growl and crack switches .
 The parents invite the men to have a few shots of kirsch or schnapps, which they always accept . After everyone’s had a good fright, the parents invite them to sit down and have a drink .
 By the end of the night the Krampuses’ growls are a little slurred, their switch-cracking is a little too close to the children . Parents have to make sure their kids don’t look out the window, lest they catch a glimpse of the
 Krampus Day was originally intended to be a celebration of the mythical beast . But villagers got jealous of the lucky few who got to run around town in costumes and act like idiots .
 The Krampusfest is known in southeast Austria as the Kranchen . The festival is known as the "Krampus Fest" in Austria and Austria .
 The Kranchen was sponsored by the junior class to make money for the seniorball . The junior class made the money for their seniorball.
 Jennersdorf didn’t have a facility large enough to hold the party, so the kids rented a hall a few towns over . The kids rented the hall to celebrate .
 There were two rooms— in one, the main hall, a band played on a stage at one end, fronted by a dance floor . To the side ran a long bar, staffed by students backed by cases of beer .
 The band played Top-40 hits, which in Europe is a mix of angsty, American punk-lite and goofy dance tunes . In Europe, the hits are a mix .
 The other, much smaller room was the ‘ Hard Core Saale/ featuring low lighting, mixed drinks, and rap . The other room featured low lighting and mixed drinks with rap .
 Most of the night I drifted between the two rooms, though toward midnight I setded at a long table with a bunch of my sophomore students . Most of that night I stayed at a table with some of the students .
 Eva, 16, told me her father was sitting three tables over when she was sitting next to her . Eva said her parents sit three tables away from each other . Eva and Eva's parents say they're not worried about their children's safety .
 The Kranchen's organizers were prepared, and within five minutes the star volleyball player was over with a mop and bucket .
 For a little while, I wondered if I should do something adult-like, say, find the principal and get Thorsten a ride home . Thorsten's mother says she doesn't want Thorsten to be taken home from school . For a while, she wondered if she should do
 Five of six guys dressed in full goat-god regalia— switches in hand— ran into the hall and began whipping people . Five of the six guys were dressed in goat god regalia . The incident happened in the middle of the night .
 A few partygoers fought back, but most of them were too gone to care . Krampus and non-Krampus alike were too dead to care, the partygoers say .
 After 10 minutes of this, the Krampuses took off their masks, everyone laughed, one of the bartenders brought over a round for them and the drinking recommenced in earnest . The Krampus were joined by a group of friends at the end of the night .
 At 2:00 am, when I left, the hall was still packed, reeking sofdy of overworked heating, spilt beer, and vomit . The author, drunk with Krampus, left the hall still packed when he left .
 A few younger students left with me with me, two of them on either side of one of their semi-conscious comrades . A few young students also came with me .
 The Krampus had devolved from a spirit meant to shock children into good behavior into an excuse for wild inebriation, and in much the same way that Santa Claus had been co-opted by crass commercialism .
 Christmas is meant to celebrate the birth of a savior, but it has become an excuse for mass consumption . Not to mention the way that Christmas itself, . itself, had become a excuse for . mass consumption, or otherwise, the author says .
 It is indisputable that women hold the winning hand in marriage . But, leaving out the discussion of this purely sentimental aspect of the matter, it is not the only reason for a relationship .
 This photo was shat on Church Street at the height of the city’s skyline . The photo was taken looking toward the city's skyline .
 Satan’s Burial In Auditorium Draws Throng . M lliey preached the devil's funeral in South Nashville .
 Satan was laid to rest with spirituals sung to the music of tambourines, a piano and an electric guitar . Satan's spirituals were sung to a piano, a guitar and a piano . The spirituals are said to have been sung in the hands of Satan .
 Marion B Southall is minister of the Truth of Life Foundation To Share the Light . He started his congregation in 1976 in an abandoned church at 1212 First Ave. Southall started in 1976 .
 S Saturday night he called his congregation, his relatives and at least a half dozen other churches to help him with his task of getting rid of the devil . S. S. calls his congregation and his relatives to help with the task of removing the devil from his home .
 For only $30 a year you can have The Nashville Retrospect conveniently delivered to you in the mail every month . For more than $30, you can get the magazine delivered to your home in Nashville every month.
 Putting off having your car checked could leave you stranded . See Page 2 for instructions . y-IXPERIE rH where .
 At Link Automotive, wo specialize In all vehicle repair#, including engines, transmissions, electrical systems, suspension and brakes . The repair# is a vehicle repair .
 The people in each part of the union, seem to be equally alarmed in the wake of the horrific quakes . Wo also offer a full line of over RUTOMOTIV6 Service /PARTS .
 Audubon was staying in a large log house belonging to a physician as the guests celebrated a wedding . He witnessed something shocking to propriety at the wedding of a physician .
 The sleeping guests rushed outside ' * v '* v v v ' 4 cl ing key over the mantelpiece. 4 . cling key over mantelpieces. 4. ' 4 . ' ' ' 4' ' 4: ' ' The guests rushed out of the room.
 Its swinging could tell them the degree of danger and whether evacuation was necessary . The swinging of the clock could tell the extent of the danger .
 An estimated 150,000 acres of timber were destroyed in the quakes . The area was sparsely populated at the time of the devastating quakes in the 1960s .
 St. Louis and Memphis in the central Mississippi in a mass preparedness drill . The drill took place in the state of Mississippi .
 George Zepp is author of the book Hidden History of Nashville . He also wrote the “Learn Nashville” column for The Tennessean from 2002 to 2010 .
 A black hearse from Dawson’s Mortuary in Franklin waited at the front door of the Franklin home .
 The moumers-or celebrators were ushered into the auditorium and took their seats in front of the gray casket . A dozen colorful funeral wreaths were flanked by a dozen colorful wreathows against a backdrop of flaming candles in two seven-branch candel
 Flowers were on loan from Ed’s Flower and Plaque Shop on Lewis Street . The flowers on loan are on display at the museum .
 Seniors 55 and older are needed to tutor children in reading in grades K-4 in Davidson County / public schools . The seniors 55-plus are needed are needed for reading in schools .
 If you * ' ' love to read and want to make a difference in a child's life, call 743*3422, Training classes . Training classes hrgllt late stage with him were a dozen speakers .
 The minister led the audience in singing Victory, Victory Shall Be Mine, with the audience clapping in time to the minister’s tambourine .
 Abbott, a tall, slender woman dressed in a pink formal, sang a spiritual, accompanying herself on the electric guitar . Abbott was accompanied by the guitar by the singer .
 Nannie Haley, a member of Meharry Boulevard Church of God, gave a rousing rendition of Satan's Satan, I Put You Out of My Life . Haley was beaten to death by a church member .
 Spiritual Temple, Southall gave the obituary of the devil, telling of the havoc he has wreaked in lives from the time he met Eve in the Garden down through the ages .
 The minister’s mother, known as Mother Susie Pilcher, spoke on the need for a positive spirit in life rather than a negative one . The minister's mother is known in her son's congregation as Mother Pilcher .
 Collection cups were passed among the audience to receive contributions for the renovation of Southall’s church . The event was held at the Southall Church in Southall .
 S tones River Manor, sponsored by area churches of Christ, is Rutherford County's only faithbased, not-for-profit senior living community . The Manor is located in Rutherford County, Rutherford County .
 Full-service senior living community offers independent living apartments, assisted living, memory care, adult day care, respite care, physician and clinic services, and complete nursing and therapy services .
 Oklahoma approved the erection of a Ten Commandments monument on the State Capitol grounds in 2009 . The monument was approved by lawmakers in 2009 and will be on display at the Capitol in Oklahoma .
 Satan worshippers say the Oklahoma Legislature's decision in 2009 to allow a privately funded monument to the Ten Commandments on the state capitol grounds means they should have equal access to build a monument of their own .
 Legal precedent suggests that federal courts might not take the same view about Oklahoma 's Ten Commandments monument or Satanists' claim of equal rights . Satanists claim equal rights in Oklahoma .
 In a 2005 case, the U.S. Supreme Court unanimously ruled in favor of Satanists and followers of white-supremacist religions . The case said a federal law designed to protect prisoners' religious liberties protected theirs .
 Ohio officials had argued that protecting Satanists' religious rights would undermine prison security by drawing more prisoners to that faith . Ohio officials argued that the state should protect Satanists from prison .
 Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg noted that government often makes concessions to accommodate the free exercise of religion . Ginsburg: Government often allows military personnel to wear yarmulkes, such as allowing Jewish military personnel .
 Justice Ginsberg made clear that her ruling dealt with the federal law in question . Ginsberg said her decision dealt with a federal law specifically with the law .
 In two other cases decided the same year, the Supreme Court issued a split ruling on the specific question of religious monuments on public property . The Supreme Court split on the issue in the other two cases .
 The court decided 5-to-4 that a monument to the Ten Commandments on the grounds of the Texas Capitol could remain . On one hand, the court also said that the 10 Commandments could remain in the state .
 Justice Stephen Brever. writing for the majority, noted that the monument had existed for 40 years before eliciting any legal complaint . Justice Brever wrote that it had existed before the complaint was made .
 The grounds of the Texas Capitol include a variety of monuments . The Texas Capitol is located in Austin, Texas .
 This, in Justice Breyer's view, made the monument more historical than religious . This, he said, made it more religious than historical . Breyer: The monument is now a monument to American history, not religious .
 "As a practical matter of degree this display is unlikely to prove divisive,"" Breyer wrote . Breyer said .
 The court ruled that copies of the Ten Commandments on the walls of two Kentucky courthouses ran afoul of the constitutional separation of church and state . On the other hand, the court decided 5-to-4 that copies were unconstitutional . The court also ruled that they ran af
 In a concurring opinion, Breyer noted that the Kentucky monuments sparked legal action almost immediately . Breyer said that the monuments sparked litigation almost immediately.
 In 2010, the court let stand a lower court ruling that ordered the removal of a Ten Commandments monument from a county courthouse in Oklahoma .
 The American Free Church of Satan has proposed a theme park . Perdition would feature features based on the devil, black masses and heavy metal music .
 The group sees it as an antidote to the Christian theme park currently pulling in vast crowds in Florida . The group says the park will be a Christian alternative to the theme park that currently pulls in huge crowds .
 Rick Hampson: A rush to save a species is necessary to save mass mass . He says it's important to protect the species from extinction .
 The New England cottontail is the only native rabbit east of the Hudson River . Once a dietary staple of Pilgrims and bobcats, it has become a candidate for the endangered species .
 Government agencies and conservation groups have embarked on a two-decade, $55 million effort to restore the New England cottontail . Despite rabbits' famed fecundity, government agencies are trying to restore its dwindling habitat .
 Peter's problem, surprisingly, is not just Old Man Coyote, Reddy Fox and Farmer Brown . It's not just the problem, but it's a problem for Peter himself . Peter's story is that he has to deal with the problem .
 To avoid predators, cottontails need protective ground cover . Ground cover is bushes, thickets, briar patches that appear in the ""new growth"" period after farm fields are abandoned .
 A North Bay teen is launching a campaign to pick up where a World War II veteran, now in his mid-nineties, left off . North Bay, Canada, teen wants to help a WWII veteran who is in his nineties . The teen says he wants to take up where
 Santa Rosa sophomore to-be Cameron Whiteside is mounting the campaign to preserve what he calls a city icon . Whiteside: "Santa Rosa is a great place to live"
 The icon, a hillside cross, was built long before the 15-year-old was born . The teen says he feels a connection to it . The icon was built before he was born but he says he has a connection with it .
 Cameron's mother says her son's first visit to the cross didn’t go so well . “This one adds character because there is something on it,” Cameron’s mother says .
 UP ^ e . e [ e wh ® n he . was 5 . years ' old and he had poison oak out of it . He was 5 years 'old and he was 5 when he died of poison oak .
 The cross was built by 96-year-old retired SFPD Lieutenant Arvo Kannisto more than 30 years ago . He enjoyed knowing he could be there, Whiteside said .
 The cross is made up of thousands of stones, all hand-placed by Kannisto . It was built to honor his fellow World War II comrades who never made it home . The cross was built in honor of his fellow comrades .
 Two years ago Kannisto spoke to KTVU after he’d been told by the property owner that he could no longer go up on the hill to maintain the cross . Two years later he spoke about how he'd been told that he couldn’t go up
 The teens are hoping to drum up enough support to allow Cameron or an interested group access to the cross so that they could regularity maintain the memorial . Cameron says he was researching the cross when he stumbled across the story of Konnisto’s .
 "I feel it is my duty after I've enjoyed it for so many years," the teen said . The teen says she feels it is her duty to return to her beloved home .
 Konnisto got emotional when he learned of the teen’s campaign to save the cross . The teen's campaign was inspired by a friend of his .
 Saved from the Titanic is a 1912 silent motion picture short starring Dorothy Gibson . Gibson survived the sinking of the RMS Titanic on April 15, 1912 . Gibson was an American film actress who survived .
 She had been one of around 28 people aboard the first lifeboat to be launched from Titanic . She was rescued about five and a half hours after leaving the ship .
 She co-wrote the script and played a fictionalized version of herself in the new film .
 The plot involves her recounting the story of the disaster to her fictional parents and fiance . The footage is interspersed by stock footage of icebergs, Titanic’s sister ship Olympic and the captain Edward Smith .
 To add to the film’s authenticity Gibson wore the same clothes as on the night of the disaster and rescue .
 It was the first film to be made about the disaster and premiered in the U.S. just 29 days after the ship sank .
 The film was released internationally and attracted large audiences and positive reviews . Some criticized it for commercializing the tragedy so soon after the tragedy .
 The last known prints of the film were destroyed in a studio fire in March 19 14 . It is now regarded as a lost film .
 Dorothy Gibson suffered a mental breakdown after completing the film . It is also the last film that Dorothy Gibson ever made, as she suffered from mental strain after completing it . The film was the last to be made by Dorothy Gibson .
 Many other sea articles and artifacts are stowed away in a storage space at an office building in Oasis, Oasis .
 Salton Sea History Museum was established at the North Shore Beach & Yacht Club in May 2010 . These historic materials were at one time on public display at the thriving museum .
 The museum moved into the yacht club following a $3.5 million renovation of the Albert Freydesigned building . The 6,500-square-foot-foot, two-story facility was built by the renowned architect in 1959 .
 When the museum lost its place at the yacht club in June 2011, due to a dispute about the organization’s nonprofit status, it reopened in February 2012 at a bungalow at the Torres Martinez Desert Cahuilla Indians Wetlands property .
 Visit DesertSun.com/SaltonSea to watch a compelling video about the people in the story who live along the shores of the state's largest lake . Meeting the people who live near the lake is a chance to learn more about the story .
 Salton Sea is one of the most beautiful waters in the world . It is also a UNESCO World Heritage Sea of Wales .
 The Kellys and other volunteers spent months renovating the old bungalow . They were asked to leave a year later . The museum is located in the desert state .
 Jennie Kelly said it was because they were told they used too much electricity . Kelly said she was told they had to cut out their electricity supply .
 The fate of the museum, much like that of the sea itself, is up in the air . The museum's fate is now uncertain .
 Salton Sea History Museum sign and other museum memorabilia fill the space in front of the fireplace . Behind him, a large Salton sea history Museum sign filled the space behind the fireplace.
 Jennie Kelly has lived in North Shore, just blocks from the Salton Sea, for 30 years . She has lived there for more than 30 years and has lived on the North Shore since 1984 .
 The museum’s director has spent years carefully collecting material and creating an extensive archive relating to the history of the Salton Sea . The museum's director, she’ve spent years .
 Former Riverside County 4th District Supervisor Roy Wilson encouraged her to establish a museum . Roy Wilson, who died in 2009, died on Aug. 26, 2009 .
 She said 17,000 people visited the museum during its first year in operation . She said the museum's first year was the first year it was open .
 The Salton Sea was created in 1905 when an irrigation channel off the Colorado River was breached and water flooded into the basin . An irrigation channel was breached in 1905 and the current sea formed in its current form .
 The water kept flowing until 1907, when engineers were finally able to stop it . The water was finally stopped by engineers in 1907 .
 Since then, the lake has been sustained largely by plentiful runoff from Imperial Valley farms . The lake has since been sustained mostly by plentiful runways .
 More water will be transferred to San Diego and cities in the Coachella Valley under the nation’s largest agriculture-to-urban water transfer . But that runoff has been decreasing and is set to decline dramatically after 2017 .
 Receding water levels will leave more of the lake bed exposed to winds that can kick up dust . This could increase air pollution and affect the health of people living in the surrounding areas .
 A drying sea can also negatively affect the health of migratory birds who stop to rest at this vital habitat . The Pacific Flyway is situated along the coast of the Pacific .
 13 months after opening, the museum and its volunteer staff had to leave on June 3, 2011 . Despite its success, it was forced to close in June 2011 .
 County officials say the museum needed federal nonprofit status to stay open . County officials said at the time it needed federal status to keep it open .
 In a letter dated July 24, 2011, the museum was granted the designation by the IRS .
 The yacht club never presented documentation of the nonprofit status by the deadline requested . A spokesman for the Riverside County Economic Development Agency says the museum never presented the documentation .
 The county bought the yacht club property from Desert Alliance for Community Empowerment, known as DACE, with the goal of restoring the rundown building . County bought the property from the group, which has a history of activism .
 In the 1960s, it was a social center for those enjoying fishing and boating at the sea . The Beach Boys, Jerry Lewis and the Marx Brothers were among those who docked their boats .
 The museum was asked to pay rent, about $1,300 per month, which was an excessive amount for a fledgling organization, Kelly said . The museum's rent was too much for the fledgling organization to pay .
 Freeman said the North Shore Beach & Yacht Club has become a thriving community center . Freeman said it has become an important community center in the community .
 More than 50 children and teens have been participating in the North Shor4 Summer Arts Program in the multipurpose room .
 Desert Recreation District’s summer camp, Summer by the Shore, is in the computer room . Fifteen more children are enrolled in the summer camp . Desert Recreation D.C. summer camp will be held at the end of the summer .
 Throughout July, the center has been serving breakfast and lunch, free of charge, to about 50 children, ages 18 and younger . About 50 children ages 18-19 have been served at the center throughout July .
 Community center holds Zumba classes on weeknights and food distribution to needy families on Friday mornings .
 The building also is rented out for private events, including weddings and bridal showers . It is often used for community events and meetings of the Salton Sea Authority, North Shore Community Council .
 Community center in North Shore since she moved to the area and worked at the yacht club during the construction phase to make sure it met the needs of the museum and the community .
 Upstairs is a large space known as the Compass Room, which is completely empty . The Compass Room is located in the centre of the museum's most famous rooms .
 The museum moved its archives into the space, without permission . Freeman said the museum was asked to vacate the room because another public program was planned for it .
 It's not compliant with the Americans with Disabilities act because it's a registered Historic Site . It’s not compliant because it is a registered historic site .
 Palm Springs Modern Committee: Alterations would “negatively impact the historic, character-defining features of the Yacht Club’s . The committee wrote in a memo to the Economic Development Agency that adding an elevator would ‘negatively’ impact the ‘historic
 On a visit to the yacht club in July, a couple dozen teens participating in a summer program took up a small fraction of the space . The yacht club is located in a lightly furnished building .
 Linda Beal, a local historian and museum volunteer, hopes the situation will soon change . Beal hopes the museum will soon become a tourist attraction . The museum is home to a collection of historical artifacts .
 The yacht club was the perfect location for the museum, she said . It’s a special place, and the yacht club is the perfect place for a museum, the museum's curator said .
 People from all over the world stopped by to talk about and learn about the sea . People from around the world came to visit the sea to learn about it .
 Beal says people requested tours of the area, asked questions about local agriculture and real estate . Beal said people also asked about the area's real estate and agriculture .
 Others were interested in finding a * particular location for photo shoots . Others were looking to find a particular location .
 Jennie Kelly hopes the county and the museum can work together to bring the resource back to the sea . The county and museum hope to work together .
 The tombs and other formal memorials to artists that Italians dutifully and sometimes touchingly maintain . Still, artists do die — and what may surprise a visitor to Italy is how accessible it is .
 The composer Claudio Monteverdi rests under a marble marker in a chapel of Venice’s Basilica of Santa Maria Gloriosa dei Frari . Some of these we sought out during a recent visit .
 In the Pantheon in Rome, an admirer had left a fresh laurel wreath at the tomb of Raphael, Michelangelo’s rival . The wreath was left at the gleaming tomb of Michelangelo's rival .
 Florence’s cavernous Basilica of Santa Croce is the most awe-inspiring expression of Italians’ reverence for their departed artists . The Basilica is one of Italy's most famous landmarks .
 The tomb of Michelangelo in Santa Croce church in Florence enshrines the remains of many artists . Machiavelli, the political theorist and writer, is buried there .
 At composer Gioachino Rossini’s handsome sarcophagus, his overture to “William Tell” (or the “Lone Ranger” theme) inevitably plays .
 Dante Alighieri is the Italian epic poet Dante's most famous poem . Dante's work is set in Florence, Florence, Italy, and is based on Dante's Dante's Inferno .
 This, however, is a memorial, not his tomb, which is in the city of Ravenna, Italy . This is not the tomb, but the memorial is in a memorial .
 It’s a near-riot of marble panels, vivid paintings and sculptures with downcast expressions, all of it rising to a pinnacle far up the stone wall .
 At the Frari church in Venice, besides Monteverdi’s slab, you’ll find the pyramid-shaped mausoleum of the sculptor Antonio Canova, containing, only, only his heart .
 In Rome, near the Pyramide subway stop in the NonCatholic Cemetery, many artists are buried, and many of them were English . Many artists were buried in the nonCatholic Cemetery .
 Passing through the gate you step from noisy Roman streets into what could be a tranquil corner of Britain . Pruned hedges, stately shade trees and bright lawns strewn with violets .
 The headstones of painters and poets, including two immortals of literature, are marked with understatement .
 Many next climbed a small rise to the grave of the poet Percy Bysshe Shelley, who drowned in Italy . The poet died in Italy in 1915 .
 He completed the human-sized angel not long before his own death and burial here .
 It represents the angel of Grief, in utter abandonment, throwing herself with drooping wings and hidden face over a funeral altar . The angel of grief is said to have been abandoned by her abandonment .
 Buy one of these custom art tanks and the likelihood you'll get the chance to buy a custom tank . E6 THE DESERT SUN | DESERTSUN.COM | Sunday, July 20, 2014 .
 Santa Croce honors Galileo, sculpted grasping his telescope . Galileo's telescope is among the world's most famous scientific discoveries .
 His remains were grandly re-entombed here after being kept elsewhere for nearly a century following his death, because his astronomy was deemed unbiblical . His remains have been kept elsewhere in the UK since his death .
 Along another wall, Niccolo Machiavelli, the political theorist and writer, is buried . The political theorist is buried along another wall in the museum .
 Michelangelo's tomb is located in the Duomo cathedral in Florence . It houses the sculpture that Michelangelo actually planned for his tomb . It depicts Christ being lowered from the cross .
 The story is that the sculptor, then in his 80s, became displeased with it and, in frustration, smashed part of it with his hammer . He then abandoned the work before abandoning it .
 The fragments were gathered and later reattached, and today you can clearly see the cracks in the cracks . The fragments are gathered and then re-attached to the same place .
 John Keats' sonnets and odes and sonnets are among the finest in English . Keats is buried in a simple corner grave at the corner of a small cemetery .
 Suffering from tuberculosis, he traveled to Rome at the recommendation of doctors who hoped in vain that the climate would improve his health . He was just 25 when he died here in 1821 .
 On a recent sunny day, a steady stream of literary pilgrims paused silently by his gravestone . His gravestone is the cemetery’s most visited .
 Police found the body of 4 7-year-old Ronald Opilka on Tuesday . The Chicago Sun-Times reports that police found the boy's body on Tuesday morning .
 Neighbors called their alderman to complain about an odor coming from the home . Neighbors had called the mayor's office to complain that the home smelled bad .
 The decomposed body of Cecylia Opilka, the man's 80-year-old mother, was found by workers responding to complaints of a bad smell . She was found buried under piles of debris by workers who also were responding to bad smells .
 Neighbor Kathy Cooke says she hadn't seen Ronald Opilka for weeks and that he hadn't been able to accept his mother's death in 2011 . She says he was unable to accept the death of his mother, who died in 2011, and that his mother died in 2012 .
 Newkirk allows people to escape their graves if they awaken underground . It's an age-old fearthafs prompted some of the more paranoid to invent contraptions .
 In this day and age, it might seem irrational to worry so much about being mistaken for a stiff . Medical science wasn't always so advanced, and there were numerous cases where unfortunate souls flew under the radar, only to wake up .
 Julia Legare's claw marks can still be found on the walls of her mausoleum . Her claw marks are still visible in the walls . She was murdered at the age of 16 in 1918 .
 Legare family lived on Edisto Island, a beautiful plot of land on the southern coast of South Carolina . Legare is a long line of wealthy plantation owners who lived there .
 The family had two children, an older son and a younger daughter, and together they lived happily on their land until their daughter, Julia, began to fall ill . Julia's illness was the result of her illness .
 Just a few years before the Civil War, Diptheria was still notwidely understood .
 Julia Legares was stricken with Diptheria . Edisto Island, with its vast quantities of stagnant water, turned out to be the perfect breeding ground for the disease .
 Julia began to suffocate, and her family could only watch in horror as her throat began to close shut shut . Julia's family watched as she suffocated, and watched her throat begin to close .
 The Legares mourned the loss of their daughter . Eventually, she closed her eyes, seemingly for good, and the Legares mourned .
 In those days, the morgues that we're familiar with today didn't exist . The persistent high temperatures and swampy atmosphere meant that decompisition set in quickly and ferociously . The dearly departed no choice but to deal with their deceased as soon as possible .
 The Legares took their daughter's body to the family crypt, remarking at how peaceful she looked, almost as if she was sleeping . As the story goes, the Legares said she looked peaceful and peaceful .
 Julia's father laid her on the stone slab inside, and when they had said their goodbyes, the family closed the heavy doors . The family sealed the crypt's keyhole with wax, sealing the crypt with wax .
 Julia Legare's older brother was killed during the Civil War . For the first time since Julia passed, the Legare family Fiickr Edisto Island gathered again at the family crypt .
 Julia's bones came tumbling out of the opening, her leathery skin still hanging from her gaping jaw . The family was horrified as they turned the key and pulled open the heavy door .
 Claw marks covered both the door and the floor of the mausoleum . The bones of Julia's fingertips were shattered, signs that pointed a frantic attempt to open the sealed door . Claw marks were also found on the floor .
 The Legares quickly laid their son to restand slammed the door shut. Distraught by what they had just discovered, the Legares slammed it shut .
 Determined not to make the same mistake twice, the Legares again visited the crypt shortly after burying their son, only to be met by another surprise . The Legares were shocked to find their son had been buried in the crypt .
 The door to the mausoleum was broken, leaving it lying at the foot of it . They replaced it, only to return and again find the door broken . The door was found broken, but it is now being used as a tomb in the cemetery .
 The Legares believe that Julia's spirit was attempting to keep others from suffering her fate . The crypt's doors refused to be closed, leading to the Legares to believe that her spirit was trying to keep people from suffering similar fate .
 Julia's doorless crypt is a morbid reminder of a horrible mistake . The deep claw marks are still visible on the floor of the church's crypt . Today, you can make your way to Edisto Island Presbyterian Church .
 Greg Newkirk is a professional monster chaser with Planet Weird . He is also a member of the Roadtrippers. He is the curator of the fantastic & bizarre .
 L Massachusetts Shakespearean theater needs $2.3M to survive . A nonprofit consultants’ report states a Shakespearean . theater in Massachusetts needs to raise $23M on to continue operations .
 Shakespeare & Company in Lenox also needs to raise $8.15 million to restructure long-term debt . The Nonprofit Finance Fund says Shakespeare & Co. needs to sell off $10 million worth of debt .
 Shakespeare & Company says it is creating a new business model and negotiating to restructure its debt . Shakespeare & Co. says it will create a new model of business . Shakespeare and Company is negotiating to renegotiate its debt and create new model .
 Last March, the theater company laid off seven employees and shifted others to part-time roles to cut costs . The theater company also shifted some of its jobs to part time roles .
 Year-round employees also took 10 percent pay cuts, and founders gave up their salaries for two months . The company's founders also cut their salaries .
 The 32-year-old company says it’s also working to “produce more plays with less money” at its three theaters . King of the orisha pantheon rules over thunder, fire, drumming, dancing and male virility .
 Shango is actually a deified king who was once the Fourth Alafin of the city-state of Oyo . Shango was once a fourth-Alafin and was once known as Shango of the Oyo state .
 He is one of the most worshipped orishas in the pantheon and his legends are numerous and speak to the human experience . He is also known as the most powerful orangos in the world .
 Obba his first wife who was faithful but unattractive so Shango withdrew his affections from her, Oshun his favourite lover, Oya his equal in strength and power, and Yewa the virgin daughter of Obatala whose purity was stolen by Shango .
 He is the the owner of the sacred drums, a powerful sorcerer who wields fire and lightning, and loves to seduce women, drink and dance . He also loves to drink, dance and dance with women and seduce them .
 Shango has a special relationship with Babalu Aye as he was the only orisha to offer him assistance when he was sick and homeless . The orisha has a very special bond with Shango as he has been offered assistance in the past .
 Shango is often considered the son of Yemaya and his fatherhood is either credited to Ogun or Aggayu . Shango's father is believed to be Ogun .
 Legend has it that Obatala taught Shango the art of diplomacy and gifted him the white bead that is now a part of his necklace . Shango was a very impulsive youth and was quick to anger .
 In nature, Shango is said to live at the top of the royal palm tree . His offerings are commonly placed at the foot of palm trees .
 Shango is petitioned for help with protection, enemies, sexual, business success, and good fortune . Shango was born in Shango, California, in 1972 . He was born with Shango's parents and siblings .
 The remains of a ship belonging to the famed French explorer Rene-Robert Cavelier Sieur de la Salle were launched on their final journey Thursday . The ship was launched off the Texas coast more than three centuries ago .
 Texas Historical Commission archaeologists found the shipwreck in 1995 in 12 feet of murky water . Archaeologists built a dam around the site and pumped it dry .
 Researchers dug through up to 6 feet of mud to retrieve the nearly intact hull . 700,000 items, including three cases of rifles, were recovered from the ship .
 Archaeologists also found a skeleton believed to be the remains of a crewmember or settler among the 40 or so people aboard the ship . Archaeologists believe the skeleton was found in the wreckage .
 The mud that covered the hull prevented its destruction by salt water and wood-eating mollusks, worms or bacteria, experts say . The mud prevented the ship from being eaten by wood and worms, they say .
 Human remains found by a 10-year-old girl in Mountrail County have been returned to the earth . The state medical examiner determined the bones were likely from the 1500s or 1600s . The remains were found by the girl, who was 10 .
 Illustrations by ALEC SEA ERIN. etween 1959 andl966, 1 managed to cross most of the Seven Seas and r n to cross the Sevens . 1 i learned to respect the ocean .
 Davy Jones’ over-roasted detailed dlscussl """" ° coup i e of them out of the old chestnuts . Nevertheless, there is no much a personal selection of personal selection .
 The So, who was this libidinous, i’ d Wagner in legend was certainly we n^ ^ pn egen de Hollander. 1843 when he wrote his P been a fine w ay to Phantom shl P St °""^ g Ven w henl
 Irving’s version has a ‘’ h entury captain, another, and definitely M ™ 0 f his ship exchange for a fast voyage . Irving's version has { ion with the legend of • , and there is a “‘‘ h ent
 When he vanished, it was said that the devil had called the debt in. Of course, when he vanished,. It was said .
 Sir Walter Scott got in on the act in Rokeby, where the Dutchman is carrying gold and silver, the plague breaks out among the crew, no port will accept her and . well, we know the rest of the story .
 Next up on the horizon, and always worth a quick re-run, is the heavily barnacled brigantine Mary Celeste .
 She was found abandoned and adrift by the British brigantine Dei Gratia between Portugal and the Azores on 4 December 1872 .
 Although there was some damage to her sails and a few feet of water in her holds, her cargo was intact but for nine damaged barrels . Although there were some damage, there was no damage to the ship's sails .
 There was plenty of food and drink on board, the crew’s belongings were still there, but no sign of crew or captain . No sign of the captain or crew .
 A small sailing vessel crossing the Atlantic could be prone to any number of disasters . What really happened will probably remain a mystery .
 Apart from a C/Ufyf night watchman on the gang/ DITl way, out of a 30-plus crew, there would probably be only fcjjOCK W o or three on board .
 It was a November night l’d seP J ^ tied down in my bunk with a Vi w mug of cocoa and the latest Hank Jansen, when I heard a e UJi‘ scream along the alleyway .
 I * knew there was a junior stewHq^) ard on board, so 1 dashed to his cabin, where he found him naked and trembling m the W open doorway .
 Hamburg’s Blohm& Voss shipyards tmrned out two beautiful barques in 1905 Passat and the ^^ ^^VeAs OOOsq f -r^SS^asa, eel for the German Mercnam training vessel fo Captain Diebitsch Service
 In command was CaPta sea with a 35-strong crew, lugmenti ^ cadets aged between 1 carryin g 3,790 . September, she met up with I Hurricane Carrie . September .
 Four years later, another sail-trainer, the E smereld, from Chile, was battling a o am ir . The Esmereld’s report was v^ a'Lge until some , later, when the yachtsman Ree d ^ vessels
 He brought on board with him such a tangible atmosphere of aggression that noone could share a cabin with him . No one could share an aircraft with him. He brought with him with such an atmosphere of aggressive as well as aggression .
 Eventually, the bosun opened up the sick bay and he enjoyed the luxury of a single berth . Eventually, he was able to get a sick bay berth .
 He had just one set of clothes, which he washed on his watch off, sitting around naked beneath the Pacific sun . He washed his clothes on the watch off .
 He refused to eat with us, and after one blistering row with the Larnptrimmer, he walked into the mess-room and told us he had placed a curse on the ship . He told us that he had cursed the ship and cursed it .
 'The Pharaoh' was a bona fide seaman with a discharge book, but we w ere glad to see ‘The Pharaoh’ go. ’ ,_r, owner of the Ion .
 The President sailed During the early hours London, BenWebster’s sturbed butler awoke his jrm with the news that Mr Twone Power was drowned . He vanished without a trace, never arriving in Liverpool .
 A year later, she with engineer Peter Jones c; maintenance work alone m boiler’s feed pump began to knocking noise . A year after maintenance work, the boiler's feed pump started to make a knocking noise.
 The boat was expected to make the York to Liverpool in 16 days . It is expected to sail from Liverpool to York in just 16 days.
 Tyrone Power was the grandfather of one of the greatest film stars -Tyrone Power . His ancestor, also a famous thespian, ne. Power, was a famous actor and singer . Tyrone's grandfather was also a singer .
 The remaining i she had left England in 1761 on :hina but had become trapped m 'th Alaska and yet here she was, r, adrift off Greenland .
 After clearing p snowdrifts on the ^ Octavius's deck, they wrenched open the f ^ TJ 1 fo’c’sle door and dis/ j M covered inside 2 8 ^ Jf fully, clothed * l; f ' * death .
 A cabin cabin the skipper still TPt 4 2$ sat, frozen solid, his hands on the desk . W j jA cabin was still frozen solid . The skipper was still on board .
 In the adjoining cabin 1 A lay a woman, frozen in a calm posture . The woman was frozen in the adjacent cabin . She was frozen .
 Her head rested on her elbow, eyes w] open, staring across the room at anothei corpse, a young man, sitting cross-legge< feet a pile of wood chippings .
 The crew lost the centre section oilskins night up top . Under a r reefer jacket they found the brittle bod small boy . In their blind panic to get back to th< Herald, the crew .
 ROY BAINTON is the author of Honoured by Ht Strangers, a biography of Ell WWl submariner, diplo“ mat and spy Capt Francis . Regular FT contributor.
 I is a Belgian illustrator and ’ work can be seen in a travelling ulogne sur Mer at the end of June .
 Mark Severin was responsible for the Chilean coast in his epic The Last of The Windjammers . Severin's epic epic was based on the Chilean coastline .
 The late Gaddis was an avid collector of strange fortean yarns but often fails to give sources . Many of the stories in this out-of-print tome certainly warrant a researcher’s further attention .
 This is a truly thorough examination of everything from the Mary Celeste to the Lusitania . Highly recommended book .
 In the mid-1950s my father took a bunch of us neighborhood kids to see it at the now-gone Belmont Theater on 21st Avenue in Hillsboro Village . In the now, gone Belmont theater, it was a place to watch the show .
 The goofball Bowery Boy, Sach, had his mind transplanted with the monster’s brain . Sach's mind, such as it was, was transplanted to the brain of the monster .
 Shrieks and laughter abounded in the historic cinema as hundreds of youngsters spilled popcorn and candy throughout the aisles . The audience spilled popcorn, candy and popcorn all over the theater . It was the first time the film had been shown in a cinema since 1964 .
 The original classic horror movie Frankenstein, staring Boris Karloff, was released by Universal Studios in 1931 . Universal Studios released the classic horror film Frankenstein in 1931.
 It was not until the mid-1950s rerelease that I saw it for the first time at the Princess Theater downtown on Church Street by the L&C Tower . It was a mid-50s re-release of the film .
 I remember getting up from my seat and retreating back up the aisle to the lobby just so I could see some people in the daylight and escape Karloffs clutches . I remember going back to see Karloff in the lobby to escape his clutches.
 Nightmares followed, which prompted my parents to explain that everyone I saw in the movie was acting .
 The first atom bomb test in 1945 started it all, and the war-ending attack on Japan displayed the devastating catastrophe it could cause .
 The “Mystic Circle’’ effect. atomic holocaust and outer space invasions. . Notice the “mystic circle’� effect .
 The Blob, Battle in Outer Space, and The Amazing Colossal Man come to mind . The Blobs, Battle of Outer Space and Colossal Men are some of the most famous films .
 WSIX-TV Channel 8 launched a program called "Shock Theater" in 1958 . The program initially featured mostly horror classics from Universal Studios .
 Ken Bramming, already recognized for his broadcast voice and personality, was chosen to introduce the movies . Bramming is already known for his personality and voice .
 Classics such as Frankenstein, Dracula with Bela Lugosi, Lon Chaney Wolfman series, and Son of Frankenstein starring Basil Rathbone, made up the feature list .
 “Shock Theater” beat out the “Tonight Show’s” with lack Parr during that period . Bramming says ‘shock Theater’ even beat out ‘Tonight’ with ‘Shock’ .
 Much of that jump came from Bramming’s idea to introduce a macabre Master of Ceremonies, live skits during breaks in the evening s feature, and some Dave Brubek jazz tunes to placate the adults .
 " Shock" became almost almost a ritual as neighborhood kids would gravitate to my home and enter into our large, isolated playroom from our backyard . “ Shock” became almost an almost daily ritual .
 We would set up in front of our portable TV set, the kind with the built-in rabbit-ear antennas . We would use the set-up to watch a TV set with rabbit ear antennas .
 Usually me, Dave, Sam and others would wait anxiously for the introduction from Dr. Dr. Paul. "Dr. Paul" Paul says he was always waiting anxiously to hear from Paul .
 "Shock Theater" used a high-schooler at the time named Corky Savely . Savely regularly appeared as Granny Gruesome, Frantic Freddy the Hipster and Cyril Songbird .
 Back then all the skits were live, and viewers could often hear a stagehand’s muffled laughter in the background . Back then, all the shows were live and the laughter was muffled .
 Donovan’s Brain with Nancy Davis was about a brain kept alive in a tank . Donovan's Brain is a brain that was kept alive by a tank in a room .
 Other movies were just plain awful, so much so that they were laughable . However other movies were simply awful, with some of them being laughable .
 Missile to the Moon used the same soundtrack for the screams that was in another classic, Attack of the 50 Foot Woman . Attack of a 50 foot woman was also a classic classic .
 The scenery did not match in the background and the huge, fake spider had clearly visible wires controlling it . The fake spider was clearly visible and clearly visible .
 The monsters, huge walking rocks, moved slowly, and the acting itself was pitiful . The acting itself is pitiful, says the reviewer .
 The TV listing was called “The Mystic Circle’s” with emcee Dr. Dr. John Sutter . On Oct. 1960, 1960, the TV listing on Oct. 31, 1960 was called "The Mystic circle"
 On a cool October night in 1961, Sam and his friend Sam watched The Ape with Boris Karloff . Sam and Sam were in the audience for the first time together .
 It was not really that scary but believable enough to make us boys wonder if the ape could be lurking about in trees or in bushes within the neighborhood . The ape was not that scary .
 The familiar position of heads down on your desk is still a vivid memory . It's a familiar position for the first time you've been in the office .
 There were some pluses, particularly if you enjoyed scary-monster and sci-fi picture shows . However there were also pluses for the film, especially if it was a good overall .
 Throughout the 1950s and into the 1960s science-fiction, monster and space movies abounded, albeit most were of the grade “C” variety .
 Theaters and the relativelynew medium of television capitalized on the fears and began showing films exaggerating the after effects of an ies .
 Historian Jeff Thompson details the history of Nashville TV’s Tasteful Transylvanian . History of the show's history .
 Bramming: "We knew we would get a young audience on those nights" Bramming says Bramming knew audiences would be young . Bramming is quoted as saying, “We knew it would get the young audience .
 The figure ws man sporting an eye patch, a cigar holder, a thin, dark mustache slicked-back hair . The figure was sporting a thick mustache and dark hair .
 The Purple Grotto, one of the most famous sets, featured a door ered in bloody handprints . Often in the background one can see the Purple Grottel in the foreground .
 Lucifur spoke in a dialect re niscent of Bela Lugosi in the or nal Dracula movie and some* resembled famed horror actor Vine Price . Some* resembled Vine Price, who played a character in the film .
 Sam lived across my backyard, through some hedges and at the other end of Herbert’s Field, which at that hour of night in the autumn was quite dark . He lived across the yard, through hedges .
 "As he stepped out through the back door and into the darkness, I let out a scream," says mother-of-one . "I was so scared that I didn't think he was going to be able to escape," she says .
 I could hear him spouting obscenities as he scampered through the hedge row and out of sight . He scampered away from the scene of the incident in a bid to get out of the sight .
 I later on received an extra helping of vulgarities from Sam, who was none too pleased with my send off . Sam was not pleased with his send off, but he later apologised for his 'disgust'
 During the early-1960s, “Shock Theater” was so popular the show was re-aired again on Sunday afternoons around the lunch hour . During the 1960s, "Shock Theater" was so successful that it was re aired again on Sundays .
 It was called “Shock Jr.” and I often ate on a TV tray and took in a horror classic, usually right after getting home from church, much to the chagrin of my mother . The horror classic is called ‘Shock Jr.,’ and I
 Lucifur gained such popularity that he appeared at several downtown department stores during those years . Lucfur appeared in several downtown stores during that time .
 "As I got a little older I had been conditioned to take these films and actors for what they were-actors," says the director .
 Lucifur, I knew, was only Ken Bramming in make-up, but he was still a specter and not easily forgotten . He was still an important figure in the history of British television dramas .
 Us kids eventually became highly entertained by the whole proceedings, especially when the skits took place . The skits were highly entertaining .
 True Whig, October 4, 1849 lOyflQA beautiful display of Fire1041; works will be exhibited by hose accomplished Pyrotechnists, dessrs. True .
 Muller and Catoir, on Friday, to-morch evening, on lower Market treet. Muller and Coir, in lower Market, on Saturday .
 The exhibition will be highly nteresting alike to the scientific and :urious . ... again at the helm of a weekend horror movie on WMCV-TV 17 .
 Channel 17 even threw a Halloween party for kids in October 1968 in which Bramming appeared as Dr. Dr. Peter Bramming . Channel 17 also threw a party in 1968 .
 New Saturday-night horror telecast on WSM-TV Channel 4 came on the scene in the early-70s .
 Lucifer was in the studio, Ken Bramming provided the introduction in his inimitable voice . Lucifer was on the guest list .
 College days came along and that entire period became a childhood memory . College days were along with college days when the college days were gone .
 Tom Henderson is a native Nashvillian who grew up in Woodmont Hills . He preserves personal memories from the 1940s through the 1970s . Henderson is now preserving personal memories .
 Jeff Thompson for the use of this article and photographs . Jeff Thompson is the author of the book, "Jeff Thompson" and "Jeff"
 Youth Guidance Major George Currey said this will mark the third year of ‘Operation Safe Treat’ He said the program is designed to make trick-or-treating safe for kids .
 Children should not eat candy until it is taken home and inspected by their parents, he said . He added that children should also be careful not to take candy home .
 Reports of strange electrical disturbances taking place in the home of an elderly Burma veteran in Somerset .
 An uncountable number of fuses had blown and lampshades had burst into flames .
 From a purely scientific point of view, the case seemed to be worthy of investigation . The case seems to be worth of investigation, according to the scientist .
 I decided to write to the Area & % s Manager of SWEB (South Western Electricity Board), the electricity supply authority . The electricity board is based in the South Western Electricity Authority, South Western Australia .
 I enquired whether there were any inducing fields in the area of sufficient magnitude to cause such a large emf . I also asked whether the surges were confined to the consumer’s side of the meter. I also enquired if there were no inducing fields that caused the surges .
 Very High Voltages WERE INVADING FRANK PATTEMORES HOME at IVERSON COTTAGE years . He didn’t mention that the phenomena had been extant for some five . years .
 Why should such an earthing fault, even a difficult one, take five years to rectify? I wondered. Why is such a fault taking five years?
 In his reply dated 29 September, he completely ignored my questions and stated that the Board’s investigation had been completed, he said . He also said that the investigation had not been completed .
 This was not what Frank Pattemore had been telling me in correspondence and not what the local Press had been reporting . This is not what he'd told me, but what he had been saying was not true .
 Roy Jones, a local businessman and former chairman of Somerton Parish Council, tried to solve the mystery himself . He contacted others who had been involved in various ways with the Pattemores .
 Roy’s efforts proved to be in vain and he wrote to Robert Boscawan, the MP for Somerton . Although he had the assistance of the media, all Roy's efforts proved in vain . He had to write to Boscawan, who is an MP for
 Roy wrote that, despite the ongoing phenomena, “nobody wished to become involved or to express an opinion except in dark and mysterious sentences,” and that “some military or supernatural phenomena are responsible, rightly or wrongly”
 Roy shared his correspondence with the authorities with me, and it was his letter of 3 May 1990, addressed to Mr Nicol, Chairman of SWEB, that finally convinced me to visit Somerton for myself .
 This is the first time in 30 years that my findings have been rejected . This is first time I've been rejected for 30 years, says author .
 Jim Lees, a senior engineer based at SWEB Head Office in Bristol, said: ‘I wish I could help you’ ” This statement was corroborated during a telephone conversation I had with him .
 SWEB employees have been told not to park cars or vans immediately outside Iverson Cottage because there had been problems with ignition systems and vehicles had to be pushed along the road before they could start .
 During his first visit to Somerton I was accompanied by a physicist, an electrical engineer, a radio engineer and some rudimentary apparatus a lkV multimeter, an ionising radiation detector, a surge clock and an oscilloscope .
 By 2pm we were introducing ourselves to Frank Pattemore and his son Nigel . We were welcomed into the living room to meet Mike, an investigative journalist, and his photographer .
 Over tea and biscuits we began to listen to a general outline of the case . The case will be heard in court on Monday .
 Frank told us that about 11 months earlier, someone from SWEB had located a force of some kind running diagonally from the kitchen door to the front door . Frank said the force was found in the kitchen of the house . The force is believed to be a force running di
 The unidentified official was using an instrument that lit up as it was moved along a diagonal . The instrument lit up when it was used by an official .
 Hamish Miller, the well-known dowser and author of a recently published book The Sun and the Serpent, was going to arrive at about 3.30pm . We decided to break off the conversation to see what we could find with our search coil .
 We were not disappointed; there was still a definite field extending diagonally across the living room . The effect was confined to a narrow beam, which peaked at floor level about 1. m from the front door .
 Hamish and Paul Broadhurst would be able to locate the same force field with a pair of dowsing rods . Hamish is a co-author, photographer, writer and earth mysteries expert, Paul . Broadhurst .
 Hamish dowsing rods are used to dowser rods in his home in Scotland . Hamish's family was in awe as he walked across the living room with the rods .
 The movement of the rods was meaningless to us but there was no doubt that they were moving, apparently of their own accord . The movement was meaningless but there were no doubts that the rods were moving . The rods appeared to be moving on their own .
 A pair of dowsing rods were made in a forge for a couple of pounds . A SWEB engineer had found with some kind of field detector . He had found what we had discovered with our search coil .
 Hamish asked if he could dowse Frank and Nigel, who cheerfully agreed . Hamish then asked whether he could get married to Nigel and Frank .
 As Nigel was approached, the rods moved perceptibly denoting, we were told, a considerable concentration of bio-energy . But as the rods move closer to Frank, they swung violently .
 Hamish remarked that he had never witnessed a bio-energy field of this magnitude surrounding anyone . Hamish suggested that Frank might be inadvertently affecting the supply voltage to the cottage .
 We had embarked on a scientific investigation and were confronted with Hamish’s dowsing rods and a lengthy recitation on dangerous Earth energies . We were now confronted with the rods and lengthy recitations on dangerous earth energies .
 ‘negative leys’, known as ‘black streams, could appear following major road works or quarrying . Hamish informed us that these negative streams could cause havoc. Hamish said that there were such things as negative leys known as 'black streams'
 This is far from the scientific explanation we were seeking for the weird events at Iverson Cottage, but we were willing to consider anything . All this was far from a scientific explanation, but it was not the only explanation .
 The events which we had been witnessing fell into the realm of the paranormal . It was difficult to comprehend how any paranormal force could conjure 2000 volts onto the mains, we had to consider this possibility .
 Following the departure of Hamish and Paul, we sat down with the Pattemores as they continued their — FT171 51 story . We sat down to talk about their departure from the company .
 Frank had bought the cottage in 1976, following separation from his wife . He had enjoyed a good electrical supply until 1982 when problems began to emerge . Frank had enjoyed the cottage's electrical supply for more than 30 years .
 Pattemores had endured a totally unreliable and dangerous installation and very often no electricity at all . Since then, nearly a decade had passed and, during this time, they had endured at best, a completely unreliable, dangerous installation .
 Wiring was constantly blown apart, consumer units melted, molten metal has dropped from ceiling roses, switches have been welded and appliances, including seven TV sets, have been damaged beyond repair .
 The phenomena were not limited to the mains, batterypowered clocks switched themselves on and off as though they had minds of their own . The telephone persistently rang of its own .
 This was a particularly strange quirk because the ringing tone sequence is generated at the exchange . This was the first time the ringtone sequence was generated at an exchange .
 The Pattemores were using a batterypowered tape recorder to record their story . Mike Pattemore had been using the device to record his story .
 It was resting on a table where it was working perfectly until Mike moved it about 25cm towards the table’s edge to better record Frank's pleasant but quiet voice .
 Mike, believing the end of the tape had been reached, was about to insert a new one when it was observed that about half the tape was still unused . Mike was trying to replace the tape with a new tape when he noticed half of it was unused .
 It occurred to me that the recorder had been moved into the line of the strange field we had detected earlier . The recorder was moved into a strange field of strange light which had been detected earlier.
 Moving the recorder back to its original position solved the problem . We repeated this six times, using three different tapes, with the same result . The problem was solved by moving the recorder six times .
 The mystery deepened when the electronic flash on Brenda’s camera would not function anywhere in the front room but operated perfectly outside . Brenda's camera would also not function in front room, but in the outside .
 Radar was considered a likely candidate for the problem but had to be ruled out because other properties, in the line of sight, should also have been affected but weren't . This was a perplexing and persistent problem which scuppered every hypothesis put forward .
 Frank showed us a meticulously kept log of the number of units of energy consumed; very 24 hours . The intermittent and random recording of up to 44 units in a single period was reflected in the enormous quarterly bills which he received .
 The vast amount of energy is equivalent to a three-bar electric fire burning continuously for 15 hours . The vast majority of energy can be used to power a car .
 Frank was unable to use a small 25W bulb at the same time as boiling water in an electric kettle . It was therefore surprising that SWEB had not been concerned about this when they knew that Frank couldn't use the same light bulb as a kettle .
 I began by writing another letter to SWEB’s Mr Dickinson, asking for his comments on points that had emerged during my visit to Somerton, Somerton . Mr Dickinson is the 'elusive Mr Dickinson'
 A small selection of damaged components from Iverson Cottage . SWEB was equally bizarre: the socalled ‘Capenhurst Report’ was invoked time and again in an attempt to impede my investigation .
 Frank’s MP, Mark Robinson, was denied even a peep at the contents of the report . The report was guarded with extreme tenacity by SWEB, who had commissioned it, to the extent that the MP was denied access .
 ERDC say that evidence from SWEB engineers substantiates this . But when, in 1991, 1 met Alan Bennett, the engineer responsible for the daily change from mains to generator, he told me that Frank’s electrical supply was trouble free when the generator was used .
 Within days of completion in November 1993, all the phenomena had reappeared and, once again, they were typical of those caused by high voltage surges .
 Both refused and vehemently disputed the existence of high voltage surges, although these had been abundantly clear from the beginning . They both refused to be drawn to the idea of a high voltage surge .
 Martyn Stevens, the Home Improvements Manager at SEC, also confirmed the existence of the surges on the neutral conductor and the fact that SEC’s sales rep had seen the meter recording before the tails were connected .
 Martyn Stevens had repeated hearsay rather than making a statement of fact . When I asked him to confirm this in writing he declined, but following my letter telling him that our conversation had been recorded, I received a letter from Vincent O’Sullivan, Contracting Services Manager at SEC
 Men m BL ACK FBGM THE DTI . Things then took a turn for the very strange .
 They remarked that it was encrypted computer data being transmitted at speed . They asked whether they could borrow the tapes, promising to return them after they had been analysed .
 Nigel's tapes were never returned but, three days later, two men in a dark coloured car followed Nigel to work . The tapes never returned, but Nigel was followed to work by two men .
 Nigel was driven to Yeovil police station, under the pretext of attending a meeting concerning the electrical supply at Iverson Cottage . He was closely questioned concerning the recording of interference with radio reception .
 Nigel was bailed for causing criminal damage to SWEB property at his home . Nigel was eventually bailed for the damage caused by criminal damage at his house .
 A posse of police and SWEB officials was searching Iverson Cottage, under warrant . Nigel was in custody at the time of his arrest .
 The search was very thorough but, in the end, only a screwdriver and a soldering iron were taken away . The search for the suspect was a very thorough .
 SWEB said that the police initiated the search of Iverson Cottage; the police claimed that it was initiated it . SWEb said that police initiated it; police claimed it was the police .
 He left a contact telephone number that proved to be that of a garage on the A487 . The garage is located in a car park on the side of the main road .
 Judd arrived unannounced and appeared to be completely familiar with all the problems at Iverson Cottage . Judd arrived at the end of the season unannounced .
 He took an envelope bearing the name and address of Lady Zinia Judd, from his pocket . He wrote a contact telephone number on the back of it .
 He eventually spoke to someone purporting to be Robin Judd who said he was a farmer who had only been to Somerset once to sell some sheep in a market . He said that he was only visiting the area to sell sheep .
 Robin Judd was Lady Zinia’s brother-in-law and was some kind of electrical engineer, says probation officer . Ian Sawyer, Nigel's probation officer, wrote to him to say he was Robin Judd . Mr Judd was an electrical engineer according to the probation officer.
 Stewkley Grange, Lady Zinia’s home, was used by the security services, he said . He claimed that the information came from a Special Branch friend who said it was from a friend .
 Further events unconnected with the power supply added to the mystery of Iverson Cottage . Further events completely unrelated to the mysterious disappearance of the cottage .
 Frank Pattemore wrote a series of bizarre letters to the author of the book . The most bizarre was a letter he wrote to the writer about his experiences in the book's first edition .
 The letter was sent by first class mail in a hand-addressed envelope . But when it arrived at Iverson Cottage, it was missing and in its place was a letter from David Tomlinson in Kent to Lt Col Brounlie .
 If anything, there were now more unanswered questions than when I’d first become interested in the case . And so my investigation ended; if anything, it ended .
 An experience during his RAF service fostered a keen interest in the paranormal . An experience in the RAF fostered his interest in UFOs .
 On leaving the RAF, he completed teacher training at St Mary's College, Strawberry Hill and spent 23 years teaching in schools and colleges .
 Since leaving teaching, he has promoted the holistic way of life by writing and lecturing . He has promoted a holistic approach to life .
 Her legs are so short that when she stands on a marshy riverbank passers-by keep thinking she's sinking in mud and then call 999 . When she is standing on the marshy bank she can be seen by people who think she's in mud .
 Fire crews have been called out four times now to 'rescue' Mayflower . This has led to Mayflower getting the Shorty moniker from locals .
 The pony's short legs create the illusion that she's sunk up to the knees . Mr Phillips, of Hampshire Fire and Rescue Service, said: ‘Every time we get there we can see very quickly what we were dealing with a pony with short legs .
 The pony is oddly shaped but it is fit and healthy and there is no reason to worry about it . The pony's shape is odd, but it's healthy and it's not a problem .
 Mr Phillips, 50, said the pony must have inherited its unusual proportions from two different breeds .
 Owner Sandra Whitcher insists Mayflower is a pure-bred 12-year-old Shetland . Mayflower's owner insists she is a 'pure-bred' 12 year old .
 Mayflower sees them and just runs off so they realise she's not stuck at all . When they get here they realise they're not stuck . Mayflower then runs off and runs away .
 Shetland ponies, known for their short legs, typically grow to between 2ft 4in and 3ft 6in tall . Shetlands ponies are known for having short legs .
 New Forest ponies tend to be larger, tending to be between 4ft and 4ft lOin . They are more normally proportioned and larger than any other ponies .
 A series of distinctive double-raps were heard during a search for evidence that the ivorybilled woodpecker still survives in southern Louisiana . The distinctive double raps were not only heard by the searchers but also taped .
 As such sounds were characteristic of this dramatic species, ornithological hopes of its continuing existence duly received a considerable boost .
 Analysis of the sounds revealed that they were merely distant gun shots . The reverberations sounded to human ears like drumming . Analysis of these tantalising sounds has revealed they were actually distant gunshots .
 J linen, place the Sick Call Set and have crucifix inserted in a slot at top of base of base .
 Have on the table a glass of water, a spoon, the communion cloth, and a bottle which is supplied, filled with Holy water . Also, have on the . table, a . spoon, a communion cloth and a . bottle which . supplies Holy water.
 In addition to the above have a small plate containing crumbs of bread, and five small balls with the absorbent cotton furnished in the set .
 Be sure this birthday cake’s candles are out victim to a wildfire in Hoai-Tran Bui . He's an American icon on par with Mickey Mouse and Batman . Be sure that this cake's candles are .
 Little has changed for this symbol of fire safety . But other than that, little has changed in the past .
 Smokey Bear is the face of the longest-running public service campaign in the U.S. Smokey was created in 1944 by the United States Forest Service, the National Association of State Foresters and the Ad Council in response to public fears that enemy shelling during World War II would
 Even with drier conditions this year, the extent .of wildfires has greatly decreased since Smokey was first created . The extent . of wildfires in the area has also greatly decreased .
 The loss of forest to wildfires has been reduced from 22 million acres in 1944 to about 6. million acres annually today, Conlon said .
 Smokey’s voice has changed over the years, recorded mostly by various radio hosts . Smokey's voice has been recorded by several radio hosts, mostly from radio stations .
 Smokey is “definitely an outc . . ^ doorsman, like all those WestService in the Department of ern characters I’ve played all Agriculture.” Smokey says .
 With the current drought in fires, Elliott knows personally the cost of With the . current drought . The . current . drought in California has been devastating . And Elliott u than We did today .
 “The majority of wildfires are started by huthing,” Elliott said . “It’s easy to forget that the majority ° — * — j — x i was a pretty norrinc of wildfires.”
 "It's good of a tradition to let it die,” Briley declares . The flames leaped several hundred feet skyward, showering sparks throughout the fairground area .
 Young Fields, one of the injured, said he was standing near the Woman’s Building when he heard a loud noise . Large Ball of Flame Young Fields was injured in the blast .
 There still were exhibitors inside the huge wooden Woman’s Building .
 The largest poultry exhibit in the State Fair since it was resumed after World War II fell prey Monday night . Poultry , Fish Fall Prey To Fire . Livestock Exhibit OK; Smoky The Bear Lost Poultry .
 Smoky the Bear, an animated fire prevention exhibit by the Davidson County Soil Conservation District, was also lost . The exhibit was also a popular exhibit for the district .
 Throughout the day “Smoky” had been lecturing to a full house about the importance of handling fire with care .
 This particular educational exhibit was on loan from the Soil Conservation Service in Washington, D.C. The exhibit is on display at the National Museum of Agriculture .
 Exhibitors took precautionary measures by moving their animals from under the barn to the outer edges of the Fairgrounds . The Fairgrounds is located on the outskirts of the fairgrounds .
 Dairymen follow suit with the only light available being from the fire . Dairymen followed suit with only light from the light of the blaze .
 Glen G Summer, for nearly 40 years superintendent of livestock division, said this morning that as far as he can find out not an animal was injured . Summer: As far as possible, as far from an animal is not injured, no animal was in danger .
 The excessive heat caused some fear because animals tied in the building were cut loose and allowed to go free . Some fear animals tied to the building may have been tied up in the heat .
 This coupled with the fact that cooperative fellow exhibitors helped lead animals from the building, kept exhibitors up most of the night . The event was the first of its kind in the U.S. since 2008 .
 In the Agriculture Hall, which was completely destroyed, Felix Knight, manager of that division, said financial losses would run high especially in the Future Farmer of America division . Felix Knight: Financial losses will run high in Future Farmer's division .
 Davidson County Home Demonstration Club women had more than a score of educational booths of one type or another . Women had thousands of items they had made throughout the year for sale at the fair .
 The tent which housed the wildlife exhibit escaped the blaze, except for one corner nearest the fire . The tent containing the exhibit was the only one to escape .
 This tent was within a few yards of the Woman’s Building which was completely destroyed . The tent was near the destroyed building which was destroyed .
 Even the shavings under a portion of the tent were blackened by the excessive heat, yet today the tent still stands . The tent is still standing today .
 We loaded i the deer into a station wagon and then secured the poisonous snakes . The snakes were then secured in the car .
 We moved our bears in their cages down by the stock yards until the stockmen threatened to have them shot because they were making the cattle nervous . The bears were moved in cages by stockmen who threatened to shoot them if they kept them in cages .
 Some aquariums broke and some of the fish cooked . Others swam around in boiling water as if nothing had happened . Some of the aquariums were broken and some were cooked .
 Hawkins said a number of Vanderbilt students were of invaluable assistance in removing the animals . Hawkins said the animals were removed from the scene .
 Norman Bates, 23, of Franklin, said he carried a wild boar from the scene i n the trunk of his car . Game and Fish Commissioner guard Norman Bates says he carried the boar out of the trunk .
 Evidence suggests the mother snake has had multiple virgin births, producing 22 baby snakes that have no father . The mother snake is believed to have had 22 virgin births to produce 22 babies .
 Virgin births do occur among animals, says Dr Warren Booth . Our finding up-ends decades of scientific theory on reptile reproduction, he says .
 Many invertebrates, such as insects, can produce offspring asexually, without ever having mated . Insects can also produce offspring without mating or mating . In insects, insects can also have offspring without mating .
 They usually do this by cloning themselves, producing genetically identical offspring . This is when they do so to produce genetically identical children .
 Among vertebrate animals, it remains a novelty, having been documented among less than 0. 1% of vertebrate species .
 In 2006, scientists discovered that two komodo dragons had produced eggs that developed without being fertilised by sperm . The process is called parthenogenesis .
 Captive female hammerhead sharks can reproduce without having sex . In 2007, other scientists found captive female sharks could also reproduce without sex .
 Not including genetic material from the father essentially having just a single biological parent reduces genetic diversity and makes it more difficult for organisms to adapt to, for example, changed environmental conditions or emergence of a new disease .
 Scientists and snake experts based in the United States have identified the first case of a boa snake having a virgin birth . The first case has been identified by a team of scientists and experts from the U.S.
 The female snake in question has produced offspring the like of which have never been seen before . What is more is more, the female snake is producing offspring of which never have been seen .
 The captive-born female Boa constrictor produced two litters of live offspring in two years . She was housed with four male snakes at the time .
 This colour is a rare recessive genetic trait, which is carried by the mother but not by any of the potential fathers . It is a recessive trait, and carried by only the mother and only the potential father .
 Dr Booth and colleagues conducted a series of genetic tests on snakes to solve the enigma .
 DNA fingerprinting revealed that the offspring had a number of genetic differences from any of their potential fathers . It ruled out all the males as sires of the litter, which ruled out any of the males .
 That confirmed the first instance of a known virgin birth among boa snakes . It was the first recorded virgin birth in a known boa snake species .
 Sex chromosomes are packages of DNA that drive the development of sexual characteristics . They essentially make animals genetically male or genetically female . Sex chromosomes make animals male or female .
 Humans have X or Y sex chromosomes; females have two X chromosomes and males have a combination of an X and a Y chromosome . Humans for example have X and Y chromosomes .
 snakes and many other reptiles have Z and W chromosomes . In place of X and Y, snakes have X and Z chromosomes . Reptile chromosomes are X chromosomes .
 The snakes inherited all their genetic material from their mother, as only females carry the W chromosome . This is further proof that the snakes inherit all their . genetic material .
 Baby snakes have inherited two copies of one half of their mother's chromosomes, including one W chromosome . That is because they have inherited one copy of one of the mother's W chromosomes . The baby snakes have also inherited a W chromosome from their mother .
 No vertebrate animal in which females carry the odd sex chromosome has ever been recorded naturally producing viable WW offspring via a virgin birth . More astonishing though, is that no vertebrate animals in which the females carry odd sex chromosomes have ever produced viable offspring .
 All known examples of parthenogenesis are male, carrying a ZZ chromosomal arrangement . In such species, all known examples are male with ZZ chromosomes .
 The only previously known animals to carry this WW chromosome pairing were created by scientists in the laboratory . They used intricate genetic techniques to artificially alter the way animal eggs develop .
 One other mystery is what prompted the female snake to give birth this way . The snake is believed to have given birth to a female snake .
 Bruce “Zen” Benefiel, author and speaker, matter-offactly shared details of his otherworldly encounters . Event volunteer Bruce ‘Zen’ Benefiel was a guest at the event .
 Benefiel Benefiel, 57, was adopted when he was 5, and at the time, he started questioning where he came from . Benefiel was orphaned as a child, and was adopted at 5 .
 Every so often, he said, he sees visions of “three tall Zetas” - humanoid aliens first reported in 1947 . UFO-Alien database says humanoid aliens were first reported by 1947 .
 He said they’re watching us now, observing us from afar, and will one day return . He said he said they're watching us .
 He encouraged the crowd to speak up and talk about their experiences . But it’s a different time now, and he encouraged them to do so .
 Harris said the history of the area’s connection to UFOs dates back to at least 1947 . Van Tassel was an aircraft mechanic and flight inspector who worked for Douglas Aircraft, Hughes Aircraft and Lockheed . He moved his family to Landers, where they lived out at the Giant Rock
 As the story goes, Van Tassel began having visions or connections with gnflPP hoiniJg_frnm_VpnilS . He began to wonder about his biological father and mother . Van Tassels: "I have no idea what happened to me when I was
 He remembers waking up in the corner of his room and watching his body get out of bed, climb out of the window and walk across a large pasture . He said he watched his body climb out the window to walk across the pasture .
 "Although he never knew what happened in the cloud, he always woke up happy," says the author of the book . "I'm not sure what happened to him, but he was always happy"
 In 1981, while walking through a metaphysical book store in Muncie, Indiana, a book fell off the shelf and landed at his feet . The book fell from the shelf in the store and landed on his feet, he says .
 George Noory, Giorgio A Tsoukalos and Erich von Daniken are among the headliners of this year’s event . The event features a lineup of nearly 40 speakers, including radio talk show hosts .
 Local historian Barbara Harris has studied the Morongo Basin communities for 30 years . She has studied Morongo Valley, Landers and Joshua Tree for the past 30 years.
 Von Daniken examined ancient ruins, lost cities, space-ports and scientific data that point to extraterrestrial intervention in human history . Von Danik examines ancient ruins and lost cities in his book .
 UFOs visited Earth before the great flood, before Noah boarded the animals AAVSVV, UUU, U.V*iVl b V** the crowd to speak up and talk about their experiences .
 Some of the estimated 2,000 attendees — including volunteers and staff — arrived on Thursday, before the official start of the conference . The conference is being held at an historic site in New York .
 Giant Rock in Landers is thought to be the largest free-standing boulder in the world . Barbara Harris, a local historian, took a group of 40 people on a tour out to Giant Rock .
 Harris and his family moved to Landers, where they lived out at the Giant Rock . Harris hopped into her yellow, Toyota FJ Cruiser and led a caravan led by his wife .
 As the story goes, Van Tassel began having visions or connections with space beings from Venus . The story goes that he began to have visions of space beings .
 Van Tassel put on openair conferences called the Interplanetary Spacecraft conventions, which began April 4, 1953 . The conferences were held in conjunction with the first interplanetary spacecraft conventions .
 The group gathered close as Harris expounded on the history and mystery of the rock . Harris: "The rock is the most important piece of history in the world"
 There used to be an airstrip nearby, where people with planes — including Howard Hughes — flew in to visit and to dine at a restaurant . The restaurant used to sit just yards from the rock . Howard Hughes used to visit the restaurant .
 The dismembered chunk rests on its back next to its 25,000-ton behemoth parent .
 Harris encouraged people to lean up against the rock fragment . — which itself is a massive boulder — and feel its warmth and energy . Harris encourages people to feel the energy and warmth .
 As the sun set behind the mountains, those in the group gathered together .
 Sitting on camping-style chairs, they focused their attention on the skies . They focused on the weather .
 This is the earliest depiction of the Thessalian Kyzikos, the son ot Apoiio ana meiounuer the famous city of Kyzzos . Located at the Sea of Marmara, the tuna fish catch was so important that the city’s coin
 The reverse shows a quadripartite incuse squi . A rare and very fine com. A rare 7 fine com .
 The entire trade m grain as well as slaves in die Black Sea Region was transacted with eiecirmn coins irum Kyzikos such as this for many decades . The entire Trade m grain and slaves in the Black Sea region were transacted .
 The site of ancient Kyzikos is located in the modem Balikesir Frovn of Turkey . The site is located near the city of Kyzikios in the modern era .
 It was located on the shoreward side of the present Kapidag Fenmsula (the Classical rircioniie&usj tombolo) It is said to have originally been an island in the Sea of Mannara only to be connected to the mainland in historic times .
 Ursus americanus has several different colour morphs (non-taxonomic colour varieties), including the exotic-looking glacier bear . The bear's pelage can vary from cinnamon to blue-grey .
 The spirit bear, nicknamed the spirit bear by Costello, had previously succeeded in avoiding public notice . Although its existence had been known for a few years to Alaskan biologists, this coat-coloured contradiction had previously been known .
 A labama's creaky old mansions and mossdraped cemeteries provide the backdrop for the state's tradition of spinetingling storytelling and history of paranormal activity .
 Little goblins flock to Bellingrath Gardens and Home' Balloon Glow in the Garden, when the Great Lawn is illuminated by hot air bal and inflatable monsters . Find a multitude of tours and treks to the state's most spirited attractions this haunting season .
 Event is October 26; admission is $6 for adults, $3 for children . Festivities include food, live music, and trick-or-treatinc .
 Mobile's Own Ghost Stories offers a motorized tour of the city's haunted histo spots . Over at Fort Conde, Mobile's reconstructed 1 8th-century fort, mobile's own Ghost Stories tours the city of Mobile .
 $20 per person, reservations required. Available year-round. $20-a-person .
 Huntsville Ghost Walk offers guided family-friendly ghost walks and trolley tours through old downtown . From June through October, visit Huntsville ghost walk through downtown .
 Haunted Hearse Tours of Montgomery glide past the city's creepiest sites, including Hank Williams' grave at the Oakwood Cemetery Annex . Living souls cruise with the haunted Hearse tours .
 Shannon Fontaine blends comedy and tragedy with his tales . He retells the Capitol building murder, Huntingdon's Red Lady, and the otherworldly little boy who scares downtown workers . Fontaine's hearse is filled with people riding in his hearse .
 Edhearsemgm. available year-round; after dark till midnight . $15 cash per person, reservations required .
 Visit alabamahauntedhouses.com for information on other spooky Halloween happenings around the state .
 JoBeth McDaniel is a freelance writer who once bobbed for apples during -Andalusia's East Three Notch Halloween carnival . Karl von Cosel has a history of necrophilia .
 James E CONLAN tells the scarcely-credible story of a man who loved too well and none too wisely . James E. CONLAN is the author of a new book, "James E. Conlan" James E Conlan tells the story of his life in New York City
 KARL VON COSEL CUT a major figure when he arrived in Key West, Florida, in 1930 .
 In his mkh50s, he spoke with a German accent, sported a cane, monocle, and wore tennis shoes with no socks . He spoke with an accent, wore a cane and monoculars, spoke with German accent .
 Obviously well-educated, he referred to himself as a ‘doctor’ having a medical degree . Obviously well educated, he called himself a 'doctor'
 He was working as an X-ray technician when he met 23-year-old Elena Hoyos Mesa, a Cuban woman dying of tuberculosis . He met her when he was working in Havana, Cuba .
 Elena’s parents took her to a local Hallowe’en parade, believing that she needed some fresh air . Although she was extremely ill, Elena's parents decided to take her to the parade . Elena was very ill, but her parents decided she needed fresh air and took
 She had to be rushed home, coughing acutely, and died several hours later . She had been rushed home and rushed to hospital .
 Karl visited Elena’s grave daily, and sometimes nightly, after her funeral . After her funeral, Karl visited her grave daily . Karl visited the grave every day .
 He received pennission from her parents to build an ornate mausoleum to hold her mortal remains . He received permission to build the ornate tomb .
 Two years later, he removed her coffin, taking it, first, to his home a shack that was once a slaughterhouse . He then took it to a cabin of a grounded airship that he owned .
 His grand plan was to reconstruct the airship, resurrect Elena, and fly to a South Pacific island . Elena died in the crash, but her body has never been found since .
 Elena’s sister began to suspect she was not in the mausoleum . They lived together, undisturbed, for seven years . Elena's sister thought she had been missing for seven .
 The 'doctor' invited the sister and her husband to his home . To placate her, the ‘doctor’ invited them to his . home .
 He intended to show them that Elena was much better off with him than moldering away in her coffin . He wanted to show the world that Elena would be better off in his arms .
 It was well equipped with scales, microscopes, and shelves, full of various chemicals and glassware .
 The second room had a very large bed, with Elena sitting up on it, wearing a satin gown, wedding band, and tiara . Elena sat in the second room wearing the gown, a tiara, and a wedding band .
 Her hair, adorned with a myrtle wreath, was all that that was left of the original body . Her brown glass eyes stared off into space . Her hair was adorned with an adorned wreath .
 Karl was promptly locked up by the sheriff . His sister notified the sheriff and he was locked up . Karl's sister reported him to the police .
 Men tended to believe that he was a combination of failed Dr Frankenstein and Phantom of the Opera and his ‘treatment’ of Elena sounded more like quackery .
 Karl describes placing an “electrode on her chest, gradually increasing the high frequency current until the milliamperes showed 400 . Karl: “I was very happy to be able to see my daughter’s face, but I was not happy to see her face
 A surprising number of women thought von Cosel was a complete romantic, totally obsessed with his eternal love . However, a surprising number thought he was a total romantic .
 The statute of limitations meant Karl could not be charged with illegally exhuming a corpse . However, he was accused of grave robbing .
 Exactly six months from the day of his release from jail, he left town . He left town six months after his release .
 Elena's mausoleum was destroyed by a mysterious blast . Five hours later, Elena’s funeral was destroyed . Elena was buried in a mysterious explosion at the site .
 He survived by writing for pulp magazines and selling postcards of his beloved . Settling elsewhere in Florida, he wrote for pulp magazine and sold postcards .
 The really ghoulish details of Karl's obsession were only revealed 20 years after his death by the hearing’s medical examiner during a magazine interview . Karl was a member of the hearing's medical examiner .
 He stated that the replica’s breasts felt real and, between her legs, was a padded tube in which traces of sperm were found . The replica's breasts felt like real, he said .
 This information was never disclosed as there was no trial and therefore no testimony given . There was no testimony from the trial .
 This medical examiner was not part of the team that gave the psychological examination . The medical examiner did not give the results of the psychological exam .
 A pump contained 501bs of mercury from a pump which contained 501b of the stuff that happened while Karl was a college student . Karl was in college at the time of the incident .
 He blames a ‘poltergeist’ but, whatever the cause, it would be, today, considered a major toxic waste spill .
 Karl von Cosel's memoirs are recorded in Ben Harrison's Undying Love (St. Louis-based Ben Harrison)
 James E CONLAN lives in Connecticut, U.S. and is a longtime FT correspondent . He says he is proud of his work in the field of business .
 If patrons of your establishments complain that their toes stick out from under the sheets, you had better be careful . If you want your toes to stick out, you might be in trouble .
 Department of Conservation official: Hotel and Restaurant Inspection of Hotel and Restaurants Inspection is on the watch . Sam I Bolton is the director of the division of hotel and restaurant inspection of the department .
 Bolton said hotels, tourist courts and other places taking guests for the night that don't have sheets at least 99 inches in length will be prosecuted . Bolton said his department was going to prosecute all hotels that do not have sheets .
 The penalty, Bolton said, is a fine of from $10 to $25 for every undersize sheet . Bolton said the penalty is from $25 to $10 .
 I therefore caution all persons from trading with or harboring her on my account, as I will pay no debts of her contracting . I therefore cautions all persons . from trading . with her . As a result of her contract, she will not be able to repay any debts .
 I also forbid any person purchasing said mare or receiving any articles taken from me . I will not be allowed to use the mare as a mare .
 Fugitive Slave Disguises Herself As White Man by Paul Chrastina . William Craft and his wife, Ellen, often discussed ways they might escape from slavery in Macon, Georgia .
 William Craft was a dark-skinned man who worked as an assistant to his owner, a white cabinetmaker . Craft was the assistant of a cabinetmaker who worked for the owner of Craft's house . Craft died at the hands of a family member in 1881 . Craft's wife was
 Ellen Craft was a light-skinned woman who worked as a housemaid for her owner, a white physician . Craft worked for the owner of the housemaid, who was white . Craft was the subject of a series of stories in which she worked for a white doctor .
 Newlyweds were able to visit one another for only a few hours after each day’s work was done . Because they belonged to different masters, the newlyweds had to visit each other for a short time .
 They talked of fleeing to the free northern states, where they could begin a new life and raise a family . They said they would be able to start a new family in northern states .
 The laws under which we lived did not recognize her to be a woman, but a mere chattel, to be bought and sold, or otherwise dealt with as her owner might see fit . She saw that the laws under . which . we lived didn't recognize her as a woman
 William secretly purchased the clothing needed for Ellen’s disguise . William used savings from allowance paid to his master and wages from his part-time job as a waiter in Macon .
 He delivered them to her, and she kept them in a locked chest of drawers in her room . He delivered the gifts to her and she hid them in locked drawers .
 William and Ellen made the final preparations for their escape from London . Ellen and William made the most of their escape preparations for Christmas .
 The couple decided that Ellen would his master at the ticket counter— he pose as a wealthy young slaveholder had apparently become suspicious that named William Johnson, and that they William might be trying to escape, would use public transportation to William’s master . The only problem with this plan
 The cabinetmaker looked into steamships that would take them to Ellen’s carriage, but did not recognize freedom . Ellen's carriage would take her to the carriage .
 Ellen had an idea to solve the problem when the train left the station . Fortunately, the train began to leave the station before the cabinet had to decide .
 Ellen, meanwhile, found herself in My wife raised her head, and an equally alarming situation . Ellen was in the middle of a panic . Ellen's husband's wife raised his head and found himself in an alarming situation. Ellen was also in the midst of a crisis .
 Ellen stared out the window and another poultice, and put it in a white handkerchief to be worn . Cray repeated his comment in a under the chin, up the cheeks and louder voice, but Ellen continued to to tie over the head .
 This nearly ignore him. hid the expression of the countenance, as well as the beardless chin . This nearly ignored him .
 William bought a pair of dark-green sunglasses for Ellen to wear, and cut her hair . Ellen wore the disguise to complete the disguise . William bought the pair of sunglasses and cut the hair .
 William and Ellen made their way to the Macon train station on December 21, 1848 . William died in 1848 in Macon, Georgia . Ellen and William were married at the time of their wedding .
 Ellen boarded a passenger coach, while William took his place aboard a baggage car . Ellen purchased tickets to Savannah under the alias ‘William Johnson,’ William Johnson . Ellen boarded the passenger coach and William boarded a baggage train .
 William Craft was shocked to see William Craft looking out the window of the baggage car . Cray turned towards some of the other passengers, who had taken notice of his attempt to start a conversation .
 Ellen turned to Cray with a polite bow and said, “Yes,” then resumed looking out the window . Ellen said, "Yes, yes," before looking back at Cray and continuing to look out window .
 The remainder of the two-hundredmile trip to Savannah passed without incident .
 William and Ellen boarded a steamer bound for Charleston, South Carolina . William died at the age of 92 . Ellen and William left for Charleston .
 Ellen quickly retired to her cabin, leaving William to sleep on the deck of the ship . William slept in the ship's deck, leaving Ellen sleeping in her cabin .
 The next morning William found Ellen having breakfast in the ship’s galley . William found her in the galley.
 Disguised as ‘Mr Johnson’ she was seated at the right hand of the captain . Disguising as “Mr Johnson,” she sat in the captain’s chair .
 Ellen still had one hand In a slm S’ 11 w as William’s duty to Carve her ur n. n. W’11 . William had to carry out his duty to carve her in the same way .
 I think you are very likely to spoil your boy by saying ‘thank you’ to him, a young military officer snoT en f d -“ IaSSUreyOU ’ sir ’ not hing vom’ /h ^ 6 S °
 L fl t f ° Phlladel P hia for medical said to her “v^‚” 1 P ain treatment at all. P ain tr, L Mj e manJced f nd he J eft the table. L flt t f
 The captain hn ° er ’ You have a very attentive boy sir; but you had better watch him like a hawk when you get on to the North.’ ’
 William. reDlied 0 ""^ t0 SeII> sir "’” Ellen replied . The slave trader then offered to buy William . Ellen replied: ‘’
 I cannot get on well without i or medical oa a n n n l at all bUt f ° Visita health spa in Arkansas instead . Visita is a health spa .
 There were a large number of persons on the quay waiting the arrival of the steamer, William wrote . William wrote, “but we were afraid to venture out for fear that someone might recognize me; or that had heard that we were gone, and had telegraphed
 The slave n,. passen S ers were gone, we had trader said. However, after You will have to get on without him otheTZl “ ^ ^ ^ UntiI a11 the if you take him to the North,” the slave n
 Ced °"" a triage], me take him down to Orleans a 1 k my master ’ by the arm . He hobbled across Mason's and Dixon’s line T ’ g0t and we drove off.”
 Slave trader brought his fist )wn on t foki, ' a lew nours before going back to the wharf . He intended to board a steamship bound for Wilmington, North Carolina .
 The slave trader followed her onto the deck of the ship, which was approaching Charleston harbor . A small crowd gathered as he followed EHen, repeating his offer to buy Wilham Wilham .
 The other passengers joined in, advising Ellen to sell, or at least treat William with harshness to escape." The other passenger joined in . Ellen advised her to sell . William's slave to Philadelphia .
 The man then asked Ellen to sign the ship s register for the tickefs . Ellen signed the ship's register . The man asked her to sign it .
 The young officer awkwardly shook Ellen’s bandaged right hand and loudly announced that he knew “Mr Johnson” very well . Ellen's bandaged hand is bandaged and Ellen is still recovering from a gunshot wound .
 He thanked him kindly, and the young officer begged my master to go with him, and have something to drink and cigar . But as he had not acquired these accomplishments, he excused himself, and we went on board and came off to Wilmington .
 Crafts boarded a train for Richmond, Virginia, on December 23 . After arriving in Wilmington on the morning of December 23, the Crafts left Wilmington, Virginia for Richmond .
 Ellen rode in a passenger car while William rode with the baggage . Ellen rode with William in the passenger car . William rode in the baggage car .
 William was asked about his master and their destination by the train conductor . William's master was William's owner .
 The conductor arranged for Ellen to move to a sleeping compartment . Ellen's explanation seemed to satisfy the conductor, who arranged for her to move .
 The Crafts traveled by steamboat up the Potomac River to Washington, D.C., and took another train to Baltimore, Maryland . Arriving in Richmond a few hours later, the Crafts changed trains to Fredericksburg, traveled by steamedboat to Washington .
 William was about to step into a baggage car when a train conductor stopped him . Ellen boarded one of the carriages when William was stopped by the conductor . William was not allowed to enter the baggage car .
 "I stepped into ‘my master’s” carriage, to inform him of the difficulty . I stepped into "my master's" carriage, he said . "I’m not sure how long it will be for him," he said.
 I also tried to wear a cheerful countenance, in order to break the shock of the sad news . As soon as he looked up and saw me, he smiled. page 18 .
 He was aware that if we were fortunate we should reach our destination at five o’clock the next morning, and this made it the more painful to communicate what the officer had said . As there was no time to lose, he went up to him and asked him how he felt
 He said, “Much better,” and that he thanked God we were getting on so nicely. He said that he was much better. He thanked God for helping us get on so well .
 I then said we were not getting on quite so well as we had anticipated. I said we had been getting on very well as I had anticipated, then said: 'I then said that we had got on very badly. We had to get on very quickly'
 The conversation drew the attention of other passengers waiting to board the train, several of whom expressed their disapproval . William wrote that they thought his master was a slaveholder and invalid gentleman, and therefore it was wrong to detain him .
 "Mr Johnson" and his slave had come together on his train from Washington . William and Ellen had just left the train and had just walked up to the ticket counter .
 A bell rang, announcing the departure of the train to Philadelphia . A few seconds later, a bell rang . The train left Philadelphia .
 He then told the clerk to run and tell the conductor to 'let this gentleman and slave pass;’ adding, ‘As he is not well, it is a pity to stop him here’
 Ellen thanked the man, and “hobbled across the platform as quickly as possible,” William wrote . Ellen said, “We will let him go. We will . He will be let go.’”
 On the final leg of their journey William met a free black man who was also traveling from Baltimore to Philadelphia . William met the man in Philadelphia, Philadelphia .
 William could find refuge there if he wanted to run away from his master . The man gave him the address of a boardinghouse that was owned by abolitionists .
 On Christmas morning, four days after leaving Macon, the Crafts arrived in Philadelphia . The Crafts left Macon four days before Christmas .
 He said he thought not, but he would call in some persons who knew more about the laws than himself . He said: "I thought not. But he said not. He said it would not be necessary."
 William and Ellen became well known for their escape from bondage in Boston . With the help of the Philadelphia abolitionists, they moved further north to Boston, where they escaped .
 William found work as a cabinetmaker, while Ellen worked as a seamstress . William and Ellen worked together as cabinetmakers and seamstresses . William worked as cabinetmaker and Ellen as seamstress.
 Congress passed the Fugitive Slave Act less than two years after the Crafts’ arrival in Boston . Slave hunters could legally capture and return slaves to their former owners .
 Boston abolitionists, along with members of the city’s politically active free black community, helped the Crafts to elude the slave hunters . The Crafts were helped elude slave hunters and moved to England where they were assisted by members of English antislavery movement .
 The couple raised five children and attended school, learning to read and write . They attended school and went on to raise five more children .
 In 1860 William wrote an account of their escape titled Running a Thousand Miles for Freedom . William wrote a book titled Running A Thousand Miles For Freedom .
 Ten years after the end of the U.S. Civil War, the Crafts returned to Georgia, settling near Savannah . They started an agricultural school for former slaves for free .
 Faced with increasing financial problems, segregation, and the rise of the Ku Klux Klan, they were forced to close the school and move in with a daughter who lived in Charleston, South Carolina .
 SasrJsSai iSM Mi jha**f^ ""3 1 1 15 f : •§*<£ V* n y _ Pj 1> aj P d *g O E -o o B <0 n <5 2 J( ■5 52
 The 25-minute storm caused widespread damage to houses, vehicles, trees and power supplies in Zhengzhou and Luoyang . The storm is the first to hit China's capital, Zhengzhou .
 Most of the fatalities were caused by buildings collapsing under the weight of the hail, but at least seven resulted from direct hits . At least seven people were killed in the hail storm .
 Freak hailstorms have previously hit towns in Nigeria, Australia and Russia . Some reports claim hailstones the size of footballs have been reported in the past .
 Juan Carlos Oseguera, 19, died when he was hit by ""baseball-size"" hail in Fort Worth, Texas, sometime around March 2000 .
 Two suicide notes in her handbag complained about her unfaithful husband and apologised to her family . The suicide notes were found in the handbag of the mother-of-three .
 WILLIAM POTOGI was given a ritual bath by a witch doctor in Paramaribo, Surinam, to make him bullet-proof .
 He asked the witch doctor's assistant to test whether it had worked and was shot dead with his own sawn-off shotgun at point-blank range .
 Moustafa Mohammed, 35, confessed to killing Yosra Mohammed, 19, who had reported her missing . Mohammed, who reported her to police, beheaded her seven-year-old daughter .
 EDWARD McBRIDE, 37, drowned with more than 501b of stolen cameras and CDs, among other items, drowned when he refused to let go of his loot while swimming across the Arkansas River in August .
 Police from Tulsa, Oklahoma, were chasing him when he jumped into the muddy water with a duffel bag containing the goods . Police say he jumped in to the water with the bag .
 Rory GRAHAM, 22, DIED AFTER FALLING into the sea from a cliff on Ibiza on 19 May a week after his parents in Bridge of Allen, Stirlingshire, received a hoax call claiming he was killed .
 He was pulled unconscious from the water by the crew of a local fishing boat and died later in hospital . The man died in hospital in hospital after being pulled unconscious .
 A Thai woman jumped to her death into a pool at the Samut Prakan Crocodile Farm near Bangkok on 11 August . Tourists were preparing to feed the crocodiles with buckets of chicken .
 Somjai Serabul put down her handbag and a bottle of water before jumping off a bridge into the water . The 32-year-old jumped off the bridge in a bid to save her life .
 She appeared to hug the first crocodile that clamped its jaws around YEAR-OLD daughter after suspecting her uncle had raped her . The crocodile clamped jaws around the year-old daughter of her uncle .
 EGYPTian farmer buried his unmarried sister alive in an 'honour killing' after she became pregnant . He buried her alive in a bid to honour her honour .
 SHIRLEY STOCKSDALE, 75, got her arm caught in a sofa bed in Cape Coral, Florida, in August 2001 . Her arm was caught in the bed of a couch bed .
 Though she was just inches from a telephone and a whistle, she was stuck for at least two days and died . She was probably from dehydration and stress and died from dehydration .
 She might have been trying to lift the bed out of the sofa, perhaps to pick up something that had fallen under it . She may have been lifting up the bed from the sofa .
 Classical compositions performed by the Philadelphia Orchestra are the soundtrack for dazzling Disney animation . Philadelphia Orchestra conducted by Leopold Stokowski .
 It was required viewing for every pothead I knew in high school. It's been re-released a few times and was re-watching for everyone .
 Originally, there was a little female centaur named Sunflower who was pretty much a handmaiden/personal assistant for the tall, beautiful white, blonde, dare I say 'Aryan' centaurs . Sunflower was originally a handmaidan/assistant to the tall
 Sunflower is drawn along racist lines to be a ""pickininny Negro"" big lips, nappy hair and all . Sunflower was created by Sunflower in the 1930s .
 She was removed from the 1960 release of Fantasia, and edited out of the 1990 50th Anniversary edition, and laser disks . She was edited from the 1990 edition of the album and laser disk .
 The 50th anniversary DVD is so badly edited that after removal of the third appearance of dear Sunflower, the sound track isn't matching up with the film any more . After removal of third appearance, the film's sound track doesn't match up with film .
 A copy of the Disney film has been found in the U.S. It was released by Disney, but not Disney .
 I vaguely recall a few Bugs Bunny cartoons being withheld from release on some recent Big Deal Anniversary because it was decided they were racist or unacceptable, going by today's standards . I vaguely remember a few cartoons being held back from release because they were deemed unacceptable .
 "If you pay close attention to Disney's animation now, they're still full of racism and sexism," says the author . "They still have to be careful of what they say, and what they really mean mean."
 Larry Tribula shares an intriguing discovery with CNN iReporter David Gergen . The discovery was made in the form of a new book, The New York Times' Larry Tribulas . The book is published by CNN iReport .
 Larry noticed a bear on all fours in a Michigan restaurant . He describes it as being displayed near to some black bears . Larry was dining at a restaurant called Antlers in the Upper Peninsula .
 This particular individual, roughly the size of a juvenile black bear, was golden brown in colour and, departing significantly from the typical ursine form, sported a long bushy tail, resembling that of anteaters but not quite as large . However, this particular individual was .
 Larry did not consider it to be a hoax, and hopes to take a picture of it, should he ever return there . Larry does not believe it is a hoax . Larry hopes to photograph it if he ever returns .
 You Report Teachers from 1896 required to be top-notch teachers . Millie Gardett Munsey on horse Grasshopper in 1896 .
 Applicants had one shot at passing rigid test . Before being issued a credential, prospective teachers must devote years to completing a host of classes and then apply what they have learned during two quarters of student teaching .
 California students must also prove proficiency in reading, writing, and math . They must also pass the California Basic Education Skills Test .
 In 1896, a test called simply ‘the Teachers Examination’ was given in May just before the opening of school . The test was given to teachers in 1896 just before school began .
 It’s possible some of those who took the test in 1896 had completed all or part of a two-year program at one of California's two teacher training colleges in those days . It's possible that some of the people who took that test may have completed all of the two
 Your performance on the Teacher Examination was the sole determination of whether or not you were granted a certificate . Your performance in the Teacher Exam was the only determination .
 All sections had to be passed at a proficiency level of 60 percent or greater . All sections were passed at proficiency levels of 60 per cent .
 Today, students may retake any failed section of the curriculum . Students may also retake any section of their classes . Submit stories to Bakersfield.com/ youreport .
 In 1896, failing one section of the test meant that you had failed the test and you were not allowed to continue . But in 1896, failure to complete the test would have meant you failed to pass it .
 The 1896 exam covered spelling, arithmetic, physical geography, geography, physiology, music, music and literature . The exam was also covered geography, history, geography and geography .
 Takers had to “describe how a line is generated” Geometry was next, and takers were asked to explain how it generated .
 If you were seeking a teaching certificate in Kern County in 1896, you had to know a lot of stuff that you would never use in the classroom . In 1896, Kern County teachers had to learn a lot more about the classroom than they would use in their teaching certificates .
 Only the most astute could handle teaching 10, or 20, or 40 kids from all grade levels in one large room . The room was difficult to heat in January and impossible to cool in May or June .
 Passing the test meant a generous sary of $75 a month, perhaps as much as $85 if you would agree to haul in water and fire wood and sweep the floor once a week . But passing the test means a generous $75 per month .
 Jerry Kirkland is a retired elementary school principal who has been researching the history of Kern school districts for 12 years . He says the district has a history of being a Kern school district .
 Most of the schoolhouses were oneroom affairs with all grades being taught by a single teacher . All grades were taught by one teacher in the schoolhouse .
 Without buses, schools had to be built near Harrell clusters of people . Schools were built near the homes of some of the city's poorest people .
 Eight of the 86 teachers were men and 15 of the women were married . Most were, but eight were men, but 15 were married.
 Stockton, who would later serve as county superintendent of schools, was named Stockton Stockton . Alfred Harrell, Millie Gardett and Millie Munsey would also have a school named in her honor . A school in Bakersfield, California, is named after Munsey
 Pat Gracey, who was 23-years-old at the time, said it felt like her house was dancing . She said it was like it was dancing when she saw her house dancing .
 Gracey: "It was an old house, it was built in the 1880s, anyways it was doing a dance, and I started screaming,” Gracey said . Gracey says she started screaming when the dance began .
 Betty Freeman said she had to convince her husband that they weren't being bombed . Another resident, Betty Freeman, said she was forced to convince him that they were not being bombed.
 She said, 6C My husband thought he was back in World War II being bombed. She said she thought he had been back in WWII being bombed . 6C was 6C and 6C .
 Most residents were terrified by the vigorous shaking, some were not . Bob Burgeis was shaken by the shaking, but was not shaken by it .
 Main shock lasted just under a minute, claimed 13 lives, and devastated the town . The main shock lasted less than a minute and left 13 people dead .
 Joann Johnson, who owned the local newspaper with her husband, explains what it was like to see Downtown Tehachapi after the earthquake . She and her husband owned the newspaper together .
 Fear of another big earthquake and even aftershocks, many people slept outside for weeks and even months . Many people slept out for weeks or months .
 Joann Johnson said, “We slept outside on our families front yard, for about a week. We slept outside . Joann said she and her family slept in the family's front yard for a week .
 The 1952 earthquake caused massive damage to Tehachapi, New Mexico . Everyone in the town agreed that the earthquake made it stronger . The town was devastated by the earthquake, but the town was rebuilt .
 White often told her grandchildren of Civil War events and her last days as a slave . White often said she was a slave and slave to her grandchildren .
 She was the oldest member of an Old Age Club at Bethlehem Center and a member of Mt. Mt. Olympus . She was also the oldest person in the Bethlehem Center, a club at Bethlehem and a club in Bethlehem .
 Carmel Baptist Church and the Union of the First Street Baptist Church are two churches . The funeral will be held at Mt. Carmel in New York City, New Jersey .
 Survivors include 15 grandchildren, 62 great-grandchildren and 37 great-great-grandchilds . Survivors include one son, James White of Nashville .
 A missing girl in New Zealand was found safe in a van that was part of the search party . The girl was found in the van part of a search party that was searching for the missing girl .
 Yona Hou, seven, fell asleep in the back of her family's van after leaving a chip shop . She had fallen asleep in back of the van when she fell asleep after leaving the shop . The seven-year-old was taken to hospital by paramedics after falling asleep .
 Yona's mother drove the van around Waiuku, south of Auckland, looking for her . After reporting her missing, the mother drove around the town looking for the missing girl .
 T he Irish have always had a way with death .
 Few other nations can measure up to the Irish in the number and variety of folklore, traditions, and stories about death and dying .
 Another explanation exists, though, one less concrete, yet equally dramatic and historical . Another explanation is that the story of the Civil War was actually a hoax .
 Many of the Irish customs of death and dying are ancient holdouts, remnants of the pre-Christian Celtic society that at one time inhabited the Western Islands .
 They have been altered in constant retelling over many centuries, but they retain that element of Celtic pagan belief once so common .
 A body of Irish folklorists and scholars will explain that the leprechaun is actually Lugh of the Long Arm, the ancient Celtic god of light and the arts . The mysterious Irish fairy known as the pucha is a distortion of Epona, a Celtic horse goddess .
 As our modern technological society continues its unending march across the globe, traditional folk belief and custom is crushed beneath its merciless tread . Traditional folk belief, custom and tradition is crushed under the merciless tread of modern technology .
 Legend of the death omen still lingers in rural areas of western Ireland . The banshee is most famously known as the banshee, most famously in Ireland .
 Even in the face of the recent technological and economic boom Ireland is experiencing, the idea persists in some quarters that a supernatural being lingers in the very shadow of death .
 Bean means woman and Si designates the fairies; quite simply, a Bean si or banshee is a fairy woman . A Bean si is a banshee, or a banhee .
 The Tir na nOg, or “Land of Eternal Youth” is a place few mortals have visited, and from which even fewer have returned . As such she is making her abode in the Tir na og, making her a member of the world's most famous
 The banshee, while sharing some characteristics with spirits, is not a ghost . "The banshee" is not "a ghost"
 She never lived as a mortal human, but exists as a creature with her own purpose . She was born as a child, but she was never a child . She is now a woman with a unique purpose .
 Traditionally the banshee has held a particular function — to chaoin over the recent or impending death in a noble Gaelic family . The banshee holds a function over the death of a noble family .
 "In this mode, the banshee is not menacing, but rather a sympathetic otherworldly figure who feels sorrow and offers condolence" "The banshee" was not menacing but rather rather sympathetic otherworld figure .
 Like many of the fairy legends, the story of the banshee suggests an older origin . The banshee is believed to have been born in the U.S.
 The Celts believed that their kings and chieftains were not the owners of the land, but rather the human manifestations of it . The ancient Celts believe that the land is owned by humans, not its owners .
 As the king was responsible for the health of the land, so famine, plague, drought, or crop failure were likewise blamed on the king and his rule .
 On his inauguration, the new leader was symbolically wed to the local goddesses of sovereignty in any number of ceremonies . The new leader is symbolically married to his new government .
 His misrule would anger the goddess, causing her to punish her ‘husband’ and the land he oversaw . The goddess would punish him for his misrule .
 At the death of the leader, the goddess might manifest herself to grieve along with his human widow . The goddess may manifest herself along with the human widow of a leader .
 This theory of the banshee’s origins is further bolstered by the legend that accompanies the epic Battle of Clontarf in 1014 .
 The night before the Irish king Brian Boru was to give battle to the Danes, he was visited by the goddess Aoibheall . The goddess was native to the region around County Clare, County Clare .
 Aoibheall foretold the death of the king and announced his son Donnchad as successor to him . The king's death was announced by his son and his successor Donnchade as successor .
 This would seem a likely origin of the banshee as a female being who follows royal Irishmen . The banshee is believed to have been the most powerful female being in Ireland .
 This term may refer back to the Celtic war goddess Badb, again demonstrating the banshee’s pagan origins .
 Not every death is heralded by the fearful wailing of the banshee, thankfully enough . The banshee's death is not the first death to be heralded .
 Folklore tells us that the banshee is attached only to very important families, usually of Gaelic stock . Folklore says that the banhee is only attached to very powerful families .
 Stories of the banshee come not only from Gaelic families, but from Saxon septs with distinctly Saxon surnames . The banshee is said to have come from a number of Saxon families .
 The Potterton family, the Cartwright family, and even the English family all have a keening woman . While it is not surprising to find a banshee legend attached to the O’Keefes, Aherns, Clancys and Hegartys .
 In fact, the most oft-told tales of the banshee come from Anglo-Irish family traditions .
 One of the more famous examples is also an example of a variation on the traditional banshee legend . The more famous example is also a variation of the traditional banhee legend.
 The viscounts of Gormanston, who came to Ireland from Lancashire in the 1300s, occupied an estate in County Meath . They came to the country in the 13th century and lived there for centuries .
 It has been said that on the death of the viscount, gangs of foxes assembled near the castle to wail and bark . The viscount's death was said to have happened on the night of his death .
 This unusual event has been reported as recently as the deaths of Edward, 13th viscount, in 1876; Jenico, 14th vis Count, in 1907; and Jenico Edward, 15th visCount, in 1925; . Jenico died in 1925 .
 The keening of the banshee is what made the spirit such a feared being . Piercing Screams is a new series of horror films from horror horror films .
 Unlike the keening of mortals, which, while highly emotional, was an intelligible dirge, the cry of the banshee was most often described as a piercing scream or shriek .
 The banshee s wail was such that deep terror was evoked in the listener, not so much by the death it forewarned as by its very sound . It was such a wail that it evoked deep terror, evoked by the sound .
 The banshee is a particularly demonstrative creature . Far less often does the banshee appear to be merely sobbing or crying .
 Though the spirit is heard more often than seen, it was accepted that the banshee always took the form of a female . Sometimes a young woman combing her long tresses with a blue comb, other times an old hag tearing her hair from its roots .
 A particularly bold young man saw the banshee one night, sitting by the roadside combing her hair . The banshee was seen by a young man who saw her combing hair .
 Rake that he was, he stole up behind her and snatched the comb out of her hands . The comb was stolen from her hands by the Rake .
 The banshee remained outside his door, wailing and shouting for the return of her property . She wailed and shouted for her property to return .
 The terrified man at last passed the comb out the window using tongs from the fireplace . He then used tongs to pass it out of the window .
 Scotland’s version of the banshee, the Bean nighe, appeared as a woman washing bloodstained shrouds in a stream . It is not unheard of in Ireland and Scotland's version of banshee is also not uncommon .
 Another variation has her appearing as the bloodied corpse of a girl killed centuries before by the family’s rogue ancestor . This would make her more of a ghost seeking to torment the living for revenge . Another variation sees her appear as a ghost of the past .
 While the traditional folk beliefs of the Irish people have mostly passed into distant memory, in an unguarded moment one might still find some willing to retell a chance meeting with the old girl .
 An acquaintance of mine from the rural coast of Donegal disclosed her own brush with the sorrowful specter . She said she had a similar brush with an acquaintance of hers from Donegal .
 As a teenager she had gone to visit her grandmother in the Gweedore region of Donegal . She had visited her grandmother as a teenager .
 Soon after nightfall, an ungodly moan was heard from across the fields . It was the first time the moans had been heard in the field .
 The terrifying cry drew closer and closer to the little cottage and soon seemed to be moving in a circle around the building itself . It was the first time the terrifying cry had been heard from a woman in a small town .
 Despite her own fears, and her grandmother’s entreatees, my friend rushed outside . Despite her fears, she rushed outside to see her friend .
 As she stood in the darkened yard of the whitewashed cottage the wailing sound rounded the comer of the house and moved towards her . The wailing was heard by the sound of a wailing sound .
 Ancient American is a bi-monthly magazine describing overseas’ voyages to our continent hundreds and even thousands of years before Columbus . Ancient American explores the history of our continent’s early explorers .
 New discoveries and the latest theories about prehistoric contacts with the Americas appear in each issue of this week's edition of our Planet Earth .
 A Tudor-style boy is dressed in Tudor clothes by a Tudor era female . He is dressed up as a female Tudor and dressed in the clothes of the Tudor .
 Bram Stoker sought to get to the bottom of the strange custom in his work Famous Impostors . The question as to why is one which plagued Stoker, author of Dracula .
 Queen Elizabeth I, then a princess, was sent to Bisley to take in the country air, when suddenly she fell ill and died . Stoker uncovered a local legend that told how, around 1543, Elizabeth I fell ill .
 Henry had recently had his wife, Catherine Howard, beheaded and, famously ill-tempered and unpredictable, no one wanted to upset him further . Henry's wife Catherine Howard was beheaded .
 No girl of similar appearance to Elizabeth could be found to replace her . As such, the governess hurried to find a replacement but no girl of a similar appearance was found .
 The governess had him put on the princesses’ dress and presented him to the King . He was given the dress by the governess .
 In 1870 the vicar of Bisley claimed he had uncovered the coffin of a girl dressed in Tudor clothes but had reinterred the remains in an unmarked grave so it did not become a shrine . In fact, the trick worked so well the King was never informed and the boy
 Stoker cites a series of 16th century letters which detail ‘secrets of great moment’ between the Queen and her closest companions . The letters detail her refusal to marry and apparent inability to bear children . Her baldness, baldness and a change in the style of her
 Of course, all these things can be explained away much more simply, but, whatever the truth, everyone loves a conspiracy . The truth, however, is that everyone loves conspiracy theories .
 The Stephens Island Wren has a rare place in ecological history . The cat who killed them all is called The Cat Who Killed Them All . Stephens Island is home to a rare species of bird .
 The only known species on Earth to be entirely wiped out by a single being . Not only was it one of only three flightless songbirds in the world, it also holds the distinction of being the sole known species to be wiped out .
 Stephens Island, or Takapourewa to the Maori, covers an area of 2.6km 2 and is the most distant island off the northern tip of New Zealand 's South Island .
 Named in honour of Admiralty Secretary Philip Stephens by Captain James Cook . Located on a shipping route, the island was deemed an appropriate place to build a lighthouse . The island was located on a . shipping route .
 Stephens Light became the residence of one Mr David Lyall in 1894 . Stephens Light was the home of Mr Lyall .
 Tibbies the cat soon made Stephens Island her home and hunting ground during 1894 . A companion to Lyall, the lighthouse keeper, Tibbies became a companion to the keeper .
 It was not long before she was presenting her master with gifts of local wildlife in particular, a small bird which was unlike any that Lyall had ever seen . Lyall was delighted to be presented with a bird which he had never seen .
 Eleven of the birds were brought to Lyall by Tibbies in almost pristine condition . Tibbies seem to enjoy the act of the chase and the kill rather than eating the birds .
 The discovery quickly found its way to Sir Walter Buller, New Zealand's ornithological expert at the time . The discovery was made by New Zealand ornithologist Sir Walter .
 Buller reported the find to the British Ornithologists' Club in London . The bird is a member of the wren family .
 The wren colony on Stephens Island, perhaps < total of ten mating pairs, was extinct within the year of discovery . Due to Tibbies' expert mousing skills, wren colonies were extinct within a year .
 The lighthouse cat had possibly single-handedly disposed of the bird . The feat was exasperating in its seemingly senseless execution .
 The 'Lyall' Wrens were thought to have originated from a time when Australia and Antarctica made up the ancient landmass known as Gondwanaland . The wrens that made up Tibbies' nighttime entertainment were .
 Stephens Island Wrens lyalli, sometimes referred to as the Lyall wren, were typical of most New Zealand wrens . The Stephens Island wren was a typical of the wren .
 Nocturnal birds, the wrens made their nests in holes or under rocks, much like the puffin, and fed upon small insects . Wrens were found in holes, under rocks and under rocks .
 Seen to scamper about at night, much like a mouse, this is perhaps why Tibbies was so keen on hunting them downi. Tibbies spotted the mouse in the middle of the night .
 There is a British tradition of hunting the wren performed on St Stephen's Day .
 Legend has it that when St Stephen was hiding from his enemies in a bush, he was betrayed by the chattering of a wren . He was captured and thus captured and stoned to death .
 Tibbies thought her actions would bring good luck to the island, or maybe the small birds were unwittingly named after European wrens in honour of this custom .
 Fossilised remains found all over New Zealand reveal the species once inhabiting the entire country . In Memoriam from fossilised remains of the species .
 It was most likely killed off on the mainland by rats introduced by the Maori and other groundbased predators . The species was killed off in New Zealand on mainland .
 Evidence suggests other cats introduced to the island may have assisted in Tibbies' work right up until 1899 . Although pretty to look at, it is more saddening that their song will never be heard .
 It became known as the H 12 j ftik Curse of the Crying Boy"", and even made . jfjMfe j I headline news at one point .
 There were at that time more than one of these paintings around and each seemed to have the same effect . There were more than a dozen paintings of the paintings at the time .
 The home and all contents would be totally destroyed but the painting of the little crying boy would not show any sign at all of going through a fire . The home would have been totally destroyed in the fire but the boy's painting would show no sign of the fire .
 The newspaper began receiving telephone calls from people all over the area that had similar stories to tell about the crying boy painting . The newspaper received similar calls from all around the area with similar stories .
 One person that called the ""Sun" was Dora Mann of Mitcham . Mann's house was completely gutted by fire six months after she bought the picture .
 After one month of hearing all the tales, the ""Sun"" gave their readers the chance to bring their crying boy paintings and agreed to have a large bon fire to rid everyone of this cursed or jinxed painting .
 All paintings brought to the newspaper were burned and everyone rejoiced . All paintings that were brought to newspaper were actually burned .
 The picture itself was a portrait painted by a Spanish artist of an orphan . The picture was painted by an orphan in Spain .
 It is said that his studio burnt to the ground, and the boy was later killed in a car crash . The boy's studio was later destroyed and his studio was destroyed .
 The picture is one of the first to be mass produced in the UK, there are several thousand of them in circulation, but the curse still appears to apply to all copies .
 It is said that the curse will only effect Someone if the owner of the painting becomes aware of it . The curse is said to only effect someone if the painting's owner becomes aware .
 Some psychics have claimed that the painting is Haunted by the spirit of the boy it depicts .
 There have been reports of the crying boy painting being found in charred homes untouched since 1985 and as recent as 1988 .
 The footprints are known locally as ‘devils' trails’ and are considered to bo of supernatural OF^in in local folklore . The footprints arc considered to be a sign of the supernatural of OF*in in folklore .
 The footprints are about 3:n long and 4 m [lOcmJ wide, suggesting that the people who made the footprints were only about 4ft Sin U..30IT1) tall, perhaps indicating that they ware marie by juveniles . The footprints suggest that they were only
 The ghosts of Spook Bridge in rural Pennsylvania are notorious for their vivid and terrifying hauntings .
 The bridge was made up of only a couple flat bench logs stretched across the Shamokin Creek in Gosstown . There were few social events for people to attend at the event .
 The entire area would turn out to drink hard cider, applejack and socialize . However, on occasion a party would be planned and the entire area turned out .
 Late one summer, Mr Dunkelberger announced that he was holding a gathering . The gathering was the first time he had held a gathering in his hometown .
 Martin Goss and his wife looked forward to the event . He invited everyone in the area and invited everyone to attend .
 His wife was substantially younger than he was and she was most excited about the party . The party was held in honor of his wife, who was a college student .
 On the night of the event, Martin accompanied his wife to the Dunkelberger house . Martin's wife was also at the event .
 He told his wife that he was going home and excused himself from the party . He said he was tired of the party and decided to take a vacation .
 Sometime later in the night, a group of revelers made their way to the bridge .
 He had apparently slipped on the slippery bridge and fallen to his death . He had slipped on a slippery bridge .
 He was possibly too inebriated to extricate himself or else he could have struck his head . He could have been too drunk to get out of the way .
 The revelers ran back to the Dunkelberger house where they broke the news to Mrs. Mrs. Dunkelberg . They broke up the news with her family .
 A group of men conferred and it was decided that the acting coroner should be sent for . The acting coroner was sent for. It was decided to send an acting coroner to investigate .
 The coroner’s home was several miles away and someone was dispatched to fetch him back to the scene . The coroner had to be sent back to his home several miles from where he was killed .
 The men built several bond fires so that the area would be well lit for the coroner . Meanwhile, the men built a fire to keep the body from the water . The coroner called for someone to remove the body .
 Coroner made his way out onto the footbridge and reached down to pull the body up by his shirt collar . No one made a move to do so and in disgust the coroner pulled the body from the wooden structure by his collar .
 The assembled men plunged into the water and helped remove the body from the water . Suddenly, the assembled men plunge into the waters and help remove it from the sea .
 The coroner turned to the men and demanded to know why they had refused to touch the body until he had . The coroner then turned to them to ask why they hadn't touched the body .
 One of the men explained that they didn’t want to touch a body because the first one to touch the body might have been haunted by him forever after . The first person touched a body might be haunted by it, they said .
 For many years people claimed that Martin Goss haunted the bridge where he had died . After that night the bridge became known as “Spook Bridge’s”
 Town named for Goss forgot about him and changed its name after he died . Town of Goss was named for him and is now named after him . Goss died in 2008 .
 Hart Island does not appear on the MTA's subway map or the Department of Transportation's bicycling maps . Hart Island is not on the subway map, nor the department's cycling maps .
 AAA map shows the blue dotted line of a public ferry from City Island to Hart Island . The ferry closed to the public in 1976, but the ferry closed in 1976 .
 It can be seen only on clear nights, only from the east and by inference, when lights from the city bounce off the water of the Sound and leave the island backlit . The island can only be seen from clear nights .
 Hart Island can be found on Google Maps . Google Maps labels the northern half of the island as "Potter's Field" The northern half is known as Potter's Field, a place where bodies are buried .
 Hart Island bought Hart Island for $75,000 in 1868 . The new potter's field was set on 45 acres at the island's northern tip . Hart Island was bought by the city of Hart Island, Hart Island .
 Administration was handed over to what was then called the Department of Charities and Correction, which operated a prison and a technical school for delinquent boys on the island . Administration of the island was turned over to a prison, technical school .
 Inmates were given the job of burying the dead, a practice that continues to this day . Inmates are still buried in the prison where they are buried .
 The Department of Correction estimates that more than 850,000 people are buried on Hart Island . The actual number may be somewhere between 750,000 and a million, a standard deviation .
 In the last few years the old cemetery filled up, so the burials moved to Hart Island's south side . Hart Island is now on the south side of Hart Island . The burials have been moved to the south of the island .
 The other grave, for fetuses and stillborn babies, will be loaded with 1,000 miniature coffins buried five deep . The grave will be filled with fetuses, stillborn children and fetuses .
 In Matthew 27:3-10, Judas cast the 30 silver pieces he received for betraying Jesus onto the temple floor, and then hung himself in shame . Judas then cast the silver pieces on the floor of the temple .
 The priests, concerned that adding blood money to the temple's treasury would violate church law, "bought with them the potter's field to bury strangers" The priests were concerned that they would violate the church law .
 We are lucky the name ""potter's field"" stuck, since printing the alternative on maps would be rather purple . The alternative would be purple .
 Lots of unidentified people are buried on Hart Island, and lots of poor people, too . Hart Island is home to many unidentified people and poor people .
 The wife of Fred Bartels, the island's first warden, recorded the burial on April 20, 1869 . It's reasonable to assume that Slylce was laid in the ground by inmates because of the burial .
 Haggins was buried as an unidentified body in 2004 even though he had received food stamps, spent time in prison, and lived in city shelters . Three government agencies held his fingerprints on file, which meant at least three government agencies had his fingerprints .
 Laurie Grant's daughter Laurie Grant is buried on Hart Island, Hart Island . Laurie Grant should be buried in Hart Island but should not be buried there, she says . Grant is the daughter of Laurie Grant .
 Dr. Grant was obstetrician and gynecologist with a successful private practice in Westchester County, New York . Grant died in 1994 at the age of 92 .
 She felt nauseous for months, became dehydrated and malnourished, and required a feeding tube . She was dehydrated, and needed a tube for months and required months of treatment .
 The epidural numbed only one side of a woman's body, leaving the other half in stabbing pain . The other half of her body was stabbed by the pain of the epidural, leaving her in agony .
 Grant would be able to visit the grave, which would be marked with a number instead of a name . Grant's grave would also be marked by a number, not a name, but a number .
 She was on so much medication she was barely conscious, Grant says . Grant: "1 don't remember signing any papers. was really out of it"
 As a doctor, Grant easily could have afforded private burial in the Valhalla area of Westchester County . Her family already owns a cemetery plot in Valhalla, a few minutes' drive from her current home .
 Grant was too sick to think if it, however, and hospital staff did not ask her relatives about other burial options . Hospital staff didn't ask her family about other options, but she refused .
 The baby's body was placed in a pine coffin and buried in a mass grave on Hart Island . So the baby's remains were placed in the pine coffin .
 Grant's experience was typical, says Melinda Hunt, an artist who has been fascinated with Hart Island since the early 1990s . Hunt has published a book and produced a fLm about the island .
 Many families were told by hospital nurses or social workers to "Let the city handle it," Hunt says . Hunt says it's possible to smooth the ordeal's edges, and possibly to speed things along .
 The Office of the Chief Medical Examiner and the police department's missing persons unit use personal records, prescription bottles and fingerprints to identify people who die in hospitals, nursing homes and on the street without identification .
 Of the nearly 1,200 people buried on Hart Island last year, only about 15 were unidentified . Only about fifteen were unidentified, says Dan Stevelman .
 Some advocates doubt whether officials are as diligent about tracking down next of kin as they are about identifying the deceased . But some advocates say officials should be more diligent about identifying next-of-kin .
 Hunt regularly receives emails from family members who can easily afford an individual grave in a private cemetery, but never received word that a loved one was dead . Hunt regularly gets emails from people who can afford individual graves in private .
 Leonard Melfi, an influential playwright in the 1960s, was buried on Hart Island by mistake when he died in 2001 . Melfi was buried by mistake in Hart Island when he was buried there .
 Amy Koplow remembers a man who was buried on Hart Island despite his sizable pension from his career as a backstage technician at CBS television studios . She says he was buried in Hart Island, despite a sizable pension for his time at CBS .
 The man had the misfortune of dying on Presidents' Day weekend . City employees responsible for locating his family did not get to his case until he was already buried on Hart Island .
 Elaine Joseph's daughter Tomilca was born premature at Beth Israel Hospital during the blizzard of 1978 . Elaine Joseph was born at the hospital in New York City .
 Joseph called the hospital morgue for four days, getting no response . With subways closed and all transportation to Manhattan shut down, he called the morgue four days .
 Joseph was told that she had signed papers allowing Tomilca to be buried in the potter's field . When someone finally answered, Joseph asked if she had agreed to bury her . The potter was buried in a potter field in the Potters' field .
 This was impossible, since the storm had prevented Joseph from ever getting to the hospital . Joseph was taken to a nearby hospital, but the storm prevented him from getting there .
 Joseph went on to serve 23 years in the Navy and retire as a lieutenant commander . "It's just a bunch of bums," he says . Joseph, 58, says he served 23 years .
 Narratively is an online magazine devoted to original in-depth and untold stories . Narratively, Narratively.com is an award-winning magazine dedicated to original stories .
 Each week, Narratively explores a different theme and publishes just one story a day . This week's theme is the 12th week of our weekly feature stories .
 Arkadelphia, Arkansas, plays host to two highly acclaimed schools that have been at odds with each other for years . Unlike most college towns around the country, Arkadelphia is a small college town . The town is home to a pair of highly acclaimed universities .
 In the early days of their existence, these two medium sized universities had very large differences when it came to religion and values . The two universities have very different religious beliefs .
 It was that difference which sparked the ghost story known as The Lady in Black .
 The story begins in the 1920s when Joshua met the love of his life, Jane . Joshua met Jane when he was a young man named Joshua . The story goes back to Joshua and Jane .
 Joshua, being from Henderson, never gave a second thought to dating Jane . Jane was a student at Ouachita, and Joshua never gave second thought about dating her . Joshua is from Henderson .
 His friends began to ostracize him and threatened to never speak to him again if he didn't end his relationship with Jane . His friends however were not as understanding .
 Joshua was given such a hard time by his friends because Jane was religious, not outgoing type, a local historian says . Jane was highly religious and wasn't outgoing type .
 Jane and Joshua managed to hold their love together, until the day came when Joshua finally gave in to his friends' hazing . Jane gave up her love to her friends, and Joshua was forced to give in .
 He broke up with Jane right before the annual homecoming dance at Henderson, Henderson . Jane was heartbroken by the news . Jane is a junior at Henderson .
 She went back to her dorm room at Ouachita to put on a black dress and veil, because she felt that nothing was worth living for if she couldn't have Joshua . She said she felt nothing worth living if she wasn't with Joshua .
 She then began walking to one of the many cliffs that line the Ouachita River, where she plunged to her death moments later .
 The Lady in Black has haunted the Henderson campus searching for the ones who made Joshua break up with her . From that time forward on homecoming night at Henderson, the girl that has become known as The Lady In Black haunted the campus looking for those who made the break-up .
 This ghost story is still very predominant in the Henderson community today, as Mann can attest . Mann says it's still very prevalent in Henderson .
 Each year Mann tells the story of The Lady in Black at the Pine Tree speech that welcomes incoming freshman to the Henderson campus . Mann's speech is a speech to the incoming freshman at Henderson University in Henderson .
 Welch says she saw a faint figure dressed in black exiting the dorm on homecoming homecoming of last year . Welch also says she and a group of friends were walking back to the girls dorm around midnight . Welch said she saw the faint figure dress in black exit the building .
 Mann's ghost story has become known not just in Arkadelphia, but state wide as well . Mann's knowledge of the ghost and unique story telling ability has made the story known not only in the community .
 Numerous news organizations throughout the state have covered The Lady in Black . The most widely known report being in the 1980's by Chuck Dovish, from KTHV Channel 11 in Little Rock, for his weekly special Travling Arkansas .
 Ouachita officials would not comment on the validity of The Lady in Black ghost . Officials at the school would instead say that she is merely a rumor . Officials would not confirm the existence of the ghost .
 The cliff where she is said to have jumped off — which is owned by Ouachita — has been sealed off . It has been closed off to prevent anyone from entering the cliff without a university escort .
 With this new influx of wealth many Dutch needed new ways to spend their new found wealth . Dutch needed to find a new way of spending their money .
 In the mid 16th century the tulip was introduced to Europe from the Ottoman Empire . The tulip is the most popular tulip flower in the world, and was introduced in 16th Century .
 After decades of study by botanists, it has been found that tulips thrived best in the Netherlands .
 The tulip trade thrived to the point that be the 1630’ s people were even making careers out of growing, breeding, and selling tulips .
 The flower became a status symbol among well-to-do and wealthy Dutch as breeders created tougher and more beautiful species of flowers .
 Eventually the tulip became more than just a mere flower, but a source of wealth and prestige for the Dutch upper class . The tulip is now considered a symbol of the Dutch aristocracy .
 In the 1630’ s the tulip became a securities instrument as . i nvestors . pumped their money into tulip growing and breeding . The tulip was a popular investment instrument in 1630s .
 The profits made in the tulip business attracted more and more investors who sought to get rich quite . The profits were made from tulip profits .
 One tulip transaction involved 40 bulbs being sold for 100,000 guilders . During that time it was recorded that 40 tulip bulbs were sold for more than £100,000 .
 In one transaction 12 acres of land was traded for a single Semper Augustus bulb . The bulb was sold for 12 years ago .
 Some people risked all of their savings to buy just one rare bulb, which was hoped to bring fortune and wealth . The price of the rare bulb continued to rise and rise .
 By the height of tulip mania, the average tulip bulb was selling for 5,000 guilders per bulb . The tulip bulbs were sold at the peak of mania in the 1930s .
 By the spring of 1637, the price of tulips became so inflated that the vast majority of Dutch buyers and investors could not afford to buy a single bulb .
 Tulip auctions ceased to sell their bulbs as buyers could not come up with the money to cover the inflated costs . Tulip bulbs were auctioned off as buyers were unable to pay for the bulbs .
 Between February and April of 1637, tulip prices crashed to l/20th their price at the height of the mania . tulip mania was the peak of tulipmania in 1637 .
 Investors lost everything as their precious bulbs became instantly worthless . The bulbs were instantly worthless.
 Many people had their entire wealth wiped out in what would become one of the first economic bubbles in history . The bubble would be the first of its kind in the world .
 Those who burrowed money to invest were doubly screwed, as they now owed thousands of guilders to creditors and lenders .
 By summer of 1637, the price of tulips dropped to the point that hundreds of bulbs could be bought for a single guilder . Hundreds of bulbs were bought for just one guilder in summer 1637 .
 At an international conference he stood up and claimed to have found a man who had a first class maths degree and an IQ of 126, but his skull did not contain a brain .
 If you placed a torch against one side of his skull then the whole head would glow like a light bulb, says Lorber . Lorber: "You placed a light on the side of your skull then you could see it glow."
 To prove his point, Lorber produced Xrays that showed a black void where the man’s brain should have been .
 The man, named Roger, had 95 per cent of his brain missing but was normal in all other respects . The man was named Roger but was 'normal' according to Lorber .
 Lorber's discovery was an adult example of the neurological disorder known as hydranencephalus . Lorber had discovered the disorder in an adult .
 At an early stage the skull fills with fluid so that the brain never develops . This is normally associated with birth defects, such as spina bifida, and means that at early stages the skull fill with fluid . This means the brain does not develop and the brain doesn't develop
 Hydranencephalus is a severe condition and usually renders infants severely disabled, assuming that they can survive at all . It is a condition that usually renders babies severely disabled .
 The case of Roger, the man with no brain, seemed to fly against conventional brain science . Lorber came under suspicion from his colleagues after his announcement .
 Lorber himself used the example of Roger to ask a fundamental question . Lorber: "Roger is not Roger. Roger is Roger. He is Roger." Lorber says, "Roger has been Roger for more than 30 years" Lorber asks: 'Roger is Roger'
 Others see Roger as proof that the mind and brain are in fact two separate entities . Others have been less reticent and see him as proof of the brain and mind being separate .
 Lorber’s work has been taken as proof that human consciousness can survive death . Many Christian groups and proponents of an independent ‘soul’ have taken Lorber's work to be proof that .
 By 1982 Lorber had found at least two others with hydranencephalus, and at last count he believed he had traced as many as 50 . By last count, Lorber believed he'd traced up to 50 of the patients .
 He died in 1996 and the neurological community’s interest in adult hydranencephalus died with him .
 None of the patients had ever even heard of Lorber’s research, let alone encountered an adult patient such as Roger . None of them had ever met Lorber's research, nor had ever encountered him .
 After some effort, I tracked down one of Lorber’s co-workers, who wishes to remain anonymous . Lorber's co-worker says he is proud of his work ethic, but he is not surprised .
 All this suggests that the case of Roger may not be as straightforward as it first appears and maybe even places doubt on the idea that an adult can live without a brain . Roger may have been able to live with a brain without having a brain, according to his doctors .
 Sharon Parker, a hydranencephalic woman from the north of England, was discovered to have nearly 90 per cent of her brain missing in 2002 .
 Early tests suggest that her brain keeps working by using a complex and little understood form of rerouting and jobsharing between those few parts of her brain that still remain intact .
 Sharon Parker is at last tangible proof that Lorber’s work was not complete fiction, as some have suggested . Sharon Parker was Sharon Parker, the author of Lorber's first novel, in the 1960s .
 Lorber's claim that there were a great many people walking around with next to no brain inside their skulls could well be true . In fact, Lorber’s claim that many people are walking around without a brain in their skulls .
 Be careful the next time you call somebody a ‘pea-brain’ you might just be telling the truth .
 Paul Chambers is a TV producer and freelance science writer living in Hertfordshire . He is also a freelance science producer and a freelance producer .
 It's difficult to associate a cemetery with a place of happiness and celebration when all you think about is how much you miss the person when you visit their grave . Cemeteries are no longer associated with happiness or celebration .
 Stan loan Patra$, from the small village of Sapanta in Romania, has turned cemeteries into joyful places to celebrate the lives of loved ones . Stan Patra$ is a man named Stan . Stan .
 Patra Patra founded the aptly-named Cimitirul Vesel, or Merry Cemetery, in the 1930s . Patra^ founded the appropriately-named cemetery .
 He began creating colorful, cross-shaped tombstones and writing epitaphs for village people who had passed away .
 Each tombstone is painted with a base of a signature blue color, and then detailed with brightly-colored lines and patterns . The tombstones are painted in blue, then detailed in patterns .
 The epitaphs are silly but meaningful lyrical poems that describe something significant about the person's life . They are meant to be humorous but meaningful poems .
 Along with the poems, paintings of scenes from the person's life are included as well, usually having to do with their occupation .
 The epitaphs and paintings are often whimsical, and sometimes even satirical, and often satirical .
 Patra$ himself passed away in 1977, and he is now buried in the Merry Cemetery with a colorful tomb .
 The Merry Cemetery has its roots in the local Dacian culture, which views death as an adventure, a joyful passing to the next life . The cemetery is located in the city of Dacia, Romania .
 "It's quite the contrast to our Western view that death is a tragedy that should be grieved and mourned," she says . It's quite a contrast to Western view of death being a tragedy, she adds .
 It's pretty refreshing to see a place that's usually so weighed down with grief become so light-hearted and celebratory . It's definitely not something most of us are used to, but it's not something we're used to .
 The Merry Cemetery is a beautiful way to keep the village of Sapanta alive and running, long after the members have passed . Now a popular tourist attraction, the Merry Cemetery in Sapanta is now a beautiful place to visit .
 Their memories are cherished and celebrated as this cemetery provides a link between this world and the next . Their memories will be cherished .
 The fungus is suited to the conditions in Egyptian tombs . A team of intrepid scientists entered Wawel Castle in Krakow, Poland .
 They were heading towards the chapel in order to open the tomb of King Casimir IV, sealed since the King’s death in 1492 . The tomb of the King has been sealed since 1492 since Casimir died .
 On entering it, the team found nothing unusual and, after making their various studies, sealed the grave once more .
 Twelve men entered King Casimir’s tomb but within a week four of them were dead . 12 men entered the tomb but four of the men were killed within a fortnight . The tomb of Casimir was discovered in the early 1400s .
 The death toll continued to mount until only two of the original team remained alive . Edward Roszyckim and Boleslaw Smyk, both of whom were to suffer from ill-health for years afterwards .
 It very much looked as though the scientists had been the victims of a curse from beyond the grave . The scientists were killed by a 'curse from the grave'
 Several members of Howard Carter's archaeological expedition died following their discovery of King Tutankhamen’s tomb . The Curse appeared to pass from fiction into fact after several members of the expedition died .
 Since then, many have sought to find an explanation for the alleged high mortality rate associated with opening of ancient tombs such as those of Kings Tut and Casimir .
 Symptoms were particularly severe in those people involved with the excavation or study of objects from ancient Egyptian tombs .
 Dr Taha laid the blame on a type of fungus named Aspergillus which could release airborne toxins that can affect the lungs and other major organs . The fungus could release toxins which can affect lungs and can affect other organs .
 The Aspergillus fungus is well suited to the conditions found in Egyptian tombs . It is very resilient, capable of surviving for thousands of years .
 Dr Taha subsequently announced that he had solved the myth of the Mummy’s Curse . He placed the blame firmly on Aspergillus, which caused the curse .
 Dr Boleslaw Smyk, one of the two surviving scientists from King Casimir’s tomb, was also puzzling over the fate of his colleagues . A decade later Dr Smyk was also perplexing over his colleagues’ fate .
 Shortly before exiting the tomb he had taken the royal insignia from the king’s coffin . Shortly before he exited the tomb, he took the king's coffin .
 He concluded that he and his colleagues had suffered after inhaling deadly fungi toxins . One of these revealed the presence of Aspergillus, leading him to conclude .
 In the coming years further proof of the potential dangers of tomb fungi came from a number of studies .
 One of the most famous was performed on the mummy of Rameses II which, in 1977, had 89 species of fungi on it, including a deadly Aspergillus strain .
 Environmental conditions in ancient tombs can suit some types of toxic fungi very well indeed . Other studies have confirmed that the conditions in tombs suit some of the toxic fungi .
 The combination of a warm, dark and damp space with plenty of organic remains (in the form of wood, food offerings and bodies themselves) would ensure that the fungi were well looked after .
 If food runs out then the fungi simply become dormant, remaining in stasis for thousands of years awaiting the arrival of archaeologists . If the food is run out, the fungi become dormant and then they become dormant .
 Dr Boleslaw Smyk believes toxic fungi have more to answer for than just the death of a few Egyptologists . Dr Smyk says toxic fungi are responsible for the deaths of Egyptologists in recent years .
 He has linked Aspergillus fungus with ‘leukaemia houses’ which are individual dwellings whose occupants have a vastly increased chance of dying from this disease . The disease is linked to an increase in people dying from leukaemia .
 The distribution of toxins through air conditioning vents has been linked to headaches and respiratory infections that are commonly reported in episodes of sick-building syndrome .
 Despite all the weight of evidence, it is quite possible that scientists may have found the answer to a problem that never actually existed . Despite all this evidence, scientists may still be baffled by the evidence .
 In 2002 Mark Nelson traced the fate of all 25 people who had been present at the opening of King Tut’s tomb . Despite the ‘curse’ they continued to live for an average of 21 years .
 He concludes that the incidence of death associated with King Tut’s tomb was no higher than average . King Tut's tomb is located in the middle of the Nile Valley .
 Merchants, thrift stores, and booksellers may be at risk if they sell older volumes, or even give them away, without subjecting them to testing .
 Many used-book sellers, consignment stores, Goodwill outlets, and the like have begun to refuse new donations of pre-1985 volumes, yank existing ones off their shelves .
 Consumer Product Safety Improvement Act of 2008 was passed by Congress last summer . The act was passed after the panic over lead paint on toys from China .
 A new ban on playthings and child-care articles that contain plastic-softening chemicals known as phthalates has also been added to the law .
 Penalties under the law can include $100,000 fines and prison time, regardless of whether any child is harmed . Penalties can include jail time, fines or prison time .
 Not until 1985 did it become unlawful to use lead pigments in inks, dyes, and paints used in children’s books .
 Testing can still detect lead residues in books today . The use of such pigments was not uncommon in children's books .
 The day before, the Consumer Product Safety Commission published guidelines telling thrift stores what they could safely keep selling and what they should consider rejecting or subjecting them to lead testing .
 Only ‘ordinary’ children’s books printed after 1985 could be placed in the safe category .
 Older books were pointedly left off the safe list . The commission did allow an exception for vintage collectibles whose age, price, or rarity suggested that they would most likely be used by adult collectors, rather than children .
 There was no time to waste in putting this advice into practice, says David Cameron . Since the law became effective the very next day, there was no room to waste .
 People who deal in children’s books for a livelihood now face unpleasant choices . People with children's books now face difficult choices .
 Jacobsen has contacted the CPSC and her congressional representatives for guidance, but to no avail . Jacobsen says she has contacted them for guidance .
 Jacobsen also worries that any temporary forbearance on the part of the CPSC could be abrogated without notice in the future . CPSC has said that it does not plan a crackdown any time soon in the absence of evidence of risk .
 New commissioners appointed by the Obama administration are expected to show less sympathy in regulating business than the current commission . New commissioners will be appointed by Obama administration .
 50 state attorneys general have been empowered to enforce the law on their own . State attorneys general often team up with private lawyers who capture a share of fines imposed .
 Under the law, they’re liable if their products will commonly be understood as intended for children’s use, even if not labeled as such . The law protects companies from being liable for children's use .
 Public libraries expose children under 12 to pre-1985 editions of Anne of Green Gables, Beatrix Potter, Baden-Powell’s scouting guides, and other deadly hazards .
 Design Loft examines some of the costs of CPSIA-proofing pre-1985 library holdings . They are, not surprisingly, utterly prohibitive . Design Loft: The costs are prohibitive.
 ALA now apparently intends to take the position that the law does not apply to libraries unless it hears otherwise . The ALA intends to argue that libraries are exempt from the law .
 One can hardly blame it for this stance, but it’s far from clear that it will prevail . It's far from certain that the U.S. government will prevail, though .
 The law bans the “distribution” of forbidden items, whether or not for profit . For one thing, the law also bans the distribution of prohibited items .
 Most libraries regularly raise money through book sales, and will now need to consider excluding older children’s titles from those sales .
 CPSC commissioner Thomas Moore has called for libraries to sequester some of their pre-1985 books until more is known about their risks . He has called on libraries to "sequester" some undefinedly large fraction of pre-books .
 The threat to old books has surfaced so quickly in recent weeks that the elite press still seems unaware of it . The threat of old books is so quickly surfaced that it's not been noticed by elite press .
 The wider pattern of CPSIA’s disruptive irrationality and threat to small businesses has been covered reasonably well by the local press around the country . CPSIA has been described as a 'disruptive irrationality' by the press .
 Almost no one has cared to consider the law’s broad array of unintended consequences, let alone ask what went wrong in the rush to passage of this feel-good law .
 On Wednesday, the Times ran an editorial solemnly condemning “book banning’s” ban . On inspection, the editorial turned out to praise an ACLU lawsuit against a school district that removed a library book from the shelves .
 In any wider and more systematic prospect of book banning, the paper has shown no interest . The paper's book banning is not a serious prospect, it says .
 Whatever the future of new media may hold, ours will be a poorer world if we begin to lose the millions of books published before our own era . The world will be poorer if we start to lose books that were published before the age of technology .
 Children's books are a way into history, literature, and imagination for kids everywhere . They serve as a path into history and literature for children everywhere .
 Parents pass on stories and discoveries in which they delighted as children . They link the generations by enabling parents to pass on the stories they delighted with as children.
 The illustrations open up worlds far removed from what kids are likely to see on the video or TV screen . The illustrations are illustrations of the characters in the book .
 WILLIAM SUTTON is a novelist and Latin teacher who appeared in Ken Campbell’s fortean epic, The Warp, and plays cricket for Brazil . John and William are the long-playing sponge and the recording sponge .
 A mysterious Parisian pamphlet of 1632 can be credited for the discovery of the warblings . It was published in Paris in 1632 .
 Captain Vosterloch discovered a sponge used by natives of the southern seas to communicate across long distances . The sponge was used to communicate with natives of southern seas .
 Bald fact or pure fiction, the source material is as obscure as the science . The series is set to be released on Blu-Ray in October .
 If Vosterloch did not exist, it seems a tremendous lark to have invented him . But if he didn't exist, he seems to be a great lark, to invent him .
 As myth, this fantastic portrayal of sound and porosity forces us to re-examine not only the humble sponge, but also the history of sound recording, and our notion of memory .
 The phonographic poriferum, regarded as myth, takes its place in a venerable tapestry of historical science fiction . It is regarded as a myth .
 Ancient China, Greece and Egypt all produced magical devices to duplicate sound or make statues speak . Devices were produced by ancient Egypt, Greece, Egypt and China .
 Giovanni Battista Porta's 1589 speaking tube prefigures the 1,000 mile speaker . The sealed wooden tube was invented by Chian Shun-hsin in the 17th century .
 Cyrano 4 convincingly describes talking books as talking books with watch-like gears instead of pages . Cyrano's Cyrano is a computer-speakable book that has a built-up to a talking book . The book is called Cyrano, and Cyrano has been called Cyr
 A needle placed on the desired chapter produces a quasi-human voice speaking the lunar language, of course . The voice can be heard by a needle placed in the desired book .
 Cyrano also claimed to have visited the Moon . Whereupon we remember that Cyrano claimed that he had visited the moon .
 Our South Sea setting raises f amiliar questions about the colonial fascination with wonders .
 At the Paris Exhibition of 1900, the Dane’s answering machine was lauded for sound quality far outstripping the phonograph . At the 1900 Paris Exhibition, the machine was praised for its sound quality .
 B esides its value as myth and technological barometer, our supersponge is also a historical metaphor for memory . It is a symbol of memory for memory, and is a key part of our history .
 In the struggle to account for the vagaries of remembering, such metaphors relate intriguingly to prevalent technologies, such as memory technology .
 Memory has been likened to such diverse containers as the rooms of a house and the stomach of a cow . But memory has never been compared to such a diverse container as a house or cow's stomach . Memory is a form of form of memory, but memory is not a permanent part of
 These primitive metazoa (and their synthetic counterparts) provide a familiar image for forgetting, not retaining, information . The primitive metzoa are thought to be a form of memory .
 Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy, in name and effect, has unnervingly reinforced this folk notion . The disease is thought to be a form of formality in the brain .
 porifera a group successful since preCambrian times through reproduction both sexual and asexual . The viviparous are prized by biologists for clues they provide about the evolution of more complex systems . Porifera is a group of organisms that reproduce sexually and sexually .
 With thenextraordinary cellular structure, they also offer fruitful comparison with current models of the brain . With the nextraordinary cell structure, the findings offer fruitful comparisons with current brain models .
 Mobile cellular systems carry out all vital functions, without developed tissue organisation . Just as our neural pathways form and reform in a fluid evolution, so their mobile cellular systems do so .
 Perhaps we should hesitate, however, before writing off the spongiform answering machine as myth or metaphor . We should hesitate to hesitate, but perhaps not to write off the myth .
 The core phenomena of whales and giant squid are whales and squid . Consider, behind fantastical sightings of sea monsters, the core phenomena are whales .
 Vosterloch saw voices soaked up, just as Rabelais imagined them freezing . The voices were soaked up in the freezing rain .
 Perhaps one day you’ll buy the White Album again, but on long-playing sponge . The album, The Beatles' White Album, was released in 1968 .
 Valdemar Poulsen’s answering machine, the Telegrafoon, exhibited at the Paris Exhibition of 1900, exhibited in 1900 . Valdemars' answering machine was the first of its kind .
 'Nature has furnished men with certain sponges which retain sound and articulated speech' Captain Vosterloch, reports Captain Vostloch . Le Courrier Veritable, April 1632 .
 For instance, de Filippis locates Vosterloch’s voyage ‘ dans les terres australes au large du detroit de Magellan’ s voyage . ‘Dans le terre australais au large’
 Draaisma says Sorel in 1632, Marty in 1633, but Levin states that neither author nor publisher is marked . Levin says neither author or publisher was marked .
 Only scrap of information that he was a Dutch sea-captain comes from Wojciech Waglewski, former singer of Polish band, Voo Voo .
 Some stories are remarkable, while others are so filled with hyperbole that, despite how amazing they might be, a small part of you can’t help but question their factual value . Joe Doran is the author of a new book, "The Best Time to Read More:
 Other stories, though they might be written like real history, are clearly more legend than truth . Other stories may be true, but they're clearly more myth-like than real history .
 In the interest of full disclosure, I am compelled to admit that the protagonist of this tale is never actually stated to be a werewolf . Our hero was a man, sumamed Su who — if he even truly existed — is said to have suffered from a very real, very serious
 His parents misunderstood his condition, denounced him for a demon and abandoned him as a baby in a forest . His was a world with neither Wikipedia nor the joys of Internet self-diagnosis, and as such, his parents misunderstood him . As such, he was abandoned by his parents
 "Kung fu" is so common to kung fu movies that it's practically a cliche . And there he might well have died, had things not taken a turn so common a movie like this .
 Shaolin monks tried to find an adoptive family for the young Su . The first thing they did was try to find a home for the boy .
 Even Shaolin monks without hypertrichosis are pretty darn impressive . Most likely aware that if he left the temple, he'd probably be burned alive by an angry mob .
 From there, the accounts of his skills become increasingly fantastical . The accounts of the skills become more fantastical.
 Su met with 12 Shaolin masters from across China . Su was greeted with customary bows from all of the gathered . Su entered the room and was greeted by customary bows .
 Su pulled out a knife and hurled it into the ceiling . He did not bow in return . Instead, Su pulled a knife out of his hand and threw it at the ceiling.
 Su had realized the assassin was hiding in the rafters when, upon entering the room, he could hear 13 people breathing, rather than just 12 . Su had only entered the room when he heard 13 breathing, instead of just 12 breathing .
 How he managed that with all that hair around his ears is beyond me, but then I’m not a quasilegendary Shaolin Grandmaster . . . yet .yet. How he did it?
 Su found assassins with echolocation in the forest . He also fought bears in the woods for practice . Su says he's not afraid to fight bears .
 In fairness, the bears may well have taken him for a skinny secondcousin . But they were blown away when he came at them with kung fir moves .
 When he wasn't fighting bears, Su was leading his fellow monks in the defense of Fujian Province’s coastline against Japanese pirates, which they did to great success . Su was a monk at the time .
 Even pirates will shriek like little girls and turn tail when confronted with a haircovered Shaolin Grandmaster .
 Su's Death Touch technique is a popular death touch technique . Su has a history of using it in the past, including the death touch .
 The story goes that Su’s success against the pirates, and the subsequent love it earned him and his fellow monks from the common people, garnered him the attention of the Imperial government . The Imperial government saw the monks as potential rebels .
 A force was dispatched to “deaf’ with the monks — armed with gunpowder weapons . The monks were armed with gunspowder weapons. So a force was sent to "deaf" with monks .
 As awesome as these quasimythical monks were, they probably couldn’t dodge cannon fire . That already made it an unfair fight, because as awesome as they were, the monks were .
 A renegade Shaolin Master was sent to strengthen the attackers . The monks were attacked by a group of monks at the Shaolin Temple .
 The monks dealt with the cannons and missiles using only their skill and guile . Su and the Shaolin Master faced-off in an epic, hand-to-hand, one-on-one battle . The monks used their skills to deal with the cannon and missiles .
 The monks decided to take all the valuables out of the temple and then bum it down before the bad guys arrived . The monks were no match for a superior force armed with modem weaponry .
 The monks didn't relocate to a cushy back-up temple, they went to live in the mountains . But before you condemn the decision as cowardly, bear in mind that the monks didn’t relocate . The monks went to the mountains, living in the hills .
 Su died in 1 928, at the age of 7 1 , leaving a legacy that is far, far more legend than it is reliable history . Su's legacy is more of a legend than a history .
 Milwaukee man whose stun gun was used in the theft of a $5 million Stradivarius violin has been sentenced to 31/2 years in prison .
 Universal K Allah pleaded guilty in May to being party to felony robbery . He pleaded guilty to being part of a robbery in May .
 Milwaukee County Judge Dennis Moroney told hhn it was “disconcerting’ that he would engage in a crime that caused so much pain to his community . Moroney said it was "disconcerted" that he was engaged in the crime .
 His plea hearing was postponed Thursday after his public defender withdrew from the case for unspecified reasons . His public defender has withdrawn from his case . The plea hearing has been postponed .
 Prosecutors say Salahadyn used Allah's stun gun to attack a concertmaster and steal his violin after a performance . L. L. Prosecutors say he used Allah to attack the concertmaster with the weapon .
 JEFFREY VALLANCE, prolific artist and simulacrum hunter, has contributed to FT since 1989 . Someone will have to eat crow, says VALLance .
 R ecently I moved back to the San Fernando Valley in California, where the tranquillity is broken only by the squawking of crows .
 "Their crowing often wakes me up with a jerk first thing in the morning," she says of the roars . "They often creeks me up," she adds .
 While half-awake one early morning, I thought I heard a crow on my window ledge talking to me . I thought it was a crow . The crow was on the ledge of my window .
 She cocked her head and screeched, “Jeffrey, by virtue of your Nordic heritage, you will understand what I reveal to you.” She said, ‘Jeffrey’s by . virtue of his . heritage, she said .
 Hark, the mighty warrior Goran, is on a crusade to the East to kill the last dinosaur and devour its heart . Goran is a mighty warrior on a quest to kill a dinosaur . Hark is set to take on the world's last dinosaur, killing it and
 'This brutal deed will begin a blood-bath the likes of which the world has ne’er seen. This brutal deed . The world will not be able to come to terms with this brutal deed,’s author says . ‘The world will be at a blood
 If crows are caged, they will begin to ‘talk’ or mimic words, and can acquire vocabularies larger than those of parrots . Crows are able to mimic words larger than parrots, experts say .
 The terms ‘raven’ and ‘crow’ are almost interchangeable, but they have a few notable differences . The terms 'raven' and 'crow' are almost identical, but there are some notable differences in their names .
 The scientific name for the American crow is Corvus brachyrhynchos, and the common raven is Corvus corax . The scientific names for the crow in the U.S. and the raven in common are Corvuses corax and Corv
 Ravens prefer forested areas where they can feed on abundant carrion . Our omnivorous crows are more at home in the urban landscape hence the Valley .
 In mythology, the crow is one of the most common trickster figures, as well as a messenger and creator deity . The crow is also known as a trickster figure in mythology .
 Because of their jet black colour, crows and ravens have been omens of death, destruction, and spirits of divination . Crows have been known to have been associated with death and destruction in the past .
 The Vikings interpreted the cries and movements of birds as a method of divining the future . Vikings interpreted birds' cries as a way of predicting future . The Vikings used the cries of birds to divine the future of their future .
 Even without divination, it is said that Vikings could understand certain crow distress calls, for example the alarm call for a person approaching from a specific direction . It is said to be possible that Vikings can understand crow distress .
 The raven is called “Chooser of the Slain,” deciding which warrior must fall . Similar to the valkyries, the raven decides which warrior to be killed .
 A hero must be trained to understand the language of birds as a key to entering the World of the Raven (the underworld), where victory or defeat is ordained . The language is a key key to entry to the underworld .
 With God’s help, both King Solomon and Saint Francis of Assisi understood the language of birds . With God's help, they were able to communicate with birds .
 The knowledge of bird language can also be attained by slaying a dragon and eating its heart .
 At night, they return to perch on his shoulders and tell him what they have heard and seen . They return to him to tell him of their experiences .
 The “crow’s nest” on ships is a perch for lookouts to gather intelligence . Related is the ‘crow's nest’ on ships, a . perch on ships .
 In Celtic mythology, the Morrigan who often appears as a grim, hooded crow is the goddess of battle, strife, and fertility . The Morrigan is often seen in Celtic mythology as an evil, angry crow .
 She appears as both a single goddess and as a Ravens hold prophetic knowledge of the war trinity .
 The trio took part in battles, influencing the then-comecome by causing great pandemonium .
 According to legend, St George was an English knight on crusade to the Holy Land . St George is believed to have been on crusade in the Middle Ages .
 In the Middle East, he encountered a dragon which he slew with the Holy Lance . The dragon he slew was a dragon he encountered in the Middle Eastern region .
 The patron saint of England, soldiers, and Boy Scouts, he is invoked for protection against syphilis, herpes, and predatory beasts . He is invoked by soldiers, Boy Scouts and soldiers .
 Like the saint of old, George Bush is on a crusade to the Middle East to kill Saddam Hussein . Bush's crusade is to kill the last dinosaur Saddam Hussein.
 Like his namesake-daddy, George W. wants to slay the craven dragon and plunder his oil . George W.'s son says he wants to 'slit the dragon' and 'pillpill his oil'
 The dragon hungers to consume the dragon’s oily heart to become invincible in war . He hungers for the heart of the dragon to become invulnerable in war. He hangsers to eat the heart .
 The dragon has a slender body covered with scales, a long, tapered tail, and a serpentine neck . The dragon is covered in scales and has a long tapered, tape-red tail . The serpentine dragon has been described as a modern dragon .
 Curious flaps of skin are attached to the back of the serpent’s head, along with a lethal horn . The snake is believed to be the largest in the world .
 Some cryptozoologists claim the Ishtar dragon was the last living dinosaur . The dragon is believed to be the last dinosaur to be alive .
 Babylonians may have captured a specimen of the Mokele-Mbembe, a huge reptile from the Congo . The Babylonians penetrated deep into Africa and by chance captured the specimen . It is believed to be the largest reptile known to be found in the world .
 King Nebuchadnezzar may have kept this living sauropod dinosaur in the Temple of Marduk, whose symbol is the dragon . The temple may have been kept in honor of the dragon, which is the symbol of the dragons .
 Certain Christian creationists point to the biblical Behemoth as the dragon of Revelation . The Behemoth is believed to have been the creationist's creationist .
 Scientists believe dinosaurs did not die off millions of years ago and may have become extinct only relatively recently . They believe that dinosaurs may have been extinct millions of miles ago .
 Saint George may have killed one of the last of these terrible lizards . The lizards are known as giant lizards that have been known to be dangerous .
 As I write, the tree overhead is teeming with crows, raucously jabbering as if they know I am recording their tale .
 A flock of crows is called a “murder’s of the crows, from the folk belief that crows form tribunals to judge and punish delinquent crows . A flock is a "murder" of a crow, a "murdered"
 Ravens launched from Dhahran Air Base, Saudi Arabia, patrolled the skies over southern Iraq during the Gulf War . Ravens were launched from Saudi Arabia during the war .
 EF-111A Raven built by Grumman Company is an aircraft with electronic jamming equipment and a processor to detect hostile radar emissions . The Raven is a fighter jet that can jam into hostile radar .
 America’s ally in the war against Saddam is Great Britain, the country whose destiny is likewise linked with ravens . Britain is the nation whose destiny has also been linked to ravens, the author says .
 A curious superstition dating from the time of Charles II prophesies that when ravens no longer roost in the Tower, the kingdom will fall . A ravens roosted in the tower, it is believed that when the kingdom is no longer inhabited by ravens, it will
 The monarchy still maintains ravens to know what they have seen . Perhaps as a key to assured victory, the monarchy still maintained ravens .
 U.S. and Britain have been itching to storm Iraq (using intelligence gathered by Ravens) to subdue the terrible tyrant of Babylon . As the enchanted Valley crow proclaimed, the United States .
 China's censors seem to have banned internet reports about a giant inflatable toad floating in a Beijing park . Reports come amid mockery on social media comparing it to ex-president Jiang Zemin .
 China Daily dismisses the toad as a ""poor attempt to replicate the success of an original work" but fails to mention the still-powerfiil Jiang who was nicknamed The Toad during his 13-year rule .
 There has been a nationwide fad for huge blow-up animals ever since a Dutch designer floated an enormous rubber duck in Hong Kong harbour last year . A Dutch designer also floated a giant rubber duck last year in the city .
 The government banned online searches for 'big yellow duck' after Sina Weibo mini-blog users posted mock-ups of the iconic lone Tiananmen Square protester facing down a parade of bath toys .
 The toad is a traditional Chinese symbol of good luck . A spokesman said there are no plans to remove the toad from the park .
 Saint-Roch, near Cape Mouraska there is a werewolf who runs the coast as a beggar . With the talent to persuade it ignores, and by promising what he can not hold to that to get what he wants .
 It is said that this animal, with the help of his two hind feet, arrived at Quebec on 17 last and that he replied on 18 below . The animal is said to have intended to follow its mission till Montreal, Montreal .
 This beast is said to be in his case as dangerous as that which appeared last year in the Gevauclan * . The public is urged to be wary as a ravening wolf .
 A werewolf, riding in this province for many years and has done much damage in Quebec, has received considerable number of attacks in October last by various animals that had been armed and unleashed against this monster . On 3 November following, he received a furious blow with a little animal fat,
 "We just learned, the more fatal misfortunes that this animal is not completely defeated, on the contrary, he began to reappear more furious than ever and makes a terrible carnage wherever it strikes," he said .
 So all the tricks of this malicious beast, and beware of falling between his legs, are the tricks . Beware of falling into his legs. Beware of the tricks he tricks .
 More than half of the story revolves around individuals turning into a werewolf after failing to confess or make their Easter for seven years .
 True Tales of Pamphile Lemay include tales of people who have sold their soul . Lemay is a French author who has sold his soul. Lemay has published a book called "True Tales of Lemay"
 Artwork by Henri to the devil or leading a ""bad life " is to say having a pipe outside the precepts of the Church . Having a pipe is forbidden to lead a bad life .
 To unmask the werewolves, just monitor those who, every night, eclipsed at the same time . The werewolves were born in the U.S.
 "If we can hurt the animal, man is wounded in the someplace the next day," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "We can't hurt the animals. We can hurt them. If we can ... kill them, we can kill them"
 One way to issue a werewolf s curse is to reach the front, its weak point, which he received the holy water of baptism . The curse is a curse that can only be issued after reaching the front of the beast .
 It is also possible to reach the werewolf using a gun stuffed with a blessed branch . A string of bullets dipped in holy water can also be used to kill the beast .
 The werewolf is a key figure of legendary Quebecois as well as the devil and many others . In Europe At the same time as the werewolf prowls the Kamouraska in France the Beast of Gevaudan which were attributed to several deaths .
 The legends of werewolves we show how the church was important in society . We show how it was important to the church in society. We show the importance of the church .
 The central phantom is “Yankee Jim"" Robinson, who was executed in 1852 for attempting to steal the only pilot boat in the San Diego harbor . Robinson was executed for trying to steal a pilot boat .
 Robinson was sentenced to be hanged on the property where the Whaley House was to be built . Robinson was convicted of murder in 1881 . He was hanged at the site of the house which was being built in the 1930s .
 According to legend, the hanging scaffold was not properly constructed . It was not built properly, according to legend .
 Robinson dropped only 5 feet instead of 15 feet, and thus did not die immediately of a broken neck . Robinson dropped from 15 feet to 5 feet, thus not immediately suffering a fatal injury . Robinson was not killed immediately .
 It took about 15 minutes for him to be strangled, an agonizing death in which he kicked and struggled while dangling from the rope . Instead of strangling him, he was strangled .
 Two of his accomplices were later caught, but they received light sentences . Two accomplices later caught .
 The Whaley House was commissioned by businessman Thomas Whaley for his bride, Anna Eloise deLaunav, in 1957 . The house was completed in 1957 and was completed by the late Whaley .
 Family members long believed that Robinson's ghost stalked the mansion, still upset over his brutal death . Family members believed that the ghost of Robinson haunted the mansion . Robinson was found dead at the home of his wife and children .
 The last of the children, Lillian Whaley, lived in the house until her death in 1953 at age 89 . Lillian lived there until she died in 1953 aged 89 .
 After her death, the house fell into disrepair and eventually was scheduled for demolition . The house was set to be demolished after her death .
 Whaley House is now an historic home furnished with period pieces and open to the public . A citizens' committee saved it, and it's now a historic home . The Whaley house is now a private residence and a museum .
 In the 1960s, San Diego City College students staged an original play, Yankee Jim, in the courtroom of the Whaley House . The original play was performed at City College in San Diego .
 Psychics and mediums who have visited the house claim that it is home to a menagerie of ghosts of men, women, children and animals . The house is believed to have been haunted by a number of ghosts .
 Anna Eloise Whaley seen walking about the rooms carrying a candle and checking windows and locks . Whaley was seen checking the locks and windows of the rooms with a candle . She was also seen checking locks and checking the windows and doors .
 Poltergeist phenomena reported include burglar alarms being set off, windows opening and closing, a rotating chandelier, a baby cradle that rocks by itself, and a windmill that runs on an icy wind .
 Konstantinos Dellas and Ills theater company “boulouki’s” narrates the story of Greek vampires . Based on reports in medieval and modem Greek literature . The engaging theatrical performance .
 The three actors provide a theatrical essence to the mainly narrative texts . While relying on the musicality of speech and the action of their bodies, the actors provide the theatrical essence of the texts .
 Dellas was impressed because until that time I wasn’t aware that such extreme incidents; exhumations of the dead, burning of hearts or mass incidents of paranoia, had taken place all over Greece,” he said .
 Dellas referred to several reports by travelers, urban legends from various regions of Greece, articles from local newspapers, literature, folklore and ecclesiastical texts . On being asked about research involved in the play, Dellas said: "The play is based on several reports and urban legends"
 Dellas used the reports to create the play . Together with material found on the internet, the play was created by Dellas .
 A person may be transformed into a vampire for many reasons, in Greek called “vrikolakas,” said Dellas . In Greek, a vampire can be turned into a person who has been transformed .
 The director makes reference to the use of the cross, fire and wooden stakes, decapitation of the corpse and burning of the heart . As for getting rid of vampires, the director uses well-known methods .
 Of course, one shouldn’t forget the weapons provided by nature, sun and seawater, says the author .
 Metal thieves in South Africa have stolen nearly 10km of working railway track . They have caused about $2.3m of damage, it's emerged .
 Five men have appeared in court after being 'caught in the act' by security guards . Security guards who patrol the track have been accused of the crime . The men have been charged with being caught in court .
 "They're not making mistakes,"" says Thumbu Mahlangu, a member of the local transport committee .
 The stolen rails are reportedly worth about $120,000 on the scrap metal market . The rails are worth about about $12,000 per piece of scrap metal .
 Two huge black birds were seen on 26 June in a mountainous area between the towns of Tunkhannock and Nicholson, in Wyoming County, Pennsylvania .
 The primary witness saw the birds approaching from the north when he stepped out on his back porch at about 9:05pm . He said the birds approached the north from a north-facing vantage point .
 His first impression was that they were herons, but soon realised they were too big about 6ft from head to tail and the colour was wrong . The colour of the birds was wrong and the size was wrong, he said .
 They landed at see the birds as they passed overhead, heading for some woods . The birds were seen as they headed for the woods in the early morning .
 Witness said that the closest species that he could find in shape was a black cormorant, although they were much too big . The witness said that they were likely to be much bigger than a cormormant .
 Witness estimated the birds' wingspan would have been 12ft or more . The witness estimated that the birds would have had a wingspan of 12ft . He said the birds had rested in branches of branches .
 Police officers searching a property in Guerrero, Mexico, found the endangered big cat locked in a cage . Another family member was able to free the animal from the cage .
 Mexican authorities found Bengal tiger locked in a cage in abandoned house .
 Police officers found the tiger after a tip-off from a member of the public . They say it is a ‘complete mystery’ how the tiger got there . The endangered animal is an endangered species of tiger .
 Police were searching a property in the municipality of Chilapa de Alvarez, in the state of Guerrero, when they heard a strange noise . They heard it when they were searching the property .
 The female tiger was found inside a locked room and police suspect it was illegally owned . Police suspect it is illegally owned and say it was found in locked room .
 The animal was taken to a zoo where it is being cared for while police carry out their investigation . Police are investigating the incident in a bid to protect the animal from harm .
 The owner of the property told investigators he did not know who had brought the tiger to his house . The owner said he didn't know who brought it to his home .
 The last recorded sighting of a tiger in South Korea took place in Gyeonggi Province's Daedok Mountains in 1921 .
 Lim Sun-nam devotes every spare moment of the past seven years to searching for evidence that this dramatic felid exists in his country .
 Tiger-like footprints found on remote Hanbuk Mountains in 1998 in snow in snow . Footprints found in tree and claw marks believed to have been made by a tiger . Tiger-shaped footprints also found in the same area in 1998 .
 Lim Sun-nam believes there are still at least 10 tigers in his country . So far, no tiger has responded to either the aural or the living lure, but there are believed to be 10 tigers .
 He claims to have e-mails from U.S. soldiers describing tiger noises and smells . There is even a video of a tiger pawing a fence along the 38th Parallel .
 Didik has spoken to villagers and poachers who have been interviewed by Didik . Yet sightings continue to be seen among villagers .
 They have even given him tiger teeth, skin, and whiskers, some of which may have been from tigers killed only months earlier .
 He has collected faeces and found footprints in caves, caves and other localities that tigers allegedly still frequent . And he has also found footprints and found traces in caves and caves .
 Didik claims to have seen a tiger himself once, albeit briefly, during a 14-day survey in Meru Betiri National Park . Since beginning his search in 1997, Didik says he has seen one tiger himself .
 Indonesian Institute of Sciences has apparently formally identified hair samples as Javan tiger in origin . Moreover, the Javan Tiger in origin has been formally identified by the institute .
 Today is Friday, July 25, the 206th day of 2014 . Today's top 10 news stories will feature CNN iReport.com's weekly Newsquiz .
 French aviator Louis Bleriot became the first person to fly an airplane across the English Channel . He traveled from Calais to Dover in 37 minutes, traveling from Calais .
 Austrian Chancellor Engelbert Dollfuss was assassinated by pro-Nazi Austrians in a failed coup attempt . Pro-Nazi Austrian Austria Dollfuss was assassinated in a failed coup attempt .
 Benito Mussolini was dismissed as premier of Italy by King Victor Emmanuel III, and placed under arrest . Mussolini's arrest was the first time Mussolini had been charged with treason in Italy .
 Italian liner Andrea Doria collided with the Swedish passenger ship Stockholm off the New England coast . At least 51 people were killed in the sinking of the ship .
 A Woolworth’s store in Greensboro, North Carolina, that had been the scene of a sit-in protest against its whites-only lunch counter dropped its segregation policy . The store's lunch counter was the site of a protest against the white-only policy .
 Louise Joy Brown, the first “test tube baby, was born in Oldham, England . She'd been conceived through the technique of in-vitro fertilization .
 Soviet cosmonaut Svetlana Savitskaya became the first woman to walk in space . She carried out more than three hours of experiments outside the orbiting space station Salyut 7 .
 Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and Jordan’s King Hussein signed a declaration at the White House ending their countries’ 46-year-old formal state of war .
 Israelis formed a human chain stretching 55 miles from Gaza to Jerusalem to protest Prime Minister Ariel Sharon’s Gaza Strip withdrawal plan . Israelis formed the human chain to protest the withdrawal of the Gaza Strip .
 Protesters across the world called on Iran to end its clampdown on opposition activists . Iran's government has been clamping down on the opposition since 2009 .
 This sparks first Northern War when Sweden's King Charles X invades Poland . First Northern War was between Sweden and Poland in 17th century . First invasion of Poland saw Sweden invade Poland .
 Courier De L'Amerique becomes the first French newspaper to be published in the U.S. Courier is the first of its kind in the United States . The Courier is published in New York City .
 U.S. Congress establishes the Department of Foreign Affairs, forerunner of the State Department . The Department of State was the precursor to State .
 Revolutionary leader Maximilien de Robespierre is arrested by his opponents in Paris . He tries to commit suicide, but fails, but is arrested and executed .
 Spain signs peace treaty with France, ceding its part of Santo Domingo to France . Spain signs treaty to cede part of the island nation . Spain also cedes part of Puerto Rico to France in peace treaty .
 July Revolution starts in Paris in reaction to restrictive policies of Charles X . Charles X was forced from the throne after three days of fighting . July Revolution was the first of its kind .
 Opium War between China and Britain begins after Chinese authorities seize and burn British . cargoes of opium . Opium war began after China seized and burned British cargues of opium.
 Russians invade Danubian principalities at request of Turkey to put down revolts there . Russian invasion was in response to a request from Turkey . Russia invaded Danubians in 18th century to suppress revolts against Turks .
 The first successful trans-Atlantic telegraph cable between England and the U.S. is completed . The cable was completed in 1877 .
 Orville Wright tests the U.S. Army's first airplane for one hour, twelve minutes . Wright's plane was the first airplane to fly in the United States .
 An armistice is signed at Panmunjom, after three years of negotiations . Armistice was signed after the war broke out between Russia and Norway .
 Britain and Egypt agree on terms to end 72 years of British control of Suez Canal . Britain has been in control of the canal for 72 years . Egypt and the U.S. have been involved in the canal's development for decades .
 United States planes carry out first attacks against ant-missile missile sites in North Vietnam . U.S. planes carry first attacks on ant-neighboring missile sites .
 Today is Saturday, July 26, the 207th day of 2014 . Today's featured news stories on CNN.com Live .
 United States Attorney General Charles J Bonaparte ordered creation of a force of special agents that was a forerunner of the Federal Bureau of Investigation . The force was created in the 1930s and 1940s .
 The Edison Studios production ""What Happened to Mary" was released with Mary Fuller in the title role . It was one of the first, if not very first, movie serials .
 King Farouk I of Egypt abdicated in the wake of a coup led by Gamal Abdel Nasser . Farouk was the first Egyptian king to abdicate .
 Fidel Castro began his revolt against Fulgencio Batista with an unsuccessful attack on an army barracks in eastern Cuba . Fidel Castro's revolt began with a failed attack on the army barracks .
 Italian liner Andrea Doria sank off New England, some 11 hours after colliding with Swedish liner Stockholm . At least 51 people died in the crash; at least 51 were killed in total .
 Jimmy Hoffa convicted in federal court in Chicago of fraud and conspiracy in handling of union pension fund . Six co-defendants were found guilty of conspiracy . Teamsters president was convicted of fraud, conspiracy and conspiracy .
 Apollo 15 was launched from Cape Kennedy on America's fourth manned mission to the moon . The mission was America's first manned moonwalk on the moon in 1969 . The Apollo 15 mission was the first manned mission since Apollo 4 was launched in 1969.
 Mark Wellman, a 29-year-old paraplegic, reached the summit of El Capitan in Yosemite National Park . He hauling himself up the granite cliff six inches at a time over nine days . Wellman reached the top of the cliff at the end of the day
 Mohammed Mamdouh Helmi Qutb, an Egyptian diplomat held hostage by militants in Iraq for three days, was released after successful negotiations . He was released by the militants after negotiations .
 Sarah Palin stepped down as governor of Alaska to write a book and build a right-of-center coalition . She left her long-term political plans unclear, but left her political future unclear .
 Alberto Contador won the Tour de France for the second time in three years . Lance Armstrong placed third in the overall standings . Contador placed second in the race .
 Rickey Henderson and Jim Rice were inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame along with the late Joe Gordon . Joe Gordon was inducted in the baseball hall of Fame .
 Today is Saturday, August 9, the 221st day of 2013 . Today's featured news stories from CNN.com's iReport .
 The U.S. and Canada resolved a border dispute by signing the WebsterAshburton Treaty . The treaty was signed in 1903 .
 Henry David Thoreau's ""Walden" described his experiences while living near Walden Pond in Massachusetts . The book was first published in 18th century .
 President Franklin D Roosevelt signed an executive order nationalizing silver . Silver was nationalized in the 1930s and 1940s .
 The United States exploded a nuclear device over Nagasaki, killing an estimated 74,000 people . Three days after the atomic bombing of Hiroshima, Japan, the U.S. detonated the device . The bomb was detonated over the Japanese city .
 Vice President Gerald R Ford became the nation's 38th chief executive . President Richard Nixon's resignation took effect in 1973 . Vice President Ford became President Ford's first president .
 John W Hinckley Jr. was acquitted of shooting President Reagan and three others by reason of insanity . A federal judge in Washington ordered him committed to a mental hospital . He'd been acquitted o shooting President Ronald Reagan, three others .
 Lauro Cavazos was the first Hispanic to serve in the Cabinet . Lauro was nominated to be secretary of education by Ronald Reagan .
 Jerry Garcia, lead singer of the Grateful Dead, died in Forest Knolls, California, of a heart attack at age 53 . Garcia was a member of the band's original band, The Grateful Dead . Garcia died of heart attack in June 2013 .
 A corroded cooling pipe burst at a Japanese nuclear power plant, killing ive workers . Workers were killed when the pipe burst, killing them .
 Oscar-nominated movie and TV composer David Raksin died in Van Nuys, California, at age 92 . He died at the age of 92 .
 President Barack Obama flew to Guadalajara, Mexico, for a two-day speed summit with Mexican President Felipe Calderon and Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper . Obama and Harper will meet for speed summit .
 Iraqi authorities arrested British contractor Danny Fitzsimons in the shooting deaths of two co-workers in Baghdad's protected Green Zone . Iraqi authorities arrest British contractor in Baghdad shooting deaths in Baghdad .
 Jennifer Song became the second woman to win two U.S. Golf Association championships in the same year . Song beat Jennifer Johnson 3 and 1 in the United States Women's Amateur final . Song is the second women to have won two championships in one year .
 President Barack Obama promised to work with Congress on reforms for the domestic surveillance programs . Obama has promised to “work with Congress” on the reforms .
 President Obama signed into law a measure resto inq lower interest rates for student loans . Obama signed the measure in order to lower student loan interest rates .
 Rafael Caro Quintero walked free after 28 years in prison . He was sentenced for the 1985 kidnap and killing of U.S. DEA agent Enrique Camarena . A Mexican court overturned his 40-year sentence for the killing .
 French troops, aided by the Swedish army, invade Bavaria to bring Thirty Years’ War to a close . French troops aided by Swedish army and Swedish army .
 British forces under Duke of Marlborough and Savoy’s Prince Eugene defeat French at Toumai in Belgium . Prince Eugene was the son of the Savoy and Duke of Savoy's Prince Eugene .
 Elections are held in the Philippines for the country’s first assembly . Elections were held for the first time in the country's history .
 German saboteurs blow up munitions plant on Black Tom Island, near Jersey City, N.J., before United States’ entry in World War I . 1930: Host Uruguay wins first soccer World Cup, at Montevideo’s Centenario Stadium, beating Argentina 4-2
 USS Indianapolis had just delivered key components of the Hiroshima atomic bomb to the Pacific island of Tinian . The USS Indianapolis was torpedoed by a Japanese submarine .
 Amnesty is proclaimed in Philippines for Huk rebels, but they refuse to comply . Amnesty is declared in the Philippines for rebels, who have refused to comply with the law .
 The United States bomber offensive against North Vietnam is extended to the demilitarized zone separating North and South Vietnam . New Communist protests bring new Communist protests and adding to diplomatic tensions .
 United States Apollo 15 astronauts David R Scott and James B Irwin land on the moon . Scott and Irwin were astronauts for the first time in Apollo 15 .
 Greece, Tbrkey and Britain sign declaration for cease-fire agreement on Cyprus . Greece, Cyprus, Britain and Turkey agree to a ceasefire agreement on the island .
 Syrian soldiers of Arab League’s peacekeeping force in Lebanon set up gun positions around two main Palestinian refugee camps to help control guerrillas .
 President Aristides Royo Sanchez resigns two years before the end of his six-year term . He was forced to resign under pressure from the country’s military leaders .
 Bomb explodes at busy shopping plaza outside Johannesburg, South Africa, injuring dozens of people . Dozens of people were injured in the blast at the shopping plaza .
 Poland’s government announces controversial program to end food price controls and meat rationing . Poland's government has been criticized for introducing food rationing and price controls . Poland has been known for its anti-food rationing policies in recent years .
 Robinson of Trinidad offers to resign, call elections and grant his captors amnesty . Robinson of Trinbans offers resignation, calls elections and grants them amnesty . He says he will resign and call elections, grant them amnesty and grant them the right to vote .
 U.N. weapons experts report finding 46,000 chemical weapons in Iraq, about four times what Baghdad had declared in 1993 . Guards at a Lima, Peru, museum walk out with golden relics of the Incas — most of which later melt down . United Nations weapons experts find 46
 Rebel Serbs in Croatia retreat and promise not to attack government troops in an effort to prevent attacks on their stronghold . Rebels in Croatia say they will not attack government forces to prevent further attacks .
 Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic says a fierce offensive that took much of Kosovo back from ethnic Albanian separatists is over . Milosev says the offensive is over, with the end of the Kosovo offensive .
 The worst blackout in Taiwanese history cuts off electricity to 7 million households . One-third of the island is affected by the blackout, causing panic and fear it might be under attack by China .
 A collapsed utility tower is the culprit and it is unrelated to recent tensions with the mainland . A collapsed tower is not the cause of recent tensions .
 North and South Korea announce they will reopen border liaison offices and reconnect a rail line linking the two countries . North and S. Korea will also reopen a rail link between the Koreas .
 President Joseph Kabila of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwandan President Paul Kagame sign a peace agreement . The peace deal is intended to bring an end to the devastating civil war that started in 1998 .
 Iranian Vice President Mohammad Ali Abtahi acknowledges that Zahra Kazemi, a freelance photographer, was murdered while detained by the Iranian government . Kazemi held both Canadian and Iranian citizenship, and held both citizenship .
 Kazemi was arrested June 23 for taking photos of protesters in Tehran . Kazemi had been arrested June 24 for taking photographs of protesters .
 Israeli missiles crush buildings where Lebanese villagers are sleeping, killing at least 56 people, more than half of them children . More than half the victims were children, according to reports . The attack was an attack against Hezbollah militants .
 Maharashtra state government bans domesticated elephants from India’s largest city, Mumbai . The state government says forcing the animals to walk the city's chaotic, crowded and polluted streets is an act of cruelty .
 A team of European scientists unveils a new method for extracting images hidden under old masters’ paintings . Vincent van Gogh painted over a color portrait of a woman’s face unseen since 1887 . A new method of extracting images from old masters' paintings re-creates
 Austrian and Russian troops under Francis Duke of Coburg and Count Alexander Suvorov defeat TUrks at Focshani in Romania . Austrian, Russian and Russian forces defeated TUrks in Romania in 1877 .
 Venezuelan Republic falls to Spanish forces, and Francisco de Miranda is arrested . Venezuelan Republic is captured by Spanish forces in Caracas .
 U.S. troops break through the German lines around the Normandy beachhead, opening the way to liberating the rest of France . United States troops liberate France from the German beachhead .
 Thai Lap Thanh, of Frenchbacked South Vietnam, are killed 97 kilometers south of Saigon by a Communist suicide bomber . Tham Thanh was one of many Vietnamese who were killed by the Communists .
 Britain and West Germany sign 10-year agreement on nuclear cooperation . West Germany and Britain signed a nuclear cooperation agreement in 1960s .
 Britain agrees to establish a wider Malaysian federation on the Malay Pehinsula . Britain agreed to establish the federation in Malaysia in 2003 . Malaysia is one of the world's most populous countries .
 U.S. Ranger 7 spacecraft transmits to Earth first closeup pictures of the moon . United States Ranger 7 sent first close-up pictures to Earth .
 Two United States Apollo 15 astronauts begin three days of moon exploration in an electric car . The car is powered by an electric version of the Apollo 15 vehicle .
 Cease-fire takes effect between Ihrkey and Greece in fighting on Cyprus . Greece and Cyprus have been fighting on the island for more than a decade .
 Gunman shoots his way into Iraqi embassy in Paris and holds hostages for several hours before surrendering to French police . Gunman then shoots himself in the head and takes hostages for hours . He then surrenderes to police .
 Eleven people are executed in Tehran, Iran, after being convicted of participating in an attempted anti-government coup earlier in the month . The execution comes after an attempt to overthrow Iran's government .
 Britain's cabinet unanimously supports Margaret Thatcher’s resistance to stiff sanctions against South Africa . Margaret Thatcher is the prime minister of the UK and South Africa's longest-serving cabinet .
 Pier jammed with thousands of festival travelers collapses at ferry terminal in northwest Malaysia, killing at least 30 people and injuring about 370 . About 370 people were injured in the collapse, including about 370 people .
 Thousands of residents flee Beirut, Lebanon, as fierce shelling continues . Thousands of people have been forced to flee the Lebanese capital .
 United States government panel approves use of gene therapy for first time in treatment of human disease . U.S. government panel OKs use of therapy to treat patients with gene therapy first time .
 U.S. President George Bush and Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev sign a longrange nuclear weapons reduction pact at Moscow summit . The pact was signed by the Soviet Union and the United States in 1987 .
 United Nations Security Council approves possible U.S.-led invasion of Haiti . U.N. Security Council votes to authorize invasion of the country . Haiti is one of the poorest countries in the world .
 Hundreds of Israeli police and soldiers drag Jewish settlers away from an encampment on a West Bank hilltop . They were protesting the emerging Israel-Palestine Liberation Organization accord .
 African leaders agree to impose sanctions on Burundi for the July 25 military coup . The July 25 coup ousted the country’s fragile coalition government . African leaders agreed to impose the sanctions for the coup .
 Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu threatens to send troops into autonomous Palestinian areas . 13 people were killed in the worst terrorist bombing in more than a year in Israel .
 South Africa ends the Truth and Reconciliation Commission's public exploration of apartheid’s horrors after two years of hearings . The commission laid bare decades of massacres, beatings and torture . South Africa ended its two-year investigation into apartheid's horrors after hearings .
 United States Senate Foreign Relations Committee holds hearings on U.S. plans to attack Iraq and oust Iraqi President Saddam Hussein . United States wants to oust Saddam Hussein and oust him .
 The Vatican issues a 12-page document strongly urging Roman Catholic lawmakers worldwide to reject legislation sanctioning same-sex civil unions and adoption rights . The document strongly urges Roman Catholics to reject such legislation .
 World Trade Organization members approve plan to end export subsidies on farm products and cut import duties across the world . Plan is a key step toward a comprehensive global accord that has been discussed since 2001, trade officials say .
 Lebanese Prime Minister Fuad Saniora visits Syria in an attempt to repair relations damaged after Damascus was forced to end its 29-year military presence in Lebanon . Damascus forced to pull out of Lebanon after 29 years of military presence there .
 The United Nations Security Council passes a resolution giving Iran one month to suspend uranium enrichment or face the threat of economic and diplomatic sanctions . The resolution was passed by the U.N. Security Council last week .
 Deployment of British troops to support Northern Ireland police, codenamed Operation Banner, officially ends after 38 years . Deployment to support police in Northern Ireland was codename Operation Banner . Operation Banner was cod-named Operation Banner and cod-cod-named for support of Northern Ireland
 Haitian lawmakers ratify Michele Pierre-Louis to be the country’s prime minister . The move ends more than three months of political bickering and deadlock in Parliament . The Haitian parliament has been deadlocked for months .
 A string of bombings targets Shiite worshippers in the Baghdad area, killing at least 29 people . The attacks were apparently coordinated against followers of an anti-U.S. cleric who were blamed for some of Iraq’s worst sectarian violence .
 The threat of disease looms as some evacuees arrive in camps with fever, diarrhea and skin problems . Some arrive with fever and diarrhea, including skin problems, officials say .
 Security forces backed by tanks and snipers launch a ferocious assault on defiant cities and towns, killing at least 70 people and possibly many more . The regime raced to crush dissent ahead of Ramadan ahead of the holiday .
 A.D. 64: The Great Fire of Rome began, consuming most of the city for about a week . The fire consumed most of Rome for the first time since the fall of the Roman Empire .
 The English Parliament passed an act declaring the authority of the pope void in England . The pope's authority was declared void by the English Parliament . The Pope's authority in England was also declared void in the country .
 Truman signed a Presidential Succession Act which placed the speaker of the House and the Senate president pro tempore next in the line of succession after the vice president . Harry S Truman signed the act in 1945 .
 Edward M Kennedy, D-Mass., left a party on Chappaquiddick Island near Martha’s Vineyard with Mary Jo Kopechne, some time later, his car went off a bridge into the water .
 At the Montreal Olympics, Nadia Comaneci received the first-ever perfect score of 10 with her routine on uneven parallel bars . At the same time, the Romanian gymnast received her first ever 10th-ever score .
 Gunman James Huberty opened fire at a McDonald’s fast food restaurant in San Ysidro, California, killing 21 people . He was shot dead by police after being shot by police .
 Walter F Mondale won the Democratic presidential nomination in San Francisco . Mondale was the Democratic Party's first choice for the nomination in 1968 .
 Actress Rebecca Schaeffer, 21, was shot to death at her Los Angeles home by obsessed fan Robert Bardo . Bardo was later sentenced to life in prison for her murder .
 Arnold Schwarzenegger would not apologize for mocking lawmakers as “girlie men’s” remark . Democrats have criticized the remark as sexist and homophobic . Schwarzenegger has refused to apologize for the remark, despite criticism .
 Todd Hamilton gained a playoff victory over Ernie Els to win the British Open . Hamilton beat Els by two shots in the final round of the tournament . Hamilton won the tournament by three shots .
 Former EPA chief Anne Gorsuch Burford died in Aurora, Colorado, at age 62 . Burford was the first woman to lead the EPA under President Richard Nixon .
 The Taliban posted a video of an American soldier who’d gone missing June 30, 2009 from his base in eastern Afghanistan . The Taliban later confirmed to have captured the soldier . Pfc. Paul Allen was captured in the video . He was later identified as Pfc Allen .
 Authorities in Tennessee arrested Japob Shaffer in the deaths of six people . Five people were found slain near Fayetteville; the sixth body was discovered in Huntsville, Alabama .
 Tennessee became the first state to be readmitted to the Union after the Civil War . The state was readmitted after the war . Tennessee was the last state to join the Union .
 The Treaty of Lausanne settled the boundaries of modern Turkey in Switzerland . The Treaty settled the borders of Turkey in the 1920s and 1930s . It was concluded in Switzerland and was settled in modern Turkey .
 Richard Nixon engaged in his famous ‘Kitchen Debate’ with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev . Nixon was in Moscow during a visit to Moscow during his visit to the Soviet Union .
 The Apollo 11 astronauts splashed down safely in the Pacific . Two astronauts had been the first men to set foot on the moon . The mission was the first manned mission to the moon in 1969 .
 Hulda Crooks, a 91-year-old mountaineer from California, became the oldest woman to conquer Mount Fuji, Japan’s highest peak . Crooks is from California and has been in Japan for more than 30 years .
 A gunman burst into the United States Capitol, killing two police officers before being shot and captured . Two police officers were killed when the gunman opened fire inside the Capitol .
 Nine coal miners became trapped in a flooded tunnel of the Quecreek Mine in western Pennsylvania . The story ended happily 77 hours later with the rescue of all nine .
 President George W Bush says he is committed to relying on the recommendations of the September 11 commission in waging the war on terrorism . Without promising what specific steps he would take, he said in his weekly radio address that his administration would rely heavily on the commission recommendations .
 Fred LaRue, who served a prison term for Watergate, died in Biloxi, Mississippi, at age 75 . Former Nixon administration official died in Mississippi at 75 years old .
 President Obama says Cambridge, Massachusetts, police had “acted stupidly” in arresting black scholar Henry Louis Gates Jr. He says he’s invited the Harvard professor and Sgt. Sgt. Robert Henson to a White House dinner .
 A highspeed train crash outside Santiago de Compostela in northwest Spain killed 79 people . The crash was the first of its kind to take place in the region .
 Prince William and Kate, the Duchess of Cambridge, have given birth to George Alexander Louis . The royal couple gave birth to their first child in 2011 . Kensington Palace announced the baby's name at a press conference on Monday .
 Kurdish politician replaces Jalal Talaani as the country’s new presilent in the latest step toward brming a new government .
 Islamic militants destroyed a Muslim shrine traditionally said to be the burial place of the prophet Jonah . Meanwhile, a series of attacks dlled dozens of people, including dozens of soldiers .
 Fouad Massoum, 76, one of the founders of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan party led by the previous president, Talabani, accepted the position after winning twothirds of the votes in the parliament . Fouad says the “huge security, political and economic
 As Massoum was named president, the al Qaeda breakaway Islamic State group blew up the Mosque of the Prophet Younis, or Jonah . The mosque was the mosque of the prophet Younis or Jonah, residents say .
 The militants ordered everyone out of the mosque, then blew it up, residents say . The residents say they were ordered to leave the mosque . The mosque was attacked by the militants, residents said .
 Tomb robbers a dying breed in Italy following crackdowns . Tombaroli raiders are no longer easy for the ‘tombaroli,’ Italy’s tomb raiders .
 Pietro Casasanta had no Indiana Jones-type escapes from angry natives or booby-trapped temples . Pietro Cascasanta was born in Italy in 17th century .
 He worked undisturbed in daylight with a bulldozer . He posed as a construction worker to become one of Italy’s most successful plunderers of archaeological treasures .
 When he wasn’t in prison, the convicted looter operated for decades in this countryside area outside Rome . He says lax surveillance allowed him to dig into ancient Roman villas and unearth statues, pottery and other artifacts . He then sold for millions of dollars on the illegal
 Casasanta, 69, was the prince of the tombaroli, as the looters are known in Italy . Some of his finds are priceless, and some of them are priceless .
 Police and prosecutors believe they are beginning to see results in efforts to combat the traffic of stolen or illegally excavated antiquities . They say the antiquities made their way to the world’s top museums and collectors .
 Giovanni Nistri, who heads the art squad with the Carabinieri, Italy’s paramilitary police, said that in 2006 his unit discovered fewer than 40 illegal digs .
 Increased monitoring of archaeological sites has landed diggers like Casasanta in jail . Increased monitoring has landed archaeologists in jail in recent years .
 Pietro Casasanta stands near the ruins of a Roman palace in Anguillara Sabazia, near Rome, last month .
 Italy has been pressuring some U.S. museums to return artifacts . Italy has also pressured some museums in the United States to return them .
 Marion True, aad art dealer Robert Hecht, are accused of knowingly receiving dozens of archaeological treasures that were smuggled out despite laws making all antiquities found in Italy state property .
 Negotiations between Italy and the Getty have so far failed to yield a deal . Italy and Getty have been unable to agree a deal on the Getty .
 Italy’s efforts have scared museums and the international art market into following stricter guidelines for acquisitions, Nistri says .
 Over the last years the crackdown has been felt on the legal art market, experts say . Buyers are concentrating more on objects coming from private collections or other legitimate sources .
 Zilverberg said dealers and museums are learning their lesson . But he said authorities didn't monitor what was happening in their own archaeological backyards .
 When Casasanta started out in the 1950s he would sell his finds at tiny stalls that openly dealt in antiquities on the streets of Rome . He would sell antiquities in the tiny stalls on the city's streets, selling them at little shops .
 Too poor to get an education, he used part of his earnings to buy secondhand books about archaeology, fueling his growing passion . He used to be too poor to study archaeology .
 Casasanta first got interested in ancient relics at 14, when he was a teenager . The son of a mason, he was visiting the countryside around Anguillara, an area rich in Etruscan and Roman remains .
 Pottery and sculpture brought up by the plow caught his attention in the fields . Pottery, sculpture and sculptures were brought up from the fields by the field .
 His targets were usually Roman villas, on which he worked with a bulldozer and a couple of helpers . His target was a Roman villa, with the help of a few helpers .
 At such sites he uncovered statues of emperors and gods, as well as what he considers his greatest find — a 4th-century-B.C. ivory mask representing the Greek divinity Apollo . The mask is believed to have been found in the 4th Century-Century
 Casasanta unearthed the statue in 1994 and sold it to a Germany-based dealer . He says he was cheated and received less than a tenth of the $10 million agreed upon . He unearthed it in 1994, but says he received less of the money .
 Italian police recovered the mask in London in 2003 . In revenge, he reported the dealer to authorities and Italian police ultimately recovered it .
 Tomb Sweeping Day is a time for families to celebrate life, and to pay respects to their ancestors . Craig J Lennox is the author of the book, "Tomb Sweeping"
 Start the day by commemorating your ancestors and other loved ones who’ve passed on . Celebrate your ancestors in honor of those who have passed away .
 April 5th is a day to visit their graves, pull weeds, and sweep the grounds . April 5 is also a time to visit the graves of those who have fallen ill .
 Offerings of food, rice wine, and paper money will all help ensure the spirits are smiling .
 If you’re unable to visit their graves, one popular way to pay respect is to bum paper money on a street comer at night . If you can’t pay respect, you can do it by bumming paper money .
 Other ways to celebrate this holiday are by enjoying the nascent spring air . Enjoying spring air is a way to celebrate the holiday .
 A picnic in the park, or a little kite flying, would be appropriate in China . You’ll see the parks around China foil of people doing this .
 Questions raised about tombstone removal from small historic cemetery in Holmdel . Terence Wall's 9-year-old daughter says tombstones were removed from historic cemetery .
 The lifelong township resident and former township committeeman went down Saturday afternoon to the place he and his daughter often visited . He learned it was not the exaggeration of a child's imagination .
 Wall said the 60 plots provided a historical accounting of township forefathers . Wall said he was outraged because the 60 or so plots provided historical accounting . Wall: "I'm outraged because I'm outraged at what I'm doing"
 Beau Ridge Association president Edward Esler says everything was done by the letter of the association's laws . Esler: "It's not an accident, it's a mistake"
 Holmdel Historical Society member questions whether the development association received approval from municipal officials to move headstones .
 Holmdel Historical Society Vice President Peggy Laskey said the society had not been notified of the removal of the gravestone marker removal .
 Laskey also questioned whether the association went before any official body or official such as the Holmdel Planning Board or Zoning Board to get official approval on record . Laskey: The association should have gone before any municipal board or official to get approval .
 The tombstones are to be replaced with white flat placards that will lie flush on the ground where the sandstones once stood .
 Wall said from a distance you no longer can see that it is a grave site . Wall said that from a . distance you can no longer . see it as a . grave site. Wall said .
 A young man's frequent nosebleeds turned out to have a rather unusual cause .
 The patient had a well -aligned and complete set ofteethjn his mouth j _accojjingjto_r the report .
 Doctors pulled out the extra tooth after putting the man under general anesthesia . The patient completely healed, and had no more nosebleeds three months later, the report says .
 Extra teeth are not that uncommon, and may even grow upside dpwn . But they rarely qrow all the way into the nasal cavity, says Dr. David Miller .
 Dentist: "It’s an unusual case of an extra tooth certainly, the most impressive intranasal photo i think I've ever seen"
 Hell stein says he has never seen the tooth actually in the tooth . Hell Stein says the tooth is in the mouth of a tooth . The tooth is believed to have been in the teeth of a man .
 It is surprising that the nasal tooth had gone unnoticed for such a long time, Hell stein said . The tooth was found in the mouth of a man with a nasal tooth . It was the first time the tooth had been found to be missing for more than a decade .
 Between 0.15 and 3.15 percent of people have more teeth than normal, studies have found . Hellstein: "We see several cases each year"
 For it to have erupted up and through the nasal floor — that s unusual . For it s unusual for it to erupt through nasal floor, it's unusual for the animal to erupt .
 The patient in this case likely had a mesiodens, a common type of extra tooth . It is found around incisor teeth, which are found in incisors .
 One condition associated with extra teeth is cleft lip and palate, which is a facial development birth defect and often repaired by surgery .
 Officials have closed one of the city's most popular swimming holes indefinitely because of a rare toxic algae bloom . The algae bloom poses health risks to people and dogs, officials say .
 The modern era in Indian law has come to an end .
 "The gathering rumblings of the past year have called us to abandon litigation as a means to preserve our independence and provide protection to our Native interests," says the governor . The gathering .
 Take cover, for the United States Supreme Court shall make use of its darkest secrets . Take cover for the U.S. Supreme Court, the Supreme Court will use its dark secrets .
 In its efforts to conceal a shift in power from the federal government to the states, it has no concern for our place in the federal union . It has no concerns for the future of the U.S. as a nation, it says .
 Supreme Court has always been a secretive organ that has cautiously guarded the knowledge about itself, its members and its workings . The Supreme Court is a secretive institution that has carefully guarded its members .
 Its most prominent public image comes from the words it pronounces in the opinions it issues . It recedes into the background of American politics so effectively that it recedes .
 It spins narratives that often stray far from the truth, but it is in these narratives that law is born . Law is born, and it spins a narrative that can be spun far from truth, it is said .
 These narratives, euphemistically called ""opinions of the Court,"" are often cover for the range of odd political theories espoused by its various members .
 Politics hide well under the camouflage of detached adjudication . They employ ""secrets"" of decision-making that make the politics hide well .
 In one of its oldest decisions, Marbury Madison played down the fact that the Constitution did not give it the power to review Congress and the President .
 In the early days, under the leadership of Chief Justice John Marshall, the associate justices were not allowed to render dissenting opinions . Associate justices are no longer allowed to give dissenting opinions in court . The Supreme Court is now a federal court .
 When this prohibition against dissent was lifted, strange results fell into place . "Strange results fell to place. And strange results came to place," says President Obama .
 In the Cherokee Nation Georgia case, two justices backed Marshall’s description of Indian tribes as ""domestic dependent nations,"" two others felt that tribes consisted of conquered peoples, but the remaining two felt that the Cherokee people had proven well that they were entitled to be considered as part
 We always forget the dissenters, and those who didn’t entirely join Marshall . The dissenters of Marshall’s administration are often overlooked . We forget those dissenters.
 In 1831 when Cherokee Nation was decided, a few small ""domestic dependent nations" were appearing in political discussions . Monaco, San Marino, Andorra, Luxembourg were all on the verge of attaining that special status .
 For American Indians, though, we would become relegated to a wardship status, never to reach political maturity . We would become the unwanted wards of an increasingly callous trustee, writes John Sutter .
 The Supreme Court created the . fictive characteristics of the Federal-lndian relationship, yet, in the past two centuries, has withdrawn at every attempt on our part to enforce the sketchy contours of the Court’s weak philosophy .
 In more recent years, with cases like A-1 Contractors, Hicks, and Atkinson Trading Post, it has engaged its secret powers to ignore those seminal cases often referred to as the ""Marshall Trilogy" from which we get concepts of trust and guardianship .
 In the Marshall years, the Supreme Court did say in Worcester Georgia that the reach of State law did not enter into tribal lands, yet each one of these new decisions stands for a retreat from the principled stance of Worcester .
 Rather than commenting on the underlying logic of Worcester, the Court ignores the case altogether . Rather than comment on the case, the court ignores the issue altogether .
 It has ceased referring to Worcester, as it articulates its recent logic . It has stopped referring to the city as Worcester . The city has been in the news for more than a decade .
 Take care that Worcester may never be overruled but ignored into abandonment altogether . Take care of Worcester, Massachusetts, as it may never get overruled or abandoned .
 A more troubling secret power of the Supreme Court has been in its ability to transform a case . The Supreme Court's secret power is to transform the outcome of a case, the author says .
 Using this technique, the Court makes a relatively small case into something larger . The Court uses this technique to make the case into a larger case .
 The case of United States Montana is the classic embodiment of this secret power of transformation . "The case of U.S. Montana is an example of the power of this power," the author says .
 An ""exception"" to the real rule had miraculously become ""the rule"" itself . An 'exception' to the rule had somehow become 'the rule' itself .
 As an appeals court, this is considered within the Court to be the most drastic of actions . The decision was made by the Supreme Court in London on Friday .
 No law professor in the country can describe the necessary predicates to the overruling of a case, says a law professor . "No law professor has ever been able to describe the required predicates for overruling a case," he says .
 This secret remains guarded because it is one of the primary forces behind American litigation . But this secret is guarded because of the nature of litigation in America .
 If the secrets to its mechanics were disclosed, cases would be settled or abandoned . The dialectic engine of the adversarial process would grind to a halt, the author says .
 Justices O'Connor and Breyer met with Indian jurists and leaders last year . Justice O’Connor was asked point blank whether the Court was willing to re-examine some of the older, more troubling cases in Indian law .
 She said that ""maybe"" it was time for tribes to approach Congress to seek a legislative solution .
 She was somewhat laying the blame for bad law on Congress . The real culprit was an uninspired and timid Supreme Court, she said .
 The trust relationship grew out of the incidental Marshall description of the relationship between tribes and the federal government as ""like"" a guardian and ward, is a concept coming out of English law .
 A trusteeship in the English courts was always monitored by a supervising court . Trusteeship in English courts were also monitored by supervising courts .
 She was signaling that the Court, consistent with its late-1 9th century stance, would not perform that function, even with an added century to reflect upon its .
 She was also saying that the Court would be unwilling to overrule statements it made a century ago about the unlimited powers of Congress no matter how lacking in legal support .
 She was unwilling to admit that the powers of Indian tribes would ever again rise to Constitutional proportions . But worse, she was not willing to admit the powers would never again rise .
 In other words, the politics of federal-lndian relations could conceivably be settled by Congressional decree without the protection of any court . The politics could be settled in Congress without protection from courts .
 Congress could forever eradicate tribal governments in fact and leave only the hollow mention of ""Indian tribes" within the Constitution as evidence of our political existence . Congress could erase tribal governments and leave a hollow mention .
 The U.S. Supreme Court does not consider itself to bear any social responsibility for the fate of American Indian peoples . It is that the United States Supreme Court . The Supreme Court is not responsible for American Indian deaths .
 The United States Constitution was built upon an essential theory that the weak were always protected through some Constitutional mechanism . Whether it was through a bicameral Congress, residual State powers or a system of civil rights, the Constitution protected the weak .
 The status of Indian tribes cannot be relegated to a state of pupilage by judicial decree with any intellectual honesty without a backstop being installed to conform to this essential democratic theory .
 It is the function of the Supreme Court, in the exercise of its ""judicial powers"" to detect iniquities in the administration of the American political system . The Supreme Court will apply the language and theory of the Constitution to correct those shortcomings, he says .
 "We have been committed to the netherworld of a wardship status. In regards to the Native peoples of this country, we have . We have . been committed . to a wardhip status status .
 The recent decisions of the Supreme Court have deprived us of our potential for political vitality, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says the court's recent decisions have deprived Americans of potential political vitality .
 Supreme Court does not make use of commentary no matter who is the source . The Supreme Court makes use of this article to help people understand the court's decision .
 American law is a system of incremental legal reform, and, as the Supreme Court can plainly see, every commentator urges monumental change . The Supreme Court will decide whether to overturn the decision in the next step .
 In this post-modern era, we appear to have no choice but reluctantly to abide by Justice O’Connor’s suggestion . We appear to be obliged to comply with the suggestion .
 The post-modern era portends more than legislative changes, it may require changes in posture and attitude . Post-modern may require a change in posture, attitude, says author .
 It demands our vision and solidarity, and other things we presently do not have . More importantly, it demands us to be united in solidarity and vision .
 Judge Carey N Vicenti is a member of the Jicarilla Apache Nation of northwest New Mexico . He currently serves as an Assistant Professor of Sociology at Fort Lewis College in Durango, Colo .
 Indian Country Today columnist and judicial official sits as a judicial official for several American Indian nations . He sits as an American Indian judge for several U.S. Indian nations and a columnist for Indian country Today .
 John Chapman decided to leave his family’s farm in Massachusetts and go west to seek his fortune on the frontier in 1797 . Chapman was a 23-year-old man who left his family's farm in September of 1797 to seek fortune .
 Chapman thought that he could make money by starting an apple tree nursery in western Pennsylvania . He wanted to sell seedling trees to other settlers as they arrived in search of cheap land . The nursery was established in 1880 .
 John Chapman was pictured in Harper’s New Monthly Magazine in November of 1871 . Chapman was the subject of a series of articles in Harper's New Monthly magazine . Chapman died in 1871 at the age of 92 .
 The artist portrayed him wearing a belted robe that does not match any eyewitness descriptions of Chapman ‘s usual dress’ Chapman was killed in 1993 .
 Chapman knew that almost every farmer who settled in the west would plant a large orchard in order to produce alcoholic apple cider . Chapman knew about the orchard's orchard and said it would be used to make cider .
 Americans did not eat many apples in Chapman's day, but they liked to drink cider with every meal . Americans didn't like to eat apples in their day .
 Even small children drank hard cider with breakfast, dinner, and supper . Hard cider was thought to be the healthiest beverage available .
 Unlike creek water and unpasteurized milk, cider drunk in moderation seldom made anyone sick . Cider drunk with a moderate dose of cider in moderation rarely makes people sick .
 Alcohol-free “sweet” cider was more wholesome than hard cider . Without refrigeration refrigeration it fermented after a few days in the barrel .
 Chapman calculated he could sell thousands of young apple trees on the frontier . Every settler would want to plant at least fifty fruit trees to provide his family with a year’s supply of cider . Chapman calculated that he would sell thousands .
 Most settlers would plant even more trees— perhaps two hundred -- to produce extra cider for sale . Most would plant more trees to produce more cider .
 Chapman knew settlers could start their orchards from seed, but he reasoned that most would prefer the faster and easier method of planting young trees . Chapman: "Most would prefer to plant young trees from seed"
 Two-year-old seedlings sold for six cents each in western Pennsylvania . He hoped that he could sell thousands of two-year old seedlings .
 Chapman visited a Massachusetts cider mill during the fall apple harvest . He visited a cider mill in the state to learn how to make cider .
 He collected all of the apple seeds that he wanted, free of charge, by picking through the waste pulp dumped by the mill . The waste pulp was dumped by an apple mill .
 Chapman began hiking west in late October of 1797 . With a big sack of apple seeds among the provisions in his backpack, he began hiking .
 The weather was mild during the first weeks of his hike, but in mid-November, Chapman encountered a blizzard . Chapman encountered the blizzard after passing the last settlements of the Susquehanna River valley .
 He was hiking along a mountain ridge in central Pennsylvania, days away from the nearest cabins, when the storm hit . The storm hit the ridge days before the nearest cabinins were hit .
 Chapman built a fire and a leanto shelter, and then he relaxed on a bed of boughs while the wind howled around him for days . Chapman built fire and shelter, then he relaxed on a . bed of a bed on a bough while the winds howled
 When the weather cleared, Chapman discovered that it was impossible for him to resume his journey because of massive snowdrifts that buried the trail . Chapman was an exceptionally calm and reflective young man .
 He returned to his fire, stretched out on his bed of boughs, and gazed thoughtfully at the snowcovered beech trees that towered around him .
 He got up and used his knife to cut the beech branches into flexible wands . He then cut the branches into wands with his knife .
 He bent branches into shape of snowshoes, fastened them with strips of cloth from his jacket . He sliced the hem of his jacket into strips, bent the branches into the shape of a snowshoe .
 After a full day of tinkering, he had made a serviceable pair of snowshoes .
 He walked over the drifts for a week until he reached the future site of Warren, Pennsylvania, where a land company had opened an office in a cabin .
 The story of how he survived the blizzard became a permanent part of local folklore . The handful of settlers at Warren were so impressed by Chapman’s improvised snowshoes that the story of his survival became part of the story .
 Chapman chose a site for his tree nursery at the place where the Big Brokenstraw Creek joins the Allegheny River . Chapman chose the site six miles from Warren, Pennsylvania, about six miles away .
 With an axe as his only tool, he killed the big trees on three acres of land by “girdling’s” each tree, slicing off the bark in a circle clear around each trunk .
 He built a rough fence of logs and brush to keep deer out of his clearing . He then built a fence to keep the deer out .
 In the spring he planted apple seeds on the fenced land . three acres of ground for a nursery. three acres .
 Chapman probably did most of his work of site selection, tree girdling, and fence-building in the fall and winter months . Chapman is known for his work in the early 1900s and early 1800s .
 By spring he would have multiple clearings ready for planting, and he could travel swiftly by canoe from one clearing to another, to get all of his seeds into the ground .
 Chapman’s younger brother, Lawrence, became interested in his enterprise and for a while accompanied Chapman on his nursery-planting expeditions into the wilderness . The elder brother became interested and became involved in his business .
 Eventually Lawrence grew tired of camping in the forest, and he abandoned the project . Lawrence eventually grew tired and abandoned his camping project .
 John Chapman was so committed to tree planting that people on the frontier began to call him “Johnny Appleseed’s” nickname . Chapman remained committed to planting trees, but people began calling him ‘Johnny Appleeed”
 He was an amiable man who did a lot of talking whenever he got the chance, but he did not mind solitude . He was also known for his work in the field of politics, but not for his quietness .
 When not doing the strenuous work of clearing land for nurseries, he enjoyed loafing beside his fire, observing nature or reading .
 By 1802 Chapman had planted nurseries at many scattered locations along the Allegheny and Ohio Rivers and their tributaries . Chapman was earning steady income from the sale of seedling trees to new settlers .
 He had become good at guessing where it* „,” “a i;uu, were treacherously false friends . He had learned to guess where the friends were .
 Chapman was able to travel freely from one Indian town to another in Ohio during the War of 1812 . Chapman spoke Algonquian dialects fluently and traveled freely during the war .
 Chapman's habit of traveling with few possessions may have been a practical solution to the challenges of frontier life, but it also had a philosophical basis . Chapman’s habit of going without possessions may be sensible and practical .
 He was profoundly influenced by the writings of Emanuel Swedenborg, a Swedish scientist who became a Christian mystic . He was influenced by Swedenborg's writings, which he was inspired by .
 Chapman agreed with Swedenborg, and also with the ancient Greek philosopher Plato, that attachment to material things leads to unhappiness . Chapman: Material world is imperfect reflection of ideal spiritual world .
 When he visited a frontier cabin and was invited to sleep in a bed, he would politely decline and instead lie down on the floor by the fire .
 He refused to harm any animal, and lived on a vegetarian diet that included wild nuts, roots, and herbs . The author refused to kill any animal .
 Swedenborg’s doctrine that the Bible should not be taken literally, but should instead be read as a metaphoric guide to Platonic philosophy . He told one settler that, when he had been trapped by ice on an island in the Ohio River for several months, Swedenborg
 When Chapman discoursourshed on such topics, people on the Ohio frontier listened politely, but they seldom made much effort to figure out what he was talking about . Chapman: "People on the frontier listen politely"
 According to folklore, Chapman was extremely religious, but his ideas about heaven and hell were unconventional . Chapman got into many baffling, complicated debates with / fundamentalist preachers .
 Despite his peculiarities, Chapman was a well-respected man on the frontier . Chapman was known for his eccentricities, he was a respected leader in frontier .
 "Everybody knew that he was a successful businessman with a good education," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "He was a good businessman," he says .
 He habitually went barefoot and dressed in threadbare clothing and oddlooking homemade hats . He always looked clean and tidy, with his long hair neatly parted in the middle .
 Chapman's agents had standing orders to sell seedlings on credit to anyone who could not pay cash . Chapman never made the slightest effort to collect a debt so payment was effectively voluntary .
 Chapman also made gifts of cash to needy people . Chapman once handed fifty dollars to one astonished widow . Chapman also gave money to one widow .
 To spare horses from slaughter, he bought them and arranged for them to be put out to pasture . He bought them to spare them from slaughter and put them in pasture .
 Chapman became a hero to many frontier settlers during the War of 1812 . He gave white settlers diverse varieties of bitter, inedible crabapples .
 He was not interested in raising trees that yielded sweet, edible apples, because such trees cannot normally be grown from seeds . Such trees have to be propagated artificially by grafting .
 Chapman disliked grafting because he considered it unnatural . He knew that his customers would be perfectly satisfied with bitter crabapples because they made good cider . Chapman knew his customers were perfectly satisfied because of the cider .
 Chapman’s seedling trees flourished, but few new settlers moved into the area around Warren . Chapman's seedling tree grew, but the area remained largely empty . The area is now a ghost town .
 Chapman decided that he had chosen the wrong place to plant his nursery, since there were not enough customers . Chapman decided to plant a nursery in the city, but there were too many customers .
 Chapman decided to plant nurseries in western Pennsylvania and eastern Ohio . He wanted to be sure he would attract plenty of customers for his seedlings .
 Chapman spent the ensuing years planting tree nurseries at various locations in western Pennsylvania and eastern Ohio . Chapman spent most of the time planting nurseries in Ohio and Pennsylvania .
 Every fall he would collect bushels of apple seeds from eastern cider mills . The seeds were collected from the cider mills in eastern cider towns .
 He would carry seeds to Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, where he would load them into a dugout canoe . The seeds would be loaded into the canoe .
 He would paddle up the Allegheny River or down the Ohio River until he located a promising site for a future town . He would then go ashore and spend a few weeks preparing two or i'tgpA Rwrl 4o .
 The price agreed upon la one dollar and tweety-ftve cent* per acre . Nurseries usually stood right beside a growing town .
 Sometimes he would obtain legal title to the land on which he planted a nursery, but usually he would not bother to do that . He would not usually bother to get legal title for the nursery .
 He did not remain long at any of his nurseries but hired local settlers to serve as his agents . Local settlers tended to the profitable seedlings and sold them on commission .
 Chapman spent months every year traveling . up wilderness tributaries of the Ohio River in dugout canoes . Chapman’s increasing prosperity, he continued to lead an itinerant life .
 His growing attachment to his primitive way of life left him with little use for the hoard of cash that he was accumulating . He was forced to live on a primitive lifestyle that left him unable to find a way to survive .
 Chapman usually carried no money, keeping his cash hidden at various locations in the woods . Since outlaw gangs occasionally preyed on river traffic, Chapman kept cash hidden .
 He carried nothing that anybody might be tempted to steal— no gun, no traps, no coat, no shoes— nothing that he valued except for his books and his apple seeds, which nobody else wanted . "Nobody else wanted. Nobody else wanted."
 Chapman’s lack of tangible possessions kept him safe from outlaws and smoothed his relations with Indians . Chapman's lack of physical possessions helped keep him safe and helped him stay alive . Chapman was killed in 1877 by a group of Indians .
 Most Indians believed that a true friend would gladly share all of his possessions, and this belief caused endless trouble between Indians and white settlers .
 To white people, the natives were “Indian givers” and thieves . To natives, the white people tobacco but was lond ol cider and applejack, the hard liquor made .
 Map of the northern watershed of the Ohio River, the region in which Chapman planted most of his apple-tree nurseries . During the War of 1812, the frontier settlers were in the region during the war .
 Application to purchase 18.5 acres of land signed in 1836 by John Chapman . Application for purchase of 18.6 acres signed by Chapman in 1837 .
 On many occasions the impunity with which he ranged the country enabled him to give the settlers warning of approaching danger in time to allow them to take refuge .
 When the war ended in defeat for the Ohio Indians and the withdrawal of their British allies to Canada, American settlers poured into Ohio . Chapman became more prosperous than ever .
 He became a real estate developer, buying tracts of land for sale to settlers . He later became a businessman and real estate mogul .
 Chapman’s nurseries and real estate developments were all located in a broad arc of land from western Pennsylvania, across Ohio, to eastern Indiana . Chapman's nurseries were located in Pennsylvania, Ohio, and Indiana .
 His lands were all accessible by canoe from the Ohio River and its ' tributaries . The lands were accessible by canoes .
 Chapman’s real estate developments allowed him to send impressive sums of money to the New Church of Philadelphia, which sought to spread the doctrines of Emanuel Swedenborg in America . The profits from Chapman's real estate development allowed him .
 Chapman employed his sister’s ne’er-do-well husband, William Broom . Chapman's profits also supported the family of his sister, Persis, who he employed .
 Chapman died of pneumonia in 1845, at age seventy, in Fort Wayne, Indiana . His sister's descendants inherited Chapman’s estate when he died .
 His heirs were not able to track down all of his scattered real estate holdings . They recovered none of his cash savings, which presumably remained hidden in rocky clefts .
 They collected nearly six hundred dollars’ worth of property, a considerable sum at that time . They nevertheless collected nearly . six hundred . dollars .
 Fanciful engravings that illustrated the article showed Chapman dressed in an old coffee-sack and carrying a staff, an outfit that made him look like a saintly hermit in a Victorian Bible illustration .
 The article incorrectly portrayed Chapman as a poor man who owned only one small tract of land . Chapman owned only a small piece of land, according to the article . The article was incorrect to say Chapman was poor .
 Haley avoided mentioning that Chapman's apples were useful mainly for manufacturing an alcoholic beverage . Haley avoided mention that Chapman’s apples were used mainly for making alcoholic beverages .
 Chapman planted apple trees mainly for charitable reasons . Chapman raised trees as a business, but the tone of the article gave readers the false impression .
 Later writers exaggerated the distortions in Haley’s article to create a fictional image of Chapman as a pious vagrant who randomly scattered seeds to provide free apples for future generations of Americans .
 John Chapman's biography, Man and Myth, is still considered the authoritative biography of John Chapman . Chapman's "Man and Myth" is considered to be one of the world's best biographies .
 Harper’s New Monthly Magazine illustration shows Chapman . He trotted through the forest from Mansfield to Mount Vernon, Ohio, to warn settlers to flee because Indians planned to attack them .
 Chapman used language reminiscent of the King James Bible to give his warning . One settler, who had been a young girl when Chapman appeared at her door, recalled that he had used language similar to the Bible to warn .
 Vandorn was too nervous to sleep for a long time 1 j)uUie_£^^ ^. 1 j (u)u u) raise a caom on some rana innr c niipman nuu nougin mnun nix miles from Lexington
 In the dusk of the evening we saw smoke curling up amongst the tree tops . We saw Johnny standing close to a fire kindled by the side of a large log, an old tree which had been torn up .
 "I shall never forget how pleased he appeared to be when we came up to him in the wilderness, among bears, wolves, catamounts, serpents, owls, and porcupines, yet apparently contented and happy"
 Nearby lay logs and clapboards that he had cut for a cabin that he was building . Nearby lays logs and boards that he is building for the cabin .
 When the boys arrived, they found Chapman cooking potatoes in the embers of his fire . Chapman was cooking potatoes when the boys found him cooking potatoes . The boys found the potatoes in his home .
 Chapman began telling entertaining stories about the Indian wars . After a dinner of potatoes and some buttered bread provided by the boys .
 "Johnny blamed the whites for all the mischief done by the Indians," says Vandorn . Vandorn: “Johnny blamed [the whites] for the Indians’s mischief,” he says .
 Vandorn recalled, “I got into a doze, but was soon startled by the howling of wolves like so many devils, not far from the camp.” Vandorn said . Vandorn was killed in the fall of 1918 .
 Both boys got up and fired their rifles in the direction of the howling howling . Both boys were able to fire their rifles at the sound of the noise .
 Vandorn retorted, “Well, sleep if you can, for I can’t.” l ""’W"" ""g""l"" ""* WI""U I null Hill mill i iim .
 Chapman put up for sale as soon as it was completed, since he had no desire to live in a house . The next day the boys helped Chapman to erect the log cabin, which he put up on sale .
 The Mohican River was a wilderness waterway that John Chapman traveled often as he commuted by canoe across Ohio, visiting his many tree nurseries scattered around that state . Chapman traveled by canoe to visit his many nurseries in Ohio .
 Chapman nurseries planted next to the Indian village of Greentown on the Mohican . Chapman's nurseries were planted in the early 1900s .
 After the Indians were driven away by American militiamen during the War of 1812, Chapman’s sister, Persis, settled beside the river at Perryville, where Chapman visited her frequently .
 Chapman's husband earned his living as Chapman’s employee . He was very fond of her children, and her children were also fond of him .
 Her grandparents who were fascinated with the occult sexually and physically abused her . Her grandparents sexually abused her. She was sexually abused by them .
 Wigginton, her lover Lisa Ptaschinski, and friends Kim Jervis and Tracey Waugh went for a drive in Brisbane, Australia, on 21 October, 1989 .
 Wigginton told her friends that she wanted to kill a person and drink their blood . She told friends she was going to kill someone and drink blood .
 Tracey Wigginton had a reputation for Vampirism . She later claimed at her trial that she drank animal blood to survive .
 Her attack was so vicious, his spinal cord was severed and the body was left almost totally decapitated . Her attack left the body almost completely decapitated and the spinal cord severed . The victim was almost decapitated by the vicious attack .
 Wigginton said she 'felt nothing', and sat down to smoke a cigarette while her victim died . Shockingly, she sat down and smoked a cigarette as she watched her victim die .
 Wigginton then allegedly dug her teeth into his neck and drank his blood . The alleged attack happened in the early hours of Sunday morning . She allegedly attacked him with her teeth and then bit his flesh .
 Friend Tracey Waugh told police she could 'smell blood' on Wigginton's breath when she got back into the car . Police say she 'smelled blood' when she returned to the car after the incident . She told police that she could smell blood on the man
 She was found to have Disassociative Identity Disorder, with several distinct split personalities . Bobby, The Observer, Avril, Little Tracey and Big Tracey were found to be her main personalities .
 Despite her obvious mental illness, Tracey's was prosecuted and sent to prison . Tracey was sentenced to prison after pleading guilty to her mental illness .
 A TSA worker pretended to plant a plastic bag of white powder in a college student's carryon luggage at Philadelphia International Airport earlier this month . The TSA worker is no longer employed by the agency, agency says .
 TSA spokeswoman declined to identify the worker and his job title, citing privacy laws . TSA spokeswoman Ann Davis declined to name the worker .
 Debbie and Thomas Evans of Ringland, Newport, Gwent, believe their daughter's nocturnal agony was a premonition of the accident . Debbie Evans' parents believe the family's 'premonition' of the crash was pre-warning .
 'She was inconsolable for about half an hour and we couldn't do a thing with her,' says mother-of-one . She was 'inconsolable' for 'half an hour' before she was taken to hospital .
 She would often wake up saying Kieron was crying, but he would be asleep . She would wake up to say he was crying but he was asleep .
 He would wake up and cry, but then as soon as she would drift off, she would sleep . He would cry if she fell asleep, she said. But then he would fall asleep again, she added .
 Two-headed dolphin found on Turkey beach . Gym teacher Tugrul Metin took photo of con-joined dolphin while vacationing .
 A two-headed dolphin has washed up on a beach in Western Turkey, local media reports . Local media has reported that the dolphin was found washed up in the country's Western region .
 The remains of conjoined dolphin calf were discovered on a beach in Dikili npar thp Aegean city of Izmir . The private Dogan news agency said the remains were discovered by a gym teacher .
 The U-28 Creature took place in the early portion of World War I after a military engagement between the U Boat 28 and the British steamer Iberian . This chance encounter with an animal that would later be referred to as the U.28 Creature was the result of a military
 The steamer sank so swiftly that its bow stuck up almost vertically into the air . It sank so quickly that the bow of the steamer stuck up vertically in the air.
 "We all drew one another's attention to this wonder of the seas, which was writhing and struggling among the debris," she says . "Simultaneously we all drew . one another," she writes .
 We were unable to identify the creature, but all of us agreed that it resembled an aquatic crocodile . It was about 60-feet long, with four limbs resembling large webbed feet, a long, pointed tail and a head .
 The captain recorded the encounter in the manner in which the captain recorded it . One important thing to note about this encounter is the manner of recording it was recorded .
 In general submarine captains are not known to be prone to exaggeration, leading some to believe that he would not detail such an encounter in any other way but as it happened . In general, he is known not to exaggerate .
 The majority of people who report strange encounters are generally looked upon as crazy and meet with only ridicule . Also there would be absolutely no reason to concoct such a fantastic story knowing, as we all do, that it would be a hoax .
 Some investigators have theorized that this encounter could indicate a surviving specimen of pliosaurs or mosasaurs, both of which are though to have resembled gigantic crocodiles . Some investigators believe the encounter may have been from a living specimen of a giant crocodile .
 The fossil record of these creatures also seems to indicate that their spines were very flexible, which could account for the more serpentine like movement of the U-28 Creature and other so called Sea Serpents .
 Creature would have had to be swimming directly over the sinking ship seconds after it was sunk by torpedo fire . Creature would more than likely keep its distance for a naval battle .
 A 60-foot aquatic creature was transported across the Atlantic by a British steamer . Though it is unclear why the steamer would be transporting the 60 foot aquatic creature .
 On September 2, 1915 the U-28 was damage beyond repair in the North Cape . It was hit by debris from the munitions ship, the Olive Branch, which exploded after an engagement with the U.28 . The Olive Branch exploded after being hit by a U.S. Navy
 All eye witnesses of the encounter have passed away and the Iberian resting at the bottom of the North Atlantic . It is safe to say that at this point in time the mystery of the U-28 Creature may never be solved .
 We will still never know if that new discovery is what the captain reported that day or if something else, still unknown, lurks in the depths of the ocean . Perhaps one day the discovery of a creature similar to that described by the crew of the U-28 may shed new light
 There is currently no evidence to support the existence of the U-28 Creature in today’s oceans .
 On July 30, 1915, the U-28 torpedoed the British steamer Iberian . A giant explosion rocketed debris and one unidentified 60 foot crocodile like creature out of the water .
 Auckland Harbour officers recently claimed a first when they confiscated an undeclared crate from Indonesia . In November 2002, they confiscated from an Auckland furniture importer . The Sea Monster is 60 feet in length and weighs unknown .
 He bought them, apparently in good faith regarding their identity, as a special Christmas present . He had bought them as a Christmas present for his family .
 When examined at Auckland Museum, the bones were identified as originating from a cow or water buffalo . They had been coated with a thin layer of cement to make them appear fossilised .
 Scientists say popcorn kernels resist popping into puffy white globes . Scientists say they now know why some popcorn kernels don't pop up . Scientists also say they know why popcorn doesn't pop quickly enough .
 It's long been known that popcorn kernels must have a precise moisture level in their starchy center -about 1 5 percent -to explode . The moisture in the center of popcorn kernels is about 1 5% .
 Unpopped kernels, it turns out, have leaky hulls that prevent moisture pressure buildup needed for them to pop . Most kernels lack the optimal hull structure that allows them to explode .
 The findings may help popcorn breeders select the best varieties or create new ones with superior hulls .
 In the varieties popped, the percentage of unpopped kernels ranged from 4 percent in premium brands to 47 percent in the cheaper ones .
 1 7 billion quarts of popcorn are sold each year in the United States . The findings could be good news for people who savor popcorn .
 Popcorn processors are looking for ways to improve their product, including reducing the number of old maids . A spokeswoman for the Chicago-based Popcorn Board says popcorn processors are always looking for improvements .
 Purdue says two popcorn manufacturers have already expressed interest in the study . Hamaker says Purdue's findings could be used to make popcorn .
 Hamaker directs research funded by Purdue's Whistler Center for Carbohydrate Research . The research has been published online and will appear in the journal BioMacromolecules .
 Archaeologist Roberto Pimentel Nita crouches to examine a find in a maze of chambers . Nita is a member of the Archaeological Association of Peru .
 The arid at El Castillo is so arid that even delicate threads can survive in the ground for centuries . The qlimate at the arid is so low that delicate threads are able to survive for decades .
 After conquering the local lords, the Wari raised a massive imperial tomb at El Castillo . The Wari are believed to have built the tomb on top of the tomb .
 With its crimson-painted walls, this sacred building could be seen for miles around . It is a constant reminder of the might of the new regime . With its red walls, the sacred building was a constant constant reminder .
 In the lowest level the Wari interred 58 noblewomen, including 4 queens or princesses . The Wari also interred four queens and four princesses in its lowest level .
 In a chamber above, archaeologists found a throne for displaying the mummy of an important person-possibly the Wari emperor . The mummy was displayed in a chamber for displaying a mummy .
 Tomb remained open for several months while it was being filled with mummified bodies . The tomb remained open while the bodies were being filled in .
 Workers expanded the platform, sealed the burial chamber with tons of gravel and a layer of brick . Workers then built rooms above for mummies and offerings . Platform Tomb was expanded to accommodate mummies .
 A nobleman leads a ceremonial procession to carry a mummy bundle to a burial site . Phase 2 platform is the first platform to be built on the site of a mummy mummy .
 Two guardians, a man and a woman, were buried at the tomb entrance . A small burial chamber reserved for lesser nobles . IPPW5 '• • •'SmS&St*
 Each lacked a left foot, perhaps to prevent them from deserting their posts . Dying around age 60, this prominent Wari noblewoman went to her grave with wealth .
 Attendants arranged her body in the seated position favored by the Wari . Attendants dressed her in a finely woven tunic and shawl, and adorned her with precious jewels .
 To prepare her for burial, attendants painted, her face with sacred red pigment . Her face was covered in sacred red .
 The queen’s body was wrapped in cloth, a striped blanket, and a wide net of knotted cords . Geometric tattoos — Copper-alloy tupu pin . The queen was wrapped up in cloth and wrapped in a blanket .
 Skull of El Castillo’s great queen population of as many as 40,000 people . The city was larger than Paris at the time, which had no more than 20,000 inhabitants .
 From this stronghold the Wari lords extended their domain hundreds of miles along the Andes and into the coastal deserts, forging what many archaeologists call the first empire in Andean South America . Many archaeologists call it the first .
 Researchers have long puzzled over how the Wari built and governed this vast, unruly realm . The Wari is believed to have been through conquest or persuasion or some combination of both . Researchers are still trying to find out exactly how they managed to build and govern their vast kingdom .
 The Wari had no system of writing and left no recorded narrative history . Unlike most imperial powers, the Wari left no written history .
 The foreign invaders probably first appeared on this stretch of coast around the end of the eighth century . The invaders first appeared in the area around the late 8th century .
 The region lay along what was then the southern frontier of the wealthy Moche lords, and it seems to have lacked strong local leaders . The region was then known as the Moche .
 An important ceremonial drinking cup discovered in El Castillos imperial tomb depicts poleaxwielding Wari warriors battling coastal defenders brandishing spear throwers . Just how the invaders launched their offensive is unclear, but the drinking cup depicts the battle .
 The new lord constructed a palace at the foot of El Castillo . Over time he and his successors began transforming the steep hill above into a towering temple devoted to ancestor worship .
 El Castillo today looks like a huge stepped pyramid, a monument built from the bottom up . Cloaked in nearly a thousand years of rubble and wind-borne sediment, it is built from bottom up to the top .
 Giersz suspected that there was more to El Castillo than met the eye . But from the beginning he suspected that more was to be done with . Gierz: "There is more to the story to tell here"
 Architecture experts examine newly exposed staircases and walls . Architect invited a team of architecture experts to examine staircases, walls .
 Wari engineers began construction along the very top of El Castillo, a natural rock formation, and eventually worked their way downward . Their studies revealed something that Giersz had suspected . Wari workers began construction on top of the natural formation, then began working downward .
 As they move downward, they cut into the slopes to make a tier of platforms . As they moved downward, the platforms were made into a tier .
 Along the summit of El Castillo the builders first carved out a subterranean chamber that became the imperial tomb . The tomb was carved out of a chamber that was later used as a tomb .
 When it was ready for sealing, laborers poured in more than 30 tons of gravel and capped the entire chamber with a layer of heavy adobe bricks . The entire chamber was capped with heavy adob bricks .
 They raised a mausoleum tower above, with crimson walls that could be seen for miles around . Then they raised a tower above . The walls were crimson walls . The tower was then raised to be seen around the world .
 The Wari elite left rich offerings in small chambers inside small chambers . Ancient Andean peoples valued more highly than gold more than gold .
 In later times looters reported to a German archaeologist that they found mummies arrayed in wall niches there .
 It may have been used for venerating the emperor’s mummy, yet to be discovered by the team . It may even have been a place to venerate the emperor's mummy .
 Archaeologist Milosz Giersz’s work was funded in part by your Society .
 Nobility staked out places on the summit for mausoleums of their own . The royal dynasty of Peru is one of the world's most famous monarchs .
 When they exhausted all the available space there, they engineered more, building stepped terraces all the way down the slopes of El Castillo and filling them with funerary towers and graves . The Spanish conquistador built a funerary tower and a cemetery on the slopes .
 Dried mortar in many of the newly exposed walls bears human handprints . Some of the handprints were left by children as young as 11 or 12 years old . The walls are covered in dried mortar .
 When the construction ended, likely sometime sometime betweend. and 1000, an immense crimson necropolis loomed over the valley . The construction of the necropolis began in the early 1000s .
 In a small walled chamber along the western slopes of the necropolis, Wieslaw Wi^ckowski hunches over a mummified human arm, brushing sand away from its gaunt fingers . “That’s part of Andean logic.” in a
 Part of a human femur lodged in a jagged hole in of the lives and deaths of the highborn women the wall . Wieckowski says the sealed chamber was poor, but his studies are starting to fill in key details .
 Looters probably tried to haul the mummy out from an adjacent room and literwere women and girls who had likely died over ally pulled it to pieces, he says . Looters, he explains, probably tried .
 The Wari treated them in death with 68 great respect . The wari treated the Wari with great respect.
 Attendants dressed them in richly woven tunics and shawls, painted their faces with a sacred red pigment, and adorned them with precious jewelry, from gold ear flares to crystal-bead necklaces .
 Mourners arranged their bodies in the flexed position favored by the Wari and wrapped each in a large cloth to form a funerary bundle . Then mourners wrapped their bodies together in a cloth to make a funeral bundle .
 Their social rank, says Wi^ckowski, mattered as much in death as it did in life . Social rank, he says, mattered more in death than in life. Their social status, he said, was as important as in death .
 Attendants placed the highest ranked women, perhaps queens or princesses, in three private chambers in the tomb . The tomb is believed to have been filled with the highest-ranking women .
 The most important, a female of about 60, lay surrounded by rare luxuries, from multiple pairs of ear ornaments to an ax and a silver goblet .
 In a large common area, attendants arranged the lesser noblewomen along the walls . Beyond, in a large . common room, attendants arrange the lesser . noblewomen . Along the walls, attendants placed lesser noble women .
 The painted figure on a ceramic flask depicts a Wari lord sitting atop a balsa raft . Beside each, with few exceptions, they laid a container roughly the PERU TOMB 69 container .
 The Wari elite dressed well, even down to fine footwear of brightly painted leather . Remarkably preserved hand of an Andean noble still clutches a bit of burial cloth v V .
 Made of cut canes, it stored all the weaving tools needed to create high-quality cloth . Made of cutting canes and made of cutting tools, the weaving tool was made of wood . The weaving tool stored tools needed for high quality cloth .
 Wari women were consummate weavers, producing tapestry-like cloth with yarn counts higher than those of the famous Flemish and Dutch weavers of the 16th century . Wari weavers were consummates weavers .
 The noblewomen buried at El Castillo were clearly dedicated to this art . They created textiles of the finest quality for the Wari elite . The noble women were buried there are still today .
 There were six individuals in all, three children, three adults and three young adults . Three children, including what might be a nine-year-old girl, were among them .
 Wi^ckowski: It's possible the victims were the offspring of the conquered nobility . The victims may have been the children of the conquerors .
 When the killings were done, attendants threw the corpses into the tomb . When the bodies of the men and women were killed, the bodies were thrown into the grave .
 Wrapped corpses of a young adult male in his prime and of an older woman at the entrance as guards . Then they closed the chamber, placing the wrapped corpses of the men and women as guards. Then they placed the corpses of an adult male and an adult woman as guards as guards
 Each body had lost a left foot, perhaps ensuring ensuring the discovery of the remains .
 For weeks now conservators have been stripping away the thick, black patina that coated many of the metal artifacts, revealing glimmering designs . Many of the artifacts have been removed from the museum's collection .
 Cushioned in tissue paper are three gold ear ornaments, each roughly the size of a doorknob and bearing the image of a winged deity or mythical being . The ear ornament is stuffed with tissue paper .
 The flask depicts a sumptuously dressed Wari lord voyaging by balsa raft across coastal waters teeming with whales and other sea creatures . Richly painted and decorated, the flask depicts the Wari . lord .
 1,200-year-old flask seems to portray the arrival of an important Wari lord, possibly even the Wari emperor himself . The flask was found among the cherished grave goods of a dead queen at El Castillo .
 The tomb of a great Wari lord may lie somewhere in the maze of chambers that they couldn’t desert their posts . The tomb is believed to have been located in the Wari Wari .
 Wi^ckowski is awaiting the results of DNA analyses and isotopic tests to learn more about the females in the tomb and where they might have come from . The tomb is believed to be a tomb of unknown females .
 Giersz says evidence is all beginning to add up to a detailed picture of the Wari invasion of the north coast . But he says the evidence does not point to the invasion of north coast by the wari .
 Giersz, the maverick who saw the buried outlines of walls where others saw only looters’ rubble, still thinks that the tomb of a great Wari lord may lie somewhere in the maze .
 If looters haven’t beaten him to the punch, he intends to find it, he plans to find the looters . The looters are still at large in the city .
 Archaeologists Milosz Giersz and Roberto Pimentel Nita open row of small sealed chambers near entrance of an ancient tomb .
 The mini-chambers hold large ceramic jars, some bearing painted lizards, others displaying grinning human faces . They were hidden for more than a thousand years under a layer of heavy adobe brick .
 As Giersz pries loose the brick from the final compartment, he grimaces . He grimaces as he pries the brick out of the final chamber .
 Its full of decayed puparia, traces of flies once drawn to the pots contents . The pots are full of decomposing puparia .
 Archaeologist backs away and stands up, slapping a cloud of 1,200-year-old dust from his pants . Archaeologist: "It's a good day for the first time I've been here," he says .
 In three years of digging at El Castillo de Huarmey, Giersz has encountered an unexpected ecosystem of death . He says it includes snakes that coiled and died in the bottoms of ceramic pots .
 Giersz says excavating in the rubble of El Castillo would be difficult, and almost certainly a waste of time and money . Plenty of people had warned him that excavating the rubble would be expensive .
 For at least a century looters had tunneled into the slopes of the massive hill, searching for tombs containing ancient skeletons decked out in gold and wrapped in some of the finest woven tapestries .
 The serpent-shaped hill, located a four-hour drive north of Lima, looked like a cross between the surface of the moon and a landfill site . It was littered with holes, littered with ancient human bones, and strewn with modern garbage and rags . The hill is located
 Looters liked to toss away their clothing before they returned home for fear of bringing sickness from the dead to their families . The looters also like to toss their clothing away before they return home .
 Something important had happened at El Castillo 1,200 years ago, Giersz was sure of that .
 Bits of textiles and broken pottery from Peru’s little-known Wari civilization dotted the slopes . Wari was the Wari culture, whose heartland lay far to the south .
 Giersz and a small research team began imaging what lay underground with a magnetometer and taking aerial photos with a camera on a kite . They also took aerial photos of what lay beneath the surface with the kite camera .
 Giersz and a Polish-Peruvian team applied for permission to begin digging in Peru . They have applied to the permission of permission to start digging .
 The faint outline turned out to be a massive maze of towers and high walls spread over the entire southern end of El Castillo . The faint outlines of the towers and walls were found in the faint outline .
 Once painted crimson red, the sprawling complex seemed to be a Wari temple dedicated to ancestor worship . The sprawling complex was once painted red, once painted crimson .
 Heather Pringle is the author of The Mummy Congress . She says the team dug down beneath a layer of mud beneath the surface of the mummies .
 Inside were interred four Wari queens or princesses, at least 54 other highborn individuals . More than a thousand elite Wari goods, from huge gold ear ornaments to silver bowls and copperalloy axes, were found .
 Analysis of the finds shed new light on the Wari and their wealthy ruling class . Giersz and his team continue to excavate and explore the site .
 The Wari rose to glory long before the Inca, in a time of repeated drought and environmental crisis . Emerging from obscurity in Peru’s Ayacucho Valley by the seventh centuryd.d., the Wari .
 They were master engineers, constructing aqueducts and complex canal systems to irrigate their terraced fields . They became master engineers .
 Near the modern city of Ayacucho they founded a sprawling capital, known today as Huari . The city was founded by the Spanish conquistatists, and is now known as Huarari .
 Skeletal remains of one of Jamestown's first settlers were found in 1996 . He was the victim in what was Colonial America's oldest unsolved murder .
 The lead bullet and shot fragments lodged in his lower right leg contained enough force to fracture his tibia and fibula bones, rupturing a major artery below the knee . At the time, archaeologist William Kelso, now director of archaeological research and interpretation at Jamestown Rediscovery
 Forensic archaeologists at Jamestown may have identified the victim and, therefore, the perpetrator of the crime . Now, 17 years later, the forensic archaeologists are trying to identify the victim .
 Stephens went on to become a court commissioner and an outspoken detractor of Virginia Gov. Rick Gillespie . Stephens is now an outspoken critic of Gillespie .
 Stephens and Harvey engaged in fisticuffs in 1635, and Stephens lost teeth in the bargain . Stephens lost his teeth to Harvey in the fight .
 Tongues swelled, lips split open and salt caked eyes and faces as the briny ocean water dried in the sun .
 In desperation, some men drank the salty water, and those who resisted the impulse soon saw what happened to the brains of those who relented . Those who resisted drinking the water soon saw the effects of the water .
 It took only about an hour, Harrell said, before the hallucinations began for those men . Harrell: The hallucinations began after the men were taken to the hospital .
 By Day 3, only 1 7 of the original 80 who were with Harrell were still alive . By Day 2, the majority of Harrell's friends had died . The original 80 survived .
 A few sailors had found a few ammunition cans and potato or orange crates and figured out away to lash them together . The ammunition cans were filled with potatoes and orange crates .
 On the raft, they placed sodden lifejackets, which they squeezed as dry as possible, like sponges, then allowed them to further air dry atop the crude raft .
 They could trade out the jackets and buy them more time . That way, they could buy themselves more time. That's what they say .
 Inside were potatoes — mostly rotten, but with some nutrition and moisture in them . The potatoes were mostly rotten but mostly had some nutrition .
 A U.S. military plane discovered 'the boys 1 ' in the water, still with sharks all around . It was on the fourth day that finally, and by accident, a United States military plane found the boys .
 The pilot, Harrell recalled, didn't even know if the bobbing heads he saw were American or Japanese . Harrell said he didn't know if he saw bobbing Japanese bobbers or American .
 Harrell was in hospitals for months after his appendix burst and his body was riddled with infection . Harrell spent months in hospitals after the burst of his appendix . He was in hospital for months before he was found to have an infection .
 In those early days of penicillin, Harrell received 1 1 million units of the new antibiotic over 29 days . He remembers it, to the unit to the day, as well as the day .
 The young man stopped in Chicago in early 1946 to be discharged from the Marines . In 1947 he married the pretty brunette who had promised to wait for him .
 Edgar and Ola Harrell celebrated their 67th wedding anniversary on Friday . Edgar, Ola and Edgar Harrell were married for 67 years . Ola, Edgar and Edgar were married in 1964 .
 The USS Indianapolis was delivering key parts and enriched uranium for the atomic bomb used at Hiroshima . Few of the crew knew that it was delivering to the island of Tinian key parts .
 The ship was sent to Leyte Gulf to prepare for a likely invasion of Japan . After completing that mission, the ship stopped off in Guam and was then sent to Guam .
 A cable intercepted before the USS Indianapolis took off from Guam said an attack was in its path, but that information wasn't relayed to the ship . As the years unfolded, Harrell and other survivors became angry that their ship was sent out without a protective destroyer escort .
 Charles Butler McVay III, was held accountable and court-martialed even though critical information had been withheld from him . He was ordered to be held accountable for his role in the deaths of his comrades .
 McVay was posthumously exonerated by Congress and President Bill Clinton in 2000 . He was found guilty of murder in 1998 .
 The survivors of the USS Indianapolis survived, but too late for McVay . It was a victory for the survivors, but it was a defeat for the ship .
 Last year, Harrell held on his lap the great-granddaughter of Mochitsura Hashimoto, the commander of the Japanese submarine 1-58 that sank the USS Indianapolis* Harrell and many of his fellow survivors went on with their lives, drawing strength from their faith,
 Edgar and Ola Harrell were with their son, grandson and great-grandson this weekend . They were in the embrace of a few remaining survivors and their children and grandchildren . Edgar, Ola and Edgar Harrell have been together for more than 20 years .
 Diana Penner, diana.penner@indystar.com: "That first morning, we had sharks 7 a.m. That first morning of the first day of shark attacks, we have sharks 7"
 Corporal Edgar Harrell was a Marine, a 20-year-old kid, who finished his watch on the USS Indianapolis at midnight July 29, 1 945.
 A few minutes into July 30, the world exploded. Harrell had just dozed off . Harrell: "The world exploded"
 The USS Indianapolis, with 1 ,1 96 sailors and Marines, was hit by two of six torpedoes fired by a Japanese submarine . The Indianapolis was the last ship to be hit by the torpedo .
 Metal groaned and twisted, water churned and rose, and men scrambled and screamed . Metal groans, twisted, twisted and twisted as water churns and rose .
 For years afterward, Harrell and his fellow survivors talked little — if at all — about what happened that night . Harrell: "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm sure it's not a bad thing"
 This weekend, Harrell, who now lives in Tennessee, was among about a dozen of the remaining 36 survivors of the ship at a reunion in the city that gave the famed vessel its name .
 Harrell told his story, vivid with details and passion, insistent that it not be forgotten . Harrell: "I'm not going to let it be forgotten. I'm going to tell it not to forget"
 An Unforgettable WWII Story of Survival, Courage, and the Sinking of the USS Indianapolis, 1 '’ which Harrell republished in May after initially self-publishing it in 2005 .
 Harrells story, like that of his shipmates, is one of harrowing survival and gruesome death, but also of redemption . Harrell's story is that of a harrowing survival, gruesome death and tremendous courage and painful betrayal .
 In the chaos, Harrell realized he didn't have his drab brown kapok life jacket . That night, the young Harrell, originally from Kentucky, was in the chaos .
 He spied some of the jackets on deck, but waited permission to take one . He waited until permission was granted for the jacket .
 He searched for his commanding officer, looking for orders on what to do next . He also searched for orders for what he was looking for .
 Harrell held the man, keeping his head above water, but there was little else he could do . Harrell kept the man's head above the water .
 He has told the story many times by now by now; he knows how to get through it . "He has told it many times, by now," he says of his story .
 A man would get separated from the group and float off . But inevitably, a man would eventually get separated and float away .
 The life vests, crude by today's high-tech standards, would become water-logged and less effective as flotation devices, he recalled . Life vests would become less effective, he said, as well as waterlogged .
 The men figured out they could fashion vests in away that allowed them to sit on them, sort of like inner tubes . If they maintained the effort, strength and discipline to stay balanced in a seated position, they could keep their heads above water if they stayed balanced .
 The site's rare prehistoric whales helped earn it UNESCO World Heritage status . The site’s rare prehistoric whale sightings earned it World Heritage Status .
 It wasn’t until 1989, however, that the team found the link they were seeking to the whales’ terrestrial ancestors .
 Gingerich was working on a Basilosaurus skeleton when he uncovered the first known whale knee . Gingerich uncovered the leg on a leg positioned much farther down the animal’s spinal column than he expected .
 On the last day of the expedition Smith found a complete set of slender, inch-long toes . Smith found the toes on the final day of his expedition .
 Though unable to support a Basilosaurus s weight on land, these legs weren’t completely vestigial . The Basilosaurus was unable to walk on land .
 They had attachments for powerful muscles, as well as functional ankle joints and complex locking mechanisms in the knee . They were attached to powerful muscles and functional ankle joints .
 Gingerich speculates that they served as stimulators or guides during copulation . Gingerich speculated that they may have served as guides or stimulators during copulations .
 The ancestors of whales had once walked, trotted, and galloped on land . Whatever Basilosaurus actually did with its little legs, finding them confirmed that the ancestors of whale's ancestors once walked .
 Certain skeletal features of archaic whales, particularly their large, triangular cheek teeth, strongly resembled those of mesonychids, a group of hoofed Eocene carnivores .
 In the 1950s immunologists had discovered characteristics in whale blood that suggested a descent from artiodactyls . The order includes pigs, deer, camels, and other even-toed ungulates, such as pigs .
 Ornate struts of bone on Basilosaurus vertebrae secured huge muscles used to lift and lower the whale’s tail and back as it swam . molecular biologists studying the cetacean genetic code concluded that the whales closest living relative was one specific ungulate,
 Gingerich and many other paleontologists trusted the hard evidence of the bones more than the molecular comparisons of living animals . Gingerich: "The hard evidence is more important than molecular comparisons"
 Gingerich needed to find one bone in the bone to prove his theory . Gingerich found the bone in a bone in his search for a new bone .
 The astragalus, or anklebone, is the most distinctive element of the artiodactyl skeleton . It has a double-pulley shape, with clearly defined grooves at the top and bottom of the bone .
 The shape gives artiodactyls greater spring and flexibility than the singlepulley form found in other quadrupeds . The shape of artiodactsyls gives them greater spring, flexibility .
 A grooved piece of bone was found among the remains of a new 47-million-year-old whale . It was later named Artiocetus, a new species of whale later found in the region .
 Pakistani geologist Munir ul-Haq found a similar bone at the same site . Minutes later Pakistani geologists found the bone in Pakistan .
 At first Gingerich thought the bones were the single-pulley astragali from the animals left and right legs . Gingerich now believes the bones are proof that he’d been right about the origin .
 When he held them side by side, he was troubled to see that they were slightly asymmetrical . But he was able to hold them side-by-side to show that they weren't symmetrical .
 Astragalus snapped together to form a perfect doublepulley astraggalus . The puzzle-maker manipulates the bones as he maneuvers the puzzle pieces .
 Gingerich and his team passed a group of village children playing dice with the astragali of a goat . Gingerich says the children were playing a game of dice with a goat in the village .
 Gingerich believes the first cetaceans probably resembled anthracotheres, hippo-like browsers that inhabited swampy lowlands in Eocene times . Gingerich says the first humans were likely to have lived in the Eocene lowlands .
 The earliest whales appeared about 55 million years ago, like all other modern mammalian orders, during the spike in global temperatures at the beginning of the Eocene .
 Early waders gradually developed longer snouts and sharper teeth better suited for snapping fish . Chasing new kinds of food sources deeper into the water, these early waders hunted for fish . Early wader waders were chasing new food sources .
 By adapting to water, early whales gained access to an environment closed to most other mammals, rich in food and shelter, and short on competitors and predators . The environment was perfect conditions for an evolutionary explosion .
 What followed was a starburst of idiosyncratic experiments in being a whale, most of which ended in extinction long before modern times . Most of the whale's experiments were unsuccessful .
 Nummulites and other tiny desert relics provide vital clues to how early whales lived and died . Dalanistes, with a long neck and head like a heron; and Makaracetus with a short, curved, muscular proboscis that it may have used for
 Around 45 million years ago, whales' necks compressed and stiffened to push more efficiently through the water . The advantages of a water environment drew whales farther out to sea .
 Hind legs thickened into pistons; toes stretched and grew webbing . They resembled enormous ducks’ feet tipped with tiny hooves inherited from their ungulate ancestors . They resemble enormous ducks with little hooves .
 Some whales developed thick, powerful tails, bulleting ahead with vigorous up-and-down undulations of their lower bodies . Some whales had thick tails that bulleted ahead with up and down undulations .
 Selection pressure favored longer and more flexible spinal columns . Selection pressure for this efficient style of locomotion favored longer spinal columns. Selection pressure also favored longer, more flexible columns .
 Nostrils slid back up snout toward the crown of the head, becoming blowholes . Nostrils slide back up the snout to become blowholes, becoming a blowhole .
 Over time, as the animals dived deeper, their eyes began to migrate from the top toward the sides of the head, the better to see laterally in the water . The animals' eyes migrate to the side of their heads as they dive deeper, the study shows .
 Whale ears grew ever more sensitive to underwater sound, aided by pads of fat that ran in channels the length of their jaws . The fat pads gathered vibrations like underwater antennae and funneled them to the middle ear . Whales ears grew increasingly sensitive to sound .
 45million-year-old whales still had to hitch themselves ashore on webbed fingers and toes, in search of fresh water to drink, a mate, or a safe place to bear their young .
 Basilosaurus, Dorudon, and their relatives never set foot on land, swimming confidently on the high seas . They even crossed the Atlantic to reach the shores of what is now Peru and the southern United States .
 Their bodies adjusted to an exclusively aquatic lifestyle, forelimbs shortening and stiffening to serve as flippers for planing . tails broadening at the tip in horizontal flukes to create a hydrofoil . Forelimbs were shortening, stiffening, broadening to create
 The pelvis decoupled from the spine, allowing the tail a broader range of vertical motion . The tail is now able to move with the pelvis of the tail .
 The final transition from basilosaurids to modern whales began 34 million years ago . It was during the sudden phase of cooling climate that ended the Eocene epoch . The transition began during a sudden period of cooling .
 A drop in water temperatures near the Poles, shifts in ocean currents, and upwelling of nutrientrich seawater along the western shores of Africa and Europe drew whales into entirely new environmental niches . The remaining adaptations include big brains, echolocation, insulating blubber
 The fossil record of whales now offers one of the most stunning demonstrations of Darwinian evolution rather than a refutation of it .
 Gingerich grew up in a family of Amish Mennonites in eastern Iowa . Gingerich was raised in a strict Christian environment .
 Gingerich is still baffled by the conflict that many people feel between religion and science . Gingerich says he's baffled by conflict between science and religion . He says science is the answer to the question: "Science is God"
 On my last night in Wadi Hitan, we walked a little distance from camp under a dome of brilliant stars . On my final night I walked under the dome of the stars under the stars .
 He spread his arms, taking in the dark horizon and the desert with its sandstone wind sculptures and its countless silent whales . The desert is known for its sand and wind sculptures .
 With robust legs and webbed feet, it propelled itself on land like a sea lion . The sea lion propelled itself onto land like it did in the wild .
 The limbs also provided thrust for swimming; its tail served mainly as a rudder . Its tail was also used to provide thrust for diving .
 Later whales swam more efficiently with tail power . Their hind legs dwindled, and their front legs morphed into flippers . Their front legs became flippers, and they swam with flippers.
 A SINUOUS, 50-FOOT-LONG BEAST WITH GAPING JAWS and JAGGED TEETH DIED and SANK to the sea floor . Over thousands of millennia a mantle of sediment built up over its bones .
 The sea receded, and as the former seabed became a desert, the wind began to plane away the sandstone and shale above the bones . The wind also plane planes away sandstone, shale and shale from the seabes .
 Shifts in the Earths crust pushed India into Asia, heaving up the Himalaya . The Himalaya is the largest mountain range in the world .
 In Africa, the first human ancestors stood up on their hind legs to walk . The first human ancestor stood on his hind legs for walking .
 The sand around him was strewn with fossil shark teeth, sea urchin spines, and the bones of giant catfish . The sand was covered in fossils and sea spines .
 Gingerich was searching for a key bit of the creatures anatomy, and he was in a hurry . Gingerich found the creature in the middle of the search for a piece of the anatomy .
 The light was failing, and he needed to return to camp before his colleagues started to worry . He needed to get back to camp quickly before colleagues began to worry, he said . The light had been failing and he returned to camp .
 Gingerich has found the remains of unlucky humans . Along with the bones of prehistoric sea monsters, Gingerich also has found remains of humans .
 He moved down the spine toward the tail, probing around each vertebrae with the handle of his brush . He then probed the vertebraes with the brush .
 Clearing the sand delicately with his fingers, he laid bare a slender baton of bone, barely eight inches long . He laid bare the bone, a tiny eight-in-a-piece of bone .
 Basilosaurus was indeed a whale, but one with two delicate hind legs, each the size of a three-year-old girl’s leg, protruding from its flanks . Basilosaurus is a whale with a pair of delicate legs that protrude from its sides .
 Gingerich has devoted much of his career to explaining this metamorphosis, arguably the most profound in the animal kingdom . Gingerich: "It's a miracle to find out what happens when an animal transforms into an animal"
 In the process he has shown that whales, once celebrated by creationists as the best evidence against evolution, may be evolution’s most elegant proof . He has shown whales may be an elegant proof of evolution .
 Wadi Hitan — literally ‘valley of whales’ — has proved phenomenally rich in such Rosetta stones . Wadi hitan is literally “Valley of whale’s” - literally the valley of whales . The region has proved to be rich
 Over the past 27 years, Gingerich and his colleagues have located the remains of more than a thousand whales . Gingerich says countless more are left to be discovered .
 When we pulled into camp, we met several of Gingerich’s team members just back from their own fieldwork . Gingerich's team members were back from fieldwork in the summer .
 We were soon discussing their results over a dinner of roast goat meat, foul mudamas (fava bean puree), and flatbread .
 Chief ranger of the Wadi Hitan protected area reports several new bone piles . Mohammed Sameh had been prospecting for whales farther to the east . Sameh reported several new whale bones .
 Jordanian postdoc Iyad Zalmout and grad student Ryan Bebej excavated a whale rostrum . The whale was found poking out of a cliff face poking up a cliff .
 Its descendants gradually improved the function of their lungs, morphed their lobe fins into legs, and jury-rigged their jaw joints to hear in the air instead of water . Its descendants eventually improved the functions of their primitive lungs, morphing their lobe .
 Mammals turned out to be among the most successful of these land lovers . By 60 million years ago they dominated the Earth . Mammals dominated the planet .
 Early whales hauled themselves onto shore, probably to rest and give birth . Early whales plied the shallows but still hauled themselves into shore .
 Fossil record tracks anatomical changes as whales adapted to conditions that favored a fully marine mammal . The fossil record shows that whales evolved to be fully marine mammals .
 Nostrils move farther up the skull for easier breathing at the ocean surface . DORUDON PAKICETUS BASILOSAURUS Nose, eyes, and ears move farther in the skull .
 Eyes migrate toward the sides of the head; ears adapt to underwater hearing . Eats migrate toward sides of head; eyes adapt to hearing in underwater environments .
 For foot-powered swimming, toes lengthen and grow webbing . Foot-powered swimmer's toes are also known to be able to grow webbed .
 As tail-powered swimming evolves, foot bones become encased in flippers . Evolutionary U-turn, retrofitting their terrestrial body plan to sense, eat, move, and mate underwater .
 How whales accomplished such an enormous transformation has baffled even the greatest scientific intellects . How whales managed such a feat has baffled many of the greatest scientists .
 Charles Darwin took a stab at accounting for whales in the first edition of Origin of Species . The whale was one of the great challenges to Darwin's theory of evolution .
 Black bears have been seen swimming with their mouths open for hours at a time on the surface of a lake, feeding on floating insects . He noted that black bears had been seen swimming with mouths open .
 Tom Mueller wrote about mammoths in the May 2009 issue o/National Geographic . His critics poked fun at the image .
 More of Richard Barnes’s photos can be seen in his book Animal Logic . However, he eventually omitted it from later editions of his book .
 George Gaylord Simpson, the preeminent paleontologist of the 20th century, was still at a loss to explain where whales fit in his otherwise orderly evolutionary tree of mammals . Nearly a century later, Simpson was still struggling to explain whales' evolutionary position .
 If science could not account for the transformation of whales, antievolutionists argued, perhaps it never happened . Antievolutionistists argued that perhaps it may have never happened.
 They contended that land animals that began to adapt to aquatic life would soon be neither fowl nor fish, incapable of surviving in either medium . They said they contended that humans could not survive in either way .
 Backbones adapt to support the more powerful muscles that tail propulsion requires . Backbone adapts to support muscles that need to be strong enough for tail propulsion .
 The pelvis becomes detached from the spine, enhancing the whale's range of motion . The whale is no longer needed to hold its hind limbs that support a body .
 Of Pandas and People, a popular creationist textbook, was first published in 1989 .
 Philip Gingerich had unintentionally taken up this challenge in the mid-1970s . Philip gingerich had inadvertently taken up the challenge in mid-70s .
 After earning his Ph.D. at Yale, he began excavating in Wyoming’s Clarks Fork Basin . He documented the meteoric rise of mammals at the beginning of the Eocene .
 In 1975 he started fieldwork in middle Eocene formations in the Punjab and NorthWest Frontier (now called Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Province) Provinces of Pakistan . In 1975, hoping to trace migrations of mammals from Asia to North America, he started .
 Fie was disappointed to discover that the sediments he had targeted were not dry land but marine beds on the eastern edge of the Tethys Ocean . The 50-million-year-old sediments were found in the 50-miles-old sedimentary region .
 When his team uncovered some pelvic bones in 1977, they jokingly attributed them to ‘walking whales” — a preposterous notion . The pelvic bones were found in the 1970s .
 At that time the best known fossil whales were thought to be similar to modern whales . They had sophisticated mechanisms for underwater hearing, powerful tails with broad flukes, and no external hind limbs .
 Gingerich's team in Pakistan found a skull about the size of a wolf’s but with prominent — and very unwolflike — sails of bone at the top and sides of the skull to secure robust jaw and neck muscles . Then in 1979, a member of Gingerich�
 Gingerich came across some archaic whale specimens in museums in Lucknow and Kolkata, India . Gingerich also came across whale specimens found in museums . The whale specimens were found by Gingerich .
 The skull lacked several other adaptations that living whales use to hear directionally beneath the waves . Yet the skull lacked other adaptations to the whale's skull . It is believed to have been the largest whale in the world .
 The animal spent significant time in shallow water but returned to land to rest and reproduce . He concluded that the animal had probably been semiaquatic .
 Gingerich named Pakicetus, the most primitive known whale in the world . Gingerich's discovery made him see whales in a new light, Gingerich says .
 Since then, I’ve been consumed by the search for the many transitional forms in this huge leap from land back into the sea . Since then I've been consumed with the search .
 in the 1980s gingerich turned his attention to Wadi Hitan. in the 80s . He said: "I want to find them all."
 He began looking for whales in formations some ten million years younger than the beds where he’d found Pakicetus . Along with his wife, paleontologist B Holly Smith, and their Michigan colleague William Sanders, he started looking for whale fossils .
 The trio excavated partial skeletons of fully aquatic whales like Basilosaurus and the smaller, 16 foot Dorudon . Basilosaurus was the largest whale in the world and was found in the area .
 These had large, dense auditory bullae and other adaptations for underwater hearing . Long, streamlined bodies with elongated spinal columns; and muscular tails to drive them through the water with powerful vertical strokes .
 Fifty million years ago the Tethys Ocean stretched from modern Gibraltar to what is now India . Fifty million-year-old ocean stretches from Gibraltar to modern Gibraltar .
 Land-living whale ancestors entered shallow water on the western edge of modern Pakistan . They flourished throughout the Tethys until a sharp cooling of the climate 34 million years ago .
 Police on Sibale Island, otherwise known as Concepcion in the Philippines, have ordered locals to 'shoot on sight' if they see any mysterious creatures . Locals have been ordered to shoot on sight if they find any strange creatures .
 Villagers state the attacks always occur on the eve of a full moon, between midnight and 2am . Villagers say the attacks are always occurring at the time of the full moon .
 Remains of a pregnant goat and her kid were discovered on a coconut grove on farm at Barangay Poblacion . Last Saturday, the remains of the pregnant goat were discovered . The remains of a goat and its kid were found on a Coconut grove .
 Owner Charry Fajilago says intestines of both animals had been removed . Both animals were removed from their intestines . The intestines were removed .
 Another farmer, Vincent Fajutagana, claimed to have come 'face-to-face' with a mysterious creature at his Barangay Dalajica property, as reported by Au News . Another farmer said he came 'face to face' with the creature .
 Extra police armed with knives and sharpened bamboo sticks have been dispatched to the island to ward off the animals . Extra police have been sent armed with weapons and bamboo sticks .
 The supermoons set to appear on 10 August and 3 September have already spread panic among the locals . Supermoons are set to be set to hit the U.S. coast in August and September .
 The animal^ scampers away at the sight of humans, but residents are worried they might be next victims when all the goats are killed . Residents are worried the goats will be killed .
 Romblon Gov Eduardo Fiormalo has issued a ‘shoot-on-sight’ against the suspected werewolves .
 Residents armed with bamboo spears and bolos patrol their neighborhood at night at night . The animals have been elusive .
 Sibale Island is six hours by boat from the provincial capital of Romblon . It is one of the most peaceful places in the country, the mayor says .
 A murder was committed in the 1970s but no one major has been reported in the island since then until the goats started killing the goats .
 The islanders have limited access to the Internet and very few households have television sets, Atillano said .
 The Department of Agriculture has announced it would replace the goats killed . But residents have become reluctant to herd goats because it attracts the vampires and they could be the next victims .
 The whole issue came to limelight after the teenager, who was brutally attacked on the chest and the arms by a 20 year old lady . The teenager was brutally beaten up by the woman, 20 .
 The attack was so brutal that the boy has to suffer deep wounds and was hospitalized . The attack reports said the boy was hospitalized after suffering deep wounds .
 With all these procedures, the lady was also ordered to pay an amount of $400 in compensation .
 Vampire killer Rod Ferrell focus of Investigation Discovery show . Investigation Discovery will focus on Investigation Discovery .
 The program, ""Blood Lust,"" premieres at 9m. today, delving once again into the Eustis slayings of Richard and Naomi Wendorf .
 Ferrell pleaded guilty to beating the Wendorfs to death with a crowbar . Ferrell is serving life in prison for beating the couple to death .
 In Murray, KY, Rod starts his own coven of teenage followers . They meet regularly to drink, take drugs, have sex — and suck each other's blood . Rod: "In Murray, Kentucky, we have a group of teenagers drinking, taking drugs and having sex"
 Rod and three friends drive to Heather's home, where he and another of his disciples kill Heather's parents . Rod's three friends kill Heather and three others in Heather's house . Rod and his three friends then drive to the home and kill Heather .
 A Newspaperman's Life,"" is due to come out next month, said he focused on Heather's involvement with the Investigation Discovery show . Heather's book is due out in September .
 Story of Vampire skeletons 1 among Science Week attractions . Science Week begins next weekend .
 Dolores O’Riordan will give a talk on the hidden chemistry going on in the foods we eat . Dr John O'Shaughnessy will talk about how chemistry is central to the work of Ireland’s CSI forensic science team .
 Chemistry is important to Science Week 2011 given its theme, ‘The Chemistry of Life’ said Dr Peter Brabazon, who heads Discover Science and Engineering .
 Now in its 15th year it rank s as the single largest science promotion event in the country, attracting well over 100,000 participants across the State .
 Judge praises 'vampire' for starting new life after taking work courses and birth of daughter .
 James Eric Orr, 20, pleaded guilty on the morning of his trial to injuring with intent to irgure an 18-year-old victim, after and two others restrained him . Orr pleaded guilty to injuring the victim, 18, in an incident in which he was restrained
 The victim and three others had been walking over the town belt to Hataitai when the attack happened on February 2C 2010 . The victim was attacked in a clearing on Mt Victoria .
 He was bitten several times, ending up with infected bites to his chest, arms and chest . He was in hospital for a week fighting the infection . He spent a week in hospital fighting infection .
 He was taking work courses through Community Corrections . He completed a silviculture course about forestry and tree management .
 His partner and their three-week-old daughter were at court yesterday to see him sentenced . He was sentenced to two years in prison .
 In Wellington District Court, Judge Bruce Davidson said Orr's conduct had been exemplary . Orr was found to have been 'exemplary' in court .
 The judge said the victim had been significantly affected, not just having to go to hospital for the physical injuries but also having to spend time detained under the mental health legislation when his mental condition deteriorated . Judge said victim's mental health was significantly affected by the incident .
 Judge Davidson sentenced James Brooks to a similar sentence last year on a charge of wounding with reckless disregard . Brooks was also sentenced last year for a similar charge .
 He will sentence the last of the trio involved, Xenia Borichevsky, next month . Xenia will be sentenced at the end of this month .
 She is to get a discharge without convictic if she has done community work . She will be discharged without convicting if she does community work, she says .
 Orr's lawyer, Chris Tennet, said the changes in his client's life were positive . The Dominion Post .
 This assignment will analyse the importance and popularity that shadows the mythological being of the vampire in that it is a cultural shape shifter from past to present .
 Bram Stoker’s Dracula' will be treated as the basis of the vampire profile . The profile will be used to discuss the change of the . vampire through history .
 Sucking Through the Century , 1897-1997 which will aid the exploration of Dracula in relation to the culture it was written during . Michael Ferber’s Romanticism ; a very short introduction to define the art movement of Romanticism . Kathrin Faller's “And ft
 The assignment will begin by defining the point in history where vampire popularity kicked off, then go on to examine how vampirism came to be so popular considering the impact of past cultural movements .
 A more contemporary change in vampirism will then be regarded, finally leading on to how vampires have become postmodern in our culture . A more modern change will then lead to how postmodern vampires are postmodern .
 The assignment will strive to show just how much impact culture has on the receiving of the vampire and why this has made them shape shifters .
 Stoker's vampire has characteristically become the archetypal perception of vampirism . Stoker’s vampire is characteristically a vampire . The vampire is the most famous vampire in the world .
 Vracufa' had such an impact on the Victorian society of its publishing . A reason for this is probably the fact that it had such a large impact on Victorian society .
 Why did it have such an impact and why does vampirism continue to have this effect? Why does it continue to affect the world?
 Sucking through the Century . 1897-1997 expresses the link between Vracufa' and Victorian society . Sucking Through the Century , 1897- 1997 expresses the . link between the . Victorian society and the . 19th century .
 Davidson appears to be saying that Vracula' evidenced values of Victorian times and therefore, it sat in this society seamlessly . Davidson: 'Vracula is an example of the values of the Victorian times'
 This would allow a Victorian audience to identify with Stoker’s novel as they would be familiar with key features associated with the Victorian era . This would be able to recognise and be familiar .
 Davison explores that a text may not be able to stay popular literature as times change . Davison goes on to explore that a book may not always be popular literature . He explores the possibility of a text not being popular literature in the future .
 She implies that with what could suitably be called a revamp, a text or idea can return to be popular . It just has to fit in with the times .
 Stoker’s Vracufa' is significant in this idea of fitting vampirism to the notions of time . The popularity of the book has been significant in its popularity .
 Stoker sets his novel during typical Victorian times and so it feels real to his similarly Victorian audience . Stoker's novel is set in a typical Victorian period .
 "The factual and documentary like substance of his descriptions of people and places really create the sense in the audience that they are living during this tale," says the author .
 Stoker does something that really impacts on Dracula’s place in Victorian history . Then, Stoker did something really affecting on Dracula's place in the Victorian history. Dracula's role in Dracula's story is important to Stoker .
 He plays on an idea that puts together other Victorian ideas and really sets the tone and response that his audience give, and that is the idea of romanticism . The play is set to be shown at the Royal Academy Theatre in London .
 This is evident throughout ‘Dracula’ which was written in a time of sexual repression and idealised viewings of females in that it throws these ideals out and brings in the taboos . This is also evident throughout the book, which is set in a period of sexual
 Dracula succeeds in turning innocent and virtuous Lucy into a binary opposition of what was permissible . Just look at how character Dracula succeeds to turn innocent Lucy into evil .
 'Yes in ways this could alienate the Victorian audience because it is so shocking and scandalous compared to what was known' 'Yes, yes, it's so shocking'
 Victorian male could enjoy what was unavailable in common culture could be voyeuristically enjoyed though Dracula . However, it enlivens the Victorian male because of the lack of nudity in the film .
 The males in the story are afraid of this change and perhaps this is why it becomes so enjoyable, the ability to get what you want but still feel you are in the society that forbids it as if you are being rebellious .
 The vampirism of 'Dracula’ becomes a metaphor for the repression Victorians faced and feeds quite literally on internal desires and emotions which really mattered to these people . As such, the vampirsism of ‘Draculas’ is a symbol of
 Before Stoker’s take on the vampire there was another view which rather than feeding on internal desires conformed to societal and cultural beliefs . However, before Stoker's take on vampires there was a view which fed on internal urges conformed .
 The medieval periods were beset with myths and lore that impacted how society behaved due to the morals tales emitted . The medieval period was beset by myths that impacted society .
 These messages had to come from deeper ideas, even before medieval times . But these messages must come from deep ideas, such as medieval texts .
 Cain killed his brother Abel and so was banished; he wandered until he met Lilith . She is often depicted as killing human children and showed Cain the life power of blood . Cain killed Abel and was banished .
 Beresford appears to be conveying that with Cain’s punishment he gained blood lust through conferring with the embodiment of what the classicism period frowned upon, Lilith the female figure who went against perfection and sinned. Cain‘s punishment was that with . Cain�
 This makes him the depiction of 'the wicked man’ because he goes against all that classicism is about when he murders and makes his own path . This is because he is the man who goes against classicism and murders,’s character .
 This can be linked to the archetypal vampire because he is punished with immortality through being undead and forever endures blood lust . This is because he has been punished for being undead . He is punished for his blood lustiness .
 Classicism believes in perfection and adherence to principles . It is against romanticism by restricting internal feelings, being more down to business .
 Cain's behaviour would be used as a moral to not sin because it follows his internal feelings to kill his brother rather than adhering to what is respected in society . So it is right that the behaviour of Cain was used as an example of not sin . Cain's actions would be
 It makes sense that the vampirism of classical times was the act of sinning . So with the ideals of classicism in mind and the similarities between 5 Emma Foster Cain’s behaviour and the depiction of the archetypal vampire .
 For another society the shape shifting of vampirism could be a political statement for changing societal beliefs . However, for another society, it could be an expression of changing society beliefs .
 Since the arrival of Dracula and the many interpretations of it, society has changed . Society has changed and each interpretation has had to accommodate this, says author .
 New takes on vampirism have arrived to accommodate change including those which suggest statements about how we live . Yet the vampire hasn’t stayed with Dracula .
 Charlene Harris’ The Southern Vampire Mysteries* seeks to take vampirism into territories it has yet to set foot on . Harris' book is based on the work of Charlene .
 The Southern Vampire Mysteries have become a legally recognized minority . Vampire vampires in Harris*s novels have come out of the coffin .
 By understanding vampires in the way contemporary culture understands racial or physical difference, Harris has reenvisioned the place and nature of vampires in her fictional world . She places them in social terms rather than in theological terms .
 Harris plays on the traditional romanticism of the Dracula vampire where internal emotions are more important than societal stature . He uses this vampire to symbolise the minorities of the early 2000s .
 By combining these two figures she creates a highly emotive character that enables her audience to see the issues of societal racial discrimination, immigration and equality much more distinctly because a different racial group of humanity is still human . The vampire is already subjected to being labelled as something to show it isn�
 'Already we see the vampire as an outcast and can empathise much easier. So already we see it as a vampire as a outcast,' says author . 'We empathise with the vampire much easier,' she says .
 The romanticism and classicism eventually come together through the medium of character Sookie supporting her point that everything should be equal . Harris keeps the classical ideals of society within her world .
 Harris allows her audience to think for themselves about these cultural issues though an average character that supports elements of both worlds, an understanding that the media did not publicise unlike society now .
 A crisis that currently floods the media is the behaviour of teenagers which many brush off as them trying to find themselves but it is the crisis ridden teenager that has turned to the vampire genre globally . This suggests yet another revamp in the perception of the vampire .
 Stephenie Meyer’s ‘Twilight’ Series delves into the teenage vampirism approach . The series is set in New York City .
 Faller appears to be saying that Meyer takes away the alienation vampires normally face by putting them alongside a human who feels the same way . Faller says Meyer takes the alienation of vampires away from them .
 The teenage reader keeps hold of Meyer’s novel as if it is a life line because they finally feel understood . Meyer enables the teenager someone who can relate with her and so does the same with the teenage reader .
 Twilight is a pure postmodern take on the vampire through Meyer’s borrowing of aspects to strengthen her vampires’ voice such as the identifiable undead and blood thirsting qualities . Meyer borrows aspects of aspects of the vampires to strengthen their voice . Twilight is the pure post-modern
 Edward abstains from his usual diet and manages to bear a child even through not alive . But she doesn’t use them in the same way, instead she pushes them aside with Edward abstaining .
 The vampire is no longer a vampire but a metaphor for the struggles teenagers face such as fitting in, finding love and experiencing sex for the first time . And so the vampire is not a vampire, but a symbol for the struggle teenagers face .
 Edward is like the subconscious of Bella and together the characters represent the teenage reader’s self struggle . Bella is like Bella and Edward are like Edward and Bella's subconscious . The characters represent a teenage reader's self struggle, according to Bella .
 A typical vampire has to adapt to new times due to their curse of immortality . But this is exactly what we do to fit in . The vampire is a typical vampire who adapts to the new world .
 So it makes sense that vampirism is metaphorical for our own journeys through life, says author . "Vampiricism is a metaphor for the journey of life," she says .
 It makes sense that the vampire is more human than ever because we are in times where the want for pure humanity is at its strongest . In Victorian times we needed escapism from sexual repression, but now we just need to be able to be ourselves, says author .
 A July 20 episode of the HBO drama series about vampires co-existing with humans included a scene in which attendees at a Ted Cruz fundraiser are killed . The episode is about vampires living with humans and co-existence with humans .
 A female character also exclaimed a word that combined “Republican” with a vulgar epithet for a woman's genitalia . The word was combined with the word "Republican" and a vulgar phrase for a female's genitals .
 Palin turned down an offer to i v ■ 1 ■ i make a cameo on the show . Palin told Breitbart News she turned down the offer . Palin said she rejected the offer to appear in a cameo from Palin .
 Primarily a Slavic legend of a blood-sucking creature, supposedly the restless soul of a heretic, criminal, or suicide .
 Folklore claims that the vampire leaves its burial place or coffin (sometimes in the form of a bat to fly by night) seeking to drink blood from the living and then returns to its dark grave before first light . Folklore says the vampire returns to his burial place before first dawn .
 In Rumanian folklore as opposed to Slavic, the draining power of vampires is directed toward their victim’s psychic energy rather than their blood . The draining power is directed towards their victim's psychic energy .
 Their whole appearance is uncorrupted by death, although the hair on their head and face is longer than at death . The hair is longer on their heads and face at death, but at death they have longer hair .
 Throughout European history, vampires have been described as having a ruddy lifelike complexion, longish hair that has grown after death, and plump bodies .
 When a stake has been driven into a vampire’s chest, the corpse utters a deep moan . Blood is seen to come from the mouth of the corpse .
 Forensic pathologists tell us that there is a rational scientific explanation for all of these reported conditions . Forensic pathologist tells us there is an explanation for the reported conditions in these cases .
 In many cases of sudden death, the lungs become congealed with a heavily blood-stained frothy fluid . In the lungs of a patient, the fluid congeals with blood congealing fluid .
 In the agonized struggle to breathe, this may reach the mouth and nose . It can appear on the lips and face when the body is being transported . This can also be seen in the mouth, nose and lips of the body being transported.
 If death occurred when the body was king face down, then the face may well be ruddy because the blood will pool in the face and chest regions . Blood will also be in the chest and face regions .
 Hair on the head and beard cannot grow after death, but it may appear longer because the skin dries out and retracts slightly, leaving a pronounced stubble on the male chin .
 During decomposition methane gas often builds up in the thorax and abdominal cavities, giving the corpse a bloated evenfatter appearance .
 Gas may be expelled in a rush past the vocal cords, causing noises that could be interpreted as a groan . When a vampire hunter drives a stake into a corpse’s chest, heavily bloodstained fluid may be forced out of the mouth .
 Vampires are often depicted with long talonlike nails, but nails fall off as the body decomposes . Vampires often depict with talon-like nails .
 The wire triangle was eon negative pole of a dry cell batter)' before bei between the two prisms. The wire triangles were eon positive pole of the . .
 It was believed th ties would generate electricity in the prism tricity was generated, it would drive the from the negative prism toward the positiv it would contact the wire connected wit pole of the battery .
 Researchers would then note the spirits could engage in communication with each other . At that point a bel would be able to communicate with spirits .
 Following Vandermeulens death, his insi to a Belgian scientist named Rutot. who claimed that ne ha cl been at contact with the spirit of the inventor.
 Psychical researcher Herton attempted to reproduce Rutot's results to confirm his findings .
 Cambyses sent 50,000 soldiers from Thebes to attack the Oasis of Siwa and destroy the oracle at the Temple of Amun . The priests at the temple refused to legitimize his claim to Egypt .
 After walking for seven days in the desert, the army got to an ""oasis,"" which historians believe was ElKharga . Historians believe the oasis was the birthplace of the First World War .
 As no trace of the hapless warriors was ever found, scholars began to dismiss the story as a fanciful tale . Scholars began to doubt the story, believing it was a hoax .
 Two top Italian archaeologists claim to have found striking evidence that the Persian army was swallowed in a sandstorm . Now, they say, they have discovered striking evidence of the storm .
 Angelo and Alfredo Castiglioni are already famous for their discovery 20 years ago of the ancient Egyptian ""city of gold"" known as Berenike Panchrysos . Twin brothers discovered the ancient city of gold known to be the Egyptian city of Berenike P
 The discovery is the result of 13 years of research and five expeditions to the desert . Presented recently at the archaeological film festival of Rovereto .
 The brothers spotted something that could have been a natural shelter . Then they spotted something really intriguing — what could've been a shelter . The brothers say it's a sign of life .
 It was a rock about 114. feet long, 5. feet in height and 9. feet deep . The rock was about 114 feet long and 5.5 feet tall .
 Such natural formations occur in the desert, but this large rock was the only one in a large area . The rock was only one of many natural formations in the area .
 Castiglioni team found a silver bracelet, an earring and few spheres which were likely part of a necklace . About a quarter-mile from the natural shelter, they found a bracelet, earring, few spheres .
 A very similar earring, dating to the fifth century B.C., has been found in a dig in Turkey .
 Cambyses' army did not take the widely believed caravan route via the Dakhla Oasis and Farafra Oasis . In the following years, the Castiglioni brothers studied ancient maps and came to the conclusion that the caravan route was not the route .
 "Such a route already existed in the 18th Dynasty,"" Castiglioni said. " Indeed we found that such a route . already existed"
 Since the oasis on the other route were controlled by the Egyptians, the army would have had to fight at each oasis, Castiglioni said . On the contrary, since the army . would have . had to . fought at each other oasis . The army would not
 Castiglioni brothers did geological surveys along that alternative route . To test their hypothesis, they conducted a geological survey of the route .
 They found desiccated water sources and artificial wells made of hundreds of water pots buried in the sand . Water pots were buried in sand and artificial wells were built in sand .
 Thermoluminescence has dated the pottery to 2,500 years ago . The pottery is in line with Cambyses' time .
 In their last expedition in 2002, the Castiglioni brothers returned to the location of their initial discovery . In 2002, they went back to the site of their first discovery .
 Ancient maps had erroneously located the temple of Amun . Amun was located 62 miles south of Siwa, some 62 miles from Siwa .
 The khamsin is the hot, strong, unpredictable southeasterly wind that blows from the Sahara desert over Egypt . The soldiers believed they had reached their destination, but instead they found the wind .
 "Some might have reached the lake of Sitra, thus surviving,"" Castiglioni said . Some of the remains might have survived .
 Bedouin stories about thousands of white bones that would have emerged decades ago during particular wind conditions in a nearby area . Mass grave discovered at the end of their expedition .
 Mass grave with hundreds of bleached bones and skul ls found in mass grave . Mass grave was filled with bleached remains and bones .
 Among the bones, a number of Persian arrow heads and a horse bit, identical to one appearing in a depiction of an ancient Persian horse, emerged . The discovery of the bones was the first of its kind in the world .
 The team communicated their finding to the Geological Survey of Egypt and gave the recovered objects to the Egyptian authorities .
 Piero Pruneti, editor of Archeologia Viva, Italy’s most important archaeology magazine, is impressed by the team's work . He says the team has been impressed by their work .
 First fesnd ®.cc@mts fr©m the Message b®ard @f f@rteantiM.es ocew.
 Around Christmas 1981 1 travelled from Kentucky to California to spend the holidays with his family . Vanishing cowboy around Christmas 1981 .
 When I arrived, the house was filled with the smell of food being prepared . This is the first time I've been to visit the house where I've spent time working .
 He brought me a glass of wine without asking me (I drink very little and never during the day), so I let the glass sit untouched . He brought it to him without asking him, so he let it sit untouched.
 It was broken in a odd place; usually a wineglass will break at the narrowest part of the stem, or where the stem meets the base or the bowl . Usually a wine glass will break in a place such as the stem .
 While I studied my broken glass, Pat’s glass, sitting on the table untouched, also broke, in the same odd place . Pat's glass was sitting untouched, but it also broke in a strange place .
 She mentioned to Pat that he should have known it would happen, after all ‘he” liked to break the good crystal . Pat said she should have told Pat she knew he would break the crystal .
 "I remained confused no one was willing to explain to me that they knew the ranch to be haunted. I remained confused . I remained . no one . willing to give an explanation .
 Several more crystal glasses broke while the glass was untouched and in the same place on the stem . During the same holiday, several more crystal glass glasses broke in the the same way .
 My family was having a party for their friends, most of whom were a lot older than me, when I was at the party . My family's party was being held in honor of their friends who were older .
 "Most of the people attending the party were at least 40. 1 was the only single person, and I was bored. I was about 27 or 28," she says .
 I had almost talked myself into getting a plate of food and going upstairs to start a new book, but stalled a bit . "I was almost talking myself into going upstairs," she says . "But I had a bit of a moment to think about starting a book"
 "I thought there was still a chance I might meet an unattached young man, or someone more in my age group," she said . She said she wanted to meet someone in her age group .
 I glanced at the fireplace about 12ft from me and noticed a young cowboy . I looked down and saw a cowboy in the fireplace . He said: 'I'm not a cowboy. I'm a cowboy'
 He was wearing chaps, a cowboy hat off his head and hanging from leather ties around his throat, and spurs . He was also wearing spurs, chaps and chaps .
 "I was on a working ranch that still housed and tended horses, and maybe this guy had just finished work," he says . But then he remembered he was on the working ranch where he was working .
 "My plan was to stand where I was until he looked my way but he never looked at me," says Drexler . "He never looked back at me. He never did," he says . "I'm not going to let it slide past him. I'm going to
 Another guest came from the other end of the hallway and started to swing the bathroom door shut so he could get past . Another guest was also trying to get past the door . The incident happened in a bathroom at the end of a hallway .
 He shut the door, took a couple of steps and decided to enter the bathroom himself .
 The bathroom did have a window, but it was only about 18in wide . It would have been impossible for a grown man wearing full chaps to have climbed through .
 It was less than a minute from the time the cowboy entered the bathroom to the time a guest tapped on the door . The guest tapped into the door after entering the bathroom, police say .
 I asked my sister-in-law who was standing in the kitchen at the time, if she had seen him. I asked her if she'd seen him, but she said she hadn't .
 She could in fact describe him, but then said she hadn't seen him that night . She said she didn't see him again that night.
 I later learned that different family members had seen him on other occasions . He was found dead at the scene of an apparent suicide .
 I was the only one who saw the cowboy that night and I had had only one drink. I was only one of the only ones who saw it that night. I had only had one drink that night .
 After that New Year’s Eve my family told me that they suspected the ranch to be haunted . After that, my family said they believed the ranch was haunted . The ranch is now a national park in California .
 One other apparition, a sea captain from the 19th century, also seemed solid and real but could come and go in an instant . One of the apparitions they witnessed was that of a 19th-century sea captain .
 This would often be witnessed by two or three family members at the same time . The incident happened in the early hours of the morning .
 Mysterious burning smells also drifted through the house and they called the fire department . Mysterious burning smell also drifted into the house .
 Firefighters also smell the mysterious odour, but couldn't identify it either . Firefighters came to the scene and could also smell it but couldn’t identify it .
 The fire chief admitted that this wasn’t the first time they had been called to the ranch for the same occurrence .
 Poltergeist activity was frequent and ranged from flying skillets to the shoving of family members . Family members were shoving family members after being attacked .
 The Nature ConsexVancy says it has received a gift of South Kona forest land that has never been cleared or grazed . The nature group says it received the gift of the land in a gift that is never cleared .
 A Miraculous Blessed Virgin Statue in Transylvania . Retired Honolulu physician Charman Akina donated 37 acres .
 The bus was full with pilgrims going on foot to Sumuleu Ciuc . The bus went as slowly as a tortoise because the road was full of pilgrims . It was filled with pilgrims on its way to the city of Sumulea Ciuc.
 Sumuleu Ciuc (Hungarian name, Csiksomksomko) is a suburb of Miercurea Ciuc, a town at the foot of Carpathians .
 200,000 pilgrims from Romania, Hungary, Slovakia, Austria, Germany, the United States, and Canada take part in a procession and in a Mass in the open, on a hill surrounded by fir trees .
 Many pilgrims pray before the Blessed Virgins statue in the baroque Roman Catholic church . The Blessed Virgin Statue is a statue of the Blessed Virgin .
 This church was built between 1802 and 1826 on the place of a medieval Gothic Gothic church . It was built in 1826 .
 The 2.27-meter-high Saint Mary’s statue was carved from the wood of a lime tree between 1515 and 1523 . The statue of Saint Mary was carved in the lime tree from 1515-1523 .
 Some art historians suppose that the sculpture is the work of Veit Stoss , a famous German sculptor . The sculpture is believed to be a work of a famous artist .
 Several times, the Tartars sacked Sumuleu Ciuc and set it on fire, but God and the Blessed Virgin always saved the statue . The statue was set on fire by the Romanians in the 13th century .
 He began to stab the Blessed Mary’s face with a lance . Foaming with rage, he began stabbing her with a sword .
 The khan could not overturn the statue, because his hand was paralyzed when he touched this devotional object . The statue was made of a statue of the same name, the Khan .
 The restorers have tried in vain to paint over the traces of the stabbing . But no paint of any sort will stick to the statue .
 After the light disappeared, Bashaw Ali with its soldiers invaded the village near the church . Bashaw . Ali invaded the area after the light appeared .
 The smile disappeared from the Blessed Mary’s face when the enemy came nearer Sumuleu Ciuc. According to some documents of the epoch, the smile disappeared . The Blessed Mary's smile vanished from her face when she faced the enemy .
 In August 1 60 1, a young monk named Domonkos stole the Blessed Virgin’s crown, which is ornamented with pearls . The crown, ornamented in pearls, was ornamented by pearls in the Virgin's crown .
 When the thief was praying before the altar, tiny balls of light flashed around the statue, then glittered upon it . The statue was taken to the altar by the thief .
 The monk trembled at the thought of his sin and wanted to run from the church, but he fell down . He fell down and could stand only when the lights disappeared .
 Another monk, R Bonaventura Palfalvi Ferenc, saw the light when it flew out from the church and then gradually grow dim on the church tower . The light then gradually grew dim .
 Losteinen Leonard mentions in his book on the history of the Transylvanian monasteries that on December 26, 1746, a dried flower transformed into a single candle . The dried flower turned into a candle .
 Many plaques confirm that this miraculous statue has healing power, too . The statue has been placed on display in New York, New Jersey .
 In 1746, Deak Janos, a choir master from Ozsdola, and Joseph Udeak, a landowner, swore they had recovered because they had prayed before the statue .
 In 1764, Karol Stanislaw Radziwill, a Polish aristocrat, had to leave Moscow because he affirmed that the Polish people had the right to elect their king . Radziw was forced to leave the Russian capital in 1764 .
 The doctors gave up their patient for dead, but after having prayed before the statue, the Polish aristocrat recovered quickly . Doctors gave up the patient for . dead, and after praying, he was given a life-saving injection .
 In 1870, a paralyzed woman prayed earnestly before the statue and was then able to leave her crutches in the church . The statue of the statue was erected in 1872 .
 In 1931 a child from Braila in Romania was cured of her mysterious disease when her dress touched a statue . The child was cured by touching the statue .
 Hungarian paranormal writer and Fortean Times correspondent is a regular contributor to several Hungarian paranormal magazines and a correspondent for several Hungarian magazines .
 Some 25,000 people flocked to Milton Hospital near Boston, Massachusetts, to gaze at a second floor window said to show an image of the Blessed Virgin Mary .
 Few if any of the visitors doubted that Our Lady had appeared to deliver a message .
 Five years ago a seal broke in the window and a chemical deposit started to turn the glass a blotchy white, which gradually turned into an apparent religious shrine . Dozens of bouquets, rosaries, lalloons, and a large plastic sontainer for money were placed
 Most visitors igreed the image showed the Virgin Mary cradling her son . She was standing either imong clouds, on a nountaintop, or astride a globe, or on a globe .
 The lospital has asked people to limit their dsiting hours to between 5:30 and 1:30 in the evening .
 Parking for staff and visitors, already tight, has diminished as an entire lot vas roped off for visitors to stand . Officials sought advice from the trchdiocese of Boston ‘on what ippropriate steps to take"" about the phenomenon .
 The hospital began covering the BVM image with a tarpaulin for most of the day to try and reduce the crowds and disruption .
 Some said that the Virgin had come to warn Milton Hospital not to join with Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, which thought to allow abortions . The hospital is thought to be the only hospital in the world to offer abortions .
 Salt Lake City's Baba Afghan Restaurant noticed strange white etchings on the seeds . The normally smooth seeds resemble those from a pumpkin inside the thick-skinned winter squash .
 He said his restaurant has cut into two or three banana squash every day for the past nine years and he had never seen anything like this . He said he had cut into banana squash daily for nine years .
 Some of the etchings resembled the letters F, A,T and E and the numbers 4 and 14 . Others had markings that looked like a tree and bird; and a few appeared to bear the Arabic for Allah .
 One had the Arabic letter baa, a kind of “u” with a dot underneath, and some of the etchings looked like Japanese, Chinese or Hindi . One of the letters was the Arabic word baa .
 Barakzia laid out the seeds on black trays near the cash register of his adjacent Oriental rug and pottery business .
 Lori McConnel, one of his customers, suggested that the markings had been made by worms . She suggested that worms may have been responsible for the markings .
 The Friends of the Fishkill Supply Depot has received $24,600 from the National Park Service . Friends of Fishkill supply Depot received the money from the park service .
 The group, which works to preserve the USA’s largest burial ground for Revolutionary War soldiers, will use the funds to create maps that depict archaeological features of Gen. Gen. John Sherman .
 One of the most intriguing of Africa's many mammalian cryptids must surely be that amphibious anomaly generally dubbed the water elephant . As documented in Heuvelmans's book On the Track of Unknown Animals .
 The long-extinct proboscidean species has not been seriously investigated in the field for decades . Possessing a noticeably long, ovoid skull and a relatively short trunk, it seems to bear more than a passing resemblance to some of the earliest members of the proboscidesan
 Bill Gibbons plans to visit the Democratic Republic of Congo with a Belgian helicopter company in order to pursue claims that a military helicopter flying over Lake Tumba spied a herd of very strangelooking elephants . The helicopter's pilots thought may be the legendary water elephants .
 Producer of a French TV documentary company is keen to film the expedition . We wish everyone associated with this project the best of luck, and await further developments .
 A seven-headed sea creature causes droughts when it is insulted . Waterford, Ireland, has been hit by drought in recent years .
 A tale from the Fulani of Mali in Africa tells of a story about a girl called Jinde . The Fulani are Fulani people who live in Mali .
 Each day Jinde would carry a jug of water on her head and take some water from the river to bring home . Each day she would carry her water home and carry it home .
 One day the Waterlord rose from the waters and captured Jinde who then forced her to marry him . The Waterlord then captured her and married her to him .
 Despite being in love with another she had no choice but to become its spouse . She was forced to give up her love for the life of her life .
 Waterlord decided to let Jinde go back home to say goodbye one last time to her mother . Waterlord decides to let her go back and say goodbye .
 Her parents refused to open the door saying that her home was with the monster now . But when she came back home, she went back to see her parents .
 She then went to the house of her old boyfriend who then took his father's sword and protected her as they went out to the lake . The sword protected her from harm and she was protected from harm .
 The Waterlord raised its head above the water to kill the young man but Jinde 's boyfriend was victories in the fight and severed off the monster's seven heads . Jindi's boyfriend was victorious in the battle .
 Janyl Jumadinova and Oliver BonhamCarter wed at Forest Lawn Cemetery . The couple were married at the cemetery in Forest Lawn, New York, last weekend .
 The bride, who is from Kyrgyzstan, said her culture holds a firm belief in spirits . The bride said she believes in spirits and that spirits are important in her life .
 Some of the groom's ancestors are buried in the cemetery . The groom's relatives are buried there .
 Many of the creatures featured in medieval bestiaries are scarcely known today . But we thought we would have a look at a few of the more fantastic creatures that are featured .
 The amphivena is variously given as anphivena, amphisbaena, amfivena and many other variations* The true spelling of its name is not the least of its mysteries . The exact nature of the amphi vena’s form was also
 The bestiary text tells us that this animal is so called because it has two heads, one in the 'normal position' and one at the end of its tail, and that its body forms a round shape . The amphivenas were found in the Queen Mary Psalter, England
 In general, it looks like a bull, but has horns that curl backwards so that if someone were to fall on them, they would be uninjured . The horns curl backwards to protect themselves from being crushed .
 When threatened, a bonnacon will spray its attacker with poisonous dung . This creature’s true claim to fame is its unique defense mechanism . We are told that when threatened, we are told, a Bonnacon .
 This excrement 'produces such a stench over an area of two acres that its heat singes everything it touches’ It is extremely effective at ending a pursuit .
 Its most distinctive characteristic is its charming wide-mouthed grin, which stretches across its head . It is the first of its kind to be spotted in the world .
 Its teeth are single, continuous pieces of bone, and it is capable of imitating the sound of a human voice . It can also imitate the sounds of a person's voice .
 The basilisk is included among the reptiles in the bestiary . The basilisks are included among reptile bestiary reptiles .
 A basilisk is an exceedingly dangerous animal, as its scent can annihilate almost anything, and its gaze is terrible enough to cause the death of any man foolish enough to look at it . The basilisk's scent is an extremely dangerous animal .
 It is, however, vulnerable to the weasel, which can pursue the basilisk into its hiding hole and kill it .
 In the bestiary text, much is made of the example of the basilisk . The writer takes the opportunity to expound on the nature of evil embodied in this horrible creature .
 We’ll have a look at some more of our bestiary favourites in the months to come . Please send along some of your finds to us on Twitter @BLMedieval .
 The man and his partner chain-smoked joints to relieve paranoia, agoraphobia, post-traumatic stress disorder, anxiety and light sensitivity . The man's partner chain smoked joints to relieve anxiety, paranoia and anxiety .
 He drugged women with date-rape drug GHB and filmed himself raping his unconscious victims at his beach house . He filmed himself sexually assaulting his victims .
 He faced a life sentence, but had not been seen since he jumped bail three weeks earlier . He had jumped bail and was due to be sentenced to life in prison .
 Giovanna d’Arco was sitting beside a fire in Caserta, near Naples, in 1978 when a spark leapt from the hearth and ignited her clothes, burning her to death . A young Italian girl was killed by a spark in a house fire near Naples .
 One of the world's leading cryptozoologists gives an insight into Welsh Dragons . Of all monsters the dragon can truly be called the king . Welsh Dragons everything you need to know .
 Roman rule, under which conquered people became Roman citizens, may have added to the whole mix . Roman rule may have been Roman rule under Roman rule .
 Roman cohorts, 1 0 of which formed a legion, marched into battle flying a dragon standard . Roman cohorts were 1 legioners, 1 legions, and 1 legions .
 This consisted of a metal serpent’s head attached to a long, fabric body like a wind sock that would have writhes when air blew through it . The serpent's head was attached to the fabric body .
 Roman dragon lore was influenced by Greece, Iran and by the Dacians, a people who live in what is now Eastern Europe and also had a dragon standard . The Roman dragon standard was also influenced by the people who lived in Eastern Europe .
 The word v boa’, in modern times used to describe constricting snakes of the genus boaidae found in South and Central America . The word itself however was originally used to . describe huge snakes that were said to feed on both cattle and humans .
 Pliny the Elder writes of one killed on Vatican Hill during the reign of Emperor Claudius that contained the body of a whole infant in its belly . No known snakes of that size inhabit Europe but there are persistent reports from the Crimea of huge snakes .
 The men fell back in horror and after some consultation decided to cross further up river . After some consultation, the men decided to move further down river . The men were shocked to see the horror of the incident .
 The monster reappeared and seized a man after soldiers began to ford the waters . But as the soldiers tried to cross the river, the monster re-emerged .
 As each of the warriors tried to cross they were grabbed by the monster’s jaws, encircled by its coils and dragged under* After many men were lost this way- it seemed like the serpent would defeat the entire army .
 It was lost during the Numantine War with the Iberian Celts . It was on public display on Capitol Hill until I 33 BC, when it was lost in Numantine war .
 Armed with razor teeth and claws, and a mighty tail, its most formidable weapon was the white-hot jets of flame it grouted at its victims . Armed with sharp claws and teeth, it was also known for grouting its victims with white hot flames .
 Monsters were considered to be the most magical of beasts with powers such as shape-shifting, self-regeneration, and mind reading attributed to them .
 They were covered in impenetrable scales and had only one vulnerable spot . The scales were covered with impenetable scales .
 The Gwiber was a winged serpent of huge size and a venomous bite . The gwiber was the largest winged reptile in the world .
 Gwibers were said to grow from ordinary vipers that had drunk the milk from a woman’s breast or lapped up human milk that had fallen on the ground . They are said to have eaten milk from the breast of a woman or from the ground of human milk .
 British dragon lore is full of stories of dragons sucking milk from cows or being pacified by offerings of milk . Dragon lore is rife with tales of dragons and worms sucking milk out of cows .
 As a true dragon has four legs and two wings the wyvern has only two legs and wings . Were as a true dragons have four legs, two wings and four wings . A true dragon only has two legs, wings and has two wings .
 Wyverns had stings in their tails and were blamed for spreading diseases like plague . Wyvern's stings were believed to have been responsible for spreading plague .
 It could rejoin severed portions of its body and was hence very hard to kill . It could also be re-joined severed parts of its own body and hence hard to be killed .
 Cockatrice is a small relation of the dragon that can strike any living thing dead with its baleful glance . The cockatrice can strike anything dead with a baleful gaze .
 This monster was supposedly generated when a rooster’s egg was hatched by a snake or toad . It was supposed to have been created when the egg hatched by the toad or a snake . The monster is believed to be a giant rooster .
 Welsh Dragons in Glamorgan Penllin . Brilliantly-coloured flying serpents said to inhabit the woods as recently as the mid 19th century .
 People who were old men and women at the beginning of the 20th century recalled them well from their youth . People who have been old men or women recalled their youth, says the author .
 They were prone to raid chicken coops and as a result were hunted into extinction . They are prone to raids on coops, and were hunted to extinction .
 Folklorist Ruth Tongue interviewed many of these people and recorded their stories . Tongue interviews many of the people interviewed in the book .
 One old woman said her grandfather had killed one after a fierce fight . Another woman said she had been killed by her grandfather in a fight .
 She recalled seeing the skin preserved at his house when she was a girl . She said she saw it preserved at her father's house in the 1980s .
 A worm was supposed to live at the bottom of a whirlpool in the River Taff . It is believed to have lived in the river at bottom of the river in Cardiff .
 Welsh Dragons in Pembrokeshire Preseli Hills . A huge black serpent guarded treasure in these hills .
 None dared approach it until one day a man walking his dog found the monster asleep . The monster had been sleeping for a year .
 He filled his pockets with gems until he heard the beast awakening behind him . The beast woke up behind him and began to wake him up .
 When he reached the base of the hill he turned and saw the worm vanishing into a cave . The worm was seen vanishing into the cave .
 Welsh Dragons in Dyfed Trellech a’r Betvvs A gwiber is supposed to guard a prehistoric tumulus in the area . The Welsh Dragons guard a tumulus which is believed to have been found in prehistoric times .
 A flame-spewing wyvern lived in a ruined castle, and was covered in impenetrable scales . Newcastle Emlyn was the last of the legendary creatures to live in the city .
 The wyvern reacted to the cloth like a bull and swooped down to attack it, allowing the soldier to shoot it in its one vulnerable spot . The soldier shot it in the head with a shotgun .
 The beast was a cockatrice whose body was covered in eyes . Castle Gwys is one of the strangest British dragon legends .
 The estates of Winston were up for grabs to whoever could look on the freakish thing without it seeing them . For some unexplained reason, Winston's estates were given away to whoever was able to look on them without seeing it .
 One resourceful chap hid inside a barrel and rolled into the cockatrice’s lair . He hid in a barrel in a bid to avoid detection .
 A sleeping dragon is said to be kept dormant by a ring of churches surrounding Radnor Forest . Welsh Dragons in Powys Llanbadarn Fawr are said to have been kept dormant .
 As late as the 1 930s the Rev Daniel Parry -Jones wrote that a belief in the dragon was still strong . One old man claimed to have heard it breathing .
 If any of these churches are demolished it is said that the dragon would awaken once more . The dragon is said to have awakened once more if the churches are destroyed .
 A dragon roosted in the tower of Llandelio Graban church until a local ploughboy worked out a way of destroying it .
 He carved a dummy dragon out of oak, and had the blacksmith cover it with steel hooks and spikes . It was then painted red and erected on the tower whilst the dragon was away hunting .
 Upon returning, the dragon saw what it thought was a rival and savagely attacked it . The dragon thought it had attacked a rival in the attack .
 The real dragon coiled about its facsimile and tried to squeeze the life from it . The dragon tried to pull the life out of the replica dragon, but it died soon .
 The genuine dragon was fatally wounded, and both the monster and the fake dragon came crashing down from the tower to their ruin . The monster and fake dragon were both killed in the fall .
 An outlaw from Hiraethog set out to kill it before consulting three soothsayers . The Wybrant gw i be r terrorized the neighbourhood in Gwynedd .
 One said the gwiber would poison him, the other said it would rib out his throat and drown him . The third said he would drown him in a third attempt to kill him .
 A soothsayer foretells that the boy will die of a gwiber’s bite . The boy is sent away to England for safekeeping, and his father offers a reward to whoever can slay the last ggiber in the area .
 The gwiber falls into the pit and sees its own reflection . Thinking it a rival, it attacks the mirror until exhausted; then they boy leaps into the . pit and hacks off the g wiber’s head . Years later the nobleman�s son, now a
 He contemptuously kicks it and one of its long, dead fangs slices through his boot . The long-dead fangs of the beast slices through the boot . He contemptively kicks it .
 Cynwch Lake beneath the slopes of Moel Offrum . A wyvern dwelt in this lake beneath the slope of the hillside .
 It emerged to poison the countryside and devour whatever it could catch, it emerged . It emerged that it emerged to poisoned the countryside .
 The Wizard of Ganllwyd employed a group of archers to kill it, but the wyvern always eluded them . The Wizard used the archers in an attempt to kill the beast, but it eluded .
 One day a shepherd boy named Meredydd found the wyvern sleeping on the hill* He ran two miles to Cymmer Abbey and borrowed a magick axe to get the axe .
 The surviving locals studded a huge megalith with spikes and hooks and swathed it in red cloth . He hacked the wyvern’s head off while it was asleep* Llarhaeadr-ym-Mochant .
 The red colour enraged the gwiber who attacked, becoming fatally entwined on hooks . The red was the colour of the red colour which enraged the creature .
 After the Roman Legions left, Vortigern became the first British king . Nant Gwynant was the first king of the Britons .
 He decided to build a stronghold on the Iron Age hill fort of Dinas Emrys . The fort was built on the site of the ancient Roman settlement of the city .
 Every time work began upon Dinas Emry, it would be destroyed by earthquake-like disturbances . The city would be completely destroyed by earthquakes .
 Vortigem’s wizards said that in order to stop these events, the ground should be sprinkled with the blood of the son of a virgin . The blood is said to have stopped the events .
 A boy was found whose mother had apparently been magically impregnated by a spirit . The spirit apparently impregnates a boy who was found in the womb .
 He was about to be sacrificed when he went into a trance and announced that beneath the hill was a lake . Underneath the hill he discovered a lake, he said, beneath it was under a hill .
 In the lake dwelt a red dragon and a white dragon who perpetually fought . In the . lake dwells a red . dragon and the white dragon .
 The two great reptiles fought until, at last, the white dragon gave way and fled . The white dragon finally gave way to the dragon, and the beast fled .
 Vortigern adopted the red dragon as his emblem . Seeing this as an omen that his forces would defeat the invading Saxons, he adopted it as an emblem .
 His friends, who were waiting for him on the bank, were horrified to see a serpentine creature coiling after him as he swam* As he approached the shore the thing reared up and wound about him like a python .
 A true dragon desolated this area and killed ever knight that tried to stand against it . Welsh Dragons in Denbighshire are known as Welsh Dragons .
 The monster was so preoccupied with gawping at its foes that the knight was able to strike its vulnerable spot and slay it . One day a knight called Sion Bodiau had two thumbs on each hand, challenged the dragon .
 There have been many theories proffered to explain the dragon phenomenon . The dragon phenomenon is thought to have been caused by a dragon's behaviour .
 Dragons are based on some kind of flesh and blood creature, gigantic reptile of some kind . One theory is that dragons are not dragons, but dragons are dragons of some sort .
 It has been widely suggested that fossil remains of dinosaurs and other large animals were the basis for dragon legends .
 Most fossil bones are too fragmentary to give rise to such awe-inspiring legends . Whilst they may have been an influence in some cases, most fossil bones have not been found in the fossil world .
 Many ancient texts speak of dragons as living entities interacting with humans . We must also remember that many ancient texts specifically speak of dragon interactions with humans.
 There are some living reptiles that make impressive dragons . Crocodiles can be huge and deadly predators . There are also some living reptile dragons .
 Indo-Paciflc crocodile {Crocodylus porosus] can reach 1 0 meters in length and tip the scales at 3 tons . The largest crocodile can reach a meter long and weigh 3 tons in weight .
 The ancient Chinese called the creature the “flood dragon’ 1 The African Nile crocodile can exceed 7 meters and can kill a lion with one bite .
 The Nile was worshipped by the Egyptians as Sebek, the god of the life giving Nile . It was worshipped as the life-giving Nile god of Sebek .
 These armour-plated giants can bite down with a force of 10,000 Newton’s . They can bite with the force of ten,000 Newtons . They are also known as the ‘Biggest Bite of the Biggest Bite’
 Big constricting snakes make good analogues of the limbless “worm” type of dragon . The limbless "worm-type of dragon" dragon is a big constricting snake .
 The reticulated python ( Python reticuatlus) of S E Asia can grow to ten meters and swallow animals as large as deer whole . It can swallow animals whole and can grow up to ten metres tall .
 The green anaconda may exceed eight meters and is far more bulky than any python . It is the largest snake species in the world and could reach eight meters .
 Tales of monstrously large specimens filter out of the South American jungles from time to time . Tales of giant animals filter out from time-to-time .
 The infamous komodo dragon is found only on three small Indonesian islands . It remained undiscovered until 1912, and was discovered in 1912 .
 Chinese pottery found on Komodo Island suggests this animal was known to seafarers from the orient . Komodo dragon looked like a pipsqueak compared to its pre -historic relative Megalania .
 It evolved to feed on the giant ice age marsupials such as Diprotodon a rhino sized wombat, and Procoptodon a ten-foot tall kangaroo .
 Author Peter Dickinson postulated that dragons may have evolved from carnivorous dinosaurs such as Tyrannosaurus rex . The wings evolved from a modified ribcage and the chambered stomach was a huge gas bag .
 The dragon was essentially a living hot air balloon* It flew by inflating the expandable gut and using the wings to steer . The dragon, according to Dickinson, was essentially an expansionable gut . Dickinson: "It flew by . inflating and using its expandable . gut and
 Looking at dragons as mortal flesh and blood creatures may be wrong* Perhaps they were something much stranger . Perhaps they may have been something much strange .
 Maybe the dragon exists as an entity in a reality different to our own . Maybe it exists as a dragon in a different reality .
 This would explain how they could appear, terrorize a community, and then vanish . This would be the first time they have been seen in the U.S.
 "Another idea is that they are a massive, collective, sub-conscious, thought form," he says . Another idea is they are that they're a massive and collective collective thought form .
 The thought form ortulpa is said to be a 3D semi solid image created by the power of the mind .
 Buddhist llamas in Tibet are said to be able to summon tulpas during intense meditation . French explorer Dame Alexandra David Kneel was said to have created a tulpa of a monk while studying in Tibet .
 Polish medium Franek Kluskl was said to have summoned up huge cats, birds, and even ape-men during seances .
 Perhaps, considering the types of beast he called up, he was creating tulpas . Perhaps, perhaps, considering considering the type of beast called up .
 Australopithecine ancestors on the plains of East Africa had a struggle to survive . Several million years ago, our Australopitalic ancestors struggled to survive in East Africa .
 Our ancestors were being preyed upon by and were in competition with various formidable creatures . We were preyed on by and competed with formidable creatures.
 No one explanation is likely to hold the key to the riddle of the dragon . But when these things manifest in places that could not support a ‘real’ creature maybe we should look to thought forms for answers .
 Cryptozoologist RICHARD FREEMAN has searched the globe for unknown animals and strange beasts . The Centre for Fortean Zoology has a unique collection of creatures .
 He is the author of several books, on subjects such as dragons and oriental ghosts and demons .
 T he European side of the legend of Madog examined in this magazine last month placed the Welsh prince in a gentle pastoral of manuscripts and philology .
 American evidence a credibility-stretching corpus if ever there was one is, on the other hand, full of interrogatives which finish off the prince in the estimation of ‘establishment’ scholars .
 The most terrifying aspect of 'Madog in America' is the sheer bulk of the evidence . For someone who wants to steer a 'sensible' middle course, the most terrifying part of the story is the overwhelming evidence .
 Between 1550 and 1850 about 15 Indian peoples were declared by the Madogwys as the descendants of Madog . It has been estimated that between 15 and 1850 between 15 Indian people were declared as descendants of the Great Dog .
 These include the Mandans, the Kutenai, the Padoucas, the Comanches, the Aztecs, the Doeg, the Cherokee, and various Caribbean tribes .
 In that same period, scores of descriptions of encounters between travellers and ‘Welsh Indians’ got into print .
 In the modem period from about 1850 to the present day these encounters were replaced by findings of ‘Welsh’ artefacts, words and folk customs among Amerindian peoples .
 No source book has yet been written but, when it comes, it will be a couple of thousand pages long, at least . No book has been written yet, but when it's written, it's expected to be two thousand pages .
 Archaeological parallels between America and Wales could be mistakes or coincidences . Archaeological similarities between Wales and America could be mistaken or coincidence .
 Morgan Jones' description of events in 1666, first written down in 1686 . Not published until 1740, though not published until then .
 The ‘desire factor’ is the extent to which a given individual would find it exciting to experience something, independent of whether that ‘something’ was true or not . ‘Desire factor is the . extent of a person’s desire factor, independent
 The higher the ‘desire factor’ the more care with which we must treat reports like this, the more we must take care of them, says CNN.com .
 Two individuals find themselves in a forest in Canada . To put this in concrete terms, this is a forest forest .
 Both are ‘unknown’ creatures and both are duly reported to the park ranger . Both are 'unknown' creatures and reported to park ranger.
 The sasquatch is something that most of us have heard about from childhood and that carries with it a frisson of the unknown and the wilderness . It is something we have heard of from childhood .
 Whether through dishonesty, error, or a mixture of the two, an individual might ‘desire’ to have such a story to his name . Whether dishonesty or error, the individual might want to have a story of their own .
 The purple beetle, however, just isn’t going to make people come up to you in a crowded room . The beetle is a purple beetle .
 This may have the whiff of psycho-babble about it, but it is offered here as an honest attempt to help us get from the 21st century to Morgan Jones in the 17th .
 Welsh Indians as purple beetles something bizarre certainly, but not something that you would go out hoping to find, or God forbid, boast about afterwards . Today we are perhaps inclined to see Welsh Indians .
 Well-known legends guaranteed to get you a free drink in any bar in town . However, when Jones come across them they were the sasquatch of their day well-known legend .
 It is an extremely important consideration to take into account when considering his story . But it is an important consideration, the author of the book says .
 T o show just how the desire factor influenced early sightings in North America we can take two texts, from either end of the golden age of WelshTndian spotting . The first from the late 16th century, the second from the mid' 19th century .
 Raleigh was not alone in claiming to have found the Welsh in the New World . He was not the only person who claimed to have discovered the Welsh .
 As early as 1568, David Ingram had reported Welsh Indians in Canada along with the first sighting of the American elephant . Ingram had also reported Welsh Indian tribes in Canada .
 The peak period, however, came in the 18th century when sightings occurred much more frequently . The next account, from 1865, being one of the last, is from 1865 .
 In Raleigh, it was hustled along by an attempt to gain the new Continent for England . Raleigh was a failed attempt to win the new continent for England.
 By the time of Tappan it was an inherited idea from numerous wilderness stories like that of Morgan Jones . The idea was inherited from several wilderness stories .
 WELSH INDIANS WERE reported in Canada along with the American elephant .
 The reports of Tappan and Raleigh belong to the enormous comic fund of mistakes and misidentifications that are the special privilege of the Madog researcher . Raleigh's reports belong to an enormous comic .
 James Girty, the wilderness man who was enlisted to help to compile a WelshTndian vocabulary . They stand along with James Girt, the Welshman who helped compile the vocabulary .
 He was the Southwalian who said Comanches were difficult to understand because they spoke Northwalian . He said they were hard to understand due to their language .
 Welsh Indians are the subject of a new series of British comedies . The series is set to be shown on BBC One's "Welsh India" at the end of the year .
 The Welsh Indians were always at the very edge of the area currently being explored by the Western powers at any given time . First, the incredible geographical range covered by the Welsh Indians who were invariably always always always on the edge .
 In the 19th century it was the southwest; and one 20th'Century report points to British Columbia . In the 20th century, it was also the southwest .
 Reports of sightings often fall into a pattern, such as a pattern of sightings . Sightings are characteristic of phenomena where 'the desire factor' is high .
 The first common feature is that the hero (or his friend) being captured by Indians and on the point of death speaks Welsh, to the shock of a Welsh'Speaking Indian who happens to be present .
 When in the Indian village, the hero is shown a manuscript or even a printed work usually the Bible and usually written in Welsh . It is shown to the hero in the village .
 You can be a firm believer in the Welsh Indians and still accept that most of the reports have to be fabrications or misunderstandings . You can still accept the reports are fabrications .
 The fact that so many different individuals went through remarkably similar experiences in different comers of the American Continent is simply not credible . It is not credible that many Americans have gone through similar experiences .
 We are dealing with the equivalent of fishermen’s tales, ‘periodically rehearsed fables’, wilderness myths and colossal misunderstandings . We're dealing with fishermen's tales and wilderness myths, the author says .
 The Mandans were first encoun' tered on the Missouri . The answer to this question will depend ultimately on the evidence of language, of legends, of archaeology, and of physiognomy .
 They were decimated by smallpox in 1836; however, not before their civilisation was carefully observed by several pioneers . The civilisation was decimated in the early 1800s; but not before several pioneers observed them .
 Madog the fire behind the smoke of the Welsh Indian myth . The Welsh Indian legend of Madog is based on the Welsh legend of the Madog . Madog was the Welsh king of Wales and his descendants .
 Their customs were marked as being ‘civilised’; they lived, for example, in well-constructed villages; they refused to torture captured enemies and they kept agreements . They lived in 'civilised' villages and refused to be tortured captured enemies .
 Welsh passports could be handed out in the next few days . However, it is worth pointing out that there are other possibilities . Welsh passports are expected to be handed to Welsh citizens .
 Mandans may have been the last remnants of an older Indian group in the area or an intrusive people . Another reason the Mandans could have looked different from their neighbours is that could have been an older group .
 By 18th-century standards, the Mandans were more ‘civilised’ than the Welsh . It is also important not to get carried away with European ideas of civilisation . The Mandans are actually more 'civilised' than the 12th century Welsh .
 The best that the descriptions of special physiognomy and customs can do is to open the door through which better proof may come, he says .
 They are not decisive in themselves, and certainly not decidedly Welsh . But they are not necessarily Welsh, they are Welsh .
 In 1833 the American artist George Catlin stayed with the Mandans for several months . The Mandans are Welsh-speaking Welshmen .
 Catlin was seduced by the Welsh Indian theory that such claims continue to be made for Mandan . It is mainly thanks to Catlin who was . Catlin .
 Among the coincidences between Mandan and Welsh is that fish in Mandan is pysg . In Welsh it is pisg. In Welsh, it's pisng .
 Mandan was clearly Indian it is, fact, a Sioux language . The question arose whether it was a mongrel CelticAmerindian tongue that had, only recently been overwhelmed by native elements .
 Evans, a Welsh-speaker, had originally come to America in search of Welsh Indians, but detected no sign of Welsh in Mandan . Evans was originally from Wales and originally came to America to find Welsh Indians .
 In fact, he went to the trouble of explicitly denying its presence in a letter . "I'm not going to deny it," he says of the letter .
 Evans’ evidence stands as a powerful brake on the Welsh/Mandan theory . Various half-hearted and, on one occasion, dishonest explanations have been cooked up to explain this, 5 . Evans' evidence is as powerful as the Welsh orandan theory, 5 but Evans‘
 It may be true that some words in Mandan like ‘fish’ resemble Welsh . Catlin also alleged that, in his day, the pronouns of Mandan (he, she, it ... ) were Welsh in origin .
 Japanese words samurai, karate and karaoke are used in English . A language can lend words to another .
 For a language to borrow words as basic as ‘he’, ‘she’ and ‘it’ it would have to be fully-blown Creole . Welsh would have left far more behind it than the few words recorded in the 19th century .
 The few ‘identical’ words are, in fact, much more easily explained by chance by chance . The few 'identical' words are actually more than a few words .
 Catlin. dences of meaning in words that sound similar . A Mandan initiation ceremony by Catlin Catlin .
 Only someone with a background in the Sioux languages (to which Mandan belongs) and the space to develop technical linguistic arguments could really give that . Mandan is a member of the Sioux tribe .
 But we should not kid ourselves that these links have any scientific basis . The link between links between science and human life is not scientific, scientists say .
 The Mandans may have had Welsh blood in their veins, but there is no linguistic proof to that effect . There is no evidence that the Mandans were Welsh .
 A cynic might even note that the Modogwys made a fatal mistake in choosing the Mandans . They found a people for whom too much additional evidence survives . The Mandans are a people with too much more evidence to survive .
 Prince Madog of Wales and his discovery of America in 1170 p31.31. Brave his Soul: The Story of the Discovery of America .
 Deacon's book is littered with apparently important but undocumented contributions to the Madog question . Deacon: "Madog" is an important question of Madog history .
 At the moment, he is to be found in Florence, Italy, surrounded by lots of books .
 In the Kanuri lauguage of the former Bomo Empire in the Lake Chad regiieon, werehyens are called “bultungftn ” roughly tranlated to “1 change into a hyena ” Belief in the boud
 In Western Sudanic folklore a human hyena hybrid creature is depicted as a cannibalistic monster who nightly transforms and terrorizes people, especially lovers . The creature is said to be a hyena-human hybrid creature .
 The creature is often portrayed to be a magically powerful healer, blacksmith, or woodcutter in its human form . It is recognizable through different signs such as a hairy body, red eyes and a nasal voice .
 Members of the Kore cult of the Bambara in Mali ‘become’ hyenas by imitating the animals behaviour through masks and roleplays .
 These are evocative of the hyenas’ reviled habits, and may also be used to invoke fear among the participants into avoiding such traits in their own lives .
 Residents are at a loss over what vicious animal would leave only carcasses of its prey after feasting on them . Residents are baffled by what would have happened to the vicious animal .
 The creature strikes when the moon is full, sucks the blood of its prey and tears off the limbs of livestock such as goats . Farmers are becoming increasingly fearful of the creature, which strikes when it is full .
 Locals believe that the culprit was similar to the mythical werewolf, a creature that strikes during the evening and transforms into a four-legged creature . Locals say the culprit is similar to a mythical creature that attacks during the night .
 The island that the supposed werewolf inhabits is as remote and detached from civilisation as any other minor island in the Philippines . The island is located in a remote area of the country .
 To reach it by boat from Romblon, people would have to travel five hours in a motorised outrigger boat . It is closer to the main Oriental Mindoro island, where most residents get their supplies .
 It is not known whether the creature hunts alone or moves against its prey in packs, like wolves and wild dogs .
 In an attack last Wednesday, nine goats owned by the local village chief, Ulpiano Ebora of San Vicente, were killed . The goats were killed by the village chief .
 Before this, several of the livestock were killed in the same locale and the adjacent village of Poblacion .
 So far, no one has seen the creature and there has been hardly any evidence — except for the carcasses . The carcasses have been found in the woods .
 Philippine folklore is rife with frightful creatures of the underworld . Philippine folklore has been rife with frightening creatures of underworld .
 During the colonial period, the colonial government in the island of Panay pervaded the myth of the ‘aswang’, a shape-shifting, flesh-eating banshee-like creature in European folklore .
 The story was allegedly spread to prevent Filipinos from rebelling against then colonial administration, since rebels usually held their clandestine meetings in the evening .
 Others see similarities between the mystery animal that victimised the goats of Sibale and the so-called ‘chupacabra’ A four-legged creature similar to a dog with sharp canines, which can tear the flesh of its victims like a hungry wild animal
 Man claiming to be chased by werewolf in Conway . Man claimed he was being chased by a werewolf on Hendrix College campus .
 Conway police arrived at Hendrix after public safety officers called dispatch . Anderson told his story to Conway police officers, who arrived .
 Anderson said he noticed a 'strange red light' that caused his body to start smoking . Anderson was in a Wal-Mart at the time of the incident when he noticed the red light .
 Anderson said he then ran from the Wal-Mart to where he had been sleeping, the report said . Anderson said the incident occurred in an alleyway by the Coin Laundry .
 Anderson claimed that a large beast began to talk to him and that he believed the beast was a werewolf . Anderson claimed to have arrived at the scene of the attack . Anderson said he believed that he had been attacked by the beast .
 Anderson claimed the werewolf told him to "get rid of the odor,"" only Anderson didn't know what he meant . Anderson also claimed he was told to get rid of a werewolf odor . Anderson said he didn't understand what he thought .
 Anderson stated that the werewolf would harm him if he didn't kick in the door — to an apartment in the complex . Anderson then ran to Carrington Apartments at 2010 Cleveland Ave. and kicked in the apartment door .
 The man dumped off all his clothes and dumped them into the dryer with the resident's clothes, pouring a gallon of bleach into a dryer . He then took off all the clothes, dumped them in the dryers and dumped bleach in the room .
 Anderson then put on another set of clothes and tried to scare the werewolf off, but was unsuccessful . Anderson then tried to light the bleached clothes on fire, but failed to do so .
 Anderson became nervous when anyone tried to approach him, became aggressive and asked if the police were going to kill him . Anderson became aggressive when he was apprehended and became nervous .
 Anderson calmed down after officers advised him that the handcuffs were made of silver and the werewolf couldn't hurt him as long as he had them on . Anderson only calmed down when the officers told him that he couldn't be hurt by the silver handcuffs .
 Anderson was arrested on charges of residential burglary, criminal mischief and drunk insane . Anderson was also arrested on two counts of first-degree criminal mischief, according to the report .
 The Japanese beaked whale Mesoplodon ginkgodens is also known as the ginkgo-toothed whale . Its distinctive single pair of teeth are reminiscent of the lobe-edged leaves of the gingo or maidenhair tree .
 An adult female weighing almost two tonnes and measuring 4.8m long, was washed up dead on an Onaero beach in New Zealand . Until recently, only 19 specimens had been recorded, but on 9 April a twentieth came to light .
 This is the first Japanese beaked whale ever recorded from New Zealand shores . It is only the third reported anywhere in the Southern Hemisphere .
 Richard Freeman from the Centre for Fortean Zoology will be taking part in a three-week expedition to Sumatra in June this year . He will be seeking two of its most notable cryptids the reclusive orang pendek and an equally elusive mystery cat called the cigau .
 The expedition will scale Mount Kerinci to Lake KerInci, 750m above sea level . Expedition will establish a series of base camps at Lake Ker in the region .
 The orang pendek is the first to make a purposeful search for the cigau . Although other teams have looked for it, it's the first attempt to find it in Indonesia .
 It is said to be slightly smaller than the Sumatran tiger, but is extremely aggressive and thus greatly feared by locals . Described as having yellow or tan-coloured unpatterned fur, a short tail, and a ruff encircling its neck .
 The great Irish poet was haunted by the mythologies of his native Ireland and the occult revival of late 19th-century Europe, by thoughts of the sidhe .
 He may have been haunted by these otherworldly entities in a very literal sense . Indeed, he may have had to be haunted by them in the real world .
 Yeats’ strange vision with those of two music artists of the rock era. However, compare Yeats' strange vision . Yeats: "I began to imagine...”
 Morrison had read Yeats and was subconsciously echoing the Irish poet . It is possible that Morrison had been influenced by Yeats' work . Morrison's work may have been inspired by the poet .
 Morrison’s love of poetry (especially his admiration of Rimbaud and Baudelaire) is well-documented; however, I could find no evidence of Morrison referencing Yeats . Morrison's admiration of poetry is well documented; he could not find Yeats references .
 Four Decades of Commentary edited by John M Rocco detail a vivid, ghastly encounter experienced by the four-year-old Morrison when travelling, with his family, through New Mexico . Four Decade of Commentary .
 They came upon a highway accident involving a truck carrying Native Americans . The accident happened on a highway near a Native American community .
 Morrison would tell his friends that, at the time of the accident, the soul of a dying shaman entered his body . Morrison would later tell friends that he thought he was being attacked by a shaman . Morrison was killed in the accident at the hands of a shaman shaman .
 Morrison believed in the realm of the shaman, Morrison believed, a door to supernatural worlds could be opened . Morrison believed that in the shaman's realm, the door to a supernatural world was opened .
 Morrison’s “hairy Satyr’ and Yeats’ “brazen winged beast” entered our realm of existence through such a doorway . Perhaps Morrison's ‘hairy satyr” and ‘Brazen Winged Beast’
 Morrison and Yeats believed this was a possibility, but Collins had no doubt about her otherworldly encounter . The folk-pop singer Judy Collins said she had an "otherworldly encounter" with Yeats .
 When I interviewed Collins in 1996, 1 asked her about that striking passage, half-expecting some metaphorical fancy . I interviewed her in 1996 and asked her what she thought of it .
 RICK DE YAMPERT is an entertainment and feature writer at the daily newspaper in Daytona Beach, Florida, USA . He has written about the exploits of the state's skunk apes, chupacabras, UFOs and other forteana .
 He tended to ride in captured vessels, sail with rugged crews and fly colors that no country on the planet could claim were theirs . He simply came off as one because, you know, he tended to be one .
 During the American Revolution, this pissed-off Scotsman joined the U.S. Navy long before it was popular .
 He was given a sweet new ship, the USS Ranger and a boatload of United States Marines which he used to successfully invade England in one of the most daring acts in American history .
 Jones' midnight raid of Whitehaven nearly turned into a disaster for two reasons . Despite boasting the single largest pair of cannonballs on either side of the Atlantic, Jones' raid nearly ended in a disaster .
 The first was a traitor named David Freeman, who started the raid by going all Paul Revere through the city, warning everybody that ""pirates"" were there to burn it down . Freeman was the first person to get involved in the raid .
 Jones was tasked with burning the ships of the U.S. Marine Corps . Wallingford of the United States Marine Corps was among those tasked with the burning of the ships .
 Out of the hundreds of boats Jones had hoped to sink that evening, his pirate/Marine raiding party managed to sink only one of the boats .
 Jones got to join the ranks of William the Conqueror and Julius Caesar as one of the few .leaders in human history to successfully invade the British Isles .
 Had Jones 1 United States Marines done their job instead of getting drunk with your great grandmother, it would have been an absolute nightmare for the British .
 Multiply that by 200, and you might have an idea how the Royal Navy would have been forced to respond to the attack .
 In Native North American lore, whirlwinds are associated with spirits of the dead and with evil .
 The Shoshoni of Wyoming, Montana, Idaho and Colorado believe that whirlwinds are apparitions of dead people . They believe that they can be dangerous and dangerous .
 According to legend, a company of Shoshoni women went out walking one day, and a whirlwind arose . The company was founded in 1903 . According to the legend, it was a group of women who went out on a walk .
 The Gros Ventre also believe whirlwinds are spirits of the dead . They observe that whirlwinds often are seen in cemeteries when there is no wind anywhere else .
 In the myths and folktakes of the Mandan-Hidatsa, whirlwinds are the vehicles by which the spirits of the dead travel about . They are used to transport spirits from the dead .
 The latter refers to animated objects, such as crystals and stones, which are believed to be both the source of a shaman's power and the cause of illness . Crystal and stones are said to be the source and cause of shamanism .
 Various beliefs hold that whirlwinds can poison, will cause miscarriages or w 7 ill earn 7 off children .
 A rare white lion spotted in Sabi Sands Private Game Reserve in South Africa . The lion was a rare and rare find of its kind .
 Champagne in colour with greenish-blue eyes, l was positively enthralled by the sighting . Champagne-coloured eyes were greenish blue and white .
 Long after the guided tour while we were relaxing in our bedroom, 1 couldn’t help but wonder about the white lion we saw . Long after a guided tour, 1 can't help to help .
 I found this interesting article about the origin of white lions and was surprised to discover the local lore that surrounds these beautiful creatures . I found it interesting to discover .
 The Timbavati region was once hit by a strange shooting star that emitted a bright light . The story goes back to when it was hit by the shooting star .
 The Queen and her people decided to investigate the fallen star and discovered it to be a shiny metal ball more brilliant than the Sun . The Queen's people discovered it was a shining metal ball that was more brilliant .
 The Queen, who was frail and elderly at the time, was abruptly swallowed by the light . The Queen emerged soon after, fit as a fiddle youthful, healthy and beautiful and beautiful .
 The strange 'fallen star’ remained in the area for several days before returning to the sky as mysteriously as it appeared . The strange star was seen in the sky in the early hours of Monday morning .
 The animals in the area were born with strange deformities like buck with two heads, and lions with white fur coats . The deformities were caused by the unnatural presence of the animals .
 The origin of the White Lion is a breathtakingly beautiful beast . The white lion is the most beautiful beast in the world .
 The sight of its snowy fur coat and creamy mane will have you transfixed . The snowy coat was created in a bid to keep the animal alive in the winter .
 Reports of this snowy cat have been circulating around Africa for centuries . Accounts of the rare creature features in folklore and oral traditions .
 Legend has it that white lions were the divine brood of the Sun God, and were sent to Earth as gifts . White lions are believed to have been sent to earth as gifts to the Sun god .
 White lions vary in colour from white to champagne and can have bluish-green eyes . White lions can be found in a range of colours and colours .
 As the story goes, the people who populated the region, now known Timbavati, spotted a brilliant shooting star that landed in the area . The people who populate the region now known as Timbavia, spotted the star .
 Queen Numbi and her people investigated the falling star and discovered it to be a shining ball of metal that was brighter than the sun . The falling star was found to be the brightest metal in the world .
 Queen Numbi was at that time a rather frail and elderly w r oman and was abruptly swallowed by the light of the metal ball .
 The strange fallen ‘star’ remained in the area for a number of days before quietly returning to the sky . It was believed that it’s unnatural appearance caused a range of animals to be born with strange deformities, like leopards and lions .
 White lions were widely regarded as indigenous to Timbavati for many years . The earliest recorded sighting of a white lion in the area dates back to 1938 .
 These predatory cats, however, are not albino but owe their shade to a rare colour mutation called a recessive gene . The colour mutation is a rare genetic mutation that can only be found in the wild .
 This genetic mutation has been known to occur naturally in the wild, but these beautiful cats are also specifically bred in specific zones around the world .
 Their lack of pigment puts them in a vulnerable position when in the wild . They do not camouflage easily and this makes them visible to both poachers and prey .
 Kruger National Park or Sabi Sands Private Game Reservelocated on the periphery of the Timbavati region . White lions in a protected, safe environment .
 Paul Sieveking rounds up some of the latest cases of feral children in the wild . Paul rounds up the latest wild things in the news .
 A feral child was caught in the Brasov region of Transylvania, Romania, in early February 2002 .
 Manolescu loan’s car broke down when he was forced to walk home from his pastures in the shadow of the Fagaras Mountains . The shepherd's car was broken down and he had to walk across country from pastures .
 It was believed he had lived alone in the forest for years, but doctors thought that he must have had some protection . Perhaps he had been looked after by some of the many wild dogs in the region .
 He was the size of a normal four-year-old, but his missing front milk teeth pointed to an age of seven . The boy's missing front teeth pointed out to be seven years old, police say .
 He had rickets, anasmia, the distended belly of the half-starved, and frostbite on his feet and legs . He was found with rickets and rasmia .
 He has dark hair and dark eyes and once his hair was washed and cut and he was given a bath he looked really presentable . But he tends to walk like a chimp rather than upright and tries to sleep under his bed .
 Traian Caldarar, lost three years ago at the age of four, was captured a week after his capture . He was idena HE WAS EATING A DEAD DOG tified as Traian .
 He was reunited in April with his mother Lina Caldarar, 23, in the remote village of Vistea de Jos . After being re-educated at an orphanage in Brasov, he was reunited with his mom in April .
 Traian Ciurar, 24, is married to Ms Caldarar under gypsy law . The boy’s father, Traian, is also a gypsy gypsy, and the boy's mother is a grandmother .
 When she fled back to her family to escape her husband’s cruelty, he prevented her from taking her son . When she returned to her home she was denied access to her son by her husband .
 Ananova, 13 Feb; Scotsman, 14+22 Feb; Sun, 21 Feb; Metro, 22 Feb; Sunday Telegraph, 14 April 2002; .
 He was taken to the Tudun Maliki Torrey children’s home in Kano . Staff at the home named him Bello .
 He is thought to be the son of nomadic Fulani people who travel through the region . He is believed to be a member of the Fulani tribe who travel around the world .
 Mentally and physically disabled, with a misshapen forehead, sloping right shoulder and protruding chest, he was probably abandoned by his parents because of his disabilities . His parents probably abandoned him due to his disability .
 Such abandonments of disabled children are common among the Fulani, a pastoralist people who travel great distances across the West African Sahel region .
 Chimps often adopt children, but this child appears to have been adopted by the chimps . In most instances the children die, but most chimps do not . Chimps are often adopted by humans, and chimps often die .
 Bello is now aged about eight, but has the size and weight of a four-year-old . Bello, now aged eight, is now about eight years old, but is the size of a baby .
 When he was first brought in, he walked in a chimpanzee-like fashion, moving on his hind legs but dragging his arms on the ground . He is now being cared for at the centre of the world's largest zoo .
 At first he was very restless, smashing and throwing things and leaping about at Light from bed d bed in the dormitory, but today be is much aimier. At first be is very restless .
 He still leaps, chimpanzee-like, and laps bis hands over his head repeatedly, upping his hands, and does not speak but makes chimpanzee noises . He still jumps, leaps, . and lapses repeatedly . He does not talk but makes chimpanzees-like noises .
 Malcolm Raadt and his cousin Thabiso Paint were found naked and scratched near the Orange River three days later .
 Vpart from another track of tiny footprints, here was no sign of Malcolm. Malcolm. Vpart . Malcolm .
 Police used dogs nd helicopters in a fruitless weeklong search, fter which everyone thought he had drowned . Everyone thought he'd drowned .
 Johan Lombaard was out checking irrigation equipment on his farm when he found Malcolm 19 miles from lome .
 He was covered in mud, wearing only a T-shirt and lying on his side near a lake . He was lying on the side of a lake when he was found .
 The province had been experiencing weltering summer days with temperatures up o 100F . There had been torrential hundershowers at night and torrential rain .
 Luckhoff terrain is vast and solated, thorny and rocky, with snakes and . )redators including leopards . Although it is mostly armland, it is also known for its vast and thorny, rocky terrain .
 Malcolm was found covered in scabs, dehydrated and suffering from mild pneumonia . Malcolm was taken to the Pelonomi dospital in Bloemfontein, where he was treated for pneumonia . He was found with scabs and dehydration .
 When his mother, Tina Raadt, isked him how he survived, he said he had iaten ‘flowers’ and hidden under bushes at right . He said he hid under bushes and hid in bushes .
 Police were mystified how he had urived such tough conditions alone for so long . Police said they were 'mystified' how he survived the ordeal .
 Sudam Pradhana from the village of Bargania in Orissa, India, never went to the local school and enjoyed tending cows and working in the fields .
 In April 1990, when he was 13, he travelled to the dense Labingi forests in the Angul district, 19 miles from his village, with his elder cousin Abhay . He was looking for a large log to make into a plough, which he found in the
 Abhay told Sudam to rest near a makeshift loghouse while he went in search of water . Sudam was told to rest while he searched for water . Abhays said Sudam should rest near the makeshift house while he goes to find water .
 Sudam Sudam’s parents and their neighbours searched for him for several days . Sudam was found dead in the early hours of Saturday morning . His parents and neighbours were searching for him .
 His father Gautam Pradhan never reported his disappearance as he kept hoping he would turn up sooner or later and he did . His father never reported him missing as he hoped he'd turn up .
 Gayachand Muduli and Deb Muduli from the neighbouring village of Gadtaras encountered a wild creature with long hair and unkempt fingernails sheepishly gawking at them while sucking mangoes .
 They took him back to Garatarasa where he was identified as Sudam because of scars on his skull and feet . He was taken back to his home in Garataras where he has scars on skull, feet .
 He greeted questions with blank stares and stmggled to utter a word or two in Oriya . He greeted reporters with blank expressions and stuttered to speak in his native language .
 "He has big, white marks on his skin as if he has been in combat with wildlife," he says . He has big white marks in his skin after fighting with wildlife .
 Sudam might have spent the last 1 1 years in the company of the honey-collecting nomadic Mallar tribe which lives deep in the jungle . Ganesh Pradhan, the police chief at Bantala, suggested Sudam may have spent last 1 years with the Mall
 Kunu Masela, six, seen for three years scavenging for food round the Kenyan town of Machakos with a dog .
 She saw the dog dragging together banana leaves to make a bed for them . One evening she followed them out into the bush and saw them in the bush .
 Mrs Rukia Ali Murefu, 29, said her husband left her when Kunu was born in 1977 . She struggled for three years to care for her son, Kunu, when he was just three years old . She said she had struggled to cope with the loss of her
 In 1983, he was in a government juvenile home and the dog was being cared for by a market trader . He was in 1983, when he was being held in a juvenile home . The market trader was caring for the dog .
 11-year-old Alex Rivas captured in southern Chilean port of Talcahuano . Rivas was captured in June 2001, 11, in southern Chile . He was captured on June 11, 2001 .
 For many months, he had been living in a cave with a pack of about 15 stray dogs . He scavenged out of dustbins and drank milk from the teat of a bitch that had recently given birth .
 He was abandoned by his 16-year-old mother when he was only five months old . He had a disrupted childhood before being put into a children's home in Chillancito, near Concepcion .
 Since there has been no word of his recapture, FT presumes he is still at large . Since there is no word on his capture, it presumes that he is at large at large.
 Wolves and bears, they say, casting their savageness aside, have done like Offices of pity . Wolves and bear bears, say, cast their savages aside, and have done such things .
 Such children elicit both heart' rending pity for their abandonment and wonder for their survival against such terrible odds . Such children elicits both heart- rending . pity for them and wonder .
 Ancient mythology has many stories of children rescued by animals . The first ‘true’ account of a feral child was recorded by the Roman historian Procopius .
 A baby boy, lost by his mother during the chaos of the Gothic wars in about AD 250, was found and suckled by a she' goat . The baby boy was found by the goat in AD 250 .
 Aegisthus was found living with his adopted mother and named after him . The survivors returned to their homes and found the boy living with their adopted mother . Aegistshus was the first child to be adopted by the survivors .
 A child said to have been raised by goats for eight years was found in the Peruvian Andes in 1990 . Goats don’t figure much in subsequent feral accounts, although a child is said to be raised by goat .
 Many academics regarded the whole phenomenon of feral chib dren with scepticism . Most of the children never learned to speak, while those that did could recall very little of their wild existence .
 The cm cumstances of their discovery were by their nature anecdotal, taking place far from habitation and often depending on the testimony of a solitary witness . Similarly, the cm . cumstance of their . discovery were often anecdotal .
 Dismissing testb mony as superstition and folklore became commonplace in 19th century science, to the detriment of folk wisdom and forteana . Dismissalism and folklore was commonplace in the 19th Century science .
 Robert Kerr, whose translation of Linnaeus appeared in 1792, dismissed Homo ferens as imposture and exaggeration . This became the orthodox view of the view .
 Of course, inventing a species for feral children is today seen as eccentric . But it is not the first time a species has been invented for children .
 Many others were not intentional' ly abandoned, but had escaped from abusive parents or were lost by accident or in the chaos of war . Surviving without human help required considerable native intelligence .
 Levi Strauss’s qualifying phrases “most of’ and “almost all” refuse to be explained away in this fashion, particularly those of Victor of Aveyron, Kaspar Hauser and the Midnapore wolfrgirls .
 Peter the Wild Boy, found near Hanover in 1724, was found in Hanover, England, in 1807 . A 1950s French magazine article on Indian wolf-children appeared in 1950s .
 Sir Kenelm Digby, later one of the Royal Society’s founders, is the first to mention Jean de Liege in 1644 . He interviewed those who had seen him a few years earlier .
 Jean remained in hiding for 16 years . When the fighting moved elsewhere, villagers returned home, but the timorous Jean stayed in hiding .
 In the wild, his senses sharpened; he could scent ‘wholesome fruits or roots” at a great distance . He was able to scent “Wholesome fruit or roots" at great distance, he said .
 When he was finally captured at the age of about 21, he was naked, ‘all overgrown with hair’, and incapable of speech . He was captured when he was about 21 .
 In human society, he learned to talk, but lost his acute sense of smell . He learned to speak and smell, but learned to live in human society .
 He climbed trees with ease, lived off plants and seemed incapable of speech . He climbs trees and lived off plant food . He was unable to speak .
 He refused bread, preferring to strip the bark from green twigs and suck on the sap . He eventually learned to eat fruit and vegetables .
 He was presented at court in Hanover to George I, and taken to England, where he was studied by leading men of letters . He was named Peter, and named Peter .
 When coaxed from a tree in Songi near Chalons in Champagne in 1731, she was aged about 10, barefoot, and dressed in rags and skins with a gourd leaf on her head .
 In a pouch she carried a cudgel and a knife inscribed with indecipherable characters . She carried a pouch with a knife and a pouch of weapons .
 She shrieked, squeaked and squeaked, and was so dirty that she was mistaken for a black child . The little girl was so filthy she had to be mistaken for an African child .
 Her diet consisted of birds, frogs and fish, leaves, branches and roots . Her diet included leaves, leaves and roots, and leaves, but not leaves .
 She is said to have used her thumbs to dig out roots and swing from tree to tree like a monkey . She used to swing from trees to trees and dig her thumbs out roots .
 When the Queen of Poland, the mother of the French queen, passed through Champagne in 1737 to take possession of the Duchy of Lorraine, she heard about the girl and took her hunting, where she outran and killed rabbits .
 The two most prominent feral cases of the 19th century are Victor of Aveyron and Kaspar Hauser, the subject of Werner Herzog’s haunting film of the same name .
 A great deal has been written about both of these, most recently by Michael Newton in Savage Girls and Wild Boys . So I will concentrate on lesser-known cases .
 There are about 80 examples of feral children . Lucien Malson’s book lists 53 cases of feral animals .
 Children locked up for years often develop autistic symptoms . Bruno Bettelheim in 1959 lumped all three types of autism under the heading of infantile autism .
 The two girls were captured in October 1920 from a huge abandoned Hk ant-hill squatted by wolves near Godamuri in the vicinity of Midnapore, west of Calcutta .
 The mm girls were named Kamala and J -Jk W Amala, and were thought to be aged about eight and two . They are thought to have been aged about 8 and two years old .
 According to Singh, the girls had misshapen jaws, elongated canines, and eyes that shone in the dark with the peculiar blue glare of cats and dogs . Singh says the girls were missing teeth and had eyes similar to those of dogs .
 Amala died the following year, but Kamala survived until 1929, by which time she had learned to waik upright and spoke about 50 words . Kamala had given up eating carrion and learned to speak upright .
 He had deformed limbs, uttered animal cries and ate raw meat by snatching at it with his teeth . There appears to be no evidence that he actually lived with wolves .
 In May 1972, a boy aged about four was discovered in the forest of Musafirkhana, near Sultanpur, in At&^ the region where five of the ^^k wolf-children mentioned by Sleeman came from . The boy was found in May 1972 .
 He had very dark skin, long hooked fingernails, matted hair and calluses on his palms, elbows, knees and knees . He had a very dark, long, long and matted skin .
 Although weaned off raw meat, he never talked, he learned some sign language . He was able to eat raw meat and learn sign language from a sign language interpreter .
 In 1978 he was admitted to Mother Theresa’s Home for the Destitute and Dying in Lucknow . He was re-named Pascal and was visited by Bruce Chatwin . He died in 1978 at Mother Theresa's home for the destitute and dying .
 Geologists found a boy aged A about seven running with a wolf pack in a bleak desert region of Turkmenistan, central Asia, in 1962 . He died in February 1985 .
 The men threw a net over the boy, but the wolves rushed JHH to protect him, tearing at the net . JHH was thrown over by the men, but wolves rushed him to protect his life . The net was torn up by the wolves .
 Four years before Djuma was taught to utter a few words, Djuma learned to speak . Djuma is now one of the world's most famous children .
 He told anthropologists how he rode on the back of his wolf mother when the pack went hunting . He later learned to run on all fours and learned to do it on his own .
 I have no idea how many months I spent with them but I wanted it to last forever . It was far better than returning to the world of my own kind. I wanted to stay with them forever. It was the best thing to do.
 Most memories of the long journey are etched in tones of grey, but the time spent with the wolves . . is drenched in colour .
 Misha Defonseca was a Jewish orphan from the ages of seven to 11 in World War II . He lived on wild berries, raw meat and food stolen from farmhouses in occupied Europe .
 Marcos Pantoja was about seven when he was abandoned in the mountains of Spain in 1953 . Another child who had learned language before his language with wolves had learned Spanish language before .
 A seven-year-old boy was supposedly captured from a wolf lair in Hesse in 1344 . The first published account didn’t appear until 1609, in a work by the medical writer Phillipus Camerius .
 They offered him the pick of the hunting spoils, carpeted a pit with leaves to protect him from the cold and made him run on all fours until he had attained their speed and could make the most prodigious leaps . They carpeted him in a pit covered in leaves to
 After his capture, he frequently stated that he would rather associate with wolves than human beings . He often said he would prefer to associate with wolf than humans .
 Fourteen wolf-children were found in India between 1841 and 1895 . Seven of them were described by General WH Sleeman, the nemesis of the Thugs .
 The first was captured in Hasunpur (near Sultanpur in what is now Uttar Pradesh), and showed most of the typical wolf-child characteristics . The second was captured near Sultanpur, in what was then Uttar Pradesh .
 37 cared for in the Republican Hospital in Ashkhabad and it was years before he got used to sleeping in a bed . Kamala lapping food and curling up with Amaia .
 By the time of a news report in 1991, he was still crawling on all fours, eating only raw meat, and biting when he was angry . He is still crawling, eating raw meat and biting .
 Dr Rufat Kazirbaev, chief of psychiatric research in the hospital, doubt' ed if he would ever lose his wolf ways . Chief of psychiatrist at the hospital doubts' ed that he will ever change his ways .
 Twenty-three days later, a forest ranger found the little girl sitting under a tree . The little girl was found by the ranger in a forest .
 Mekhriban Ibragimov, three, lost in a snow-filled ravine, was found after 16 hours . He was sheltering in a cave with a wolf and three cubs . The three-year-old was found in a ravine with the wolf and
 Shepherds found a naked boy cowering in a cave in the Abruzzi Mountains of central Italy in 1971 . The boy was found cowerling in a hole in a mountain cave in central Italy . He is believed to have been in the cave for more than 40 years
 Doctors believed he had been abandoned as a baby and brought up by mountain goats or wolves . He was believed to have been raised up by wolves or mountain goats .
 Various families tried without success to ‘domesticate’ him, after which he was placed in a psychiatric hospital near Milan . Various families failed to 'domestic' him and he was eventually placed in psychiatric hospital .
 He walked on all fours and liked to be stroked but retreated snarling into comers when frightened . When frightened, he snarled into a group of comers and snagged .
 Atalanta was suckled by a she-bear (the symbol of Artemis) till hunters found her and brought her up among themselves . Given the right conditions beard will take care of human infants .
 Given the right conditions, bears can take care of human infants . News reports do suggest that bears can care for human babies .
 Goranka Cuculic got lost in the forest near her home village of Vranje in Yugoslavia in 1971 . In 1971, five-year-old Goranka was lost in a forest in Yugoslavia . Goranka got lost and died in hospital in hospital .
 Three days later she was found by a farmer and related how she had met a bear and two cubs . She was found three days later and related to the encounter with the bear and cubs.
 In October 2001, a 16-month-old toddler went missing in Iran and was found in a bears’ den three days later, safe and well . The toddler played with the cubs and snuggled up to them at night in a cave .
 In 1669 hunters in a Lithuanian forest saw two little boys among a group of bears . The boys were found in the forest by hunters in 1669 . The discovery was made in the same forest as the discovery of a bear .
 They captured one and took him to Warsaw where he was named Joseph . He was presented to the king of Poland, who later passed him to the Vice Chamberlain of Posnan . Joseph was later passed to the vice Chamberlain of Poland .
 Joseph escaped to the woods where he would suck the sap of trees and gather wild honey and crab apples . Several times, Joseph escaped from the woods to collect wild honey .
 Once a wild bear, notorious for having killed two men, was seen to approach him and lick his face . The bear is notorious for licking his face and killing him .
 It was suggested that they had become separated from their families following raids by marauding Tartars . It is thought they had been separated from families after raids by the Tartars.
 When taken to an asylum she refused to eat anything but raw meat, roots and tree bark . Her behaviour was ‘very crude’ and her behaviour was described as ‘crude'
 Coolies from the tea gardens found her in a forest in Jalpaigori in 1892, sitting beside a huge bear den . She was found by coolies in a tea garden in the area .
 Aged two or three, she walked on all fours and bit and scratched, but was gradually taught to walk upright and wear clothes . Although she never learned to speak, she was eventually taught to wear clothes and walk upright, although she never spoke .
 A 14'year-old wild girl was caught in the jungle near Naini Lai, Uttar Pradesh, in July 1914 .
 Named Goongi , she ran with great agility on her hands and feet and was covered all over with a thick growth of hair . Named Goongsi, she ran on her feet and covered with hair all over .
 Jim Corbett speculated that she had been brought up by bears . Her climbing ability, eating habits and diet were similar to bears . The deep scratches on the upper part of her body could well have been caused by being carried by bears.
 This turned out to be a human child, though utterly bear-like in her voice, habits and physique . Finally overcome, she was overcome by a real-life bear, though her voice and physique was uncanny .
 She refused all cooked food and slept on a mattress in a dark comer of her room . She refused to eat cooked food, slept on mattress in dark comers .
 Investigations showed that a two-year-old child had disappeared from a nearby village 14 years earlier . It was presumed that a bear had adopted her, and it was presumed she was adopted .
 Pemawathie, 42, captured a naked, long-haired boy ambling about on all fours with a troupe of monkeys in the jungle near her home village of Tissamaharama, southern Sri Lanka .
 His habits were more animal than human, she handed him over to the police . He was placed in a private welfare centre 10 miles outside Colombo, run by Miss LP Morawake .
 Two other ‘animal boys’ had been tamed there, one of whom drank milk straight from a cow’s udder . Apparently, two other “animal boys were tamed . One of the boys drank milk from the uder of a cow .
 Three months after his admission, Tissa was still learning to walk upright . He was not yet talking, although he could eat food from a plate with his hand . Three months later, he has been able to eat food with the help of a hand .
 American anthropologist Diane Skelly said he was covered in a fine layer of hair, which disap' peared once he took to wearing clothes . Skelly: 'He was covered with hair, but it didn't change once he wore clothes'
 Dr Harlan Lane (author of The Wild Boy of Aveyron) and Dr Richard Pillard, said he had suffered a ‘disastrous illness’ at the age of two, resulting in organic retardation .
 "They could account for every year of his life and he was never in the wild," says the author of the book . "He was never a wild man," he says .
 In 1982, during the chaos of civil war, a boy aged three was left for dead in the Luwero triangle of Uganda . The boy, now aged three, was found dead in 1982 during the civil war .
 All scattered apart from one female protecting a small bundle which turned out to be a human child . All scattered except from one woman protecting the small bundle .
 By the age of eight, he had been toilet-trained and learned to walk and sleep in a bed . He had also learned to sit and learn to walk in bed and to sit on the floor .
 John Sesebunya was last seen in 1988 at the age of two or three when his father murdered his mother and he fled to -r* ^ the jungle . Another wild boy, found in Uganda in 1991, was identified as John . John was found in 1991 in the
 He vaguely remembered monkeys coming up to him, after a few days, and offering him roots and nuts, sweet potatoes and cassava . He said monkeys came up and offered him roots, nuts and sweet potatoes .
 The five monkeys, two of them young, were wary at first, but befriended him within about two weeks . He says they taught him to travel with them, search for food and climb trees .
 John has been studied by a host of experts, who are convinced that he is a genuine feral child . John is believed to be one of the world's most feral animals .
 When left with a group of monkeys he avoided eye contact and approached them from the side with open palms, in classic simian fashion . He approached the monkeys with an open palm in classic fashion .
 Ugandan monkey boy John Sesebunya visited Britain as part of a choir . Mysterious gazelle boy reported in the Sunday Express in 1946 .
 The monkeys befriended him and taught him to frnd food and climb trees . The monkeys also taught him how to climb trees smiles .
 He tends to greet people with a powerful hug, in the way that monkeys greet each other . He tend to hug people with the same kind of hug as a monkey .
 Anthropologist Jean-Claude Auger was travelling alone across the Spanish Sahara (Rio de Oro) in 1960 . He met some Nemadi nomads who told him about a wild child a day’s journey away .
 Auger found a small oasis of thorn bushes and date palms and waited for the herd to arrive . Auger says he found the oasis in thorn bushes .
 Three days later, his patience was rewarded, but it took several more days of sitting and playing his galoubet to win the animals' confidence .
 The boy walked on all fours, but occasionally assumed an upright gait . Auger says he was abandoned or lost at about seven or eight months, having already learned to stand . The boy was found to have been abandoned at about 7 or 8 months .
 He habitually twitched his muscles, scalp, nose and ears, much like the rest of the herd, in response to the slightest noise . The animal twitched its muscles and scalp, scalp and nose in response .
 Even in deepest sleep he seemed constantly alert, raising his head at unusual noises, however faint, and sniffing around him like the gazelles . Even in deep sleep he was constantly alert .
 Auger describes how he learned to decipher the significance of every gazelle gesture and movement . Auger says he gradually learned the meaning of the movement of the animals in the wild .
 There was a complex code of stamping to indicate distance of food sources . Social interaction through exchanges of licking and sniffing, with the boy emitting a kind of mute cry from the back of his throat .
 He would eat desert roots with his teeth, puckering his nostrils like the gazelles . The desert roots were eaten with the teeth of his teeth .
 He appeared to be herbivorous apart from the occasional agama lizard or worm when plant life was lacking . When plant life is lacking, he appeared to eat a worm or lizard .
 Two years after his stay with the herd, Auger returned with a Spanish army captain and his aid-de-camp .
 His pursuers failed to keep up across the rough terrain, and eventually the herd disappeared as the jeep sustained a puncture . The jeep was punctured by the herd, but the driver was unhurt .
 In 1966 an unsuccessful attempt was made to catch the boy in a net suspended from a helicopter . Unlike most of the feral children, the gazelle boy was never removed from his wild companions .
 Auger took no photographs of the boy, being more concerned with protecting him from human interference than providing evidence of his existence .
 The story of an earlier gazelleboy “turned out to be a plant by a bored newsman in Cairo during World War II” According to the fortean zoologist Ivan Sanderson, the story was true . Sanderson gives no further details .
 Amir Lawrence al Sha’alan, chief of the Ruweili tribe, was out hunting in the desert straddling Transjordan, Syria and Iraq . He saw what looked like a boy running amid a herd of gazelles .
 The hunting party chased the herd in their cars for 50 miles until the boy stumbled against a large stone and was caught . The hunters were able to catch the boy when he stumbled against the stone and stumbled .
 Amir took the boy to Dr Musa Jalbout at one of the British-run stations of the Iraq Petroleum Company . He later passed him into the care of four Baghdad doctors . The Amir took him to a doctor who passed him on to four other doctors .
 Dr Jalbout said he acted, ate and cried like any gazelle, and had no doubt that he had . Any village jjowl that came within his reach was tom to pieces .
 Karim was covered in fine hair and ate only grass . A week before Karim’s report he had had his first meal of bread and meat .
 Since he was in charge of the North Cachar Hills near Assam at the time when he investigated the case, he had an excellent position to obtain a true account of the facts .
 The boy was stolen from his parents by a leopardess in the North Cachar Hills in about 1912 . Three years later he was recovered and identified and identified .
 His knees had hard callosities on them . His toes were retained upright almost at right angles to his instepep . His knees . . . had hard calledosities . and his toes were kept upright .
 The palms of his hands and pads of his toes and thumbs were also covered with very tough homy skin . The palms, pads and thumbs are also covered by tough skin .
 According to an unsubstantiated report, a wild girl aged about two was found in a forest south of Jansi in north central India in May 1986 . According to the report, the girl was found by a man in north-central India . The unconfirmed report is unsubstant
 We might recall that Atalanta, the bear-suckled heroine of Greek myth, was the most swift-footed of mortals . We might also recall that she was the swiftest of mortals.
 Memmie Le Blanc was clocked at 7mph faster than the best Olympic sprinter . The Saharan gazelle-boy could out-run game and could outrun the best game . When first captured, he moved with “a sort of flying gallop”
 Peter, Memmie, Victor and the Ugandan John Sesebunya were all agile arborialists . The last three were cornered up trees before their capture . Peter and Memmie were caught up in trees .
 The wolf-child of Overdyke in Holland, abandoned during the Napoleonic wars, climbed trees to get eggs and birds, which he devoured raw . The wolf was abandoned in 18th century, abandoned by the French and Dutch .
 Kaspar Hauser and many of the Indian wolf-children, including the Midnapore girls, could see well in the dark . Kaspar . Hauser. Hauser .
 Jean de Liege could recognise his warden by smell from a distance . Kamala could smell meat from one end of the orphanage garden a compound of three and a half acres to the other . Many wild children sniffed at objects in the way that cats and dogs do .
 Kamala and Amala had an unusually sharp sense of hearing . Victor of Aveyron, the first Sultanpur child, was born in Sultanpur .
 A naked youth aged about 15, caught in woods near Uzitza, Yugoslavia, in 1934, could mimic animals and birds as well as run amazingly fast .
 The wild children’s insensitivity to extremes of temperature is a characteristic shared with desert nomad and gypsy children . Another curious phenomenon is the insensitivity of temperature .
 This was seen in the Irish sheep-boy, Victor, the Kronstadt boy, the first Sultanpur child, the Midnapore girls, and the Saharan gazelleboy .
 The latter seen to grab a handful of hot embers and hold them for some time without apparent pain . Victor took potatoes out of a pot of boiling water while Victor took them out of the pot . Victor was seen to hold a hot ember and hold it to his side without apparent
 At least eight ferals angrily tore off any clothing they were dressed in . The ferals were attacked by a group of ferals .
 "Hardly any of them learned to laugh or smile and their libidos seemed stunted," says the author of the book . "They seemed to be stunted"
 Kaspar confused dreams with reality with reality and spoke of himself in the third person . Kaspar was born Kaspar, the son of Kaspar's father, Kaspar. Kaspar became Kaspar in a dream .
 Neither Victor nor Kaspar could recognise their reflections in a mirror . The Turkish beargirl would sit for hours in her room gazing at herself in the mirror . Victor and Kaspar were unable to recognise each other's reflections .
 Auger observed the gazelle-boy looking at his reflection in a pool of water as if it were a stranger . Auger has been collecting material on feral children for many years .
 Two treatises: in one of which, the nature of bodies, is looked into, Paris 1644 . The nature of man's soul, in the other, the . nature of the . soul, is . looked into . Paris .
 Kamala, incidentally, is the name of a medicinal plant used by Hindus against tapeworm . Kamala is a plant used in Hindus to protect against tapestorm .
 See FT44:4.4. for both wolf-boys D. D. and D.C. for the first time .
 The History of Poland by the Irish doctor Bernard Connor, who actually met one of the bear-children . Bernard Connor met one bear-child .
 Report by George Maranz in American Weekly, 5 Sept 1937; . Sunday Dispatch, 31 July 1938 . American Weekly: "America's First Lady"
 Auger describes his experience 'Un Enfant-Gazelle au Sahara Occidental' in Notes Africaines No 98 (April 1963, pp58-61) and L'Enfant Sauvage du Grand Desert under the pseudonym Jean-Claude Armen .
 The U.S. Olympic champion won the gold medal for the first time in four years . The team won a total of 130,000 medals .
 Woman suspected of witchcraft burned alive in Papua New Guinea . Death adds to growing list of people accused of sorcery tortured or killed . Victims are often scapegoats for someone else's unexplained death .
 Her death adds to a growing list of men and women who have been accused of sorcery and then tortured or killed in the South Pacific island nation . Traditional beliefs hold sway in many regions, where traditional beliefs still hold sway .
 The victims are often scapegoats for someone else's unexplained death, police said . Band of tribesmen collude to mete out justice to them for their supposed magical powers, police say .
 A group of people dragged the woman, believed to be in her late teens to early 20s, to a dumping ground in Mount Hagen . She is believed to have been dragged to the dumping ground .
 Kauba: They stripped her naked, bound her hands and legs, stuffed a cloth in her mouth, tied her to a log and set her on fire . Kauba says she was set on fire by her attackers, who set her alight . She says they tied her up to
 More than 50 people were killed in two Highlands provinces last year for allegedly practicing sorcery . The country's Post-Courier newspaper reported the deaths .
 In a well-publicized case last year, a pregnant woman gave birth to a baby girl while struggling to free herself from a tree . The case is similar to that of last year's case involving a pregnant pregnant woman .
 Villagers dragged the woman from her house and hung her from a tree, accusing her of sorcery after her neighbor suddenly died . Villagers had dragged her from her home and hanged her from the tree after she died .
 The killing of witches, or sangumas, is not a new phenomenon in rural areas of the country . It is not the first time witches have been killed in such rural areas .
 In recent years, villagers have blamed suspected witches and not the virus for the deaths . AIDS has taken a toll in the nation of 6. million people . Villagers blame suspected witches, not the disease, for deaths .
 Papua New Guinea accounts for 90 percent of the Pacific region's HIV cases . It is one of four Asia-Pacific countries with an epidemic . The U.N. says it is the only country with an HIV epidemic in the region .
 Police said they are focused more on who committed the crime . The victim was killed in the shooting .
 With all my heart and most unfeignedly and with all my will most deliberately do I wholly renounce God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost; the most Holy Mother of God; all the Angels and especially my Guardian Angel, the Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, His Pre
 The prosecution of witches solely for having pacts with the Devil increased slowly on the European continent . Convictions still required evidence of malefi da da .
 Witch-hunting handbooks such as the MALLEUS MALEFICARUM discussed pacts in great detail .
 Devil’s pacts were acknowledged to exist but apparently did not play a major role in most trials . In Protestant England, Devil's pacts did not appear to play major roles in trials, according to surviving records .
 The public cared little about pacts and more about what harm a witch did to her neighbors . The public paid little attention to pacts, more to what harm she did to neighbors .
 The first oral Devil’s pact was recorded in 1612 . Elizabethan witches in general were believed not to be in direct contact with Satan .
 In 1645 MATTHEW HOPKINS began his infamous hunt of witches in England . He obtained sworn evidence of written pacts and obtained sworn pacts .
 Modern Witches, who do not worship the Devil, have nothing to do with Devil’s pacts . Modern Witches are not worshiping the Devil .
 Diana is the goddess of the MOON and th hunt and one of the most important aspects of the GOD DESS in contemporary Witchcraft . Diana is a classical Goddess of the Moon and the hunt . Diana was a pagan goddess of ancient religion .
 Diana (counterpart t< the Greek Artemis) personifies the positive attributes o the moon, which is the source of Witches’ magidal powei as well as independence, self-esteem and fierce aggressive ness . Diana personifies positive attributes of the moon .
 A virgin goddess and maiden warrior, she is the eter nal feminist, owned by no man, beholden to none . She is a virgin warrior and a virgin goddess .
 As moon goddess, Diana shares the lunar trinity with SELEN and HECATE . She serves as patron goddess of witches and serves as moon goddess of witchcraft .
 Thames Valley Police receive calls about witchcraft and aliens . Reports of witchcraft and alien activity among emergency calls Thames Valley police dealt with .
 Forty-eight reports claim supernatural or extraterrestri al incidents between 2010 and 2013 . The incidents are said to have occurred in the U.S.
 Mental health charity Sane said it was ""absolutely essential"" police communicate with mental health services in cases such as these .
 The caller was ""unsure if it was linked to witchcraft"" A caller's sister-in-law is performing witchcraft and voodoo on her" A caller believes ""witchcraft is going on"" with a Muslim worship group Katy Dennison organises an Oxfordshire meeting group for
 In October 2013 police made further inquiries into a man who knocked on an Oxfordshire woman's window and said he had seen the 'ghost of his nan' there . Police made further enquiries into the incident in October 2013 .
 Police would attend if there was a concern for a person's welfare, police said .
 The woman's name is Elizabeth Poles and she is from Motts, Alabama, according to the Sullivan County Sheriff's Office . She was found dead at a scene in Tennessee .
 She's been spotted in several states including Virginia, Tennessee, Kentucky and Ohio .
 One viewer saw her at the 1 st Stop gas station in Fayetteville, North Carolina .
 No one seems to know exactly why she has been walking through the area or where she is headed . No one has been able to explain why she was in the area .
 Brian Thair spotted a silky, white spiders’ web stretching 60 acres (24 hectares) across a triangular clover field in Prince George, northern British Columbia . Russell Jervis had farmed since 1944 .
 A barbed-wire fence on wooden posts surrounded a field about four miles east of McBride in the Robson Valley . The field is four miles from McBride .
 It looked as if the whole field was covered with an opaque, white plastic . The whole field looked like it was covered in a white plastic sheet .
 The thin, elastic material is not soft and fluffy like webs built by individual spiders . The thin elastic material was not soft or fluffy . It is not the same as individual spiders' webs .
 There were about two Holorates ksenius spiders per square centimetre laying the silk . The spiders lay the silk around the globe .
 Near the perimeter fence, the web showed great tensile strength enough to put a handful of coins on it without them falling through . The web was strong enough to keep coins in place without falling through the fence .
 The brownish spiders, each about three to four millimetres long, were dragging lines of silk . They ignored each other as their efforts created the web . The spider web was created by a group of brown spiders .
 Dr Thair estimated there were hundreds of millions of millions at work in the field . He said there were 'hundreds of millions' of dollars to go to the project .
 Hundreds of millions of spiders had been at work . Since they didn’t seem to care if an occasional insect stumbled into their construction .
 Too much rain or insufficient wind, spiders were unable to balloon, so stayed in the field and multiplied . Thair guessed that because of too much rain, too much wind or insufficient rain, the spiders stayed in .
 It was a mystery how so many spiders managed to survive so close together for so long . But it was also a mystery to how many spiders survived so long in the wild .
 Perhaps they encountered an enormous quantity of high quality, nutritious prey . Perhaps they had encountered a huge quantity of . high quality . nutritious prey.
 People in La Marque, near San Luis Pass, and in Pearland reported seeing webs constantly between about noon and 5pm . People in the area reported seeing the webs constantly .
 An article on the Internet prompted speculation that the webs were fallout from a chemical plant leak, or radar chaff used by military aircraft to avoid detection .
 They believed the government was mixing unknown chemicals in jet fuel and spraying them, via jet engine exhaust, on unsuspecting people below . They believed they were mixing unknown . chemicals in . jet fuel .
 Samples were sent to the S&N Labs of Santa Ana, California, where Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy identified the presence of protein . The material was spiderweb .
 Similar web rains and so called ‘angel hair’ have been reported over the years . Similar web rain and 'angel hair' have also been reported .
 For more on chemtrails and falling webs, see Mark Pilkington’s FBI report in FT124:22:22-23 . For more information, see the FBI report .
 A 'Red Army' of monster crabs devour everything in their path is on the march from northern Russia . They could work their way south as far south as Gibraltar .
 Red King or Kamchatka crabs can live for 30 years and grow up to a metre (3ft 3in) across from claw tip to claw tip . Descendants of a scheme initiated by Stalin in the 1930s to bring food to the barren Soviet Arctic .
 In the past 10 years have advanced 500km (310 miles) along the Norwegian coast . They were imported from the Pacific, but escaped into the wild . In the last 10 years they have advanced along the coast of Norway .
 Around 12 million people thought to number around 12 million no one knows what caused the population to rocket in the 1990s . The population is thought to be at least 12 million .
 Each female produces 300,000 eggs a year, coming up from the depths in winter for the spring mating season . The eggs are produced by each female in the depths of winter .
 They sell the meat in fish markets, but the crabs tear their nets to shreds . The crabs tear the nets from their nets, tearing them up .
 WWF is calling for unlimited crab fishing to remove the threat to the environment posed by the invaders . WWF is also calling for the protection of the environment of the crab .
 No one knows how far south the seabed stormtroopers will advance before the water gets too warm or they face tougher predators .
 Cod, catfish and even seals prey on soft-skinned young crabs before they develop the armoured shells of the adult crabs .
 It’s possible they will halt at Lofoten, just inside the Arctic Circle . It's possible that they will stop at the Arctic circle .
 In the Pacific, where seabed competition is tougher, the crabs have ventured as far south as Vancouver Island and northern Japan .
 A military proj ectile possibly dating to the World War II era has been destroyed after it was found on a local beach . It is believed to date back to the WW II era .
 The Last Battle has never been made into a blockbuster Hollywood movie . It's the first time the story has been told in English, and it hasn't been told before in English .
 John C ‘lack’ Lee Jr., liberated an Austrian castle called Schloss Itter in the Tyrol, a special prison that housed various French VIPs, including the ex-prime ministers Paul Reynaud and Eduard Daladier .
 Lee’s beleaguered and outnumbered men were joined by anti-Nazi German soldiers of the Wehrmacht, as well as some of the extremely feisty wives and girlfriends of the French VIPs .
 The battle for the fairytale, 13th century castle Itter was the only time in wwil that American and German troops joined forces in combat . It was also the first time in American history that United States troops defended a medieval castle against sustained attack by enemy forces .
 Two of the women imprisoned at Schloss itter-Augusta Bruchlen, who was the mistress of the labour leader Leon Jouhaux, and Madame weygand, the wife General Maxime Weygand- were there because they chose to stand by their men .
 Paul Reynaud’s mistress Christiane Mabire was a strong, capable, and determined woman made for portrayal on the silver screen .
 When United States and German soldiers Joined Forces in the waning Hours of world war II in Europe in Europe’ By Stephen Harding. pages. pages .
 The other was the much-decorated wehrmacht officer Major Josef ‘Sepp’ Gang! who died helping the Americans protect the VIPs . Gang! was one of the two officers who died in World War II .
 This is the first time that Gangl’s story has been told in English, though he is rightly honored in present-day Austria and Germany as a hero of the anti-Nazi resi stance .
 Harding is a respected military affairs expert who has written seven books and long specialized in World War II . Harding's writing style carries immediacy as well as authority as authority . Harding has published seven books .
 This book proves that history can be new and nail-bitingly exciting all at once . This book is the first to be published in New York City .
 The French VIPs finally put aside their political differences and picked up weapons to join the fight against the attacking SS troops . The battle was the first time they had joined forces together since the Second World War .
 We get to know Reynaud, Daladier, and the rest as real people, not merely the political legends that they’ve morphed into over the intervening decades . Despite their personal enmities and long-held political grudges, when it came to a fight the French
 The book also sets the battle in the wider strategic contexts of the Allied push into Germany and Austria in the final months of the war, and the Third Reich’s increasingly desperate preparations to respond .
 This book is a fascinating microcosm of a nation and society in collapse, with some Germans making their peace with the future, while others-such as the waffen-SS unit attacking the castle-fighting to the bitter end .
 The book also takes pain to honor the lives of the “number prisoners” who worked at Castle itter-faceless inmates from Dachau and other concentration camps whose stories have never been told in this much detail .
 Whatever their political leanings or personal animosities toward each other, the French vips did what they could to help the so-called “number prisoners’’-! .e. the ones stripped of their names- in any way they could .
 Michel Clemenceau was the son of the Great War statesman Georges Clemieau . He was an outspoken critic of Marshal Petain and was arrested by the Gestapo .
 During the attack, with ammunition running dangerously low-they got down to the last magazines of their MP-40s-thei r tanks destroyed . The enemy advancing from the north, west and east, this septuagenarian kept blasting away .
 The bones were found in El Salto, Durango State, northern Mexico, in a cave hamlet built into a cliff . The bones are believed to be those of a man and a woman .
 The site called Cueva del Maguey dates back to around 1425 and was formerly home to the Xiximes tribe . The site was once home to a tribe known as the XIXimes tribe and is now located in central Spain .
 Cueva del Maguey is a cave built into the side of a cliff in El Salto, in the Mexican mountains of Durango . Archaeologists excavated the cave and found more than three dozen human bones which showed evidence of having been defleshed, cooked and then ritual
 The Xiximes believed they could guarantee a good harvest if they consumed the souls of their enemies . Fellow tribesmen from neighbouring villages ate their bodies and hung their bones from trees as offerings to the spirits .
 There had previously been no scientific evidence to back up those early accounts, often derided as hysterical exaggerations . But the team behind the discovery and subsequent research says the bones, which have laid undisturbed for centuries, offer concrete proof .
 The rituals were tied to the agricultural cycle of planting and sowing com, according to the research reported in National Geographic .
 After each harvest, warriors of the Xiximes were sent to hunt for flesh . Preying often on lone men working in isolated conditions in the pine forest region .
 The bones were found in El Salto, Durango State, northern Mexico, in a hamlet of caves built into a cliff . Only the bodies of the Xiximes people had value for the rituals .
 The warriors brought their unwilling victims back to the village where they were ripped limb from limb . The warriors ripped the unwilling victims from limb to death .
 The bones were cleaned and the flesh eaten in soup as part of an all-night celebration complete with tribal song and dance . The flesh was eaten in soups and the bones were then cleaned and eaten in a soup .
 The bones were then stored in treasure houses until the start of the planting season . They would be hung from trees as an offering to the spirits the tribe believed would bless the crops .
 Her name is a contraction of the Yoruba saying “iya omo eya” meaning “mother whose children are the fish .” and mer-people are Yemoja sacred offspring . mer people are mer people who live in Yoruba and are sacred offspring of
 Yemoja wears seven panels skirts to represent the seven seas of which she rules over . The seven seas are represented by seven panels of skirts .
 She carries a black haired horse tail fly-whisk, a sabre, or a machete with which she defends her children .
 When she spins, the rippling edges of her dress are the tempestuous waves of the stormy sea . Her dress is the ripples of the ocean that she spins .
 The queen of the Earth, owner of all waters, and the orish of motherhood . Yemoja .
 The Bakersfield Californian Herb Benham has a goat named Si . Si gives new meaning to the phrase ‘You old goat’
 I think my friend Wendy named her lizard and usually lizards are last in line to be named . I think her friend Wendy's lizard was named . Usually lizards were last in the line of naming .
 "What you do is go home and when the cat jumps on your lap, you forget that you even saw a goat," says the author of the book .
 It's one thing to have a goat with a name you can hardly remember, but if he’s crippled too, now we’re really in unfamiliar territory . The goat has been crippled since it was taken down by the authorities .
 The animals were the first to be shown in the UK in a series of years . The animals have been in the country for more than a decade . Animal experts say they expect a little performance value for the money .
 If Caramel had been one of the children’s pets, he might be the kind of goat you could let in at night and trade headbutts with on the carpet . I said, thinking that if Caramel . had been . one of . the children's pets,
 He barely had a name, he may or may not have been able to walk and he wasn’t the least bit sociable . He was a baby who may not be able to talk, but he was a good guy .
 An old goat, not the least bit friendly, lives way beyond the time that any self-respecting goat would live . The goat is not the most friendly of all the animals, but it lives as long as it does .
 Young goats end up in deep freezers, wrapped in clean white paper . Meanwhile, the sweet young goats are kept in deep freezer freezers . The goats are often left in the freezers of their own .
 A long beard and a personality given to irritation. Especially one with a long beard . Especially one of those with a personality .
 That beard made Caramel look like the college professor who has a Ph.D in coeds and a minor in attractive grad students . Caramel's beard made him look like a college professor with a PhD .
 The ritual happens every Tuesday in Abu-el-Seoud, a dingy neighborhood in Cairo . This had never happened during any previous visits there .
 Drums beat slowly at first, then faster and faster as participants — nearly all of them women — dance, fling themselves about, slap themselves, scream, and fall to the floor . They believe the jinni that possess them are being driven out, thus freeing them of suffering
 A kodia or sheika, a person thought to have supernatural powers, is in charge of the zar . A sheika is a woman thought to be a sheika thought to hold the throne .
 Incense is passed over the women s heads and under their arms to purify them before they begin . Incense also passes over the heads and around the arms of the women before the ceremony .
 The dancers may dress in red robes to get rid of red jinni, or in the white robes of pilgrims to Mecca . Dancers may also wear red or white robes to rid of the red .
 In spite of the wafting incense, the acrid smell of gyrating bodies is overpowering . The acrid smells are overpowering.
 Tambourines and flutes join the drums to produce arcane sounds . The sounds mingle with the humid air outside .
 The kodia and the musicians are all women, wearing traditional scarves and robes . The musicians are seen in traditional garbuses and scarves .
 They sit on the floor with tambourines before them, inhaling incense . They inhale the incense as they play with the tambours .
 Participants are expected to pay as much as they can afford, and sheikas are suspected of being charlatans . Although such get-togethers are illegal in Egypt, nothing is done to stop the rituals .
 Women trying to rid themselves of jinni moan, pray loudly, and ask God for help as they prepare to dance .
 They feel that the zar gives them peaceful release from their mental or physical demons . They say they feel that it gives them peace from their demons .
 Some say their personal jinn has been with them from childhood, causing depression and misery . Some say they have been with their jinn since childhood . Others say it has caused them depression or anxiety .
 The women attending the zar distrust psychiatrists, or aren’t able to afford them, so they turn to the zara as a kind of catharsis . The women are often unable to afford psychiatrists .
 The place of women in the Islamic world has always been inferior, and the zar allows them to deal with their resentment . Women in the Muslim world have always felt inferior to women in their place, says the author .
 The dishwasher-sized ‘Jasker Power System’ was built by the anonymous Irish engineer .
 The 'Jasker Power System' was developed over 23 years in a remote stone outhouse on a windswept hill in Ireland .
 Once the dishwasher-sized device is powered up, it will produce cost-free energy until its parts wear out . He said that once the device can be powered up it will be able to produce cost free energy .
 He claimed a prototype has supplied all his domestic power for 17 months . He claimed to have supplied all of his own power in 17 months.
 Physicists remain underwhelmed, because the Jasker breaks the first law of thermodynamics . Physicologists remain distinctly underwhelm .
 On this day, Brundage has zombie guests fraternizing among the bugs, raven and mice . Zombies continued from page D1 .
 Six-year-old "L’il Noel Price" is a stegosaurus from the Late Jurassic Period revived in fuzzy green fabric . His mother originally made the costume, stuffed tail plates and all, out of a Simplicity pattern for her son, "Big Noel" Price
 He then scurried around the hving room on all fours, his long tail wagging . He then ran around the room, wagging his tail .
 He assured his grandmother that the costume also made him feel wild . i r JC1 10ls ^ - 10ls: 10ls, 10ls .
 Noel is going to be 3 hunter in camouflage gear for Christmas . He was so cute that he wound up on the family Christmas card . Noel's dad wore the camouflage gear .
 Mika Price said the dinosaur costume was her favorite of all the costumes she made over the years . Price said it is her favorite costume of all her costumes .
 No distinction should be made between commercial and non-commercial speech, says CNN.com editor .
 The Constitution protects the free speech rights of corporations and unions to express themselves on candidacies and issues through paid advertisements . It ruled that the Constitution protects corporations, unions from expressing their views .
 The ruling overturns two precedents, a provision from the 2002 McCain-Feingold campaign-finance act limiting corjorate-funded political ads immediately before federal elections . The ruling overturned two precedent dates back to 1947 .
 Pres. Barack Obama promised to work with Congress on new legislation to regag businesses and unions . Obama also promised to push for legislation to protect workers and unions from discrimination .
 One idea put forth by lawmakers would give corporate shareholders or union members a binding say over spending on political ads . Another idea would allow corporate shareholders and union members to have a say over political advertising .
 Another would enact the Fair Elections Now Act that creates a public financing system for campaigns . Another would create a system of public financing for campaigns. Another would make it easier to fund campaigns.
 She suggested a constitutional amendment to strip a corporation’s ‘personhood’ for First Amendment purposes . The amendment could be used to strip corporations of personhood, she said .
 Our representative democracy has flourished for more than two centuries because of the marketplace of ideas . That's a chilling idea that’s the chilling idea our representative democracy is at risk .
 Under McCain-Feingold, the government could “prohibit the publication” of corporate-funded books that called for the election or defeat of a candidate . During last year’s oral argument, Deputy Solicitor • General Malcolm Stewart said .
 A Supreme Court majority does not support free speech . Neither does a majority on the Supreme Court . Americans who truly cherish free speech should be allowed to speak freely .
 The Leaf-thronicle’s Editorial Board has published a series of opinions on the topic of this week's featured news stories . This week, we asked the editorial board to share their views on the issues of the day .
 Zombies have free speech rights too, United States court rules . U.S. court rules zombies have right to free speech .
 An appeals court in Minneapolis, Minnesota allows a group of zombies to press ahead with their lawsuit against police . The zombies were arrested for disorderly conduct and charged with disorderly conduct . The court allowed the zombies to continue their lawsuit .
 An appeals court overturned a lower court in finding that the group of seven ""zombies"" had been wrongfiilly detained during a 2006 shopping mall protest . The group was protesting against consumerism in a shopping mall .
 The three-judge panel ruled that Minneapolis police lacked probable cause to arrest demonstrators for disorderly conduct . The panel, by a two-to-one vote, ruled that the police had no probable cause for arrest .
 The judicial panel upheld the lower court in dismissing the plaintiffs' claims of ""false imprisonment"" and ""First Amendment retaliation"" by Minneapolis police after being put in jail for two nights . The plaintiffs' claim was dismissed .
 An appeals court sided with the protesters in ruling that police had no reason to imprison them simply for "dressing as zombies, and walking erratically in downtown Minneapolis,"" the court decisioi said .
 The decision allows the protesters to revive their lawsuit against Minneapolis and its police . The lawsuit seeks damages of at least 50,000 dollars per person arrested . The protesters are seeking damages .
 Stray dinosaur roams Clarksville, a group of the undead lurks, blood tricking from the corners of their mouths . In a leafy neighborhood, in a “Leave it to Beaver”-style house, a zombie lurks .
 The front door creaks open, and poised inside is a diminutive woman wearing a hairnet . The door is opened by a woman in a hair-net .
 Her lips are a ghastly grey. She holds a pot full of brains and other organs. j She is a woman who holds a large pot of brains .
 Cathy Brundage — is so organized this Halloween that she ordered her zombie costume nametag early from the “It’s Time Clock Shop,” complete with strategically placed bite marks . Cathy is a member of the ‘It's Time Clock shop’
 For hundreds of years, and in various cultures, people have believed a corpse can be brought back to life via some form of witchcraft . For those ignorant of zombie lore, for . hundreds of . years,  people have thought a corpse . can be revived via witchcraft, according to some
 “Night of the Living Dead’s” concept was further exploited by 1960s Hollywood . ‘Night of The Living Dead,’ was released in 1960s .
 Noel Price Jr. wore the same costume his mother wore when he was seven years old . Mika Price helps her grandson, Noel Price, with his dinosaur costume .
 Zombies are evidently hungry for human f\ es h — or more specifically, brains . Zombies are hungry for brains, not brains .
 For modern day Halloween celebrants, such as Brundage, one of the joys of dressing up like a zombie is it’s a twofer . For modern-day Halloween celebrations, such a zombie costume is a two-fold opportunity .
 In addition to being a zombie, you also get to be whatever you were before you were “zombified” You can also be what you were after being ‘zombie’
 One glance around the Brundage living room gives the impression that one is not in Hilldale anymore . Hilldale is a small town in the heart of Hilldale, Georgia .
 Martha Stewart Living Halloween issue has been transformed into a Martha Stewart Halloween issue . The Halloween issue was inspired by Martha Stewart's Martha Stewart magazine .
 Family photos on every visible wall are encrusted with cobwebs and tilted in a dizzying fashion . Family photos are on the walls of the family home . The family home is filled with family photos of themselves and friends .
 Rubber mice scurry across the frames, or stop to peek at the hands of a clock . Rubber mice are seen in the frames of the frames .
 A photo of Lafayette "Fate" Jennings, a distant family ancestor, was on the wall anyway, peering out from the ghostly past . A raven is perched on an end table; another is perched perched on a end table .
 A plastic cockroach crawling behind his frame is added to the actor's creepy factor . The creepy factor is heightened by the presence of the creepy cockroach .
 Brundage isn’t certain of the exact roots of her Halloween obsession, other than she was born October 2 . She was born Oct. 2 .
 The auspicious date provides perfect timing for getting a house spooked up for Halloween . It's the perfect time to scare up a house for Halloween.
 Hummingbird Hoya lived with his beloved grandmother long ago in New Mexico . See ZOMBIES, PAGE D3 .
 Hoya dressed himself in his colourful hummingbird coat and flew far away . Because he was so small and wanted to be sure that people could see him, Hoya wanted to make sure people could .
 Below him, he saw a lovely spring and decided to stop, taking off his beautifully feathered coat . Below him he decided to take his coat off, and then took it off .
 Kia, the daughter of Chief Kya-ki-massi, arrived to fill her jar with the cool spring water .
 Many young men of the Zuni Indian tribe longed to marry Kia, but were afraid to ask her father, the Chief of the Chief . Kia's father was afraid to marry her because he was afraid of her father .
 Kia began to fill her water jar without speaking to the attractive young man nearby . Kia continued to fill the water jar .
 Hoya followed Kia to her house, and they talked for some time at the bottom of her ladder, which led to the lodge roof . Hoya and Kia went on a tour of the lodge in Hoya's lodge .
 The young men of the village did not see Hoya vanish, which aroused their curiosity . Hoya vanished from Hoya's village .
 When Hoya arrived back at his beloved grandmother's house, she met him with a bowl of honey combined with sunflower pollen .
 The next day, he carried some of the delicacy to the spring as a gift for the princess . He carried it to the princess as a present .
 Again, he walked Kia home and they conversed at the bottom of her ladder . He walked her home again .
 He then put on his magic coat and flew away instantly as Kia ascended the ladder to her roof . Kia then climbed the ladder and put on her magic coat to escape .
 At dawn next day, Hoya and his beloved grandmother, dressed in their hummingbird coats, zoomed away southward to the land of the sunflowers .
 Hoya's beloved grandmother mixed the pollen and honey together, much the same way as kneading bread dough .
 Hoya wrapped a large ball of the mixture in a deerskin, which she took to Kia that very evening . She then wrapped it in a ball of ice cream and wrapped it inside a deerkin .
 Village youths gathered to watch Hoya climb Kia's ladder to her lodge roof . Village youths watched from a distance as Hoya climbed the ladder to the roof .
 Hoya secretly hid his magic coat under a rock before lowering himself into Kia’s lodge .
 The young men of Zuni village gathered in a ceremonial lodge to announce that in four days we will go on a parrot hunt . The young members of the Zuni tribe say they will hunt for the parrot in the next four days .
 The hummingbird quickly put on his hummingbird coat and flew away to Parrot Woman's Cave . He quickly put his coat on him and flew into the cave .
 "I also ask your help for myself,"" Hoya told her of the plot to kill him, Hoya said .
 Hoya was instructed by the group to go down the rope to the nest of the young parrots . Hoya is instructed by a group of friends to go to nest in the nest .
 Parrot Woman was waiting for him, spreading her large fanlike tail outside her cave entrance . She was waiting to greet him when he arrived .
 The rope broke, letting hoya fall to his death . Upon returning to the village, young men reported that the rope broke .
 In Kia’s lodge, there was much sadness at the loss of Kia's new husband .
 Parrot Woman took her two young birds and, with Hoya in his magic coat, flew up to the mesa . Hoya wore a magic coat to protect himself from the wind .
 Hoya took the two young parrots to his new home and from the roof he heard Kia crying inside . Hoya said Kia cried inside .
 Kia ran up the ladder and to her great joy, she discovered her husband with the two parrots . Kia was reunited with her husband and her husband .
 At dawn, Hoya placed the two young parrots on the tips of the ladder poles . The parrots were placed on the poles at dawn .
 Hoya heard the terrible news, so he went to the cave of the Bear Mother . Hoya went to Hoya's cave to find out what happened .
 "I have come to warn you and to ask you for your help in protecting me,"" replied Hoya . Hoya replied: "I am not afraid. I have come here to ask your help."
 Hoya secretly wore his magic hummingbird coat beneath his buckskin shirt . Hoya again secretly wore the coat beneath the buckskin .
 He was forced by the young men to lead the attack at the cave entrance . He said he was forced to take part in the attack by young men .
 She chased the young Zuni hunters, killing a few of the young tribesmen . She chased them, killing some of the hunters . The young tribesman was killed by the woman .
 Later, Hoya flew home with two bear cubs and at dawn he placed them on the roof . Hoya placed the cubs on the top of his roof .
 When villagers discovered the bears on Kia's roof, they knew that Hoya was still alive . The bears were found on the roof of Kia, a car owned by Hoya's family .
 Hoya decided to fly to his beloved grandmother's home near Rainbow Cave to seek her wisdom about a new plan of his own . Hoya's grandmother is a member of the Rainbow Cave family . He decided to ask her advice about his new plan .
 She helped him paint a bird cage with many colours and they filled it with birds of matching colours . The cage was filled with matching colours and filled with birds .
 Back to Zuni village he flew, carrying the cage, which he placed in the centre of the plaza . He placed the cage in the Zuni plaza .
 From that moment on, all of the happy, dancing Zuni tribe accepted Hoya and his gifts .
 His wife they called Mother, and they called him Father of their tribe for many contented years . The tribe was contented with his wife and his wife .
 Debate over Zwarte Piet has raged in the Netherlands in recent years . Black Pete is usually portrayed by white people in blackface makeup, with thick red lips and a frizzy Afro hairstyle .
 St. Nicholas arrived by steamboat from Spain in November, accompanied by a flotilla of boats packed with Black Petes .
 Amsterdam has begun discussing possible solutions, including using different colors of face paint for Pete, or smudging his cheeks with soot . Amsterdam has also discussed possible solutions to the problem .
 The issue is sometimes linked to ongoing tensions between native Dutch and immigrants . The issue has been debated for more than a decade .
 Opponents often are told to embrace the tradition, a remark that's especially galling for secondor third-generation Dutch people . Opponents say they should embrace tradition, but that's not true .
 Two white female Dutch celebrities who oppose the Petes and have married black men have been the target of ugly sexual insults . Victoria's Secret mode Doutzen Kroes and singer Anouk have also been the targets of the insults .