 PPP's newest Florida poll finds a 5 point gain for Mitt Romney over the last three weeks . Romney 49Obama 48 from PPP, a firm that typically surveys for Democrats and liberals .
 The shift in the race is largely attributable to independent voters shifting their preferences . Independent voters shifted their preferences in the presidential race .
 When it comes to the biggest issue in the election, the economy, Romney's edge over Obama expands to 51/46 on who voters trust more . Romney and Obama's images have headed in difference directions since the debate .
 Voters have warmed up to Romney, going from a negative favorability rating to a positive one at 50/47 . Voters are warming up to Mitt Romney a good bit .
 51% of voters approve of him to 47% who disapproved of him . Now 48/50, he's in slightly negative territory .
 With 284,000 Florida votes already in, absentee vote data more critical than polls . Romney 49Obama 48 - Obama 48 .
 At least 284,000 people have already cast absentee ballots in Florida over the past week . Florida is one of the most populous states in the country .
 About 2 million voters have requested the ballots, which are typically mailed . The ballots will be mailed to voters .
 President Barack Obama’s campaign is closer than ever to matching Republicans in requesting absentee ballots . Obama's campaign is closing in on matching Republicans' absentee ballots, according to the numbers . The numbers also show that the president is closer to matching GOP absentee ballots requests .
 Republicans are winning absentee-vote race in North Florida, Naples area and Miami-Dade County . Nearly 20,000 ballots have already been cast in Miami Dade County alone .
 Democrats are pulling ahead in Central Florida, Tampa Bay’s two biggest counties and in Broward County . Democrats pull ahead in Florida's Central Florida and Tampa Bay's two largest counties .
 Republicans lead Democrats by about 126,000 to 114,000 absentee votes cast . Democrats lead the Republicans by about 115,000 votes . Republicans are ahead of Democrats in absentee voting .
 A Miami Herald/El Nuevo Herald/Tampa Bay Times poll last week showed Romney with a 7 percentage-point lead over Obama .
 Despite all the positive trends for them, Republicans are a little nervous . Republicans are nervous about their chances of winning the White House .
 They’ve always out-organized and outvoted Democrats by absentee ballots — usually by big margins . Democrats have always been out-organised and out-voted with absentee ballots .
 Democrats trailed Republicans by 16 percentage points in absentee ballots in the 2008 election . Democrats trailed the GOP by 16 percent in absentee voting in 2008 . Republicans were 16 percent more than Democrats were in 2008 when the election was held .
 In the rest of the country, however, it’s a different story for Obama when it comes to likely Hispanic voters . In the other half of the U.S., Obama has a big advantage in the Hispanic vote .
 Cuban-American voters are overwhelmingly Republican . They appear to be increasingly excited about Romney’s campaign .
 FIU professor: Cubans just don’t have a sense of humor . “Cubans just do,” says Eduardo Gamarra, who conducted the poll .
 Cuban voters consistently gave Obama low marks on handling the economy, immigration and foreign policy . In national and Florida surveys, Cuban voters gave him low marks in handling economy .
 Cuban voters could help other Republican candidates on the Florida ballot, particularly in South Florida . Momentum from Cuban voters is expected to help other GOP candidates .
 Take out Cuban voters, and Obama wins Florida Hispanics 64 percent to Romney’s 33 percent, the poll says . The poll has a 3. percent error margin .
 54 percent of Florida Hispanics say they are not better off than four years ago . Overall, 54 percent said they were better off, compared to 46 percent who said they are .
 Florida's unemployment rate is higher than the nation's . That's not just a reflection of Cuban sentiment; it's an indication of Florida’s unemployment rate, which is higher .
 The number of Hispanic children living in poverty now exceeds the number of non-Hispanic white children, even though Hispanics are a minority . Hispanic children now live in poverty in the United States .
 Rep. David Rivera defends himself over federal investigation, plays tape recording of FBI witness . Rivera says he's not guilty of any wrongdoing . Rivera's first sit down English-language television interview in weeks in weeks .
 David Rivera defended himself Sunday against a federal grand-jury investigation into his alleged involvement in a primary campaign against his Democratic opponent . Rivera is accused of trying to smear his opponent in a Democratic primary campaign . Rivera says he's not guilty of any wrongdoing .
 Rivera pulled out a black Sony tape recorder and held it up against his lapel microphone to play a recording of what he said was a telephone message from an FBI witness in the case . Rivera: "I don't know why I'm going to be charged with murder in this case"
 The FBI is investigating whether Rivera illegally funneled secret money to Justin Lamar Sternad . Sternad lost in the Aug. primary to Joe Garcia, who lost the primary .
 State records show that federal authorities as late as last year were investigating him in a separate matter stemming from a secret $500,000 dog track payment the congressman had arranged . The congressman arranged the payment, state records show .
 Rivera denied at the time that he was even under state investigation or that he had a lawyer . Rivera had denied he was under investigation or even under investigation .
 At least two campaign vendors say they have been interviewed by federal authorities . The Miami Herald and El Nuevo Herald report that federal authorities interviewed Sternad . Sternad's campaign fueled by tens of thousands of unreported money .
 The FBI was scheduled to speak to Ana Sol Alliegro, Sternad’s campaign manager . She apparently acted as Sternad's conduit to Rivera, the FBI says .
 A target of a federal investigation is typically not informed of the probe until it is wrapping up or investigators have compiled enough evidence to confront their subject . The target of the investigation is usually not informed until the probe is wrapped up .
 Rivera tried to discredit vendor Hugh Cochran, who has said Rivera hired his company, Campaign Data, to target voters to receive Sternad fliers . Cochran says Rivera hired campaign data company to send fliers to Sternad voters .
 Bruno Barreiro chaired the Miami-Dade County Commission when it signed off on a new, mostly publicly funded Marlins ballpark in the heart of his Little Havana district .
 Public money covered more than 80 percent of the stadium and parking garages, which cost about $634 million . Public money paid for the stadium, which was built in part of a $636 million deal .
 The county spent some $376 million, the city of Miami $133 million and the Marlins owner Jeffrey Loria $125 million . The county and the city also spent $376million on the stadium .
 Garcia, a former Miami Beach city commissioner, has been hammering on the stadium since the primary . Garcia is a former mayor of Miami Beach, Florida .
 Garcia touts opposing the stadium project in Spanish-language radio ad . Garcia says he opposes stadium project . Garcia: "I'm not a fan of the stadium"
 Garcia voted for a bill in 2007 that would have provided the Marlins with $2 million in annual sales tax revenue . Barreiro says Garcia in 2007 voted for the bill in the Florida Legislature . Garcia says the bill would have helped the Marlins get $2M in annual revenue .
 Amendment 4 is longest of 11 amendments on Florida’s longest-ever ballot . Multi-billion dollar impact could mean major tax relief for first-time homebuyers, owners of second homes, small businesses and corporations .
 Florida residents could face higher taxes and massive cuts to struggling local governments . But it could also mean higher taxes for Florida residents and massive local government cuts .
 Amendment 4 could be a few hundred dollars in tax cuts for the average new homebuyer . As much as $600,000 in tax breaks for multimillion-dollar properties like the Fontainebleau hotel in Miami Beach could be in the balance . Amendment 4 is up or down
 Proponents of Amendment 4 argue it will create thousands of new jobs . Proponents say it will reinvigorate the state’s troubled housing market and save homeowners millions of dollars .
 Full-time Floridians shouldering the tax burden of snowbirds and corporations, while governments are forced to make bone-deep cuts to social services . Snowbirds, corporations and corporations shouldering tax burden, says Florida governor .
 McCabe said he is in favor of property tax reform and efforts to revive the housing market . McCabe called Amendment 4 a “patch job” that will shift tax costs from businesses onto long-time homeowners .
 Florida voters will ultimately decide, as the amendment requires a 60 percent margin to make it into the Constitution . The amendment is among 10 others on this year's lengthy ballot .
 Absentee voters, who submit their ballots by mail, make up an ever-increasing share of the Florida electorate . Florida's relaxed voting laws and aggressive campaign strategies are the result of lax voting laws .
 As many as one in four Florida voters will cast their ballots from home instead of a voting booth . One in four voters will vote from home in the coming election .
 Almost 40 percent of the votes cast in Miami-Dade were absentee in the primary election in August . In the August primary election, almost 40 percent were absentee .
 As many as two-thirds of the votes were cast by mail, records show . In some precincts in Hialeah and Sweetwater, as many as 2-thirds were cast .
 Miami-Dade police arrested two boleteros, or ballot-brokers, on charges of altering ballots of elderly or disabled voters . Police say they altered ballots of voters of elderly, disabled or elderly voters .