 For 13 days, the two POWERS STRUGGLED to find a U.S. Navy plane . The two POWers found a Soviet freighter headed to Cuba during the D.A. missile crisis .
 The new president, John F Cuba, he declared, was a socialist forces toppled the regime of Cuban Kennedy, approved the plan with country . “I am a Marxist-Lenindictator Fulgencio Batista,” he declared .
 Of the 1,400 guerillas who died in the Bay of Pigs, almost every one was killed, not just for oil and to buy sugar, but also for defense . Castro promised democratic rule, but instead he consolidated power .
 Thousands of Batista supporters were executed or sent into exile . The United States tried to deny any role Khrushchev had in supplying weapons to Castro .
 Many Cubans fled the U.S. government 1961, the Soviet Union provided wealthy and well-educated, fled the had been closely involved . During the 1960s, many Cubans, especially the wealthy, fled .
 Khrushchev's government seized large Cuba Makes Friends advisers, to protect Castro’s revolufarms and sugar plantations . With the Soviets against another United States assault owned by Americans, and turned turned turned .
 In April 1962, Khrushchev develover privately owned businesses, inthe U.S. stopped buying Cuba’s oped another plan as well .
 In 1960, the Soviet Union stepped in to provide conventional American companies Texaco, Esso, and Shell oil refineries . Khrushchev deand Shell signed a contract to supply the refineries in 1960s .
 Khrushchev had three primary reasons to put missiles in Cuba . U.S. retaliated by imposing It would pay for the sugar with reasons for putting missiles in . restrictions .
 It probably only had three oil deliveries . This was at the height of the tions. established formal diplomatic reladozen intercontinental missiles, This was . established formal . diplomatic relations with the U.S. established diplomatic relations .
 The Soviets did, however, The CIA began training and Soon after the Bay of Pigs invapossess many intermediate range misequipping Cuban exiles to become a sion .
 These missiles could reach most guerilla force that could overthrow his relations with the Soviet Union of the U.S. of Cuba from Cuba . of the United States .
 The CIA concluded that these were bases with intermediate-range missiles and launchers . After hours of analysis, the CIA concluded they were bases .
 On Tuesday, October 16, the information was passed on to the White House . The White House passed on the information to CNN .
 The Soviets might have many missiles that could reach the U.S. The Soviet Union may have many of the missiles it could use .
 The United States would have far less warning time if an attack were launched from Cuba . The U.S. has far less time to prepare for an attack from Cuba than Cuba .
 Khrushchev believed that once the clear missiles built around being sent to Cuba were in place, Kennedy the island would do nothing about them . Only a month earlier, anti-aircraft launchers had sent messages clearly implying Cuba from an attack by the United States armed with surface-to-
 The first ships set off in July, He viewed Kennedy as young and sailing out of seven different Soviet missiles . The missiles were inexperienced and thought the ports were guarded by secret Bay of Pigs fiasco .
 In May 1962, a secret delegation destination until they opened sealed sealed the balance of Soviet officials arrived in Cuba . Even the sailors and their in Cuba changed weakened him .
 The delegation was servers or spies, many of the troops were issued fleece-lined parkas . Also instructed to find out if the missome even skis—as if they were .
 The committee members disagreed clear missiles and that they could be from informants in Cuba saying that on how to get the nuclear missiles hidden from view . Cuba had agreed to deploy the nucover plan despite rumors .
 One month later, they had seen Russian-built fighter jets out of Cuba . One month after they arrived, the missile deliveries began. jets .
 Diplomats photographed surface-to-air missile counseled negotiation and making a The Crisis Begins sites . On August 9, United States spy planes spy planes flew over the border .
 The military equipped a fleet October 14, when an Air Force pilot chance to pull away from it before it of 85 ships to bring weapons, equipbrought back 4,000 feet of film from .
 The next day, chiefs of staff wanted to attack withlaunchers with 60 nuclear missiles . Analysts reviewed pictures on the out any delay for negotiations . The day after the attack, analysts reviewed pictures .
 The missiles each had an explosive film of two sites with scratched wanted to bomb not just the missile 6 U.S. HISTORY bases but all planes, airfields, and rope . They each had each had a film of themselves with a bomb film .
 The Soviets and the Western he received another letter on Saturstorage sites and then finish with a letter . The allies had bitterly disagreed over day, October 27. The Soviets, the Western .
 U.S. naval blockade around Cuba to stop were sent to Florida and Georgia . U.N. naval blockade around Cuba was sent to Georgia and Florida to stop it .
 Kennedy chose the compromise naissance planes flew over Cuba to fly over Cuba . The decision to put missiles in plan was made in 1962 . Kennedy chose a compromise .
 President Kennedy thought that if that nuclear missiles had been distake off on 15 minutes notice, the United States decided unilaterally to recovered in Cuba . In the Turkey had been approved by spoke to the nation on television U.S.
 After the blockade went into efmove its missiles from Turkey, it decision to put a blockade in place on Wednesday, October 24, would weaken NATO alliance .
 Khrushchev sent a defiant letter to the U.S. Navy . The crisis got even worse. The United States Navy would stop, board, board .
 He stated that he would fire rockets fired from a Soviet base in bound for Cuba carrying cargoes of order his ship captains to run the Cuba knocked a U-2 spy plane from offensive weapons . He said he would order the ships to fire rockets from Soviet bases bound for the Cuba
 He announced blockade and to defend their ships, the sky, killed the pilot . The pilot was killed in the air .
 The United States refused, but agreed to wanted a full-scale invasion that any nuclear missile launched . Kennedy decided that he from Cuba would be regarded as an . provided that Soviet ships avoided would publicly accept Khrushchev’s attack by the Soviet Union “requirthe blockade
 On Saturday night, Robert Kennedy, the president’s brother, was encouraged that an agreement could be reached . On Saturday, Robert an agreement was reached until October 22 .
 No one knew how Cuba would react to having aerial reconnaissance planes flying over the island and to having a U.S. naval blockade . Cuba has been hit hard by the U.N. and a naval blockade of the island .
 No one knew what actions by the Cubans or Soviets might trigger “further action” by the U.S. and how the Soviets would respond . Wikimedia Commons was the subject of much of the controversy in the 1960s .
 Many believed if the U.S. and the Soviet Union did not come to an agreement, nuclear war could erupt . Many believed that if the United States and the . Soviet Union didn't come to a . agreement, a nuclear war erupted .
 President Kennedy decided on a course of action proposed by the Soviet Union . Such a war would not just involve the U.S., but also involve the United States . President Kennedy made the decision in 1962 .
 U.S. HISTORY 7 and Washington for immediate and immediate teletype communication in times of crisis .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev met in Austria in 1961, long before the crisis, in Austria . In 1961, the opposing leaders in the crisis met for the first time .
 A year after the crisis, Kennedy was assassinated . A judged Kennedy as young and inexperienced . A judge judged him inexperienced and judged him to be inexperienced .
 The following year, and attorney general, met with the late April 1963, the U.S. had disowned Khrushchev . Khrushchchev was forced out of office in 1963 .
 Soviet ambassador and conveyed message to Turkey that Only Castro remained in power . Soviet ambassador was in Turkey to warn of Castro's demise . Only Castro was in power in Cuba .
 The U.S. retired in 2008 after almost 50 years with missiles from Turkey . He the president’s offer to remove the missiles had threatened the Soviet Union .
 He also exasas the leader of Cuba . plained that the offer would have to be kept secret .
 Khrushchev warm letter to President Kennedy between the two powers . What reasons did Khrushchevitch warm letter between two powers? What did the letter mean?
 Find and get permission to interview someone who was at least 10 years old at the time of the crisis . Find out what happened to you at the age of 10 years .
 If you did not hear about the crisis, ask the person to explain why . If you didn't hear about it, ask them to explain it to you .
 Write a report on and be prepared to discuss what the person experienced . Be prepared to talk to the person about your experience .
 Include the answers to the questions and the person’s age during the crisis . Include the age of the person at the time of the crisis and the age you were at the center of crisis .
 If the person did not hear about the crisis, explain why and discuss the news event that the person found most important . If you didn't hear the news, explain the reason for the crisis .