 The week of October 7, 1962, saw bad weather in the Caribbean preventing U-2 surveillance planes from making more reconnaissance flights over Fidel Castro's Cuba, just ninety miles off the Florida coast . Bad weather prevented U.2 surveillance flights over Cuba .
 Sunday morning, October 14, was cloudless, and the U-2 flight got some good photos . Pictures were analyzed and reanalyzed over the next few days . Sunday morning's cloudless weather provided some of the best photos .
 President Kennedy immediately decided that the missiles would have to be removed and called his most trusted advisers together to serve as an Executive Committee of the National Security Council, or ExComm .
 Its job was to develop possible responses to the buildup of missiles and the consequences the buildup represented . The U.S. military says it has no plans to respond to the build-up of missiles .
 Four tactical air squadrons were readied for air strikes over Cuba, with missile sites, airfields, ports, and gun emplacements as their potential targets .
 More than 100,000 troops were sent to Florida for a possible invasion of Cuba . The U.S. troops were deployed to Florida to prepare for possible invasion .
 Throughout 1962, the movement of Soviet personnel and equipment to Cuba had aroused suspicions in the U.S. intelligence community .
 U.S. ships and planes began photographing every Cuba-bound Soviet vessel . U-2 spy planes began regular reconnaissance flights over the island .
 The first evidence of the arrival in Cuba of surface-to-air missiles came in photographs taken in late August . Large numbers of Soviet military personnel were also seen in the photos .
 Pictures provided no evidence of offensive ballistic missiles . The pictures were taken in the early hours of the day .
 In September, Kennedy delivered two explicit warnings to Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev regarding the buildup of what were being called ""defensive" Soviet arms in Cuba . Kennedy delivered the warning .
 Despite Kennedy's warnings, the Soviets continued to construct the bases . The U.S. continued to monitor their activities and take pictures .
 October 14 photographs changed the nature of the game and set in motion a series of extraordinary events . The October 14 photos were taken in a bid to win the World Series .
 Meeting of the ExComm, Oct 29, 1962, was October 29, 1963 .
 As the ExComm discussions proceeded, the idea of a naval blockade emerged as the response of choice . The idea emerged as a response to the blockade of China .
 Kennedy read Gromyko's previous statement that warned against offensive missiles in Cuba . Kennedy read the statement in a statement .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff continued to push for air strike and invasion . Later that day, preparations for the naval blockade began, but preparations for an air strike began .
 The President flew to the Midwest for campaign appearances in connection with the upcoming congressional elections . The President wanted to appear to be conducting normal business .
 He returned Saturday, October 20, to read the draft of a speech announcing the blockade .
 The blockade represented only ""limited action"" against Cuba and the Soviets . Kennedy felt that the blockade was the best way to start . He could always opt for broader action, such as an invasion or air strikes, if the blockade failed .
 He wanted to speak on Sunday evening but was persuaded to delay it until Monday . State Department could brief leaders of allied countries, congressional leaders could be informed .
 Many months of sacrifice and self-discipline lie ahead for the U.S. President, Hillary Clinton says . Clinton: "We will be tested by our strength and patience"
 Kennedy's speech drew wide support in Latin America and among U.S. allies . Kennedy: "I'm not afraid to say I'm going to speak to Latin America"
 The United States presented photographic proof of the missiles during a televised confrontation with the Soviet Union . Several Soviet vessels turned back from the quarantine line, and the U.S. presented in the United Nations .
 The Soviets would remove missiles under U.N. supervision and inspection . The U.S. would lift the blockade and pledge not to invade Cuba .
 Khrushchev demanded removal of U.S. missiles in Turkey, the Soviet Union's neighbor, in exchange for removal of Soviet missiles in Cuba . Kennedy got another letter demanding removal of United States missiles from Turkey . Kennedy's letter was sent to the White House in 1961 . Khrush
 The implicit message was if the U.S. invaded Cuba, the Soviets would invade Turkey, and the conflict could escalate . The message was that the United States invaded Cuba and the Soviets invaded Turkey . The United States and Turkey were at odds in the 1950s .
 On Sunday, October 28, the Soviets agreed to remove the missiles from Cuba . The missiles were removed from Cuba on October 28 .
 Negotiations for final settlement of the crisis continued for several days . But the immediate threat of nuclear war had been averted .
 The United States dismantled several of its obsolete air and missile bases in Turkey . Subsequently, the U.S. dismantled some of the bases in the country .
 The Cuban missile crisis was perhaps the greatest test of John F Kennedy's presidency . While he and Khrushchev were able to achieve a peaceful resolution, the crisis had far-reaching consequences .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev signed the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty . It was the first disarmament agreement of the nuclear age . The treaty was signed within a year of the first test ban treaty .
 The first ""hotline"" between Washington and Moscow was installed in 1963 . Also in 1963, the first "hotline" was installed .