 In fact, John F Kennedy with tireless help from media toadies more obsequious than any today, elevated political charade to a level Obama and his staffers can only envision in their sweetest dreams . John F. Kennedy helped elevate political charades to a higher level than any
 No alternative media existed in 1960-63 . This was made possible because of no alternative media available . This is made possible, because of the lack of an alternative media .
 The JFK fable that swayed Rush last week might have never gotten its wings if Rush himself had been on the airwaves in 1962 and helped strangle it in the crib . Indeed, the very JFK fabled fable may have never got its wings .
 Berlin wall went up as a direct consequence of JFK's appeasement . That very Berlin wall was built as a result of the President's decision to build it .
 The Berlin Wall was raised and the Castro regime was entrenched because Kennedy snubbed Eisenhower's advice and shrank when challenged by the Butcher of Budapest . The Berlin wall was raised by Kennedy and the Berlin Wall remained in place .
 Rush Kennedy oration scoffed at appeasement, Rush. Rush. So here's another muscular Kennedy. Oration scoffing at appenteement .
 JFK's inaugural oration proved a fairy tale and Ike's advice a tragic joke . The Bay of Pigs became the proverbial “fiasco” rather than the liberation had Nixon won in 1960 .
 A chastened JFK quickly returned to Eisenhower's knee, rationalizing his lie to America and his back-stab to Cubans . JFK said he had feared Soviet reactions in Europe had he held the line in Cuba . Eisenhower said he feared Soviet reaction in Europe would have been worse .
 The Soviets brazenly built the Berlin Wall exactly 4 months after Kennedy's talk with Eisenhower . The Soviets built the wall exactly four months after the Kennedy-Eisenhower talk .
 Ten months after that, the Soviets started shipping nuclear missiles to Cuba . Ten months later, the Soviet Union began shipping missiles to the island .
 When those missiles were removed from Cuba 4 months later, Camelot's media auxiliaries and subsidiaries cranked into high gear . Camelot: "Camelot" was a major player in the U.S. anti-Cuba coalition .
 Republicans and conservatives of the time penetrated the farce and angrily denounced it . The farce was a farce, but the GOP and conservatives denounced it, he says .
 In his diaries Nikita Khrushchev confirmed the cause of the conservative ire while gloating about his trouncing of Kennedy . In the diaries he gloated about how he had trounced Kennedy .
 Until today the U.S. has complied with her promise not to interfere with Castro . Until today, the United States complied with that promise . The United States has not allowed anyone else to interfere in Castro .
 JFK's solution also pledged that he immediately pull the rug out of under Cuba's in-house freedom fighters . JFK also pledged to pull out of the rug under Cuban dissidents . JFK pledged to immediately pull out from under Cuban freedom fighters in Cuba . JFK: "I want to pull the
 The Coast Guard in Florida got 12 new boats and seven new planes to make sure Castro and his Soviet patrons remained unmolested as they consolidated Stalinism 90 miles from United States shores .
 This ferocious guerrilla war, waged 90 miles from America's shores, might have taken place on the planet Pluto . All you'll read about it in the MSM and all you'll learn about it from those illustrious Ivy-League Academics .
 JFK Special Message to Congress on World Defense and Assistance,April 2, 1963 Raul A Garcia 8/26/2008 .
 Castro has destroyed my nation and pauperized its people and been brutal to them, says President Obama . Castro "destroyed my nation," says Obama. Castro's government has been "brutal to them"
 It is your pipe-dream and ignorance and ignorance that endears you to that Stalinist regime that still holds its people hostage . It's your ignorance and obvious swallowing of all the propaganda that endear you to the regime, he writes .
 History should not be learned from a few Hollywood filmsthat is dangerous and simplifies history, the Marxists have done with it, Raul Garcia says . Raul A Garcia: "History is not a lesson"
 The release of the papers during the Missile crisis reveal the insanity of Castro whom Nikita had to restrain . Nikita was forced to restrain Castro from releasing the papers .
 Castro has aided and abetted almost every terrorist group in the past fifty years, precisely against U.S. interests . Castro has helped almost all terrorist groups against the United States, says Obama .
 In time he will fall, Cuba will be free and schoolchildren will no longer have to be indoctrinated . Schoolchildren will now be free to critize anyone they choose and criticize anyone they want .
 The whole Cuban ""revolution"" has been a process of myth-making and brainwashingin that regard it has succeeded, M Fontova and many others will revise this charade .
 I repeat my statement that I will only return to topple the statues of the false prophets. I repeat his statement that . I repeat this statement that he will only . return to toppling the statues .
 There are more prostitutes now that even before, the Canadian man who was boasting before me how he had procured the services of one for a ""really good price"" on his junket to Cuba I told to leave my midst or I would deck him to the floor .
 "All governments here, Democratic and Republican, have equally failed to deal with that ruthless dictator whom you love so much. All governments here ... have failed to . All governments ... failed in dealing with that . ruthless dictator," she said .
 Grain sales and other foodstuffs from the U.S. to Cuba have increased exponentially in recent years . Foodstuffs have increased from the United States to Cuba .
 I want the best for the Cuban people and that can only be achieved without the Castros, their apparatchniks, and that failed system of misery now almost fifty years old . The Castros are now almost 50 years old. I want best for Cuban people .
 Oliver Stone, Ted Turner, Gabriel Garcia Marquez have all groveled at the feet of the killer . So many here in the U.S. are totally ignorant of the real happenings for the past five decades .
 He was a drug-runner, murderer, and, if my memoray of the film serves me right, had an unhealthy interest in his sister . He was also a drug runner, murderer and a murderer, but he was a good friend .
 Reagan and Nixon would have handled the situation no differently than what Kennedy did, says historian John Avlon . Kennedy's actions would have been no different from Kennedy's, Avlon says .
 Gentleman, it is time you dragged yourselves into the reality of the world as it is today, rather than a pipe-dream of what you or your family may have lost with the downfall of the corrupt Batista regime .
 Good article and necessary antidote for those poisoned by the notion of JFK as an anti-Communist hero .
 The line about what would Reagan or even Nixon have done is a great one . Reagan or Nixon would have done the same thing, he says .
 I am overweary of the drivel uttered by the left and the pseudo-left in this country for so many years about this . I am over-weary of drivel about this. I’m overwearing of the left’s drivel .
 "I will return to the land of my birth only to help overturn the statues of the oppressors and false prophets," she said .
 As one of those freedom fighters arrested for Violating the Neutrality Act in 1965, I applaud your article .