 By the time the United States had evidence of the buildup 01 boviet missiles on the island of Cuba, in October 1962, contingency planning for such a situation had been in progress for some two years .
 The basic concept for the operations remained essentially the same . Force requirements had ■• increased from time to time on the basis of revaluation of the enemy's capabilities, the author says .
 By the beginning of October 1962, CINCLANT was convinced that consideration should be given to relocating and pre-positioning of troops, aircraft, ships,' equipment and supolies .
 He directed CINCAi-Lant and CINCNAVLAMT to take measures reauired to assure maximum readiness by 20 October .
 The conference was to develop specific actions that could be taken to increase the readiness posture of the United States Armed Forces and reduce the reaction lead time .
 Active Army units assigned to the supporting STRAC OPLANs were given an increased supply priority . The conference was a result of this conference that active Army units were given increased supply priorities .
 Organizational arrangements drawn up by CINCLANT envisioned a joint task force under 'CinCLANT' Service components . 'CINCLant' was created by the agency .
 On 16 October the Department of the Army designated the Commanding General, United States Continental Army Command as the interim Army component commander . U.S. Continental Army command has been designated as an interim commander .
 Staff were informed that the Administration had decided to prepare plans for a sea blockade of Cuba while protecting U.S. territory and shipping and the Guantanamo Naval Base .
 The U.S. would initiate a strict quarantine of all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba, continue close surveillance of the island, and reinforce the United States base at Guantanamo, while evacuating dependents of United States personnel .
 President added that he had placed additional military units on standby alert . He gave no indication of the extent of military preparations already underway .
 The task of preparing movement schedules and moving troops to implement CINCLANT 1 s OPLANs was challenging and complex . U.S. Army Movements is the largest force in the Army .
 The size of the units to be moved, the distances involved, and the shortness of time allowed, the planning staffs in Washington and in the field were hard pressed to secure enough equipment and shipping for pre-positioning .
 In Washington, the Army Chief of Transportation had the responsibility for movement of troops and materiel for the Army and, when assigned, for the Navy and Air Force .
 The commander originating the basic plan submitted for JCS approval the transportation requirements for the first 30 days, by mode and in 5-day increments, to support a specific operation .
 Transportation requirements that could not be met from the transportation resources assigned or attached are listed .
 Planning for the pre-positioning of force continued on . 22 October . Joint Chiefs of Staff authorized the loading of .
 Third' Army was directed to activate, assemble, and prepare for movement to selected airfields . Army staging areas command headquarters for each staging base .
 Third Army was also directed to complete activation of Headquarters, Army Staging Area Command, and to move it to its designated destination as soon as possible . Third Army ordered to move Headquarters of Headquarters to its intended destination .
 USCONARC directed the Commanding General, 2d Logistical Command, to prepare a detachment of 35 officers and 95 men for movement from Fort Lee to Opalocka Air Force Base to establish the base command .
 Opalocka Air Force Base was established by 2'4 October, but USCONARC did not officially establish the base command until 30 October .
 Peninsula Base Command 'was to operate the Army staging area commands and terminal commands and provide administrative and logistic support as required'
 It was responsible for all emergency supplies and aerial resupplies . In addition, it was also responsible for air supply and aerial supplies .
 Third Army transferred to the operational control of Peninsula Base Command all logistical-type forces required for the support of operating forces in Florida . USCONARC, Third Army on 30 October transferred .
 The 507th Transportation Group was alerted for movement on 23 October and directed to move to Ooalocka Air Force Base on 26 October . The group was ordered to move from the air force base to the air base in the U.S.
 Its mission was to provide liaison teams at all staging bases in Florida and at all surface ports of embarkation being used . It was the first of its kind .
 It was attached to Peninsula Ease Command for operational control on 30 October . It is now attached to the Peninsula Eases Command .
 Peninsula Base Command to Third Army was not clearly defined . The relationship of the Peninsula Base command to the Third Army is not clear .
 Commanding General, USCONARC, acting as CINCARLANT, established an advance headquarters at Homestead AFB, from which he intended to exercise operational control of Army forces in the Atlantic Command .
 A CONARC review committee later found that USARLANT command relationships had not been clearly or formally defined and concluded that better use of the existing command structure should have been made .
 Committee felt the primacy of the Commanding General, Third 2b. 2b . Committee felt . primacy . of the commanding general . Commanding general, Third . 2b: Commanding . General, Second . of Commanding Generals, Commanding Officers .
 Defense Transportation Management Service said it could furnish only 11 day coaches for the first increment of Task Force Charlie . Task force Charlie was the first unit to be deployed to Fort Hood in October .
 This number was only sufficient for the first train that was scheduled to depart Fort Hood that day . This number of passengers was not enough to board the train that left Fort Hood .
 The Defense Transportation Management Service was unable to forecast when troop cars for subsequent incremen ts wou ld be available . The Pentagon is unable to predict when troops will be available for the first time .
 Flatcars to move equipment were available in ample supply . Flatcars were also available to move the equipment .
 Such cars were to be used only when movement requirements could not be satisfied through commercial or other DOD interchange fleet capabilities . Such cars would not be used in the military's fleet .
 After CINCARLANT made a request to the DA, the Strategic Air Command instructed 37.7 aircraft to carry out the mission . The decision was made following a request from the DA .
 The Army Task Force was dependent on Int £L y f°f ajJPhibious shipping . The Army task force is now dependent on the internet .
 Task Force Charlie at Fort Stewart required immediate construction of four LST ramps at the port of Savannah . Some units were scheduled for transport in these amphibious vessels were to outload from the port .
 The vehicles would have to be waterproofed or a causeway landing would need to be made . In the latter case either the vehicles or the causeway would have been made .
 The four LSTs were loaded to a maximum weight capacity . The causeway pier of four sections wis crement's equipment was added to the equipment .
 USCONARC directed Task ° h i e St °L staff a ""™ h orize"" and the MSTS arranged the charters in matter of three days .
 During the partial implementation of the OPLAN, a number of movement control problems arose . During the partially implementation, the problems arose with movement control issues .
 S. Kugler, United States Army's Role in the Cuban Crisis VII-23 .
 Many requirements set forth in the OPLAN, particularly those concerning reports, lacked sufficient detail or proper clarity . The plan did not clearly delineate responsibilities assigned to various agencies, the report says .
 In addition to enemy situation, enemy situation changed rapidly and developed unforeseen requirements. In addition, enemy situations changed rapidly, the situation developed rapidly. The situation in the U.S. changed rapidly.
 The preparations to execute the plan revealed that coordination between the plan and the counterpart plans developed by other headquarters or Services was inadequate . Coordination between the plans and the counterparts developed by others was inadequate, officials said .
 There were no headquarters-wide standard operating procedures for implementing contingency plans, and no pretested procedures existed for the establishment of an emergency operations center . Also there were no standard procedures for establishing a contingency plan .
 USCONARC logistical staff said this function was as vital to the Army's readiness posture as were training, supply maintenance, and communications . It was the consensus that this function is as important to the readiness posture .
 A movements control nucleus was established in the Plans Division of the USCONARC Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff for Logistics .
 USCONARC had to improvise management tools, devices, and procedures, rather than executing a planned system of move\ \; ment control . Another factor hindering movement control was the lack of a unit designator system .
 In early 1963, USCONARC forwarded to the DA a series of recommendations concerning the need for a revised, simplified, and standard procedure .
 Defense Readiness Condition system was a problem for the U.S. Air Force . The system was used to control movements and control of the aircraft .
 The warning time it provided created the environment in which improved force readiness could be achieved . lH .
 DEFCON system was the catalyst to complete certain required actions, including tailoring of service support units, reallocation of personnel and critical' items of equipment, and arrangements for commercial and military transport of their movement .
 Use of the DEFCON system started a chain of interrelated actions . USCONARC headquarters and within the subordinate commands . MSTS, MATS, and the Defense Traffic Management Service also initiated action .
 CONARC logistical planners concluded that USCONARC s readiness depended on the margin of warning it received through the DEFCON system . The CONARC planning team concluded that the readiness of the U.S. military depended on margin of alert .
 The required DEFCON was not instituted promptly enough, nor was it raised high enough, experts say . But during the Cuban crisis, they say, they believed, they were not instituted quickly enough .
 In the actual preparations, many actions should have occurred under DEFCON 1 status . Yet only A DEFCon 3 was actually put into effect . In fact, many of the actions were taken that should have been under the de-de-fenceon status .
 The necessity of providing support units for contingency •plans was another lesson learned from the Cuban crisis . The need to provide support units is another lesson from the Cuba crisis .
 Sufficient support units for the expanded concent of the OP'LAN were not available within the actiye forces of the United States . Those units could not have been made available within reaction times .
 SERVLANT organised and dispatched the necessary units to supply these naval operations . Servlant organised the operation following President Kennedy's speech .
 SERVLANT had to react to the increased demand for supplies for the Cuban crisis with very little pre-positioning .
 Service Squadron Four was already advantageously positioned in support of an amphibious exercise off Puerto Rico, and a training' mission 51 .
 1 01'' ^ enabled the USS HYADES to very quickly remove evacuees from Guantanamo . The USS HADES was able to quickly remove them from Guantanamo. 1 1'' .
 Tankers, tenders, salvage and towing ships had to be deployed in late October . In general tankers and tenders were deployed, but not all needed .
 Despite the emergency nature of the supply deliveries, movement control often functioned very well . Despite this emergency nature, the deliveries were often successful .
 From 21 October to 25 October MATS lifted a 3,600-man Marine battalion from Camp Pendleton to Guantanamo . For example, a battalion was moved to Guantanamo Bay .
 In the same period another battalion arrived from Cherry Point, North Carolina . The U.S. military added another battalion to its ranks .
 Planes were landing at Guantanamo every ten minutes and averaged only 1-1-1/2 hours turnaround time . Planes landed at Guantanamo landing every 10 minutes .
 Normal COMPHIBLANT transportation had to be augmented by SERVLANT ships . Commercial shipping was needed to move necessary rolling stock into Guantanamo for construction of defenses .
 Large quantities of equipment and material needed by the construction battalions gave them a perpetual transportation problem . Construction battalions needed to transport large quantities of material .
 Throughout the Cuban operation none of the major items needed was in shcrt supply . None of the main items needed were in shrut supply .
 The USS INDEPENDENCE and the USS ENTERPRIZE were able to maintain their fuel stocks at near capacity . Minor problems in the movement of supplies did appear .
 At the beginning of the operation backlogs of both air and surface freight increased rapidly . The backlogs increased rapidly in the operation . At the start of the flight backlogs were high .
 Much of the backlog was the result of the heavy demands placed on shipping by the Guantanamo defense construction project . Much of this backlog is due to the heavy demand placed on ship shipments .
 MATS increased its airlift capacity and together with organic airlift moved the supply backlogs out to Guantanamo and Roosevelt Roads . The supply backlog was moved to Guantanamo, Roosevelt Roads and Guantanamo Bay .
 This rapid influx of air freight in turn caused backlogs at both bases . Air freight was also causing backlogs in both bases in the U.S.
 The cause of the problem there was the inability of these activities to handle the increased volume because of personnel limitations and the unavailability of aircraft and surface shipping . The problem was due to personnel limitations because of the personnel limitations .
 The two SERVLANT AK ships were committed to' support the fleet ballistic 53 . The two Servlant AK ships are committed to the fleet of 53 .
 No organic shipping was available to establish a regularand direct delivery of surface freight to task force units at sea .
 Surface freight movement was accomplished much less satisfactorily by the use of auxiliarly naval craft and other organic units that were available . Surface freight was accomplished by using auxiliary ships and ships .
 Commercial bottoms had to be utilized to make scheduled deliveries to bases at Guantanamo, Roosevelt Roads, San Juan, Trinadad, and Kingston .
 Commercial shipping was the least satisfactory method of -supply . Commercial shipping required double handling of cargo, further strained the overloaded Caribbean ports, and diverted underway replenishment ships .
 Norfolk is the base of operations for both AKS and AF ships . Mayport was used to provide support for both types of ships . Norfolk has been used to support the AKS, AF and AF .
 At sea the AF ships operated effectively, but they were hampered by communication backlogs of as many as three or four days . At sea they operated effectively .
 The chief problem in AF operations, however, proved to be the surplus of provisions on hand when the Cuban operation was cancelled .
 AKS shipping was also delayed by the communication backlog, and the wide dispersal and rotation of ships proved to be a serious problem . AKS ships were delayed by a communication backlog .
 All shipping assigned to PHIBLANT for the Cuban operations was assembled and formed into a task force by 2 November .
 A designated subordinate of the Naval Task Force Commander would assume operational control of the ship by direct contact and order it to an unloading sit>5 or holding area . There a designated subordinate would order the ship to a holding area or unload it .
 This procedure was never implemented, since no operations were conducted against Cuba . No operations were carried out against Cuba, according to the Cuban government .
 As early as June AFLC was able to begin making its own plans for moving the required amounts of war readiness materiel needed . AFLC is able to make plans to move the necessary amounts of materiel .
 The air preparation phase of this plan had been relatively simple because it had assumed that the Cubans possessed only a rudimentary air defense capability . The plan was relatively simple as it assumed that Cuba had only a basic air defense .
 The evidence produced in August 1962 showed that the Cubans were rapidly acquiring a modern air defense system . The TAC established a planning group to develop a new air plan .
 AFLC were directed to complete delivery of the initial WRM by 20 October . AFLC was directed to deliver the WRM on 17 October, four days later .
 By midnight 19 October all supplies were in place except some tnat were unavailable . 62 support equipment and over 11,000 personnel were on standby .
 Deployment of tactical units to Florida was then able to begin, on 20 October . By 22 October, all TAC combat forces had been deployed to Florida .
 The crisis did not involve actual combat; rather the deployed U.S. forces acted as a deterrent to hostilities . The crisis was not actual combat .
 AFLC had to overcome only the problems involved in supporting the employment bases, not in supporting combat operations . AFLC says AFLC has to overcome problems associated with supporting employment bases not in support of combat .
 AFLC might have been sorely pressed to supply some critical items to all the deployed forces if it had been necessary to mount more than one such operations . AFLC may have had to provide more than a few critical items .
 The Cuban crisis was clearly the gravest sort of threat •to our security since World War II . The size of the threat supplied an impetus which might have been lacking under less crucial circumstances .
 AFLC, and the 1*1,000 reservist s^alled to active dut y was ected__to__be combat support . "The movement control of these units under combat conditions remained untried"
 Problems arose during the deployment of iorces m October . Problems of considerable magnitude did arise during deployment .
 The relatively small size of the reaction to the Cuban missiles allowed such a successful movement of personnel and supplies . Perhaps it was only the relatively' small . small . size of reaction to Cuban missiles that permitted such a . successful movement, it is thought .
 At the request of the AFLC, the USAF headquarters organized an ad hoc commiovee to evaluate the logistical efforts in the Cuban Crisis . The AFLC organized the ad hoc committee .
 Many of the consumable items required in the crisis had not been procured by AFLC or were not available in the AFLC logistics system . Funding for the crisis was not provided, chiefly because of the lack of supplies .
 As a result these items had to be withdrawn from United States and overseas bases . The items were withdrawn from U.S. bases .
 AFLC expended a large proportion of the available military airlift capability to move these items to the deployment bases . AFLC spent a large part of the time moving the items to their deployment bases. AFLC said it was a significant amount of time to move the items .
 Each office contacted its counterpart in other commands and piecemeal information existed at all levels .
 At Headquarters, AFLC, attempts were made to provide information on assets and resource requirements, but no method existed to obtain the desired information on a timely basis . The AFLC was unable to provide the information to the AFLC .
 Command Post personnel at AFLC noted other weaknesses in performance 'in the Cuban crisis' AFLC also noted 'other weaknesses' in performance in Cuba . Command post personnel noted 'weaknesses' in Cuban military response .
 There was a lack of supply discipline, and there was widespread abuse of high priority requests . There was also a lack discipline, says the BBC's chief executive .
 Rome Air Materiel Area reported operating commands were reluctant to use Defense Supply Agency centers and went by habit to the AFLC for all material support . The Rome air force was reluctant to rely on the Defense supply agency .
 AFLC was the most confusing situation for AFLC in recent years . AFLC had to deal with numerous late changes made in the forces involved . The AFLC has been criticised for its handling of the situation .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff increased the number of Air Defense Command aircraft at the Florida bases . The increase was announced on 19 October .
 Additional models of aircraft v;ere called, for late in the planning stages, and their different logistics needs caused even later changes in the logistics arrangements . Additional models were also called for late planning stages .
 LAN required addir.s°additicr.ai deployment anc employment bases, requiring changes ""in shipoing orders" in ship orders"
 AFLC needed better force structure information more quickly and a materiel policy that would enable the command to plan support for a contingency without unduly endangering support for other commitments worldwide . AFLC needs better force information and materiel policies more quickly .
 The procedure to establish WRM requirements was another factor in delaying AFLC support action . AFLC has been criticised for not taking action against WRM .
 During the crisis a delay of at len*-t ten days occurred between the identification 60 days and 60 days . During this period, identification was delayed by at least ten days .
 The rrt-A establishin S priorities and precedence also hampered ellective materiel support . Rrt A-S was established to establish priorities and precedents .
 AFLC asked for target dates for pre-positioning materiel, the precedence rating ol the operation, and authority for redistribution of its worldwide assets . AFLC also asked for the authority to redistribute worldwide assets, and the precedence of the operation .
 USAF did not authorize diversion of overseas stocks for a month . AFLC did not give AFLC the firm inplace date of 20 October until 17 October .
 AFLC diverted premium transportation to-return items form overseas bases . AFLC was forced to divert premium transportation from overseas bases to avoid further delays .
 This created delays and resulted in excessive numbers of aircraft at pickup bases . This led to excessive delays and aircraft being sent to pick up bases . The aircraft were sent to pickup bases at least once a week .
 Parking space problems were aggravated and aircraft and crew utilization suffered . Aircraft and crew usage suffered .
 In summary, the Air Force generated the necessary effective logistic support for the Cuban crisis, but it was not a neat job .
 The AFLC had to meet support requirements without a supporting L-SAF-approved program . AFLC was forced to meet requirements without the support of a supporting program .
 The crisis necessitated crash actions to obtain or redistribute assets with the result of costs being high . Costs were high and logistic support was not possible .
 It was clear that to avoid a similar situation in future emergences the Air Force would have to do more advance planning . The Air Force will have to plan for future emergencies .