 Former CIA Deputy Director Ray Cline led countless plots to kill Castro in addition to the operation that discovered the Cuban missile sites . Cline thanked Castro for the visa to attend the conference .
 Castro feigned a look of shock, and said, ""Why, Mr Cline, it is our pleasure. It is your pleasure," he said . Castro then replied, "Yes, yes, Castro, yes"
 In 1989 and 1992, I worked to convene meetings in Moscow and Havana with the key players in 1962's harrowing ""Thirteen Days in October,"" bringing together former enemies to talk about the events .
 I sat at the table with former Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko, the legendary ""Mr Nyet"; former Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin; Sergei Khrushchev, editor of the secret memoirs of his father, Soviet Premier Nikita . Robert McNamara,
 Harvard-Soviet Joint Study on Crisis Prevention revealed how close we had come that autumn to a radioactive nuclear winter . Most striking to me as a young man back then were the words of the chastened and humbled elders who had so narrowly avoided inflicting mass destruction .
 They spoke of the dangers of misjudgment, miscalculation, and the unintended consequences of military action . The U.S. President Barack Obama and the U.N. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton spoke out .
 Upon discovery of missile sites in Cuba, several of Kennedy's top advisors called for an immediate airstrike and invasion .
 The weapons would have killed tens of thousands of U.S. marines -and may even have struck Miami . Had we invaded, the weapons . would have been killed .
 Kennedy took all measures to avoid pushing his opponent into a situation where the choice was between humiliating defeat or a devastating war . The veterans of the missile crisis repeatedly pointed to our shared humanity and our shared fallibility .
 The tragic cost of Syrian children is the tragic cost to Syrian children, the sectarian vengeance between the Sunni majority and the ruling minority Alawites . The Syrian conflict is the result of military action in the Arab Spring .
 The toppling of Muammar Gaddafi became a lesson to rogue regimes around the world that they should develop and keep nuclear weapons to ensure their survival . In the chaos of the civil war in Libya, weapons disappeared from their depots and ended up in the hands of radical Islamists .
 A second lesson is that human beings can become extreme, irrational, and suicidal under crisis conditions . You cut one head off the mythical Hydra, and the beast grows two more. You cut a head off a mythical Hydra .
 Our meetings showed how reckless revolutionary authoritarian regimes can be when cornered, reminding us today of Iran, North Korea, Libya, or Syria . We are reminded of Iran and North Korea's reckless authoritarian regimes, we say .
 Fidel Castro sent a cable to Khrushchev calling for him to be the first to fire nuclear missiles, to launch a preemptive strike against downtown Manhattan and other major U.S. cities . A warhead 60 times more powerful than the one dropped on Hiroshima would have been 60 times
 Khrushchev broadcast over open radio his pledge to remove the missiles . Realizing that events were spinning out of control, he broadcast his pledge . The missiles were removed from the site .
 JFK resisted calls to invade and Khrushchev raced to accept a negotiated end to the crisis . Fortunately, JFK resisted the invasion and the crisis was averted .
 Castro's mindset was driven by nationalism and fanaticism, a peculiar product of the Cuban experience . Castro's mythology was created in the country's struggle as a small nation against a neighboring goliath, the country had created .
 Castro was completely resigned to the fact that they were all going to die if the U.S. invaded . Castro was a member of the Castro family . Castro's family was killed by the United States.
 Kennedy had seen Japanese soldiers and civilians commit suicide rather than surrender in WWII . In the South Pacific in WWII, Kennedy saw Japanese soldiers commit suicide instead of surrendering .
 He learned that overwhelming force does not mean your opponent will capitulate . He learned from his lesson: "Overwhelming force doesn't mean you have to capitulate"
 The Gaddafi regime chose to let the country be devastated and fight to the last bullet, rather than capitulate to rebels and the demands of the established big powers . We saw similar behavior most recently in Libya, where the Gaddafi regime opted not to capitulate .
 The death toll in Syria has already reached 30,000 and Assad is still presiding over the destruction of his country . Another lesson has to do with the ""red lines" and the nuclear crisis with Iran .
 His actions provide no basis for the ""lesson" that George W Bush proffered to justify preemptive action in Iraq, nor is there a direct parallel with Iran, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: "There is no direct parallel" with Iran .
 Kennedy did announce that the missiles were unacceptable and demanded that Khrushchev remove them . Kennedy did say they were unacceptable, and demanded they be removed from them .