 I thought this morning we were going to discuss a point brought up by the American delegation, and that my speech might be in the afternoon . I thought that this morning I was going to talk about this morning, but I'm not sure if I'm going to speak this afternoon .
 Check and see if the five points are anywhere around there, aide says . 4. 4. 5. 6. 5 . 5. 5: 5. 4: 5: 4. 6: 4: 6: 8: 10: 10. 10: 11: 11. 11:
 "I do not want to make a traditional two-and-a-half, or three-hour speech. If I do not speak long, do not think that it is because I want to provide information, but really because I don't want to give information . Do not think
 I must keep in mind everything that has been discussed in the two previous days. I must also keep up with everything I have discussed, I said . I'm not going to make a decision on whether to play for the first time in a row. I'm going to play my part
 I believe that the meeting has been truly fruitful, at least for me, since I did not have an opportunity to participate in the previous meetings. "I believe that this is a truly fruitful," he said .
 "I think that I should limit myself to those things that, by their character, have not been discussed in other meetings," he says . "That is why I think that ... I think ... that is why ... I'm not sure what I'm going to do."
 "It is necessary to analyze or report the involvement in it of different personalities. I should begin by saying that in analyzing such a period such as this one, it is necessary . It's necessary to begin by analyzing or reporting the involvement of the personalities involved in it, he says .
 "I respect Khrushchev for his demonstrations of friendship toward Cuba in extremely difficult times," says Cuban leader . "I don't think it's a sign of respect for the Cuban people," he says .
 Khrushchev came to visit me at the Teresa Hotel, where I was practically in confinement in those days because of the atmosphere of intense hostility that I found there, and because I had been virtually thrown out of my other hotel, he says .
 "I had two alternatives, to either set up a tent in the UN front yard or to go to the Teresa Hotel. I had two options, either setting up a camp in the front yard of the UN. Or setting up in a tent at the Teresa hotel, or setting up
 I was visited there by many heads of states, among them Khrushchev, which was a great honor . I was also visited by heads of state, including the late Soviet leader . I'm proud to be a member of the U.S. State Department of National Security Council .
 "Always, when we requested something from him, he made every possible effort at his disposal to approve our requests," he said .
 He gave me the impression of being basically a peasant; that was the impression he gave. He gave it the impression that he was basically a peasants, he said . He said: 'That was an impression that was that he gave'
 "A clever peasant, and not only a clever peasant," he was an intelligent, very intelligent man, he said . "He was a very clever peasant. A clever peasant."
 President Kennedy had personal qualities, apart from the conflicts that emerged between his administration and ours, he says . "I also have an opinion of the personal qualities of Kennedy," he adds .
 He was the central character in charge of directing the U.S. during the October Crisis . He was also a key figure in the American government during the crisis .
 He had new ideas-some of them were brilliant, or very intelligentsuch as the idea of the Alliance for Progress . Some of the ideas he proposed were brilliant or very intelligent, he said .
 It is my opinion that with the authority he attained precisely after the October Crisis- which was when he consolidated his leadership in the United States- he could have been one of the presidents, or maybe the president, in the best position to rectify certain aspects of the U.S.
 French reporter, Jean Daniel, asked to come to Cuba to talk with me . "I was talking that morning with a French reporter who had interviewed him," he says .
 News of the Dallas attack in Dallas was heard on the radio . He conveyed a message to me and, as we were talking, the news of the attack was heard in Dallas .
 "From what that reporter told me, I could see a man who was pondering the possibility of holding talks, finding some solutions to the problems with Cuba," he says . "He conveyed to me to what degree we had been in danger of a nuclear war"
 He truly wanted, regarding all these issues, an exchange of opinions that really became unnecessary, he said . He said, "He truly wanted ... that he truly wanted" An exchange of opinion became unnecessary .
 We were in the middle of our conversation when the news of his death arrived . We were talking about his death when he died .
 "I think Kennedy was a capable man because of his authority," he says . "He was able to correct certain aspects of U.S. policy toward Cuba," he adds .
 I have explained this, and I say it with lots of sincerity, to justify why I feel real respect and admiration for these historic figures, and because I do not have the least intention of saying things to hurt anyone, or to defame anyone's memory . I say this with lots
 In relation to the most immediate antecedents of the problem that would emerge afterwards, we have the issue of the Bay of Pigs, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "In relation to [the Bay of Piggy] we have to think about what happened to us
 He knew that it was a very serious problem; he had made certain pledges regarding Cuba in some speeches during the electoral campaign . He had pledged to Cuba during the election campaign, he said .
 It is true that he had constitutional authority to have stopped it, but constitutional authority alone is not enough, he says . It's true that constitutional authority was not enough for him to stop it, he adds .
 Sometimes you need moral authority and a considerable amount of political authority to solve certain problems, which U.S. administrations usually don't have during the first few weeks of government, and sometimes do not have even during the entire first presidential term . Sometimes, sometimes, the United States does not
 Many times it is said that a president cannot solve this or that problem in his first term because the next elections are still pending, but that he could solve it during a second term . You are aware that many times it . often times it says that a . president cannot . solve this
 " Somehow, we have to acknowledge that he remained very composed regarding these events," he said . "Somebody's very composed," he added. "I'm very proud of my family and friends."
 As has been stated here, the whole thing became a disaster, a political disaster that, because of its scope, cannot be compared to a military disaster, with other military disasters . The whole thing, as has been said, became a . political disaster .
 "From the military point of view, and the scale of the battles, it also became a disaster," says the historian . "It also became also a disaster, and from the military, it became a ... disaster," he adds .
 It was a difficult trial for Kennedy, and I would say that he showed courage at the time . Kennedy showed courage, says CNN's John Sutter . Kennedy's trial was "a difficult trial," Sutter says .
 President Obama could have ordered U.S. troops and squadrons to participate . He could have made the decision to order United States troops or squadrons .
 The Bay of Pigs' battles were held within view of the U.S. aircraft carriers and warships that were three miles from our coasts . The Bay was held in view of aircraft carriers .
 I saw this personally when we entered Giron as it was getting dark that 19 April 1961 . I saw it personally when I was in Giron, as it got dark that night .
 The squadron was out there with all its lights off, in full combat gear . "All the lights were off, with all the lights off," the squadron said .
 The invasion plans even presupposed the intervention of military forces later on, according to the invasion plans . The invasion plan was based on the idea that the invasion would take place later on .
 The goal was to establish a government, recognize it, and support it with troops . The goal of establishing a government was to create a government and recognize it .
 In other words, the invasion plans included the premise of using military force against our country . "Those troops that disembarked, and those forces did not have the support of our people and could not do anything but maybe sustain their hold on a piece of territory," he said .
 "We know that the plan presupposed a recognition after the recognition. But we know that we need to be recognised after recognition," she said .
 In other words, if Kennedy had not been a composed and courageous man at the time, if he had not realized how mistaken the plan was from every point of view, military and political . Kennedy was a composed, courageous man, and not a dictator .
 Kennedy, undoubtedly was very concerned with Latin American public opinion . Kennedy was undoubtedly very concerned about Latin America public opinion.
 President Obama did not give the order for U.S. forces to intervene in Syria . He did not want to begin his administration with an event of that nature .
 "That would have been a very bloody war, and I do not know if the number of Cuban casualties would be as high, maybe, as if an intervention had occurred during the months of the 1962 October Crisis . That would have happened during the month of the October Crisis in 1962,
 There are no doubts that that war would have had a different character and unpredictable consequences . War would have been different, unpredictable, and had different consequences, says David Cameron .
 "At the time, April 1961, we had hundred of thousands of armed men and women in our country," says Obama . At the time of the April 1961 shooting, the U.S. had 100,000 armed forces .
 Weapons were distributed throughout the country, in the mountains, the plains, the cities, everywhere, everywhere . "Weapons were distributed everywhere," says the author of the book .
 "An enormous resistance would have been put up by the people, who were armed and had just come out of a war," he says . "They would have put up an enormous resistance," he adds .
 Our people would have had to fight a well-equipped army that numbered up to 80,000 men-in-arms, yet by the end of the war we barely had 3,000 battle weapons . Our people were forced to fight an army that would have been well-armed,
 At that time, we could estimate that we had approximately 300,000 men and women armed or capable of taking up arms, or in different ways organized and prepared . At the time, the U.S. government could have about 300,00 people armed or able to take up arms
 We also already had some infantry cannons, some tanks, on which soldiers received quick, accelerated training . The soldiers were also given some infantry cannon and tanks .
 I would ask the first advisers-at that time we already had some specialists teaching us how to use the weapons, Czechoslovakia and the USSR . There was a large number of cannons and anti-aircraft artillery guns-and we asked them if they could train all the necessary personnel
 The training program would have taken years, yet we did it in weeks, says Dzhiki . "What our comrades would learn in the morning, they would go and teach in the evening in the other camps that we organized," he says . Dzhki: "The training program
 Maybe, we might still be fighting if there had been an intervention in 1961 . Maybe, maybe, we would still be still fighting if we had been fighting in 1961.
 This may have meant a cost of hundreds of thousands of lives for our country, says President Obama . "This may have been the cost of many lives for many," says Obama .
 A prolonged struggle would have resulted in considerable losses for the invaders of our territory . A prolonged battle would have also resulted in significant losses for our territory, the king says .
 This is why I said that, on the contrary, we should credit Kennedy with the common sense and wisdom to have not ordered the intervention of the United States troops at the time .
 I know of presidents who would not even think for three minutes about ordering the intervention of U.S. troops. President Obama would not have thought such a thing in three minutes, he says .
 I tell you this so you can understand the reason for our opinion of the conduct of President Kennedy at the time . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . President John Kennedy was killed by a plane crash in 1963 .
 In Giron, we find the antecedents of the October Crisis because there is no doubt that, for Kennedy, it meant a severe political blow . The October Crisis was a major political blow for the Argentine government .
 I am not going to talk about the clandestine operations, acts of sabotage, that were continuous during that period . "I will not be able to say what I was doing," he said .
 I am not going to make reference to the problems related to assassination plots. I'm going to talk about assassination plots, but I won't mention them . I am going to be careful not to mention assassination plots .
 "Unfortunately, all these things happened in one way or another during that period, but are not the subject of our analysis," he says . "We are not sure what happened in that period," he adds .
 Kennedy was determined to end one way or another the revolutionary process in Cuba . Kennedy was left very bitter about Cuba, but Kennedy was still bitter about it .
 I cite, as I used to, the example of the Alliance for Progress designed to change objective conditions, because he knew that the objective conditions in Latin American were, as they still are nowadays, favorable for social explosions .
 We should remember that the Bay of Pigs crisis was followed by a meeting between Kennedy and Khrushchev . We should be careful not to repeat what happened in the 1960s, says John Kennedy .
 Khrushchev heard with concern the Kennedy statements regarding Cuba . According to the news we received, the news was received . The Kennedy statements were made in response to the Kennedy statement .
 We still need to find out, through some of the figures that were there, if that was when Hungary was discussed, because Kennedy made reference to Hungary- that they had solved the problem in Hungary and that the U.S. still had not been able to solve the problem of Cuba
 I do not have the menas to clarify this now, if this was mentioned in the Vienna talks . I do have to clarify that this was discussed in Vienna talks, he says .
 I have heard comrades talk about the conversation between and Kennedy, and the subject of Hungary was mentioned-the same problem they did not know how to solve-and they took it as a warning, as a firm statement that they were planing to solve it .
 I remember that visited us, I do not remember the exact date either, if it was after the Washington trip . I remember it was in Washington, but I don't remember the date of the visit .
 In which of the two conversations, or if on both occasions, the issue of Hungary was mentioned, we have to clarify . But it is not clear if the issue was mentioned in which of two conversations .
 I do know, and I am aware of the great concern that Khrushchev felt after those conversations . I do not know, but I know, that I'm aware of his great concern, he says .
 It was a frequent subject, long before any idea of installing missiles existed . It was also a frequent topic of discussion long before the idea existed .
 Soviet delegation provided details of conversations that took place regarding missiles . Aleksandr, for many years an ambassador in our country, and ambassador during the crisis, has talked about this, and other members of the Soviet delegation have provided details .
 Uzbekistan's leader of the party in Uzbekistan is due to visit Cuba . Party leader spent several months in Cuba providing cooperation in matters of agriculture, irrigation, etc.
 He was bringing along a marshal, Belysufov or Belysofov, [corrected by unidentified speakers] Bydiusuv. He was brought along by an unidentified marshal .
 I am appalling in English, but I think that in terms of pronunciation I am even worse in Russian. I am appalled in English. I think I am also appalling in Russian, I think . I'm appalling in . English, he says .
 Petrov Bydiusov-undoubtedly a very smart and energetic man- later died in an airplane crash in Yugoslavia .
 He accompanied , but he was the one basically entrusted with the issue of the missiles . He accompanied . He was one of the ones responsible for the missile launch .
 CNN's John Sutter talks about missiles in a new interview with Vladimir Putin . Putin says he is ready to launch a missile attack on North Korea .
 President Obama spoke to CNN's John Sutter about the situation in Cuba . He asked him what would be required to prevent a U.S. invasion, he said .
 If the U.S. knows what an invasion of Cuba would mean with the Soviet Union, that would be, in my opinion, the best way to prevent an invasion . Well, if the United States knows what a Cuban invasion would mean, it would be better to avoid it .
 "To corroborate this with documentation, you can, if you want, see the version that I wrote six years later and what I said in a report to the Central Committee in 1968," he said . "I said in 1968. What I said was what I wrote in 1968,
 A Soviet military delegation came to visit around that time, headed by a marshal . The Soviet military visited the area in the 1960s .
 He asked us how we believe the problem of an invasion could best be prevented . He asked how we believed the problem was best to prevent it .
 We told him that by adopting measures that unquestionably expressed to imperialism-forgive me for using that word, but that is how it was said, literally - that any aggression against Cuba would mean not only war with Cuba, but war with them .
 He already had the mission to propose the installation of strategic missiles, and perhaps he was even afraid that we might refuse . Perhaps he was afraid that perhaps he might refuse, he said .
 The missiles could mean, or could be used as a reason for criticism and campaigns against Cuba and the revolution in the rest of Latin America . Well, the missiles here could mean ... well, well, but could also be used .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin says missiles would be beneficial to consolidation of the socialist bloc's defensive power . Putin: "When the issue of the missiles was first brought up, we thought that it was something beneficial to the consolidation"
 The comrades who participated were the comrades of the directorate, who met to analyze this problem and make a decision . But really, the comrades who . participated were ... comrades of . the comrades .
 "That in our opinion it would strengthen the socialist bloc," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "That would strengthen [the socialist bloc] that would strengthen it"
 If we held the belief that the socialist bloc should be willing to go to war for the sake of any other socialist country, we did not have any right to consider something that could represent a danger to us . We should not have been prepared to consider such a move, he says .
 The questions of propaganda stayed within us, but we also saw the real danger of any crisis that could emerge, but without any hesitation, and honestly, thinking in a truly internationalist manner . The questions remained within us. The questions were within us .
 "With an enormous trust in a country that we believed was experienced in many things, even in war, and in international affairs-we told, we stated to them the usefulness of signing a military accord"
 The October Crisis is the anniversary of the October Crisis in 1968 . President Richard Nixon said in a private conversation in 1968 that the crisis was a precursor to the 1968-September crisis .
 "We, from the beginning, saw it as a strategic operation. In all truth and summarizing, we, from . from the . beginning of the . start of the operation, we saw it . as a . strategic operation," the president said .
 "If it was a matter of our defense alone, we would not have accepted the missiles here," says Putin . Putin: "We are not going to accept missiles here. If it was the matter of defense alone we would have accepted them"
 The missiles could damage the image of the revolution, according to a source close to the Kremlin .
 "We were very committed to the image of the revolution in the rest of Latin America," she says . "We are committed to [the image of [the] revolution in Latin America]," she says.
 The presence of the missiles would turn us into a Soviet military base would have a high political cost for our country's image, which we valued so highly . The fact that the presence of . the . missiles would . turn us . into a . Soviet military bases would have been a high
 If it had been for our defense-and I say this here, Aleksandr knows this-we would not have accepted the missiles . So if it were for our own defense, we wouldn't have accepted missiles, he says .
 The missile installation is something that would strengthen the socialist bloc . It would help in some way to improve the so-called correlation of forces, the Kremlin says .
 "That was how we perceived it immediately, immediately, instantaneously. That was how ... instantaneously," she said . "That's how we perceive it immediately"
 If we had argued about what they were for, the conclusion would be that they should not be brought. It would not have made sense, because it would not make sense, it would have made no sense to bring them .
 In fact, we would have refused to accept the missiles because, of course, their presence was not presented in those terms . The missiles would have been accepted by the Russian president, Putin said .
 We asked a few questions about what kind of missiles and how many . Then we asked a couple of questions about how many missiles were made .
 We did not have any practical knowledge of these things, and we were informed that they would deploy 42 missiles . We were told by the U.S. government that the missiles would be deployed in Syria . We are not sure how long the missiles will be deployed .
 From what has been shown here, it seems there were 36 operational missiles and six for testing . From what it seems, there was 36 operational missile launches and six testing .
 "We asked for time because we had to meet with the leadership and to inform them about all this before coming to a decision" "We said we would do this quickly. We said they would do it quickly," she said .
 "We analyzed the matter in the terms that I have explained. In fact, when this meeting was over, we organized a meeting of the leadership," he said .
 We said that the presence of the missiles had this and that significance . The presence of missiles has this and this significance, the U.S. government said .
 We also were not unaware-and for me it was obviousthat the presence of the missiles was going to give rise to great political tension . The presence of missiles was . going to cause great political tensions, he said .
 "We saw this matter from the angle of our moral, political, and internationalist duties. But we saw it as a matter of moral and political duty," he said .
 After the Bay of Pigs invasion, there had already been talk about missiles . After the invasion of the U.S. in 1961, there was already talk about missile attacks .
 He insinuated more than once that an invasion of Cuba could be responded to with the use of missiles . President Obama said an invasion could respond to an invasion with missiles .
 He insinuated this more than once, publicly, to such an extent that everyone here was talking about the Soviet missiles before the crisis, after the Bay of Pigs, as if they were their property . The Soviet missiles were the property of the Soviet Union, he said .
 "It did not seem right to me that our people, our populace, should place their hopes for defense in support from abroad," he said . However, he refrained from saying a single word about missiles .
 Our populace should be prepared-as it is today, and today more than ever-to develop their confidence in themselves and their ability to struggle and resist without any foreign support . Our people should be totally prepared- as it is .
 I did not talk about the Soviet missiles as a possible aid in any of my speeches, and there are quite a few in that period . That is why I didn't talk about Soviet missiles, he says . He says .
 Even Kennedy said in his campaign that he thought that there was an imbalance in strategic missiles . As was also acknowledged here yesterday, even in the U.S. even said in the United States .
 Throughout the world, people thought there was an imbalance in strategic missiles . People thought there would be an imbalance of strategic missiles, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 It was known that the Americans had a very powerful air force, but that the Soviet Union had made great progress in the area of rocketry . The Soviets had made progress in rocketry, according to the author .
 During those days, there were spectacular technical achievements like the space flights . The space shuttle was launched in 1961 .
 "All of that had an enormous effect on world opinion, and from what I can see, it also had an effect in the United States. All of that," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm not surprised at what happened in the U.S.
 It is not at all strange that we would have more or less similar ideas about the combat capacity of each of the great powers in this area of nuclear missiles .
 The presence of missiles here in Cuba meant a modification, not a change, says President Eisenhower . "We cannot talk about a change in the correlation of forces, but it was a considerable improvement" says Eisenhower .
 Of course, we never saw the missiles as something that could one day be used against the United States, in an attack against the U.S., an unjustified attack or a first strike, we said . We never saw them as a weapon that could be used by the United.
 "He was constantly talking about negotiations with the United States, of ending the Cold War, the arms race, etc. etc. He was constantly talked about negotiations," he said . "He would be constantly talking with the U.S. He would talk about negotiations ... of ending Cold
 So to judge the mood of that time, one should understand what was thought about this and about the strength of each of the great powers . So to understand what the mood was thought, one must understand what it was thought by the world .
 Cuba's defense as a secondary matter for the reasons I have explained. But we saw that this improved the situation of the socialist bloc, he says . We really saw the issue of Cuban defense as secondary matter.
 "So that was how we saw it, and we have continued to have this perception throughout all these years," she says . "We have continued this perception," she adds .
 Knowing what one knows now, one can see the practical military importance these rockets had, because they really turned medium-range missiles into strategic missiles . The rockets were developed in the 1950s and 1960s .
 When we returned to the meeting with the marshall and . , we gave them our answer. When they returned to . We gave them their answer. The marshall said they would not be surprised to find out what happened .
 Those little recorders that many people have now have now that they can put in their pocket did not exist . They were recorded in the 1960s .
 This meeting is being recorded, and whenever heads of state visits are visited, it will be recorded . So this meeting was being recorded and will be used in future visits to the UK .
 We asked Gorbachev the last visit we had from him, and we agreed that everything we talked about should be recorded . We agreed to record everything we discussed with him, including his last visit to Moscow .
 Of course, there are those who are more in the habit of recording and those who aren't recording .
 The meetings with U Thant were recorded, by mutual agreement, and all that. The meetings were recorded by mutual consent, and they were recorded . The meetings have been recorded in the hope they will be used in the future .
 If one thinks about history, one sees how many details and things could have been recorded and kept . If one thought about it, one could have kept the details of the events .
 We said that we were willing to receive up to 1,000 missiles, if they wanted to send them . To be more faithful, we said that . We said . We would be willing to . receive . up to a thousand missiles . If they wanted them, they would be able
 It has been made. As they say a Roman general said in ancient times-I think it was Julius Caesar. It has now been made, as they say they say, as . they say in . ancient times . I think it is Julius Caesar .
 This may also explain why we felt so indignant about the later development of events, about what happened . This may have also explained why we were indignant over the events in the early 1980s .
 Because we practically took an attitude of rebellion and intransigence about the crisis, we took a 'reaction' to the crisis . Because of that attitude, the government took an 'insulting' attitude, he said .
 Soviet military officer explains how the Soviet military organized it . "How they organized it. Then there was the whole process that has been talked about," he says .
 We can see this, not only from theoretical considerations, but because we have also found ourselves forced to send troops abroad, as we did in Angola, for example . We can also see this as a result of the fact that we are forced to deploy troops abroad .
 I remember the first time we sent 36,000 men in a few weeks with a large part of their weaponry . The first time I remember I remember being in charge of a large group of troops .
 I also remember what we did after Cuito Cuanavale, when we increased our forces to 53,000 men . But I also . remember what I . also remember . what we . increased the forces to . increase in . troops . But also remember how we increased forces
 "It was an absolutely free and sovereign decision by our country. They conveyed them to us in 1975, but it was a free decision," she said .
 A crisis situation arose in Cuito Cuanavale that forced us to send large numbers of troops, he says . "We did so with decisiveness, because one must do things decisively," he adds .
 "If 20,000 are needed and you send 10,000, the most likely thing is that you will be defeated," he says . "If you send ten,000 you will probably be defeated"
 When our troops advanced, they had 1,000 antiaircraft weapons, so that they could have superiority in antia aircraft weapons . To give you an idea, when . our troops advance, when our troops . advanced, the . troops had 1.000 ant-aircraft weapons
 "We also have some experience in troop movements, and we know what it means to carry out an operation," says the British PM .
 "Of course, there were no missiles in this case, but we did have to send all kinds of heavy weapons," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "There was no missiles, but there were all heavy weapons"
 The operation with the missiles was carried out very efficiently by the Soviet Armed Forces and in a very short time. This operation with missiles was . This operation . was carried on very efficiently, the . Soviet armed forces were able to carry out the operation .
 "They really have summarized what was talked about in the Soviet Union, and what was said in the . Soviet Union" Nikita always used the reasoning Nikita was always using, says the author .
 I have already said that Nikita was very shrewd about how he presented the problem to the other CPSU leaders, and how he really thought, or if there was another CPSU leader who knew Nikita's most personal intentions, I said .
 In light of the facts we know today about the true correlation of forces, we can clearly see that it was a necessity . In the light of today's facts, it is clear that the correlation was necessary .
 "I am not criticizing him for the fact that he wanted to improve the correlation of forces. Really, I am . I am not . criticizing him," he said .
 "It seems absolutely legitimate to me, absolutely legal-if we are going to talk in terms of international law-absolutely moral, to want to improve the correlation of forces between the socialist bloc and the United States. It seems absolutely legal to me," says President Obama .
 If what they really had was 50 or 60 missiles, there is no doubt that the presence of those 42 missiles significantly improved the situation . The presence of 42 missiles "vigorously improved" the situation, says CNN's Peter Bergen .
 You probably also know how many missiles the Soviets had on the submarines and their ability to move with their submarines and also carry out strikes, because I know they had submarines with nuclear missiles . The Soviets also had nuclear missiles on their submarines .
 This information has not come out here, how many they had at that time . This information hasn't been released, but how many people they had had .
 If they had talked to us in those terms, of improving the correlation of forces, perhaps we would have advised prudence, perhaps .
 If you have 50 missiles, you have to be more prudent than if you have 300, President Obama says . Obama: "I think, of course, that if you had 50 missiles ... I think ... you have been more prudent" Obama: 'I think I'm not going to
 If we had had that information, and if they had talked to us in strategic terms, we would surely have advised prudence because I say, and I repeat, that we were not concerned about defending the country .
 "We do not receive missiles or anything, and here you can see that we are all unworried," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We are not going to receive missiles, but we are going to get them"
 I do not know what kinds of conventional weapons and smart weapons that it has, and you can see that we are calm here. "I don't know what kind of conventional . weapons and . smart weapons and all those things that it . has," he said .
 "We have confidence in our ability to fight, and we are proud of this confidence and ability," says Tana Muhammedi .
 "That was how we understood it, and how the other members of the Soviet leadership understood it," he said . "But that was how I understood it. But that was ... how I understand it, he said."
 He could present something in one set of terms and think in another set, he could think of another set . He could also think of things differently, he says .
 "Even today, I cannot find any other explanation. But I could not find any else explanation," he said . "I could find no other explanation"
 "We would say that he was fond of Cuba, in his feelings, his emotions, all. All. We would say ... in the feelings, the emotions, and all," says the Cuban ambassador .
 "He had a political theory and doctrine, and he was consistent with that doctrine," he said . "He was consistent, and that doctrine. He was consistent," he added .
 He even thought, erroneously, that one day socialism would surpass capitalism by peaceful means, he said . He thought, wrongly, that a day socialism could surpass capitalism, he added .
 I say that this is a possibly mistaken concept, because I do not think that the aim of a socialist society should be consumption . I do think that I don't think that socialism is about consumption, rather than consumption, I say .
 I do not think Third World countries need to imitate capitalism in consumption in consumption . I think it is a waste of money for Third World nations to try and imitate capitalism .
 I always wonder what would happen in the world if every Chinese family had a car, and every Indian family also had a . car . Every family in Bangladesh, Pakistan, and all those other places had a. car .
 There is a mistake in this concept of socialism. That is why I say that there is no socialism, he says . That is the reason for socialism to be socialist, he adds .
 Socialism should solve people's basic problems, not be the idea that everyone should have a car or consumer objects . socialism should solve basic problems such as health, culture, housing, food-all the essential material needs, says David Cameron .
 "They should have what they can have, what the environment can tolerate," he says . "The environment should be able to tolerate. They should have it," he adds .
 We have a different concept of socialism, but he was a man of profound political convictions, he says . We have different concepts of socialism but we have different ideas of socialism .
 He was very aware of what a nuclear war would mean for the Soviet Union . He was also aware of the threat posed posed posed by the Soviets .
 I think that parity exists at all times after the first moment when there is the capacity to make a response that would cause terrible damage . I think the words, the words . yesterday by Mr McNamara was excellent when he said that parity existed at all . times . After the first .
 Even if all the nuclear weapons were launched against one country, the world would be annihilated just the same . But even if the world were annihilated, it would be the same as the world .
 Even if only 10,000 of the 50,000 warheads are used and are used in only one place, the world will be finished . Because the contamination this would cause-and the problems of all kinds- would be such that the world would be finished, the problem would be worse
 This reasoning about when parity really exists seems wise to me, because parity exists as soon as there is the capacity to respond by doing enough damage . It would be unacceptable to someone who is thinking about launching a nuclear attack, he says .
 I tried to find out how this was discussed in the leadership of the CPSU and the Soviet Government when I traveled to the USSR in 1963 . I was in the Soviet Union in 1963 to try and find out what was being discussed .
 For all my questions, I was not able to get a clear answer about the possibility that the strategic argument had been used among the Soviet leadership . For all his questions, he said, he was unable to answer .
 After the verbal agreement, it was necessary to formalize it, but it was already in effect . The agreement was verbal but formalized after it was formalized .
 That was how a draft was drawn up in the USSR; Aleksandr has spoken about this . Aleksander has spoken out about this. The draft was how it was drafted up in Russia .
 Politically, the draft was erratic, in the sense that there was no clear foundation established about the matter. Politically . Politically. There were no clear foundations established about it .
 I took some away, some of the considerations, and I established the political foundation for the agreement, which in my opinion was unobjectionable . I took away some considerations, he says, and established a political foundation . "I took away the considerations," he says .
 The Soviet Union will send to the Republic of Cuba armed forces to reinforce its defenses in the face of a danger of foreign aggression, and thus contribute to maintaining world peace, says Soviet Union .
 The type of Soviet troops, and the areas where they will be stationed on the territory of the Republic of Cuba, will be set by the representatives named in accordance with Article 11 of this agreement .
 There is no mention of the kind of strategic weapons, and this agreement could have been mentioned, and no one could have challenged the legality and morality of this agreement . No one could challenge the legality of the agreement .
 Of course, it was not essential to bring the missiles here to defend Cuba, says President Obama . Obama says the missiles were needed to defend the country .
 The U.S. has a lot of these pacts throughout the world, and they are respected . The word of nations is respected, because the word of nation is respected and because the risks involved in violating the treaties are taken into consideration .
 "We could have been able to achieve the aim of the defense of Cuba without the presence of the missiles," says President Obama . The Cuban government says the missiles were necessary to defend Cuba .
 This is one of the things that reaffirms the conviction we had at that time and that we have kept until now, even though there is not a single bit of proof that a different argument was used . This is not the case, but it reaffirms our conviction that we had,
 The comrades in the Soviet delegation-I can no longer say Soviet, from the CIS- have spoken, in my opinion, with absolute honesty about the reasoning and concepts that prevailed there in the former Soviet Union . That is why the comrades in . the . Soviet delegation have spoken with absolute
 The missiles were installed in the period when they were installed, because there were people living in the places that had been chosen . All this brought, or gave rise to, a great effort in the . period when the missiles were . installed, as well as the . time when missiles were
 "We appointed a comrade, a party and government official, to attend exclusively to everything connected with the negotiations to free the land to install the missiles," he says . "It was quite a bit of land," he adds .
 Hundreds of families had to move from their homes in the city . Hundreds of people were forced to leave their homes, but hundreds more had to be relocated .
 "We had to arrange this with them, find land for them, give them benefits," says minister . "They had to find land, find benefits and find land"
 All of this was negotiated, and all as much in secret as possible, without being able to explain what it was for . All of the negotiations were done as much as possible as possible .
 All those who knew something knew that they had the duty to consider themselves quarantined . "All of us are quarantines. All of us have a duty to protect ourselves," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 A Soviet official often changes his thought while talking with someone, a Soviet official would often change his thought . "You can imagine, there were a lot of troops, 42,000 men, and they establish relations," he said .
 So we adopted the method that is used in cases of serious epidemics, which is to quarantine the infected people . The method was used in the case of Ebola, but it was too late to quarantines .
 Of course, there were large troop movements, and there began to be talk relatively early that there might be offensive weapons, other sorts of weapons or missiles . Of course there was also talk about possible offensive weapons .
 "Other people know more than we do about this problem. I do not know what the technology is like," he says . "I don't know what it is like; other people know what is like"
 No one knows if the device could occupy an entire block . The device is approximately 25 meters long, no one knows how long it could be .
 When such big devices were unloaded, no matter how hard one tried to hide and move through in the streets, everyone knew about it . Everyone knew about the device when it was unloaded, even though it might be difficult to hide .
 "Several million Cubans knew it. That was the best kept secret in history, I would say, because several million knew it," says President Obama .
 I imagine that the Central Intelligence Agency must have received letters, because there were spontaneous informers here . The CIA must have had to receive letters from people who wanted to help the CIA .
 "They were people who were not with the revolution, and they sympathized with the U.S. or they were against the revolution," she says . "They sympathized" with the United States, or "against the revolution"
 "We had to see to an infinite number of details and solve an infinity number of issues to keep it a secret," says the author of the book .
 Raul's trip to Moscow, the trip of Che and to the Soviet Union when he delivered the final draft that was accepted . Che and Raul visited Moscow in the 1960s .
 "Our draft was accepted, just as it was, without adding or deleting one comma," the author said . "We are happy to have our draft accepted and accepted without editing," he said .
 We should remember that a tremendous atmosphere was being created, which seemed negative to us. We should be careful to remember that it was creating a negative atmosphere .
 We thought that we should come out with the law on our side, and simply publish this military agreement . Therefore, we thought that . therefore, we should . simply publish it . The agreement was published by the U.S. government on Monday .
 Many military operations have to be done in secret, the operation itself, not the basis for an operation- and the information that was given about it . But we should distinguish between secrecy-many military operations - and secrecy .
 "The mistake about the secrecy, which was one thing that harmed us, was also the information that was given to Kennedy, going along with the game about the category of the weapons, whether they were offensive or defensive," he says .
 Cuban statements-and there were several-did we ever go along with the game relating to the category of the weapons. If you want to verify this, you will see that in none of the Cuban statements. You can't verify this .
 Cuba considered that it had a sovereign right to have whatever kind of weapons it thought appropriate . Cuba refused to go along with that game and said it had no right to establish what weapons our country could or could not have .
 We reaffirmed our right to have whatever type of weapons we thought appropriate for our defense . Therefore, we never denied or confirmed the nature of the weapons," he said .
 Khrushchev went along with the game of categorizing the weapons. In contrast, to tell the truth, he said, "I'm not going to go along with that."
 Since he did not have any intention of using the weapons in an offensive operation, he believed that it was the intention that defined the nature of the weapons . The weapons were not intended to be used in any offensive operation .
 Kennedy did not understand the issue of intentions, but rather the type of type of weapons, whether they were strategic weapons or not, he said . Kennedy was not concerned about intentions but about type of weapon, he added .
 Kennedy was convinced that strategic weapons were not going to be brought to Cuba . Kennedy was also convinced that the Cuban government would not bring strategic weapons to Cuba.
 "There was something more than shrewdness here. Because of this, I would say that there was something else here," he said . He said .
 The secrecy about the military agreement and the deception-were two facts, two facts that did harm. I think the two things-the secrecy about . the military . agreement and . the . deception- were two facts of the deception, he says .
 Because I think a different approach should have been adopted, and not the approach of deceit, I think it should be adopted,’s David Cameron . ‘A different approach to the world is needed to be adopted,' he says .
 It did us a lot of harm because, in the first place, Kennedy had a lot at stake. Kennedy had to be careful, he says . Kennedy's actions did us harm, but it was a mistake, he adds .
 The agreement was not published in the agreement . Perhaps this was one of the factors he used in deciding not to publish the deal .
 It is possible that he was counting on not doing anything that would hurt in the elections, but he did the worst thing . It's possible he hoped not to hurt the election, but did the wrong thing .
 There are no strategic weapons in Syria, says President Obama . "They are filling that country with tanks or cannons or who knows what," he says .
 He thought according to a rationale; he made calculations according to rationale . He thought . He made calculations in a rationale. He thought very carefully .
 They have repeatedly told me this, they have told me that, many times. They have repeated this to me many times, I said . They have said this many times over the years, he said . He said: 'They have told him this, many of them many times'
 In the eyes of world public opinion, Kennedy gained moral force, not legal force . Kennedy gained legal force, rather than moral force . In the world, Kennedy's actions were seen as moral and political .
 Khrushchev was put in a difficult personal situation-which he would not have wanted but that, in fact, occurred . He was put into a difficult situation- which he would have not wanted, he says .
 He presented himself as one who had been deceived, who had had been assured of this, that, or the other, while the truth was something else . The truth is something else, he said, but he was deceived .
 "That was one of the advantages he was given, not the secrecy itself but by the secrecy plus the deception," he says . "He was given the advantages of the secrecy and the deception. He was given," he adds .
 The United States had an enormous advantage because they held the secret in their hands . That when the missile sites were finally discovered on 14 October, the U.S. had a huge advantage . The U.N. had an advantage because the secret was in its hands .
 The initiative in the military realm was put into the hands of the United States because they knew what was happening and could afford to choose one option or another, a political option, a quarantine, or a surprise air attack on those installations . The initiative was put in the hands .
 I think that was a very dangerous moment, from the military point of view- even if it was illegal, arbitrary, and unjust, or even immoral from any of the points of view because you have to comply with international laws . I think the moment was dangerous, from a military point
 Of course, the Soviet military officer explained something here that is extremely important . Of course. Of course .
 I told the Soviet officer not to put all the missiles in the same place-that was on 26 October, already in the middle of the crisis . They were a considerable distance away-which was the right thing, the elementary thing; .
 It is unquestionable that the Soviet military took these elementary measures, but I fear that a large part, or almost all, of the surface-to-air missile units could have been destroyed in a totally surprise attack .
 The defenses of those installations were strengthened against the low-altitude overflights when we mobilized all our batteries and devoted them to defending those installations . The U.S. mobilized all its batteries to defend those installations.
 The United States had eight days-or from 16 October when it was reported to them, six days-to act before making this information public . But the U.S. had been told they had six days to act before it was made public .
 I think this was an extremely dangerous time, not only from the political point of view but also militarily, the way the issue was handled in these two respects . I think it was a dangerous time for the U.S. to be involved in the Middle East .
 "In my opinion, these were negative respects, but that was how it was handled," she said . "I'm not happy with the way it's handled. In my opinion of the situation, I'm very happy with it," she added .
 The crisis broke out on 22 October, but in the morning we issued a combat alert to all forces when we saw the movement and the meeting, all the information that reached us publicly . The alert was issued in the early hours of October 22 when the crisis began .
 "We did not lose a single minute. We issued a maximum combat alert to all our forces that same day before Kennedy spoke," he says . "We didn't lose a minute," he adds .
 "The crisis erupted on the night of 22 October, and defense preparations occupied almost all of our time after that," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "Defence preparations were almost all the time after the crisis erupted"
 "We assigned to all the Soviet facilities practically all of our anti-aircraft batteries," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . "We were assigned to almost all of [the] Soviet facilities," says Putin .
 "We thought that it was the most important thing to defend from the beginning of the crisis," says German Chancellor Angela Merkel . Merkel: "We're not going to give up on the crisis. We're not giving up on what we think is a solution to the crisis"
 The Soviet Government has just received from U.S. President Kennedy, the following document, of which we attach a copy . The document was sent to the Soviet Government .
 President Kennedy the following document, a copy of which we have attached. President Kennedy sent the document to the White House .
 The Republic of Cuba has the total right, as any other sovereign state, to defend itself and choose allies as it wishes . Cuba has a right to choose allies, as well as allies, the Cuban president says .
 Government declares its decision to actively fight against such actions . Government and depicts these actions as treacherous and aggressive- Government .
 We have given instructions to our UN Security Council representative to urgently present to the Council the issue of the violation by the United States of the norms of international law and the UN Charter . U.S. imperialism has been accused of being aggressive and treacherous .
 Soviet military representatives in Cuba have been instructed to adopt corresponding measures, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . "We have instructed the Soviet military to be completely ready, ready for combat," says Putin .
 There were really no big protests because politically adverse conditions had arisen due to the procedures used . We are sure that the actions undertaken by the American imperialists with the intention of taking away the legitimate right of the Republic of Cuba to strengthen its defensive power and the defense of its territory .
 Will provoke the irate protest of all peace-loving countries and will move into action the widest masses in defense of the just cause of revolutionary Cuba . This is what I am saying.- Will provoke all peace loving countries and . will move to action .
 "This could have been accomplished, in part, if we had done things openly," says President Obama . "This is not the first time we have done so much," says Obama .
 All this is true because we were within our most absolute right to do so. All of this was true because of our right to speak out . We were in the right to express our views on the issue of abortion in the U.S.
 "If we had the right, how were we going to act in a way that made it seem that we did not have this right, that made us do something wrong," says David Cameron .
 "I am analyzing this in terms of ethics, politics, legality-not terms of force, correlations of force or in military terms," he says . "I don't think of this as a military issue, but ethics and politics," he adds .
 We send to you, Comrade Castro, and to all your comrades in arms, our warmest greetings and express our firm believe that the aggressive plans of the United States imperialists will be thwarted . [ends quoting letter]
 Khrushchev, who knew how many missiles and nuclear weapons he had available and all those things, sent us this letter on the 23d. "Khrrushchev" was the leader of the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 "The issue is clear, things are clear, and we went ahead with preparations," says President Obama . "We went ahead ahead with our preparations. The issue was clear," says Obama .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin wrote a letter to the Soviet military command . Putin: "We had already taken all the humanly possible measures, I met with the military command"
 It reported that everything was ready, all the weapons that were mentioned here, that was explained here . The Soviet officer explained here, and with lots of willingness .
 A truly strange phenomenon occurred among the Soviet troops in such a situation such as that one, in which the people were in extreme danger and at the same time remained totally calm . The Soviet troops were in danger, but remained calm, the author says .
 Our people maintained a calm and intransigent position regarding this issue. Our people maintain a calm, intransistent position.
 Low-altitude overflights were unacceptable, as I mentioned before and, therefore, our batteries were going to open fire . That same day, the Soviet officers were notified that low altitudes were unacceptable . We wanted them to be informed .
 According to the accord, there were two armies and two commands, we commanded our forces and our country . The accord was based on an accord signed by the two sides of the warring nations .
 On the morning of the 27th, when the U.S. aircraft arrived, they faced the fire from our antiaircraft batteries . This was an daily occurrence early in the morning, the author says .
 The Soviet antiaircraft missile unit shot down the aircraft in the eastern part of the country . Naturally, it was a moment of great tension .
 In reality, it was clear, that when we were meeting, or even before we met, when we met with the Soviet officers, we were sending a message to Khrushchev, he had already sent a message . But in reality, that . even before . meeting, even before
 His message proposed the basis for a solution- which was the withdrawal of the missiles in return for guaranties toward Cuba, of not attacking Cuba .
 The next day, he sent another message, adding to the issue of the guaranty for Cuba . The message added to the issues of the guarantee for Cuba, the Cuban president said .
 "We realized that we had become some type of game token. Of course, when this news arrived, the news arrived here on the 28th, it provoked a great indignation"
 We not only saw a unilateral decision; a series of steps had been taken without including us. We were not happy with the unilateral decision . We were disappointed with the decision to take the decision without including the public, he said .
 They could have told us; there was the message on the 26th and on the 27th. The message could have been from the same place as the other . They could've told us, there was a message on 26th, 27th and 28th .
 There had been time, but we heard on the radio on the 28th that an agreement had taken place . There were time to wait, but there was no time for an agreement to take place, it was said .
 I understood the Soviet officer when he said that it was the most painful decision that he had to obey in his life, the officer said . The Soviet officer said it was a painful decision to obey the issue of inspection of the ships .
 "I believe that there was a message on the way, informing us after the fact. I believe that . There was no doubt that the message was coming," she said . "There was no sense of urgency," she added .
 The reaction was of profound indignation, it was not a feeling of relief . The reaction of all the people, of all people, all the cadres, of . all the comrades, was of . profound indignation . It was not "relief", it was "profound indignation"
 President Obama issued the five-point demands on the 28th anniversary of his presidency . Obama has been criticized for his comments on the matter .
 The end of the economic blockade and of all the economic and trade pressure measures that the U.S. implemented throughout the world against our country; 85.5 percent of the world’s trade pressure was imposed on North Korea .
 The end of all subversive actions, shipment and infiltration of weapons and explosives by air or sea, organization of mercenary invasions, infiltration of spies and saboteurs, actions that are carried out from U.S. territory and certain accomplice countries; 86. The end .
 The end to all pirate attacks conducted from existing bases in the U.S. and in Puerto Rico; 87.9% of pirate attacks were conducted in the United States and Puerto Rico .
 The end of all violations of our airspace and waters by U.S. aircraft and warships; 88.88. The end to all violations by United States aircraft and . waters by . United States .
 The withdrawal from the Guantanamo Naval Base and the return of the territory occupied by the United States. The withdrawal of the Guantanamo . The withdrawal . of the . Guantanamo Naval . Base and return of . the . territory occupied .
 "If there was a real danger of war, if we would have known that Nikita was willing to withdraw the missiles and find a solution on that basis, we would not have refused," says Putin .
 There was no purpose in insisting on a situation or a solution, but it had to be an acceptable and honorable solution . Logically, there was no need to insist on a solution to the situation, but there was a need for it .
 The simple solution to withdraw the missiles is "incongruent with all the steps taken," says President Obama . The U.S. had given its word that it would not attack Cuba, Obama says .
 Cuba would have helped but would have said the minimum guarantees we want are these. Cuba would say the minimum guarantee we want is these. The minimum guarantees are these, they would say, but they would have been the minimum . Cuba would not have helped, but it would have offered to
 The whole world would have seen with relief the beginning of the solution of the crisis, says Mikhail Gorchkov . Gorchov: "The consent by Nikita to withdraw the missiles would already have produced relief" "Not a guarantee that they would not invade us, not a guarantee
 The people would have thought that it was reasonable to find an agreement on a basis related to Cuba . Cuba should have been kept in mind instead of the missiles in Turkey, the author says .
 Nikita Nikita was in the Baltic Sea, near Turkey, when he said he thought about missiles in Turkey . Nikita said that he was near Turkey when he thought of the missiles in his mind .
 In the end, he ends up also thinking about the missiles in Turkey for whatever reasons, because someone might have suggested that they could be included . And in the end of the interview, he also thinks about the missile missiles in the country .
 It made no sense to propose an exchange of missiles in Cuba with missiles in Turkey, he says . "From the political and international point of view, for the honest people, the peace-loving people, those people in the world"
 The demands that Cuba made were completely reasonable, the author says . Cuba made a good negotiation point could have been found, he says . "Peace was really threatened," he says of Cuba .
 "I believe that the procedures used promoted those actions that endangered peace. I believe that that is not the answer to that question"
 "We were already at that point on the 28th, when another solution was not possible anymore," he said . "Another solution was already possible," he added .
 A commitment had been made, Cuba had been ignored, Turkey had been mentioned . Turkey had also been mentioned, but then we issued our five points . Cuba had made a commitment to the U.S. but Turkey had not been mentioned.
 The Soviet Government asked us to please hold our fire, to not shoot anymore. The Soviet government asked us not to shoot anymore, he says . 'The Soviet Government wanted us to stop shooting,' he adds .
 "Only as long as the negotiations are taking place will we maintain that cease-fire order," he said . "We agreed, right, but as long . We agreed to not fire against the low-altitude overflights," he added .
 The aircraft stopped flying on the 27th of the month after the crash .
 There were no more sorties that afternoon, no more overflights that afternoon . The plane was the last to fly over the country .
 "It was very humiliating. But later, after the batteries went silent, they began to conduct overflights again while the negotiations were taking place," he said .
 "You have to really understand the Cuban personality to comprehend the harmful effect to our morale of events of this nature," says the Cuban president .
 I fully explained to him our position, even the five points, and especially our categorical opposition to the inspections . I . fully explained our position to him, even though he was not satisfied with his five points .
 I told him that we did not accept-because the USSR is a sovereign country, so were we-and that no one could authorize an inspection of our territory . I told them that we would not accept an inspection-because we are sovereign country . The USSR is sovereign country and so
 "That was one of our reactions because we were in disagreement with the manner in which... with the outcome of the crisis," he says . "We disagreed with the way in which the crisis was dealt with," he adds .
 He proposed that we accept a group of UN representatives and all that, a UN reconnaissance plane crewed by people acceptable to the Cuban, Russian, and American Governments . The plane would have been a reconnaissance plane, he said .
 The United States has told me that if this system is put into practice, I will make a public statement, in the Security Council if necessary . "They will not continue to have aggressive intentions against the Cuban Government, and they will guarantee the integrity of the nation's territory, etc.
 "We do not understand why this is being asked of us, because we have not violated anyone's rights," says Daley . Daley: "We are not doing anything wrong, we are not violating anyone's right"
 We have been the victims of an embargo, in the first place, which is an illegal act; and in the second place, of an attempt to determine from another country what we have the right to do or not do within our borders . We have not been able to determine what we
 Cuba is a sovereign state.-I am reading the essential things-The United States has been repeatedly violating our airspace without any right . Cuba is the only country in the world that has sovereignty and sovereignty .
 "We can accept anything that complies with the law and that does not involve a reduction in our status as a sovereign state," says minister . "We are not going to be reduced to a state of state," he says .
 "I understand that this business about the inspections is one more attempt to humiliate our country," says President Obama . "This is one of the most humiliating things in the world," says Obama .
 This demand for inspections is to validate their attempt to violate our right to act within our borders with complete freedom, to decide what we can and cannot do .
 If Cuba were to strengthen itself militarily to a degree that the United States takes on itself, the U.S. will determine . The United States will determine how much of Cuba's military might strengthen it .
 "We do not have the least intention of accounting to or consulting the United States Senate or House about the weapons we think it appropriate to acquire," he says . "We are not going to be able to fully defend our country," he adds .
 "We have not yielded, nor do we intend to yield any sovereign prerogative to the United States Congress," says President Obama .
 "It would not be honorable if we accepted negotiating about a sovereign right of our country," he said . "We would not accept negotiating about the sovereign right," he added .
 All actions by the United Nations on Cuban territory can only be undertaken with the consent of the Cuban Government and people . The U.N. cannot take any of its own actions on Cuban soil .
 In the first place, our government does not have the least doubt of the great intention, disinterest, and honesty with which the current UN Secretary General is working .
 We do not have any doubts about your intentions, good faith, and extraordinary interest in finding a solution to this problem . We have no doubts about you intentions and good faith . We do have no doubt about your good faith and interest, we say .
 I understand the interest all of us should have in peace, but the road to peace is not the road of sacrificing the rights of peoples, he says . "That precisely the road that leads to war," he says. "I understand the ... the interest we should have is in peace
 The road to peace is the road of guaranteeing the rights of peoples and the willingness of peoples to resist when defending those rights, says the author of the book .
 The road to the last world war was the road set by the annexation of Austria, the dividing up of Czechoslovakia, and acts of German imperialism that were tolerated and that led to that war . The annexation and the division of Austria was a key factor in the war .
 What is of greatest interest is not paying any price for peace now, but rather, guaranteeing peace in a definitive way . That is why it is difficult to understand how one can talk about an immediate solution without reference to future solutions .
 I said southeastern, that is what appears here-Cuba is not Austria nor southeastern Czechoslovakia nor the Congo . The Congo was not Austria, nor Czechsoslovakia, nor the Czech Republic .
 We have the very firm determination to defend our rights through any difficulties and any dangers. We have a firm determination, says the police chief minister .
 I hope has not underlined anything more here, because otherwise this will drag on too long . I hope this will not drag on for too long. I hope it will not be too long, but it will be too late .
 The Soviet Government's decision to withdraw the strategic weapons they brought to defend Cuba should have been enough for them .
 If the U.S. wants to humiliate our country, they will not succeed, he says . "If, in addition to that, the United States wants to humiliated our country," he says. "They will not . succeed"
 "We have not hesitated a single minute in our determination to defend our rights," says D.C. Mayor's office says .
 No state can permit a blockade that is not only military, or even an economic one, he says . The blockade was illegal, he writes .
 "This is using the imposition of a great power's force against a small country," says the Russian president . "It's using the imposed force against small countries," he says .
 I also told him that the air reconnaissance that was being done over Cuba was illegal and inadmissible . The air reconnaissance was illegal, he said, and it was illegal . I also said that air reconnaissance over Cuba is illegal .
 These three things-economic embargo, military blockade, and air reconnaissance-are illegal . Economic embargo, air reconnaissance, and economic embargo, are illegal .
 In my opinion, the Pentagon and CIA have more power than the State Department . In his opinion, he says, "The Pentagon and the CIA are more powerful than State Department"
 If the CIA and the Pentagon continue to have that power, "I see the future of the world very black," says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: "The world is very black"
 "I hope they do not have any monument to U Thant there in the United States. Well, I hope ... they do," she said .
 I said to the United States that if they do anything drastic, I would not only report them to the Security Council but would accuse them of wrongdoing . I would accuse the U.S. in the Security Security Council .
 Even though the U.S. has the vote and the veto, there can still be a moral sanction, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "Even though the United States has the power to veto it's still possible to sanction it"
 I also told them I would resign my post, because if the U.N. cannot stop a great power in an attack against a small country, I do not want to be the secretary general . I also said they would resign if the United Nations cannot stop the attack on a small
 I warned them that they should not make any attack on Cuba, because that would be the end of the United Nations . I warned the U.N. not to attack Cuba, but that would end the United States, he said .
 "My aim is to achieve peace and ensure the continuation of the United Nations," she says . "I want to achieve the end of the U.N. and achieve peace," she adds .
 Khrushchev's first proposal to dismantle Soviet Union was accepted by the Soviet Union . The proposal was the first proposal by the then-Krushchev about the dismantling and inspection of the USSR .
 The Soviet Union was referring to having the inspections performed outside Cuba, he says . "This might create some division or misunderstanding between the Soviet Union and Cuba," he adds .
 Thant: "There are other things of interest in my opinion but in essence, that is what U Thant said. There is other things that are important to you"
 The lengthy negotiations or talks with Mikoyan began, based on the positions taken by the Soviet Union and the positions we had taken. The negotiations began, and they began with the positions of the Soviet Soviet Union .
 President Obama has been in talks with Iran over Iran's use of missiles . He said the negotiations were difficult because they were first talking about missiles . Obama said the talks were "very difficult"
 "A really unpleasant incident happened when the talks with Mikoyan started," he said . "I'm not sure what happened to the talks," he added .
 They gave him the choice of returning to the USSR, and he really made a very generous gesture . The former Soviet Union president made a 'very generous gesture' to return to the country .
 It was also very hard for us to receive that news, at a time when we were beginning talks that were not easy at all . It's also very difficult for them to receive the news, as they had begun talks that had not been easy to begin .
 As you have seen and heard in recent days-at least many of us have-the letters have been published . Some of you surely knew it before-some of you know it before .
 On the first day, I was able to reach my goal of reading 85 pages of them, early in the morning . The first day of the week, I read 85 pages .
 The IL-28's came up with the idea of using them in the U.S. Air Force One . It's not the first time the IL28's have come up with a problem .
 I should say that I see a difference here between Kennedy's and Khrushchev's conduct, in this correspondence . With the same honesty I have spoken with up to now, I should . I should be honest, he says . Kennedy's conduct is different, he writes .
 It must be said that Khrushchev conducted himself very well, with great dignity . It must also be said he conducted himself well with dignity, says historian .
 He is anxious to solve not only these problems but also many others . You can see that he is eager to solve many of these problems .
 Khrushchev used profound arguments, not just with respect to the crisis, but also with world peace, he said . "I see here a noble, thoughtful, capable, intelligent Khrushche, who uses profound arguments," he said. "He was a noble and thoughtful, thoughtful
 You can see that he squeezes Khrushchev, squeezes him more and more, and the further away the missiles were, the more he squeezed him . The further away from the missiles, the closer he got to the Soviet Union, he squeezed his grip .
 "It is not the same thing to discuss when the missiles were here as when they have been taken out," says Putin . Putin: "It's not a matter of whether or not the missiles have been removed from the U.S.
 Kennedy's language became harsher as the ships left for the Soviet Union with the missiles . Kennedy became harsher when the missiles were left for Soviet Union . The missiles went to the Soviets, but Kennedy's words became harsher .
 He was reluctant to formalize the pledges he had made to Khrushchev . He had been reluctant to formally formalize his pledge .
 He said one thing in one place, then tried to soften it with other words elsewhere . He said that he was trying to soften his words with others elsewhere .
 Khrushchev struggled so that the pledges Kennedy had made would be fulfilled and formalized . You can be seen struggling to get the pledges fulfilled . Kennedy was assassinated in June 1968 .
 It is unquestionable that Khrushchev's position was much weaker at that stage, from an objective point of view, especially after 20 November, when the missiles had been withdrawn .
 "We finally informed Mikoyan that we had no alternative but to fire at the planes flying at low altitudes," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We had no choice but to shoot down the planes," says Putin .
 CNN's John Sutter spent the morning at a base where he was responsible for the order . "I went to one of our air bases to spend the morning there," Sutter says .
 The planes passed over that base at 1000, and I considered that I had a moral duty, not to commit suicide there, but to be with the troops that were going to fire . I considered not committing suicide, but not commit suicide, he said .
 We had warned Mikoyan about 24 hours before-24 or 48 hours before, so that he could inform the Soviets . "Mikoyan had been warned about 24-24 hours before," he says .
 "We were waiting for the planes at that antiaircraft battery that morning, and fortunately, fortunately, the planes did not come" "Fortunately, fortunately the planes didn't come," he says .
 Because there were so many batteries there that it would have been impossible not to hit the planes, the planes would have had to be hit . Because of the batteries, it was impossible to hit planes, officials say .
 Kennedy told Khrushchev that he mentions me every once in a while, always trying to cause friction between the Soviets and us, or make the Soviets punish us in some way, he says .
 "He would say that Castro was the bad guy, and wanted war or who knows what," he said . He would then say that he wanted war .
 He said that he had received news that we were going to fire against the low-altitude overflights . He said he had been told by the U.S. government that it was going to shoot at the low altitudes .
 "I imagine that Mikoyan in some way communicated to someone, through some channel, that we had decided to fire," he says . "We had decided not to fire. I imagine that," he adds .
 Kennedy really was so pleased with the results he had obtained that he had no reason to complicate that whole situation . It seemed stupid to me that the U.S. would continue with those flights, I said .
 There were people among the antiaircraft troops who made cartoons, drawing spiderwebs and things . There were also people who drew cartoons, drawings of spiders .
 Cubans who were at the antiaircraft batteries had a sense of humor . Cubans at the anti-aircraft batteries were humorously funny .
 Cuba's prime minister says he will not tolerate further low-altitude overflights over Cuba . The U.S. military plans against the revolution and demoralize our national defense, he writes .
 Groups of sabotage and subversion have been introduced into Cuba, the U.S. says . This proves the military usefulness of the overflights for the United States, the Cuban government says .
 Administration's attitude was reasonable, not to cause a conflict, he says . "I think the attitude adopted by the administration was reasonable," he adds .
 They understood that it was unnecessary and senseless, and that our reaction was natural . "They understood that they understood that . It was senseless and unnecessary," she said. "That was natural," she added .
 This might have interrupted the withdrawal of the missiles or something, and made the situation more complicated, says CNN's Peter Bergen . Bergen says the situation was more complicated .
 There were exchanges of fire because some came close to the coasts, and all the batteries fired at them when they got near . Then they approached the coasts and there were some enormous exchanges of . fire .
 Low-altitude overflights ended by mid-November . But, in general, the U-2 remained . The U.2 remained.
 We were not in agreement with the U-2 overflights, but we could do nothing about them . We could not do anything about them, says U.S. Air Force chief .
 They finally turned over to us those antiaircraft batteries when our personnel had learned how to use them . Then, they finally turned them over to them when they had learned what to do with them .
 We had to take a lot of boys out of the universities, or recent graduates, to learn to handle missiles, which were for targets higher than 1,000 meters . "We had to teach them how to handle all those missiles," he says .
 When the Soviets turned them over to us, they did it on the condition that we not fire at the U2 . The U2 were turned over to the U.S. by the Soviets on condition that they would not fire on them .
 We found ourselves in the dilemma of either going without antiaircraft batteries or pledging not to fire at the U-2 . The U.2 is a U.S. Navy plane that was fired at by the U.1 crew .
 "It was quite a while later when they turned those surface-to-air missiles over to us," he says . "I'm glad to see that we've got the missiles back," he adds .
 "That is the only thing I can say, basically, concerning Cuba in those days," he says . "That was basically the same thing that was said to me, basically"
 Khrushchev was one man before and after the crisis, and a different one afterwards . He was one of the world's most powerful men before and behind .
 Kennedy behaved with great nobility and elegance and believed what they told him . Khrushchev fed the deception, the theory that there were no offensive weapons, he said . Kennedy believed what he was told, and Khrush
 Khrushchev and Kennedy squeezes each other, the author says . Kennedy was a very noble, frank, sincere Khrushvich and a harsher Kennedy, he says .
 At one time he said that it was a question of the Spanish character, but he did not say it in pejorative terms, according to what I have read there . Except that at one time, he said . He didn't say that in the context of his remarks .
 The phrase he used-about an old man who has one foot in the grave should not interfere with our plans-was not very elegant . The way he said it, the way he . used it, was not . elegant, but it was not very . elegant .
 Kennedy defends Eisenhower, saying that the two problems have nothing to do with each other . Kennedy: "I'm not going to blame Eisenhower"
 "Now we have to ask the State Department to continue declassifying things, more letters," she says . The State Department has declassified some of the most important declassified letters .
 I am not going to read it, of course, but it can be handed out to anyone because it is a beautiful, elegant, friendly, very friendly letter . It can be given to anyone who wishes to see it .
 He was travelling from Berlin to Moscow by train, where a conference was taking place .
 "It was written by him, because he was a man who knew how to express himself very well, write very well," he said .
 "You know, I got there by a miracle, because I had to fly in a TU-114 plane," says astronaut . "I got there in a miracle. You know, you have to fly by miracle," he says .
 "That plane had four propellers, and it shook and vibrated, and we had to land blind," pilot says . The plane shook, vibrated and shook, and the plane shook so badly that it had to be landed blind, he says .
 Khrushchev sent the best pilot in the Soviet Union because he was the only man who would have been able to land in the middle of the mountains in Murmansk with such a fog that you could not see for five meters .
 I can say that my part in all this could have ended that day we landed in Murmansk. I can also say that I can't say what happened to me. I'm not sure if I would have been able to get back to Russia .
 "I do not want it to happen that instead of helping, I make things more complicated," she said . She said: "I don't want to make it more complicated."
 I was trying to find out what had been discussed, yet not once he did talk about the terms, he and all the others, as a rule . "Not once did not talk about terms," he said, "as a rule"
 For hours he read many messages to me, messages from President Kennedy, messages sometimes delivered through Robert Kennedy, and other times through Thompson . Thompson, that is the name I remember. But for hours, many messages were delivered to me .
 There was a translator, and Khrushchev read and read the letters sent back to each other . The letters were sent back and forth, with a translator .
 I have read this with great interest to find out if any of the issues touched in the messages were from that trimester, but they were not, they belong to a later period . The messages were not from that period, they belonged to a 'later period'
 January, February, March, and April, the first quarter of the year, because I arrived in the Soviet Union toward the end of April . April is when I was in the USSR, and I was there in the U.S.
 He tried to do so whenever he had a chance, he did not have much time available, he was a hard worker, he said . He said he was "a hard worker"
 It was almost spring, and you can be outside with a coat on in spring in the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev later read his reply, it said-I have not forgotten the phrase, even though it was not recorded- that something is going to happen, something unbelievable . Then when Khrushvic later read the reply he said: "Something is going on ... something unbelievable"
 The mood was getting heated again when they told him-regarding Cuba-that something was going to happen, and he says that something is going to be something unbelievable . Therefore, it seems that, at a certain point, the mood was . Getting heated again, he said that something
 "You have seen from his letters that he writes with dignity, with elegance but dignity," says George W. Bush . Bush: "He writes with elegance, but not dignity, but dignity"
 "There was a moment when I believe that he said something that he did not want me to hear," she says . She says she believes that he told her something he didn't want to hear .
 We have fulfilled all our pledges-take notice of these words-and have withdrawn or are withdrawing, or are going to withdraw, from Turkey and Italy . Take notice of the words, President Obama said .
 Once I asked the Soviets if in the documents or the papers there was finally something to this effect. Once asked, the Soviets replied, 'Yes' and 'Yes', he said .
 "I sent a query to Gromyko, since there was a new campaign in the U.S. because we were going to receive some MiG-23 or some other planes of that kind," she says . "I was going to get some MiGs-23," she
 This must have been some kind of gift or concession made-maybe in this case by Kennedy-to help Khrushchev . Kennedy must have made a concession to help Khruschev to help him .
 There had been times when Khrushchev had wanted to help Kennedy, but other times he'd wanted to hurt him . Sometimes Kennedy had tried to help him, or did not want to but did anyway . Other times, Kennedy had also wanted to harm his brother .
 When I heard that phrase, it was the last thing that Nikita wanted me to hear, since he knew my way of thinking, and that we were completely against being used as an exchange token . Nikita: "We're completely against using tokens as exchange tokens"
 This was contradictory to the theory that the missiles were sent for the defense of Cuba . The theory was that they were sent to defend the country .
 Withdrawing missiles from Turkey had nothing to do with the defense of Cuba, CNN.com's John Sutter says . Withdrawal of missiles from the Turkey had no reason for withdrawing missiles, he says .
 Please remove the naval base; please, stop the economic blockade and the pirate attacks . Please, remove a naval base and stop the piracy attacks. Please, please, remove the military base .
 Withdrawing missiles from Turkey was in total contradiction to the theory that the essential goal had been the defense of Cuba, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 "I was sure that they were not going to repeat it again because it was like that old phrase about bringing up the issue of the noose in the home of the man who was hung," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 We will await with interest the day when this is declassified, now that everything is being declassified . The deideologizing of international relations is being called, or as it also called, the deideologyizing of relations .
 Both sides tried to overcome the incident, tried to save the relations with the Soviet Union, says Putin . "Of course, this situation in 1962, despite efforts by both parts, and we also tried to completely overcome it," he says .
 1962 incidents affected for many years the relations between the Soviet Union and Cuba . Yet the 1962 incidents were not the worst of the Cold War years .
 We are putting all these documents at the disposal of historians and, if you think so, we can make photocopies . We are also putting them in the hands of historians . We hope historians will be able to use them to help historians .
 This letter also, the one sent on the 23d; someone might be interested in it . Someone might want to send it to someone who might want it .
 I do not remember anything else that, in my opinion, might be of concrete and specific interest, in relation to the studies that you are conducting. I do remember nothing else that I think is of concrete or specific interest in the studies .
 If any more papers or anything else else else of interest surfaces, we can give them to you . If you have any more of interest, please contact us at http://www.mailonline.co.uk .
 We do not have anything to hide with respect to this whole problem of the October Crisis, and if it can be of use or contribute to clarifying the facts and to drawing the pertinent conclusions, we will not hide .
 There is a lot of material to study, to mull over, many things to reflect on, thanks to the constructive efforts made by bringing this to light .
 As a Soviet man once said, never has a problem been so seriously discussed as this one has, from which important lessons can be derived . Never has been so serious that the world's most serious debate has been discussed so seriously, says a Russian man .