 Documents show that U.S. intelligence listed Soviet weapons as "unidentified artillery pieces" when they were actually cruise missiles armed with Hiroshima-sized nuclear devices . The documents show that United States intelligence listed the weapons as ""unidentified artillery pieces"
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended an all-out U.S. invasion of Cuba to destroy the Soviet missile bases . They were deployed to within 15 miles of the Guantanamo base on the same day - October 27, 1962 - that the Joint Chiefs' recommended an invasion .
 President Kennedy rejected the advice of his military advisers in favor of a diplomatic solution to the crisis . The solution included a secret understanding between his brother and the Soviet ambassador . Kennedy rejected military advice from military advisers .
 Dobbs conducted extensive interviews with Soviet combat veterans and discovered previously undisclosed U.S. intelligence documents . The documents explode the myth of successful crisis management and offer new insights into how a . United States president makes decisions at a time of grave international crisis .
 Khrushchev alluded to the threat hanging over the U.S. Naval base at Guantanamo during a meeting in the Kremlin on October 24, 1962, with the president of Westinghouse, William Knox .
 He told Knox that the Guantanamo naval base would “disappear the first day” after a U.S. invasion of Cuba . He said the base would disappear after a United States invasion would take place .
 The Soviets had deployed nuclear cruise missiles to Cuba, armed with 14-kiloton warheads . The missiles were roughly the power of the bomb that destroyed Hiroshima .
 FKR cruise missile regiments were stationed near the port of Mariel in western Cuba and at Mayari Arriba in eastern Cuba . FKR cruises missile units were stationed in western and eastern Cuba.
 A convoy of FKR cruise missiles was moving from Mayari Arriba to a pre-launch position at the village of Vilorio . Khrushchev was speaking with Knox at the time .
 Two Soviet soldiers were killed during this deployment when their truck fell down a ravine . Two Soviet troops were killed in the same incident .
 Soviet soldier Viktor Mikheev was killed when his truck fell down a ravine near Guantanamo naval base . Soviet soldier was killed in the fall of his truck near the base in Guantanamo Bay .
 Several thousand “RUSS/SINO/CUBAN TRPS’s” convoy was transporting “unidentified artillery equipment” from Vilorio to Filipinas . The Marines defending Guantanamo followed the movement of the convoy . The convoy was carrying “Unidentified
 A Navy intelligence message on October 28 gave the precise coordinates for the deployment, but did not identify the missiles . The FKR cruise missiles were deployed by the U.S. Navy .
 The FKR missiles were still in position in Filipinas on November 12, long after the Soviets had begun to dismantle the strategic missile sites . The missiles still remained in position long after they were dismantled by the Soviets .
 Both the Filipinas and Vilorio sites were targeted for air strikes by A4D Skyhawks, operating out of Roosevelt Roads Air Naval Station .
 A GITMO Naval intelligence summary dated November 14 reported that ‘missile launching platforms” had still not been dismantled at the pre-launch site at Vilorio .
 The same intelligence summary reported the arrival of “three artillery pieces (of unknown type) of unknown type in Filipinas from Santiago de Cuba . Three artillery pieces were reported to have arrived in the Philippines .
 The United States evacuated 2,810 women and children from the Guantanamo naval base on October 22, shortly before JFK addressed the nation about the presence of Soviet missiles on Cuba .
 Five thousand U.S. Marines were sent to Guantanamo to reinforce the base . The base could have been wiped out by the Soviets in a matter of minutes .
 If you have Google Earth installed on your computer, you can download the precise coordinates of the Soviet deployment of FKR cruise missiles around Guantanamo by downloading this Google Earth layer .
 One Minute to Midnight is available in One Minute To Midnight, available through Amazon.com . More information on the targeting of the Guantanamo naval base is available on the book .