 Cuba was an ally of the Soviet Union during the Cold War . After the Cuban Revolution of 1959, Cuba became dependent on Soviet markets and military aid .
 In 1972 Cuba joined the COMECON, an economic organization of states designed to create co-operation among the communist planned economies . Cuba was dominated by its largest economy, the Soviet Union, which was dominated in 1972 .
 Moscow kept in regular contact with Havana and shared varying close relations until the end of the Soviet Union in 1991 . Havana and Moscow kept regular contact for decades .
 Cuba entered an era of serious economic hardship, the Special Period . Cuba then entered a period of economic hardship . Cuba's economy then entered an economic crisis .
 Maxim Litvinov, the Soviet ambassador to the U.S. to the United States, set up the first Soviet embassy in Havana in 1943 . Cuban diplomats under the auspices of President Fulgencio Batista visited Moscow the same year .
 Litvinov's successor, Andrei Gromyko, became the ambassador to both the U.S. and Cuba but never visited the latter during his tenure . Litvinovo's successor was the Russian ambassador to Cuba .
 Batista's return to power in a 1952 coup saw the closure of the embassy . The embassy was closed in 1952 after the return of the former dictator .
 The Cuban Revolution propelled Fidel Castro to power on January 1, 1959, but initially attracted little attention in Moscow . After the revolution, the Cuban Revolution became a major political issue in Russia .
 Soviet planners were unprepared for the possibility of a future ally in the region . They were resigned to United States dominance over the Western Hemisphere .
 Khrushchev sent his deputy, Anastas Mikoyan, to Cuba to discover what motivated Castro . Castro had returned from failed trip to Washington, DC, where he was refused a meeting with U.S. President Dwight Eisenhower .
 Khrushchev's aides had initially tried to characterize Castro as an untrustworthy American agent, according to reports . Mikoyan returned from Cuba with the opinion that Castro's new administration should be helped economically and politically .
 Washington's increasing economic embargo led Cuba to seek new markets in a hurry to avert economic disaster . Cuba sought new markets to avoid economic disaster after Washington imposed an increasing embargo on Cuba .
 Khrushchev approved the temporary purchase of Cuban sugar in exchange for Soviet fuel . Castro asked for help from the Soviets, and the Soviets agreed to buy sugar in return .
 The deal was to play a part in sustaining the Cuban economy for many years to come . The deal is expected to last for decades and last for many more .
 Cuban sugar became widely available even during frequent shortages of other food products . It also would play a role in the Soviet economy, with Cuban sugar becoming widely available .
 Castro announced publicly that Cuba was to become a socialist republic in 1961 . After the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion of 1961, Castro announced that Cuba had to become socialist republic .
 Khrushchev sent congratulations to Castro for repelling the invasion . He privately believed that the Americans would soon bring the weight of their regular army to bear . The U.S. invaded Cuba in 1962 .
 The defense of Cuba became a matter of prestige for the Soviet Union . Khrushchev believed that the Americans would block all access to the island by sea or by air .
 Khrushchev and Castro planned to secretly establish a Soviet Armed Forces presence on the island . They planned to announce a defense pact once nuclear-armed ballistic missiles were installed and targeted at the United States .
 A U-2 flight on the morning of October 14 photographed a series of surface-to-air missile sites being constructed . The U.S. military says the missile sites are under construction in Russia .
 U.S. President John F Kennedy announced the discovery of the installations on October 22, 1962 . Kennedy proclaimed that any nuclear missile attack from Cuba would be regarded as an attack by the Soviet Union .
 Castro brothers and Che Guevara became popular figures among the Soviet public . The Castro brothers were reminiscent of the leaders of the Russian Revolution .
 Castro unnerved the Soviet Politburo with his belligerent attitude towards the crisis . He urged the Soviet Union to launch a preemptive nuclear strike to annihilate the U.S.
 On October 26, the Soviets offered to withdraw the missiles in return for U.S. guarantees to avoid carrying out or supporting an invasion of Cuba . The Soviets also offered to remove missiles in southern Italy and in Turkey . In return, the United States agreed to remove all of the missiles
 It led to a thaw in U.S.-Soviet relations but strained Cuban-Soviet relations . The Cuban-U.S. relations were strained by the Cold War .
 Castro was not consulted throughout the Kennedy-Khrushchev negotiations . He was angered by the unilateral Soviet withdrawal of the missiles and bombers . Castro was angry at the unilateral withdrawal of missiles and bomber bombers .
 In 1962, the Soviets created a SIGINT facility in Lourdes, just south of Havana, Cuba . The Soviets created the facility in 1962 .
 The SIGINT facility at Lourdes was among the most significant intelligence collection capabilities targeting the U.S. The facility was part of a major intelligence collection capability targeting the United States .
 The station allowed the Soviets to monitor all U.S. military and civilian communications satellites . The station was abandoned in 2002 .
 Castro made a historic visit to the Soviet Union in June 1963 . He returned from Cuba to recall the construction projects he had seen, specifically the Siberian hydro power stations .
 Castro spoke about the development of Soviet agriculture . Castro also emphasized the necessity for using Soviet experience in solving internal tasks of socialist construction in Cuba .
 Soviet attempts to appease Castro were still marred by a number of difficulties . Castro and Khrushchev negotiated new sugar export deals and agricultural methods to solve the main problem .
 Castro increased contacts with China, exploited the growing Sino-Soviet split . Castro proclaimed his intention to remain neutral and to maintain fraternal relations with all socialist states . Castro also declared his intentions to stay neutral .
 In 1966, Guevara left for Bolivia in an ill-fated attempt to stir up revolution against Alfredo Ovando Candía's U.S.-sponsored military junta Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia . On 23 August 1968, Castro made a public gesture to the Soviet
 Soviet allies deemed the invasion to be an infringement of Czechoslovak sovereignty . In return for his public backing of the invasion, the Soviets bailed out the Cuban economy with extra loans .
 Leonid Brezhnev was the first Soviet leader to visit Cuba or any other country in Latin America . He visited Cuba between 28 January and 3 February 1974 . The visit was a state visit by the Soviet Premier of the USSR .
 Foreign Affairs Minister Andrey Gromyko, Chairman of the State Committee of the Council of Ministers on Foreign Relations Ivan Arkhipov and General Director of TASS Leonid Zamyatin were part of the Soviet delegation .
 Brezhnev arrived at José Martí International Airport and was met with full military honors from the Ceremonial Unit of the Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces . He was greeted by a reception with military honors . The former Soviet Union leader was greeted with military honor .
 Soviet delegation visited Plaza de la Revolución and laid a wreath at the José Martí Memorial before it held talks with Castro in the Palace of the Revolution .
 More than a million Cubans took part in the Cuban-Soviet friendship rally . The rally was held on Revolution Square, in Havana .
 The next day, he held more talks with Castro, his brother Raul and President Osvaldo Dorticos . It was decided that the design and construction of high-voltage power lines in the east and west of Cuba would be carried out .
 On 31 January, both took part in the opening of the Lenin Secondary Special Boarding School .
 Castro and his regime became an important Cold War ally for the Soviets . Cuba's proximity to the U.S. was a key ally of the Soviets during the Cold War . Castro's regime was an important ally to the Soviet Union .
 The relationship was for the most part economic, with the Soviet Union providing military, economic, and political assistance to Cuba . Cuba's relationship with the USSR was largely economic .
 In 1972, Cuba gained membership into the Council of Mutual Economic Assistance . It enhanced strong co-operation in the realm of national economic planning . It increasingly gave Moscow economic control over Cuba .
 From 1976 to 1980, the Soviets invested US$1.1. billion on the construction and remodeling of Cuban factories and industry . The Soviets spent the most of the time in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Between 1981 and 1984 Cuba received approximately US$750 million a year in Soviet military assistance . The Soviets continued to consider Cuba as an important Cold War propaganda tool .
 In 1985, trade with the Soviets accounted for over 70% of Cuba's entire trade . Cuba's trade with Soviet Union accounted for 70% .
 Both nations continued to collaborate on projects in the sciences, technology, sports, education, and education .
 Diplomatic relations cooled until the end of the Soviet Union in 1991 terminated Soviet-Cuban relations . However, throughout the Gorbachev era, diplomatic relations cooled .
 Heightened tensions best characterized diplomatic relations between Cuba and the Soviet Union throughout the Gorbachev era . Heightened tension best characterized relations between the two countries during the Cold War era .
 The introduction of his Soviet reforms of perestroika and glasnost and his ""new thinking"" on the foreign policy set off an economic crisis in the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union faced a varying array of problems when Gorbachev took power after the death of General Secretary
 Gorbachev's attempts at reforms provoked the strengthening of a vocal opposition frustrated with the pace of reforms . The Soviet Union was at odds with Cuba after the Soviet-Cuba relations deteriorated .
 The transition during perestroika towards market reforms weakened the Soviet ruble . It resulted in a reduction of basic subsidies and widespread shortages of basic goods, a loss of jobs, and decreased productivity .
 The economic difficulties spread to other areas of Eastern Europe and other Soviet satellites, such as Cuba . Cuba was one of the most economically troubled countries in the world .
 In essence, perestroika undermined the Soviet Union's ability to live up to its economic commitments to Cuba . In 1986, Castro embarked on his own set of reforms, which was called the ""rectification of errors""
 Castro intended to forestall or eradicate any reformist ideas spreading in Cuba prompted by radical political and economic reforms in the Soviet Union or elsewhere in Eastern Europe . Castro intended for the reforms to prevent or to eradicate any ideas spreading from Cuba .
 The Cuban policies and perestroika were diametrically opposed and highlighted the unravelling of the Soviet-Cuban relationship . The Cuban policy was diametrally opposed to that of Soviet policies .
 The effects of glasnost on political criticism and discussion in the Soviet Union further strained the Cuban-Soviet alliance . Cuban President Castro Castro was assassinated in 1961 .
 Castro bashed glasnost during a joint Soviet-Cuban conference in Havana in 1988 . Soviet elite became more critical of Soviet foreign policy towards Cuba, and critical articles soon emerged .
 In April 1989, Gorbachev attempted to convince Castro to take a more positive attitude towards the Soviet Union . In his visit to rekindle ties with Cuba in April 1989 he visited the island to try and convince Castro of taking a positive stance .
 Gorbachev was only the second Soviet leader to visit Latin America . The visit was mostly a symbolic gesture since Castro declared the Soviet-Cuban alliance as void .
 Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze declared the meeting to be a ""milestone in Soviet-Cuban relations" relations rapidly declined after Gorbachev's return to Moscow . By 1990, Moscow had found it increasingly difficult to meet its economic responsibilities to Havana .
 In 1985, it had paid over eleven times the world price for Cuban sugar, but in 1989, it paid only three times that price . In 1989, the price of Cuban sugar dropped to just three times the price .
 As the economy continued to decline, members of the Soviet elite grew more critical of the unequal terms of trade . The Soviet elite became critical of unequal terms .
 Cuban government forced to look elsewhere for foreign investment and trade . Cuba's economy has been hit hard by a lack of foreign investment in recent years .
 Cuban government in 1990 and 1991 established tariff-free trading agreements to boost imports and exports . Government gave foreign entities more autonomy and generous tax incentives . Diversified Cuba's economy by focusing more on pharmaceutical industry and tourism .
 The agreement set sugar at world market prices with the intent to reduce Cuban dependence on the Soviet Union . The agreement was intended to reduce Cuba's dependence on Soviet Union sugar .
 In June 1991, the Soviets disbanded the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance, which had been a huge basis for the alliance . The council disbanded in June 1991 .
 Gorbachev's ""new thinking" attempted to remove Marxist ideology from east–west relations . That further strained the Cuban economic situation . Gorbama's 'new thinking' also strained Cuba's economy .
 His new foreign policy took on a new orientation that stressed international independence, non-offensive defence, multilateral co-operation and the use of the political process to solve security issues .
 Castro and Gorbachev had ideological differences over disarmament, international conflicts in Nicaragua and Angola, and the debt crisis in the developing world created irreconcilable differences .
 Gorbachev announced on September 11, 1991, that all Soviet troops would be removed from Cuba . The announcement was part of a cooling of Cold War tensions .
 Castro believed Marxism undermined Cuba's struggle against U.S. imperialism . Gorbachev's move symbolized his efforts to eliminate Marxism from Soviet foreign policy, Castro said .
 Cuban leaders felt that they had less to lose and began openly criticism of Soviet reforms . After a Soviet coup attempt in August 1991, Cuban leaders began openly criticizing the reforms .
 An editorial in Granma several days after the coup wrote that in the Soviet Union, politicians favour the process of privatization and the acceleration to the market economy . An editorial on the coup said that politicians favour privatization .
 From 1985 to 1991, Soviet-Cuban relations continued, as Moscow wanted the relationship with Cuba to be reformed, not terminated . Havana relied on continued Soviet investment and trade from Moscow .
 Perestroika and Gorbachev's other reforms quickly eroded the economic and political alliance between the Cubans and the Soviets . It became increasingly difficult for the Soviets to maintain their trade commitments to Cuba .
 Castro publicly criticized Soviet reformism after 1989 . Castro hoped Soviet communism to survive perestroika . After 1989 he publicly criticized reformism but hoped it would survive .
 The end of the Soviet Union in December 1991 had an immediate and devastating effect on Cuba . Cuba was devastated by the collapse of Soviet Union . Cuba suffered a devastating economic downturn in 1991 .
 Valuable aid and trading privileges ended for Cuba, with the Soviet Union no longer existing . Valuable trade and trade privileges ended with Cuba ending .
 Cuba is the only Marxist nation in the Western Hemisphere . Cuba can no longer maintain its political status . Cuba soon entered a fiscal crisis .
 Soviet Union alone imported 80% of Cuban sugar and 40% of citrus . The Soviet Union imported the sugar and citrus .
 The end of the Soviet Union led to great isolation and economic hardship in Cuba . Oil imports dropped from 13 million tons in 1989 to about 3 million tons with Russia .
 List of Soviet ambassadors in Cuba . As per the Russian Embassy's site . List of ambassadors in Cuban Cuba .