 Google Scholar Indexing is a free form of search engine . Use this article to help students with reading comprehension comprehension and vocabulary . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport .
 Sign in via your Institution . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN.com . Send your photos to the gallery at the bottom of the page .
 The episode is widely regarded as the closest the world has come to nuclear war . It was certainly the most dramatic standoff in the Cold War .
 Washington and Moscow had the sense to recognize how matters could escalate dangerously out of control . Deal was made in which the missiles would be withdrawn in exchange for a U.S. pledge not to invade Cuba and a secret arrangement .
 The aftermath saw bickering over the terms of the settlement, and strained Soviet-Cuban relations . It was a more cordial climate of Soviet-American relations that brought arms control measures .
 The confrontation has generated a massive and still-growing literature, examining diplomacy and crisis management, secret intelligence, civil defense, command and control, international law, and even linguistic analysis of the talks within the White House .
 Decades after the crisis, many aspects of the crisis remain contested, and knowledge still grows with new interpretative frameworks and with the continued release of official documents . Decades later, knowledge continues to grow with new interpretations and release of documents .
 The end of the Cold War brought greater access to Soviet documentation and generated oral history testimony from participants .
 Historians acknowledge that Cuba was an actor as well as acted upon . Unfortunately, Cuban documentation is practically nonexistent, although historians acknowledge that .
 Without the Cuban decision to accept missiles, the Cuban missile crisis would not have occurred . The Cuban decision was made to accept the missiles, Cuban officials say .
 Both books are engagingly written accounts that draw extensively on fresh sources . Both books were written by Americans living in the Middle East .
 Colman 2016 draws on documents from archives across the world to place the missile crisis in its wider international and chronological context . Colman is based on a study of the history of the Korean peninsula's missile crisis .
 The analysis in Garthoff 1989 is enriched by the author’s experience as an official providing guidance to the White House . The analysis is enriched .
 Updated version of the political science standard, presenting three theoretical models for understanding what went on . Updated versions of the standard .
 Presents the crisis as international event beyond the United States, the Soviet Union, and Cuba . Explains some of the aftereffects up to 1970 .
 Detailed account of the missile crisis that sets the episode in its broader Cold War context . Remains that the war in Vietnam stemmed from a misplaced belief in Washington after October 1962 .
 A cogent narrative highlights areas of historical debate, as well as omissions in the record . The book is published by Aleksandr Fursenko .
 A lucid and engaging introduction, which uses Soviet and Cuban materials alongside American materials . Your subscription doesn't include the subject .