 The revelation marked the beginning of a thirteen-day crisis that saw the U.S. deliver an ultimatum to the Soviet Union . The crisis saw the world verge on a nuclear holocaust .
 Taylor characterised the Cuban missile crisis as the two most important weeks in human history . Taylor: The two most significant weeks of human history were the Cuban missiles crisis .
 Taylor may have overstated, but he reminded us that this was the closest we have come to extinguishing human civilisation . It was the close we have to extinguish human civilisation, he said .
 This crisis saw the Soviet Union accede to U.S. demands . It has been called President John F Kennedy's and America's finest hour .
 It has been described as a sobering experience for the president and the superpowers, leading to d6tente . It has also been described by the president as an experience for him .
 The missile crisis has also been called a reckless display of power that had some unfortunate repercussions . But, in current historical revision, the missile crisis also has some unfortunate consequences .
 Almost everyone over the age of forty or so remembers the events of the 13 days in October . Almost everyone in the U.S. remembers the October 13 events .
 This paper reviews the causes and conduct of the crisis and the significant results . This paper is based on the causes, conduct and significant results from the crisis . It also reviews the conduct and the results of that crisis .
 It is particularly appropriate to review the Cuban missile crisis becaus abundance of new evidence that has become available in the past three y part of the process of glasnost .
 Presidential advisers like McGeorge Bundy, C Douglas Dillo MacNamara and Theodore Sorensen have joined these conclaves . Presidential advisers have joined them .
 Most of the key actors are dead, but those who were younge officials have offered their views . On the side of the side, most of the . side, the . sides of the war are dead .
 We have heard from, among other Khrushchev's son, Fyodor Burlatsky, one of the Soviet leader's son's speechwriters, and Sergo Mikoyan .
 Sergei Khrushchev has related what his father told him many years ago about the missile crisis . Sergei has said that his father's words about the crisis have changed since then .
 Scholars know that they must examine these dialogues and interviews carefully . But scholars must examine them carefully, they say .
 Neither the Soviet Union nor Cuba has yet declassified documents on the missile crisis . Neither country has yet released any of the documents .
 Scholars, the John F Kennedy Library and organisations like the National Security Archive of Washington, DC, have used the mandatory declassification review process and the Freedom of Information Act to open files .
 Documentary evidence has encouraged Kennedy-era officials to speak extensively about the crisis . This new documentary evidence has been released in the wake of the Kennedy assassination .
 Eisenhower and Latin America is the subject of a new book on Eisenhower's role in Latin America . The author's work on Latin America has been published in the past .
 Using declassified evidence, I traced the growing hostility between the U.S. and Fidel Castro's Cuba . Using newly declassified documents, we traced the relationship between the United States and Cuba .
 The bulk of the new documentary evidence relates to the origins of the crisis . I shall devote much of my paper to this subject .
 Scholars agree that the Soviet Union gambled reck ing missiles in Cuba . In retrospect, scholars agree that it was a gamble .
 Khrushchev must have anticipated Kennedy and U.S. intelligence agencies would quickly discover the siles . The siles were discovered by the Soviet Union and the United States .
 Kennedy believed that he would be 'impeached' if he did not challenge . Khrushchev should have known that Kennedy would have challenged him . Kennedy believed he would have been 'imputated' if not .
 Khrushchev said he wanted to protect Castro and counterbalance U.S. missiles in Turkey . The Soviet premier wanted to counterbalance United States missiles in the country .
 During the 1960 presidential campaign, candidate John Kennedy alleged that during the 1950s the Eisenhower/Nixon team had allowed a 'missile gap' to develop .
 Khrushchev knew that Kennedy and the U.S. Defense establishment understood that there was a 'missile gap' but that it favoured the United States . Kennedy knew there was the gap but it favoured his country .
 Department of Defense official Roswell Gilpatric pointed to the United States strategic superiority in a speech in October 1961 . In fact, Roswell said the U.S. had a strategic superiority to the Soviet Union .
 President Kennedy accelerated United States military spending . Kennedy accelerated U.S. military spending in the wake of the Vietnam War .
 In terms of inter-continental ballistic missiles, the U.S. had a better than four to one advantage . The United States was rapidly expanding its advantage, the author says .
 The Soviets had approximately twenty ICBMs on their soil in October 1962 . Secretary of Defense MacNamara conceded that the Soviets could possibly have surmised that the U.S. was contemplating developing a first-strike capability .
 The fifteen Jupiter missiles positioned in Turkey also bear re-examination . The 15 Jupiter missiles are positioned in the country .
 The Kennedy administration's stance after the crisis was that these medium-range missiles were old, obsolete, unthreatening . Kennedy had previously ordered their removal, and that, in any case, Kennedy had ordered them removed .
 Minutes of the meetings of the EXCOMM group, convened by President Kennedy to consider the crisis suggest different perceptions . ExCOMM was formed by a special committee convened by the president .
 At the beginning of the crisis, on 16 October, the president speculated on Soviet motivations . President speculated on the Soviet motivations.
 Although the Jupiters had been authorised in 1959, President Dwight Eisenhower delayed their deployment, probably judging that they were unnecessarily provocative . President Eisenhower delayed the deployment of them in 1959 .
 The missiles were deployed in mid-1961 after the stormy meeting in Vienna between Kennedy and Khrushchev . They became operational in April 1962, and were turned over to Turkish forces on 22 October 1962 .
 Kennedy had ordered a study to consider the missiles in Turkey, but he had not actually ordered them removed . Kennedy had previously ordered the missiles removed .
 Cuba is frequently depicted as a pawn in the Cold War . As a client state of the Soviet Union, Cuba is often depicted as an enemy of the West .
 The release of the photographs led to calls in the United States for an invasion or bombing of Cuba . The U-2 reconnaissance plane took photos of Cuba during the mission .
 It is on these questions that the most new documentary evidence exists . It's on the questions of whether the government is complicit in the murder of Americans .
 The most likely sequence of events that led to the agreement on offensive weapons is that in the spring of 1962 Khrushchev and his advisers began contemplating sending missiles to Cuba . The most plausible sequence of the events is that the Soviet-Cuban agreement was reached in 1962 .
 Ernesto 'Ch6' Guevara, Fidel Castro's trusted adviser, travelled to Moscow in late August/early September . This plan was initiated by Ratil Castro, the Cuban leader's brother, during his visit to Moscow .
 The traditional explanation of U.S. policy during the Soviet-Cuban plotting is that the United States was shocked by the discovery of the 14 October discovery . Now the traditional explanation for the discovery was that the U.K. was shocked .
 The U.S. claimed it only acted to warn the Soviets about putting offensive weapon systems in Cuba . The Bay of Pigs invasion fiasco of April 1961 led to the death of the Cuban people .
 Between April 1961 and October 1962, the U.S. launched no hostile missions against Castro's Cuba . The United States did not launch any hostile missions in Cuba .
 After 1975, that history had to be modified with the revelations of the Church Committee . The Church Committee had to change history after 1975 .
 From 1960 through 1963, the United States persistently attempted to assassinate Fidel Castro . The U.S. tried to kill Fidel Castro from 1960 to 1963 . Fidel Castro was assassinated in 1963 . The Castro family was killed in 1961 .
 The Church Committee recorded eight specific attempts on the Cuban's life . The church committee recorded eight attempts on his life .
 Operation Mongoose authorised the Central Intelligence Agency to train Cubans to infiltrate the island and carry out sabotage activities . Approved by President Kennedy in November 1961, it authorised the CIA to train Cuban spies .
 CIA-trained saboteurs burned cane fields and blew up factories and oil storage tanks . CIA-trained saboteur blew up cane fields, blew up oil tanks and factories .
 Kennedy administration officials tended to dismiss Operation Mongoose as a harassment and spoiling campaign, not a second Bay of Pigs . When faced with this new evidence in the mid-1970s, Kennedy administration thought it was a harassment campaign .
 Documents suggest that a U.S. invasion of Cuba was central to hopes for Operation Mongoose's success . The covert programme was intended to have the capacity to produce a pretext for direct U. States intervention .
 Hopefully an uprising could spark an uprising that would provide a justification for a massive rescue mission carried out by U.S. armed forces . The uprising could be sparked by an uprising .
 This interpretation emerges from the guidelines established for Operation Mongoose and from declassified minutes of Colonel Lansdale's group meetings .
 During the first ten months of 1962, the Pentagon worked intensively on contingency plans for an invasion of Cuba . The Pentagon, on orders from the president and secretary of defense, also worked on plans .
 On 5 October 1961, President Kennedy ordered the joint chiefs of staff to begin contingency planning for Fidel Castro's removal from Cuba .
 As part of the planning process, in April, May and August of 1962, United States military forces carried out large-scale manoeuvres .
 'Operation Mongoose Plan B Plus' called for provoking a full-scale revolt in Cuba requiring a U.S. military response . Kennedy authorised the development of the plan in August 1962 .
 On 2 October, Secretary of Defense MacNamara ordered the JCS to intensify preparations for either an air strike or invasion of Cuba by 20 October . The JCS has been tasked with preparing for either a strike or a Cuban invasion by the end of October .
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy told Lansdale and the CIA that he wanted 'massive sabotage activity' directed immediately against Cuba . On 4 October, Attorney General Kennedy said he wanted a 'massive' attack on Cuba .
 The Pentagon ordered aircraft, ships and troops into position in Florida, reinforced the United States military base at Guantinamo Bay . The Pentagon also pre-positioned supplies such as petroleum, oil and lubricants .
 Plans and movements indicate something more than routine contingency planning . These plans and movements are not routine .
 Before drawing conclusions from this new evidence, however, we should be cautious, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Intensive preparations for an attack on Cuba are related to growing alarm in the United States about Soviet shipments of conventional weapons, including surface to air missiles, to Cuba .
 The Soviets decided in the summer of 1962 to station medium-range 12 . The Soviets, in . 1962, decided to station 12.2 miles of Soviet Union territory . The mission was the first of its kind .
 Kennedy administration officials have denied that President Kennedy would have ordered, without provocation, an invasion of Cuba . Administration officials have vociferously and repeatedly denied that .
 A question about the origins of the Cuban missile crisis arises . The origins of this crisis arise .
 President Kennedy's performance during the Cuban missile crisis has been praised as a superb example of crisis management . a naval blockade of Cuba, labelled a military quarantine, the pres. his demand of having the Soviets dismantle the missile sites .
 Am that 'we went eyeball to eyeball with the Russians and they blink phers, such as Arthur Schlesinger Jr and Theodore Sorensen, high marks for resisting pressure from military strike on Cuba .
 Prior to the declassification of documents, schol asking hard questions, particularly about the tactic of issuing a pu to the Soviets .
 In return for the removal of missiles, the U.S. publicly pledged not to invade Cuba . The So Jupiter missiles in Turkey would be dismantled . In return, the missiles were removed from Cuba .
 Ambassador Nations Adlai Stevenson actually suggested this compromise meeting . Ambassador Stevenson suggested the compromise .
 Stevenson's diplo ruled out private negotiations and recommended the public ultimat . Scholars have wondered whether the 42 medium-range mis radically undermined the balance of power, thereby justifying a p 15 .
 The Cuban missiles would be under the cover of the U.S. early-warning system for ballistic missile attacks . The Cuban missile system would be used by the United States in Cuba .
 The Cuban missile crisis foreshadowed Henry Kissinger's argument of the 1970s that strategic superiority conferred negligible diplomatic or military advantage . Henry Kissinger argued in the 1980s that such an advantage was negligible in terms of diplomacy .
 Even without the Cuban missiles, the Soviet Union had the nuclear capacity in 1962 to inflict unacceptable damage on the U.S. The Soviet Union was capable of inflicting unacceptable damage, experts say .
 The new evidence raises further questions about public ultimatums and the ability of leaders to control events once they have initiated them .
 At the height of the crisis, on 27 October, a U-2 plane was shot down over Cuba . The U.S. was the first U.2 to be shot down in Cuba .
 The Soviet military officer who ordered the firing of the SAM did so probably without authorisation from Moscow . It is thought to have been ordered by a military officer in the country .
 On the same day, another U-2, experiencing an equipment malfunction, wandered over Soviet airspace . The U.2 was experiencing a malfunction, but it was not malfunctioning .
 Soviet fighters scrambled to intercept it; United States fighters left Alaska to rescue it . The U.S. left Alaska after it was intercepted by Soviet fighters . The United States was able to rescue the aircraft .
 US leaders realised that if the U.S. attacked Cuba there could be Soviet casualties, but they could not calculate how high that risk was . They believed the Soviets had a few thousand personnel in Cuba .
 U.S. officials forgot to inform the Soviets exactly where they had drawn the quarantine line . Another error was that, until 27 October, the Soviets had not known exactly where the line had been drawn .
 The U.S. launched a test ICBM that was stationed near armed ICBMs . And, during the crisis, the United States also launched an ICBM .
 The Cuban missile crisis also demonstrated that in a public confrontation leaders can forfeit decision-making power to operational personnel . Leaders can also forfeit decision making power in public confrontation, experts say .
 The commander of the Strategic Air Command issued DEFCON 2 alert instructions in the clear, rather than in code, because he wanted to impress the Soviets with U.S. power .
 During the crisis, United States warships forced Soviet submarines that patrolled near the quarantine line to surface . U.S. warships forced submarines to surface during the crisis . Soviet submarines were also forced to surface by the United States .
 Naval commander dropped depth charges to force Soviet submarine to surface . In one case, a naval commander chose the high-risk option of dropping light depth charges .
 Kennedy administration detained a 60-man Cuban attack team scheduled to sail from Florida . Kennedy administration worried that teams already in Cuba would inflame the situation .
 President Kennedy's men, the EXCOMM committee, were briefed on the missile crisis . The committee was briefed by President Kennedy on the effects of the crisis .
 For thirteen days they worked continuously, under extreme pressure and with little sleep . For 13 days, they worked under little sleep and under little pressure .
 Ambassador Adlai Stevenson had memory lapses brought on by emotional and nervous tension . Ambassador Stevenson was in the middle of his nervous breakdowns .
 During the crisis, advisers who favoured diplomacy were unable to argue their cases effectively . The crisis was the result of a lack of diplomacy in Britain .
 We have little new evidence to assist us in assessing the results of the missile crisis and determining its effect on the history of the Cold time, we can only ask a few tentative questions .
 Both John and Robert Kennedy seemed personally sobered by crisis and the realisation that they could have lost control of events . The Kennedy brothers were sobered that they felt like they had lost control .
 Robert Divine opined, the first two years in office served as the of John F Kennedy . Robert Divine has opined that the first 2 years of Kennedy's presidency were the best years of his presidency .
 During his last year in office, the president l . established a direct telephone link or 'hot-line' between and Moscow to prevent nuclear miscalculation .
 The Limited Test Ban Treaty of 1963 was signed by the U.S. President Eisenhower . The test ban on nuclear weapons in the atmosphere was a result of the test ban .
 In November 1963, for example, a French journalist was asked to act as an intermediary between himself and Fi . Nevertheless, the covert war against Castro continued .
 The tration sporadically mounted sabotage campaigns against Cuba in 1963 . In 1963, the tration mounted sabotages against Cuba .
 Day that the president was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, the CIA ha vous in Paris with an anti-Castro Cuban and passed to him a poisonous hypodermic needle .
 In view of the agreements he struck with the United States, Nikita also seemed to have a new attitude about the Cold War . Nikita seemed to be taking a new look at the situation in the U.S.
 Whether we can answer those questions will depend upon gaining access to Soviet and Cuban archives, says CNN.com .
 When it does, we shall be able to ask new, hard questions about Soviet and Cuban behaviour and policies . When it comes to Cuba, we can ask new questions about its behaviour and policy .
 In the 1990s all minutes of EXCOMM meetings will be declassified . We can probably expect, however, that in the . 1990s, all minutes will be released .
 When the full documentary record is open for scholarly research, we should have a full understanding of these most important two weeks in human history, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .