 Cuba has long been an ally of America and a large American naval base in Cuba . Many Americans owned businesses in Cuba and many American naval bases in the island nation . Cuba has been a major ally of the U.S. in Cuba for decades .
 He was supported by America because he was anti-communist . But he was corrupt and very unpopular with many Cubans . He was also unpopular with people in Cuba .
 In 1959, after 3 years of attempts, Fidel Castro, removed Batista from power and took control of Cuba . Fidel Castro took over Cuba from the Batista in 1959 .
 He took over U.S. owened land and businesses and gave the land to odinary Cuban Farmers . The land was taken over by the Cuban government .
 Eisenhower authorised the CIA to investigate ways of overthrowing Castro in 1960s . Eisenhower authorised CIA to look at ways to overthrow Castro . The CIA was tasked with overthrowing the Castro regime .
 CIA provided support and funds to Cuban exiles and investigated ways of disrupting the Cuban economy . CIA investigated ways to disrupt Cuban economy in Cuba . CIA provided funds to Cuba's exiles, investigated how to disrupt economy .
 January 1961, the new President, John F Kennedy, broke off diplomatic relations with Cuba . He supplied arms, equipment and transport to 1,400 anti-Castro Cuban exiles to invade Cuba and overthrow Castro .
 In April 1961, the exiles leanded at the 'Bay of Pigs' on the Cuban coast . The exiles landed at the Bay of Pigs on the coast of Cuba .
 Castro's troops were met by 20,000 troops, armed with tanks and modern weapons . They were met with tanks, modern weapons and tanks . Castro's forces were armed with modern weapons.
 Castro's troops captured or killed all 1,400 Cuban exiles within a few days . Castro's forces killed or captured all 1.400 Cuban dissidents . Castro was the Cuban president of Cuba .
 After the Bay of Pigs, the USSR supplied Cuba with more weapons . Most significant of these were nuclear missiles .
 The USSR had many cheap, medium range missiles than the USA . The launch site near the U.S. coast was ideal for the launch .
 Missiles in Cuba were a huge propaganda victory against the USA and boosted his reputation . Missile in Cuba was a propaganda victory for the Cuban government .
 On 14th October 1962 a U.S. spy plane photographed the construction of the Soviet missile site in Cuba . Do nothing which would make Kennedy look weak . Kennedy's Options: Do nothing .
 Surgical air attack to destroy the nclear bases could encourage a counter attack . Invade Cuba by air and sea would illicit an equivalent soviet response . Invaded Cuba by sea and air would illicit a similar response to an invasion by Soviet forces .
 Use diplomatic pressure by getting the UN to intervene and negotiate if the USA was forced to back it would be a sign of weakness . Use diplomacy to get the United Nations to intervene in negotiations .
 U2 spy plane flies over Cuba and takes photographs of Soviet nuclear missiles . Blockade Cuba so that no more Soviet weapons can be delivered to Cuba would not solve the problem and may result in retaliation .
 Gromyko denies there are any 'offensive' missiles in Cuba . Kennedy broadcasts live on U.S. TV and tells the American public about the exsistance of missiles . 24 October 1962 The blockade begins .
 Khrushchev propings trade of Soviet missiles in Cuba for Ameican missiles in Turkey . American military forces put on alert and go to DEFCON 2 one step away from war .
 USA and USSR set up a direct telephone link between the Kremlin and the White HOuse . USA and Russia set up phone link between Moscow and White Huse .
 Kennedy seen by the world as the victor he had stood up to the soviets and backed down . The USA Kennedy seen as the winner of the war . Kennedy was seen as a victor in the world .
 He had also stood up to his military advisors who had wanted to invade Cuba . He had stood up against the idea of invading Cuba .
 Kennedy removed missiles from Turkey from Turkey . Castro remained in power and communist threat remained . Kennedy removed missile from Turkey, but Castro still in power .
 Kennedy had made many enemies - some key generals thought he was not really prepared to fight communism . Kennedy's enemies thought he wasn't prepared for the fight against communism .
 The USSR was shown to have lied about the nuclear missiles in Cuba . Khrushchev had been forced to back down and ordered the missiles to be removed from Cuba . In 1964 the USSR was replaced as Soviet leader .