 The commander-in-chief test will move to front and center of the discussion .
 Kennedy faced the question in the 13 days of the Cuban missile crisis . It was a key moment in the Cuban crisis .
 Kennedy's decision was to find a way to get rid of nuclear missiles in Cuba before it came to that . Kennedy had publicly drawn a red line the previous month . He says the decision was less about whether Soviet long-range missiles were worth fighting for .
 Kennedy faced a series of decisions in the aftermath of the crisis that were even more difficult . Kennedy's first weeks were in those first weeks in those weeks .
 Talk of air strikes and blockades and invasions continued out of the public eye . And those weeks were even more fraught with danger than we knew, as we knew .
 Getting through 13 days of the Cuban missile crisis without war required cool heads and careful decision-making . Getting through the 13 days without war needed cool heads .
 On the 13th day of the crisis, Khrushchev caved, the world sighed with relief, and school children could take a break from their duck and cover drills . But the crisis didn’t simply evaporate with one radio broadcast . Kennedy’s own secret White
 The missiles were still in Cuba, as were dozens of short-range tactical nuclear weapons, nuclear bombers, and tens of thousands of Soviet troops . Khrushchev’s promise to remove the missiles wasn’t part of some trick .
 It just might be “a gigantic hoax of which history has had no parallel,” worried Secretary of State Dean Rusk in a moment secretly captured by Kennedy's hidden tape recorders .
 On the 12th day of the crisis, a Soviet missile had shot down a U-2, killing the pilot . The pilot was killed by the missile, which was shot down by the Soviets .
 In one episode revealed for the first time on these tapes, Kennedy was forced to confront that issue directly . Planes flying the low-level missions were returning to base with holes from Cuban bullets . And planes flying the planes were returning with holes .
 Preliminary reports had come in that another American surveillance plane had been shot down over Cuba . The plane is believed to have been a U.S. surveillance plane shot down .
 Kennedy mulled his options waiting for the Pentagon to confirm the Pentagon's decision . Kennedy mulls his options as he waits for the report .
 President Nixon knew he would face scorching political pressure when word leaked out that another plane was down . It was the day before the 1962 midterm elections . He faced scorching pressure from the public .
 Kennedy was handed a reprieve that day, but retaliation could easily spiral into war . Kennedy was given a reprieved that day .
 A secret recording of the president confronting the decision in real-time and in intimate detail . It was a false alarm that Cuban fighters had scrambled but not actually shot down a plane . The president confronts the decision based on the kind of incomplete and flawed information he's given .
 The decision about what was and was not worth fighting for was one Kennedy faced many other times in the weeks after the 13 days . The focus shifted from missiles of October to the rest of the formidable arsenal the Soviets sent .
 The Soviets were refusing to remove them from the deal, they said . They said they were not part of the deal . The Soviets said they would not remove them .
 The Americans knew about some of them, although they didn't know that Moscow’s plan was to hand them over to Fidel Castro . It would have made Cuba the world's fifth nuclear power overnight, which would have been given to Castro .
 With a range of about 25 miles, they could “deal bloody hell with Guantanamo,” as Marine Corps Commandant General David Shoup told Kennedy, but they couldn’t reach the United States . Tens of thousands of Soviet troops still in Cuba .
 Kennedy navigated those weeks by choosing carefully where to apply pressure . Kennedy navigates those weeks with carefully where he applied pressure .
 He got some of what he wanted, but he was also forced to compromise and accept a level of risk . He was forced to accept risk, but also accept some of the risks .
 The Americans decided not to push explicitly for removal of the short-range missiles . The U.S. did not want to remove the missile range .
 In vice presidential debate, Paul Ryan claimed the mantle of John F Kennedy’s tax plan . Ryan claimed to be the man behind the tax reform .
 Kennedy’s more enduring legacy is how he faced the commander-in-chief test . Kennedy faced the test of his leadership in the early years of his presidency .
 Kennedy faced a series of decisions in the aftermath of the crisis that were in many ways even more difficult . The decision was less about whether Soviet long-range nuclear missiles were worth fighting for .
 "There were also dozens of short-range nuclear missiles in Cuba. Should he order air strikes on the airfields to take them out?"
 In the vice presidential debate, Paul Ryan claimed the mantle of John F Kennedy’s tax plan . And Khrushchev would be taken at his word that he was going to remove the troops .