 The Russians sent nuclear-tipped missiles to Cuba with the two-fold purpose of trying to deter any use of force aimed at toppling Fidel Castro and countering American Jupiter missile emplacements in Italy and Turkey .
 Moscow's risky move -which also entailed giving commanders commanders some authority to launch their missiles in the event of an American attack - led to a 13-day crisis that came all too close to ending .
 President Kennedy secretly acceded to a Russian request to remove the intermediate-range Jupiters from sites within striking range of Moscow . Also, President John F Kennedy secretly agreed to remove them from sites in striking range .
 For half a century, both sides have lived up to the terms of the bargain . For 50 years, the United States and Britain have been at odds with each other for 50 years .
 The durable success of the solution to this earlier showdown should suggest how we might resolve the festering nuclear crisis with Iran, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Israeli-Iranian antipathy is surely an accelerant in this matter as well . Ahmadinejad is no doubt implicitly referring to the United States .
 The heart of the dispute lies in mutual fear -as can be seen even in Prime Minister Netanyahu's high-school-style poster presentation at the U.N. last week .
 Iran's mullahs would further undermine their already shaky support with significant slices of Iranian society . But if they declined this peace offer, the international community would firm up its unified economic and military opposition .
 More adventurism would simply be a change at the margin, easily coped with through skillful diplomacy . At best, though, it would be simply a change in the margin . Diplomatic diplomacy and counter-terrorist forces from many nations would be key to success .
 Iran might accept a no-invasion pledge, agree to cease any nuclear weapons efforts, then secretly continue to build a bomb . There are two responses to the objection that Iran might agree to stop building a bomb, but secretly build it .
 Tehran would have to submit to rigorous U.N. monitoring that would make cheating very hard . The first is that Tehran must submit to a rigorous United Nations monitoring regime . Tehran would also have to comply with the United Nations .
 The cost of getting caught would be quite high, leading to the imposition of even stricter sanctions and providing a clear rationale for the use of force against the regime . Second, the cost of being caught would also lead to stricter sanctions, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 There is no way for an American president to make such a deal and then go back on it, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "There's no way" for a U.S. president to go back, he says .
 Ten more will honor an agreement of this sort if one is made with Tehran . Ten more countries will honor such an agreement if they make an agreement .
 The attractiveness of the deal to the Iranians, and the way it binds those making it, means that the most serious impediment to proceeding is likely to be opposition by the U.S. and Israel .
 American reluctance to negotiate will continue to be driven by the poisoned relations that have persisted since the 1979 hostage-taking at the U.S. embassy in Tehran . U.N. Embassy in Tehran was taken hostage in 1979 .
 Israeli resistance to such a solution will be fueled by understandable anger with a regime that calls for Israel’s destruction . Israel's resistance to a solution is fueled by anger with the regime that routinely calls for its destruction .
 It is time for the leaders of both countries to calculate costs, risks, and benefits most carefully . Nevertheless, it is time to consider the risks and benefits of the project, writes Andrew Hammond .
 A Cuban-style deal might shore up the regime and allow Iran to punch above its weight in world affairs . Yes, a Cuban style deal could shore up Iran's regime .
 Fidel Castro surely benefited in these ways from the negotiated solution to the Missile Crisis . Fidel Castro's government negotiated a deal with the U.S. to avoid the crisis .
 Iran must not become a nuclear-armed state, but it must be seen as outweighing other concerns about its behavior in the wake of a pact .
 The other great gain to be had, by all three principal protagonists, would be better relations with the world . All three main protagonists would benefit from their efforts to improve relations with world .
 Iran’s isolation would diminish, and the images of both Israel and the U.S. would be much improved . Iran's isolation would also diminish, as would the image of Israel and America .
 Security of all three would be enhanced at the same time as the security of the three . This at the . same time that security of all . three would also be enhanced . This is the same . time that the security . of all the three would have been enhanced .
 Not bad for the seemingly zero-sum world of power politics, where anybody's gain is supposed to be someone else’s loss . The White House has been accused of being too cozy with the White House .
 The only question now is whether some leader will come forth to make the proposal officially .
 Thucydides, who noted that pride and fear were prime movers on the path to war, would probably recommend that a neutral third party should come forward . The disputants themselves would be unlikely to grab at this chance for peace .
 He was surely right when it came to ancient Athens and Sparta; and probably still correct when it comes to America, Israel, and Iran today . He was right when he came to the ancient Athens, Sparta, and was right .
 All that is needed now is someone of vision, and courage, to take the first step . All that's needed is a person of vision and courage to take a step .
 Naval Postgraduate School professor teaches special operations in special operations . He has been teaching in the special operations program at the U.S. Naval Post Graduate School .
 Arquilla’s teaching interests revolve around the history of irregular warfare, terrorism, and the implications of the information age for society and security . He is also concerned with the implications for the security of society .
 Arquilla is also the author of more than one hundred articles dealing with a wide range of topics in military and security affairs . She has also written more than a hundred articles about military and military affairs .
 Arquilla worked as a consultant to General Norman Schwarzkopf during Operation Desert Storm . He was part of a group of RAND analysts assigned to him during the war .
 During Kosovo War, he assisted deputy secretary of defense John Hamre on a range of issues in international information strategy . During the Kosovo War he worked with Hamre .
 Most recently, he worked for the White House as a member of a small, nonpartisan team of outsiders asked to articulate new directions for U.S. defense policy .
 Mahmoud Ahmadinejad spoke of Iran's goal of having capabilities that would serve as a deterrent to bullying and arrogant powers . He is no doubt implicitly referring to the United States, but Israeli-Iranian antipathy is surely an accelerant in this matter .
 Iran might accept no-invasion pledge, agree to cease any nuclear weapons efforts, then secretly build a bomb . At best, more adventurism would simply be a change at the margin, easily handled by skillful diplomacy .
 The deal is simply too good for Tehran to say no. The cost of getting caught would be quite high, leading to the imposition of even stricter sanctions against the regime. Second, the cost of being caught would also lead to a clear rationale for the use of force against Iran .
 The attractiveness of the deal to the Iranians, and the way in which it binds those making it, means that the most serious impediment to proceeding is likely to be opposition by the United States and Israel . Ten more will honor an agreement of this sort if one is made with Tehran,
 Cuban-style deal might shore up regime and allow Iran to punch above its weight in world affairs . On balance, there is far more to gain than to lose, says Iran expert .
 The sheer gain of keeping Iran -a state that many consider an international rogue -from becoming a nuclear-armed power must outweigh other manageable concerns about its behavior in the wake of a pact .
 The only question now is whether some leader will come forth to make the proposal officially . Not bad for the seemingly zero-sum world of power politics .
 Thucydides was surely right when it came to ancient Athens and Sparta; and is probably still correct when it comes to America, Israel, and Iran today . But the rule should not be seen as iron-clad, he says, but should be taken to account .