 CNN.com will feature iReporters from across the globe in a weekly Newsquiz . Please submit your best photos and videos of the week's featured news stories to CNN iReport .
 Access to the best of Getty Images and iStock with our simple subscription plan . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on iReporter .
 Getty Images' global-scale, data-driven insights and network of over 340,000 creators to create content exclusively for your brand . Millions of high-quality images, video, and music options await you .
 U.S. planes and ships began taking up positions in the Caribbean to cut off shipments of Communist offensive weapons to Cuba Oct. 31 .
 "Images of President Kennedy behind his desk" were taken after signing the arms embargo against Cuba .
 Kennedy described a seven-point program directed at Cuba, including a quarantine . Kennedy described it as a "seven-point" program aimed at Cuba .
 President Kennedy commended two Air Force pilots who have been flying reconnaississ missions over Cuba . President Kennedy met with and commended the pilots and Pentagon officer in charge of evaluating their reports .
 "President Kennedy proclaims in a televised speech on October 22 that Cuba has become an offensive Soviet base, capable of destruction"
 A spy photo of a medium range ballistic missile base in San Cristobal, Cuba, with labels detailing various parts of the base, is shown October 1962 . The photo was taken October 1962 at the base .
 Former Russian and U.S. Officials attending a conference commemorating the 40th anniversary of the missile crisis October 2002 in Cuba said that the world was closer to a nuclear conflict during the 1962 standoff than governments were aware of .
 Rudolph ANDERSON was making a reconnaissance flight above the island . Rudolph and Rudolph Anderson was flying a reconnaissance plane .
 The Debris of an American U-2 airplane shot down by the Cubans during the 1962 missile crisis is scattered over the ground .
 A missile is on display on the grounds of the Parque Historico Militar Morro-Cabana in Havana .
 S Barry steams alongside the Soviet freighter Ansov, outbound from Cuba, for an inspection of her cargo .
 The deck of the Ansov is covered with military equipment including eight large oblong objects that appeared to be Soviet missiles . "Army missiles on George Smathers Beach here on October 28th, stand ready for any necessary action"
 With Soviet Premier Khrushchev's message saying he would remove Cuban missiles received at the White House on, today it seems their use won't be required."
 "Destroyer Inspects Soviet Freighter. San Cristobal, Cuba." "Image is available for |editorial use|. |learn more|" "Image was taken in 1962, when it was taken to Cuba .
 Vesole steams alongside the Soviet freighter Polzunov, outbound from Cuba, for an inspection of her cargo . Vesole was aboard the freighter Vesole when it arrived in Cuba .
 On deck of the Soviet vessel are large oblong missile like objects, two of which are partially uncovered . Two of the objects are partially covered .
 The Vesole pulled away from the Polzunov's cargo . After being satisfied as to the contents of the cargo, the Vesole drove away .
 U.S. President Kennedy ordered a naval blockade of Cuba during the Cuban missile crisis October 24, 1962 . A photograph of a ballistic missile base in Cuba was used as evidence with which President John F Kennedy ordered the blockade .
 Photographs taken by United States reconnaissance aircraft in 1962 .
 Protesters stage a sit-in during a demonstration against the Cuban missile crisis October 24, 1962 in London, United Kingdom .
 The Soviet ship Kasimov is shown just off Cuba with fifteen I1-28 aircraft on board December 10, 1962 . Kasimov was the first ship to fly over Cuba with 15 aircraft aboard .
 Fuselage crates on the ship were opened by the Soviet crew for United States air inspection . The airplanes, formerly based on Cuba, were removed at the request of United States authorities during the Cuban missile crisis .
 Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament march during a protest against the U.S.'s action over the Cuban missile crisis October 28, 1962 in London, United Kingdom .
 American Navy ship USS Barry steams alongside the Soviet Freighter Anosov which was believed to be carrying a cargo of parts of Nuclear Missles destined for Cuba .
 Havana's Miramar residential area was hit by 20mm canon fire . Several homes and a hotel were hit by the fire in the Miramar area of Havana .
 Members of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament stage a sit-in, protesting the Cuban missile crisis, October 27, 1962 in London, United Kingdom .
 President Kennedy announced the blockade late October 22nd, saying it had been ordered to prevent the delivery of any more offensive weapons to the island . President Kennedy said the blockade was ordered by President Kennedy .
 Map of Cuba shows Soviet missile sites and the types of installations at each . Map of Cuban missile sites shows the type of installations .
 President Kennedy signed an arms embargo against Cuba . Kennedy signed the arms embargo on Cuba in 1961 .
 The embargo effectively quarantined Cuba . Cuban refugees in Manhattan watch President Kennedy delivering a speech on television .
 President Kennedy proclaims in a televised speech that Cuba has become an offensive Soviet base, capable of destruction . Kennedy says Cuba is now a threat to the U.S. President Kennedy: Cuba is capable of destroying .
 The debris of an American U-2 airplane shot down by the Cubans during the 1962 missile crisis is scattered over the ground . The debris was scattered by the Cuban missile crisis .
 Army missiles are on George Smathers Beach here on October 28th, stand ready for any necessary action . The U.S. Army missiles on the beach are on standby for possible action .
 An aerial reconnaissance photograph shows a missile launch site in San Cristobal, Cuba . The Cuban government says it has no plans to launch any missiles into Cuba .
 Destroyer Inspects Soviet Freighter. Destroyers inspects Soviet freighter. Destroyer inspects freighter .
 Photograph released by the Pentagon shows eight ballistic missiles being transported from Cuba by the Soviet cargo ship Anosov . The Pentagon released the photograph December 10, 1962 . The photograph shows the Soviet ship Kasimov with fifteen I1-28 aircraft on board .
 Intelligence photograph of Nuclear Warhead Bunker Site 1 under construction in San Cristobal, Cuba . Site 1 is under construction at the center of Cuba's nuclear weapons program .
 Army anti-aircraft missiles are lifted from a caterpillar-wheeled vehicle to launcher on George Smathers Beach . The missiles are used to launch anti-missile missiles from the base of the beach .
 Paris headlines tell the story of the U.S. Naval blockade of Cuba, early October 23rd . Paris headlines show the impact of the blockade .
 President Kennedy announced the blockade late October 22nd... of 8NEXT United Kingdom . The blockade was announced by President Kennedy in October .