 President Kennedy first learned that the Soviet Union was constructing missile launch sites in Cuba . The crisis lasted from October 16, 1962, to October 28, when Khrushchev publicly announced he was removing the missiles from the island .
 Kennedy lifted the blockade he had placed around Cuba after confirming that all offensive weapons systems had been dismantled . Tensions continued, however, until November 20, when Kennedy lifted his blockade . Kennedy confirmed that Soviet nuclear-capable bombers were to be removed from Cuba .
 The potential for a nuclear war was real, and the potential for it was real . The Miller Center exhibits capture the president's thoughts and advice he was receiving from the president .
 Air Force Chief of Staff Gen. Gen. Curtis LeMay discussed options to deal with threat posed by Soviet missiles in Cuba . John Kennedy was president of the U.S. Air Force in 1961 .
 Curtis E LeMay, after criticizing calls to blockade the island, sums up the president's political and military troubles . LeMay: "I'm not going to be able to go back and forth with the president, I'm going to go to the island"
 President Kennedy wants to discuss his dilemma directly with one of the few living men who will truly understand what he faces . Having already heard from McCone about Eisenhower's supportive reaction, JFK wants to talk directly with him .
 Despite the distance between the two men in age, experience, and political stance, it is not the first time they have confided in each other, and it will not be the last . Despite their differences, it has not been the last time they've confided .
 Kennedy placed the call after having held crisis meetings with advisers all day . John Kennedy, Harold Macmillan placed this call after holding crisis meetings all day.
 U Thant, in turn, had been talking Soviet Ambassador to the United Nations Valerian Zorin . U. Thant was talking to Soviet ambassador to the U.N. in turn .
 President Kennedy and his advisers consider the ramifications of trading Jupiter missiles in Turkey for Soviet missiles in Cuba . Kennedy: "Jupiter missiles" in Turkey could be used to carry Soviet missiles to Cuba .