 Republicans nominated Vice President Richard M Nixon One of most active vice presidents in U.S. history . Traveled throughout the world as a ""troubleshooter"" in various capacities .
 Kennedy called upon American people for sacrifices to achieve their potential greatness -The New Frontier B Campaign 1. Kennedy called on American people to achieve potential greatness .
 Kennedy’s Catholicism became an issue until he told a group of Protestant ministers that he accepted separation of church and state . Kennedy said Catholic leaders would not unduly influence him .
 First time presidential debates shown on national television; determined the fate of the election . Those listening on the radio gave the edge to Nixon . First debate was the most important .
 Kennedy earned support of African Americans when he arranged to have Martin Luther King released from a Georgia jail . Kennedy earned the support of black Americans by arranging to release King from jail .
 JFK was unable to get much through Congress due to resistance from Republicans and conservative Southern Democrats . JFK was assassinated in 1968 . JFK's assassination was the first assassination of the president .
 Congress blocked plans for income tax cut, federal aid to education, urban renewal, medical care the aged, and creation of a Department of Urban Affairs 3 .
 Lyndon Johnson would later get these measures passed after JFK's assassination .
 Minimum wage raised from $1 to $1.25 an hour and extended to 3 million more workers . Minimum wage also extended to more than 3 million additional workers .
 Provided nearly $5 billion over four years for preservation of open urban spaces, development of mass transit, and the construction of middle class housing . Also provided nearly $4 billion for preservation, development and construction of open spaces .
 Kennedy promoted a $24 billion project to land an American on the Moon . Kennedy promoted the project in a bid to get Americans on the lunar surface .
 JFK did nothing during his first two years regarding civil rights . The Civil Rights Movement was a two-year-old president of the United States . A JFK administration did nothing about civil rights during that time .
 RFK’s attempts at enfranchisement in the South was largely unsuccessful . Only a small percentage of blacks were registered due to literacy tests, poll taxes, white primaries, and grandfather clauses .
 Kennedy was initially able to satisfy both sides of the issue . The rise of civil rights militants forced his hand . Kennedy was able to appease both sides .
 Freedom Riders were organized by CORE (Congress of Racial Equality) May 1961 . May 1961, they rode interstate buses to verify that segregation wasn’t happening . Freedom Riders are the first Freedom Riders to ride interstate buses .
 Showdown in Birmingham, Alabama 1963, closed parks, playgrounds, swimming pools, and golf courses to avoid desegregation . Birmingham closed parks and playgrounds in 1963 to avoid segregation .
 Martin Luther King Jr. chose Birmingham as a target for desegregation because it was the toughest challenge and a victory would break segregation throughout the South . King chose Birmingham because it would be the hardest challenge in the South to break segregation .
 MLK and his supporters were arrested on Good Friday for “marching without a permit” and spent 2 weeks in jail . MLK was arrested for ‘marching without permit’ and spent two weeks in prison . He was arrested in January .
 JFK decided to side with King after rioting erupted . Shortly after, King’s motel bombed . JFK also sided with King .
 That night, Medgar Evers, NAACP director in Mississippi, was assassinated in retaliation for U of Alabama issue 2 . Evers was assassinated that night .
 JFK announced he would send Congress a civil rights bill to Congress . The bill would crush segregation, outlaw discrimination in elections and give the justice department authority to enforce school integration .
 By the time JFK was assassinated, his civil rights bill was moving toward passage in the House . The bill was passed by the House of Representatives in 1964 .
 Organized in part by A Philip Randolph (who had started the March on Washington Movement during WWII) 3.5.5 million people marched in Washington, D.C. 3.7 million people attended the march .
 Protesters demanded passage of Kennedy’s civil rights bill and for more and better jobs . Protesters were demanding passage of the bill and more jobs .
 Kennedy sought conventional military strategies to deal with thorny local challenges around the world . Kennedy sought traditional military strategies, including dealing with local challenges .
 Kennedy criticized Eisenhower for allowing a ""missile gap"" that favored the Soviets . Ironically, during the presidential election of 1960, Kennedy had criticized Eisenhower's policy .
 JFK learned that the gap was actually in favor of the U.S. when he became president . Yet he continued the largest peacetime military buildup in history .
 Kennedy ordered a buildup of conventional armed forces to fight localized wars in the Third World . Kennedy also ordered a build-up of conventional forces in the 1960s .
 Built up nuclear arsenal for a second-strike capability . Set up the Green Berets . Built up a nuclear arsenal .
 Eisenhower authorized the CIA to organize, train, and arm in Central America a brigade of 1,400 Cuban exiles for an invasion of Cuba to overthrow Fidel Castro . The brigade was organized by the CIA in early 1960s .
 JFK continued the plan when the CIA pledged it would work . Invaders would presumably trigger a popular uprising in Cuba . JFK continued to continue the plan despite the CIA's pledge .
 Kennedy publicly took full responsibility on national TV for the ill-conceived mission . Kennedy: "I'm sorry for what I've done, I'm sorry"
 Established in 1961, sent young volunteers (doctors, lawyers and engineers) to Third World countries for . locally sponsored projects .
 Primary goal was to help Latin American countries to close the gap between rich and poor thus quieting communist sympathies . Primary goal: Helping Latin America to close gap between poor and poor .
 Khrushchev delivered a new ultimatum on Berlin; saw U.S. weakness in the Bay of Pigs fiasco . USSR would give Berlin to East Germany, stripping western access to Berlin . USSR saw weakness in Bay of the Pigs fiasco as weakness in USSR .
 East Germans built a wall separating West Berlin from the rest of Berlin and East Germany almost overnight . West Berlin was divided between East Berlin and West Berlin in the early 1950s .
 Kennedy called up 1,500 United States reserves to reinforce West German garrisons . Stem the flow of people escaping from East Berlin .
 Air and land routes to West Berlin were kept open . Tensions eased as the refugee problem was solved . Air, land and air routes to the West Berlin remained open .
 Khrushchev began placing nuclear weapons in Cuba, just 90 miles off the and Florida coast, in October 1962 .
 Soviets intended to use weapons to force U.S. into backing down on Berlin, Cuba, and other troubled areas . Soviets wanted to force the United States to back down, according to reports . Soviets planned to use the weapons against the U.K. in Berlin and Cuba .
 U.S. aerial photographs revealed Russians were secretly installing nuclear missiles . October 14, United States aerial photos revealed Russia was installing missiles in secret . U.N. aerial photos reveal Russians were installing missiles .
 Warning of missile attack would shrink from 30 to 2 minutes . USSR also had nuclear cruise missiles to destroy the U.S. Navy 3.5 years ago . Warning of Soviet missile attack from 30-2 minutes would shrink .
 JFK ordered a naval ""quarantine"" of Cuba and demanded immediate removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba . October 22, JFK ordered the naval "quarantine" of Cuba . JFK also demanded the removal of Russian missiles from the country .
 Kennedy also stated any attack by Cuba on the United States or any other Latin American country would result in a full retaliatory response on the Soviet Union . Kennedy also said any attack on the U.S. or any . other . Latin American . country would also be subject to a full
 Kennedy rejected ""surgical"" bombing strikes against missile sites since no guarantee existed that all missiles would be hit . Kennedy rejected 'surgical' bombing strikes because of lack of guarantee of all missiles being hit .
 Unbeknownst to Kennedy, the Soviets had tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba that would have destroyed an invading American army . Many in the cabinet and the military favored this .
 For a week, the world watched as the Soviet ship carrying missiles steamed toward Cuba . The ship was carrying missiles to Cuba .
 Any U.S. attack would trigger war between the United States and USSR . 16 Soviet ships stopped before reaching the blockade 5.5 years ago .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove missiles if U.S. removed its missiles from Turkey and vowed not to attack Cuba . October 26, Khrushchev agreed to pull missiles out of Turkey and remove them from Cuba . The U.K. agreed to lift the missiles if the U
 This agreement publicly favored Kennedy as the United States quietly pulled its Turkish missiles out 6 months later . This agreement was publicized as the U.S. pulled its missiles out of Turkey .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev realized they had come dangerously close to nuclear war and now worked to prevent a future war . Kennedy: "I'm not going to go to war. I'm going to try to prevent war"
 Nuclear Test Ban Treaty Banned the atmospheric testing of nuclear weapons . -Khrushchev refused on-site inspections .
 President Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas on November 22, 1963, while on a southern tour to drum up support for his policies . Lee Harvey Oswald, the alleged assassin, was arrested shortly thereafter . Oswald was killed a few days later by Jack Ruby, an alleged mafia member .
 Warren Commission was created at Johnson’s request to further investigate the assassination . C The Warren Commission is now known as the Warren Commission . C
 Many people continued to believe decades after the assassination that a sinister conspiracy was behind the assassination . Many people believed the assassination was a conspiracy .
 A Rammed Kennedy’s stalled Civil Rights and tax cut bills through Congress . Pledged to continue Kennedy's policies through Congress.
 Democrats nominated LBJ on the platform of ""The Great Society" LBJ was nominated for the presidency in 1964 on a platform of 'The American Society' LBJ is nominated for president in 1964 .
 Sweeping set of New Deal-type economic and welfare measures aimed to transform America . New Deal was a New Deal of the 1930s and 1940s .
 Public sentiment inspired by Michael Harrington’s The Other America which showed that 20% of the U.S. population and over 40% of blacks lived in poverty . Public sentiment was inspired by the book The Other American .
 He attacked the federal income tax, Social Security System, the TVA, civil rights legislation, nuclear test ban treaty, and the Great Society .
 Ronald Reagan's platform in 1980 was very similar to Goldwater's in 1964 . Reagan is considered by many today as the ""father of modern conservatism"
 Johnson characterized Goldwater as a warmonger who might start a nuclear war . Johnson said Goldwater might start nuclear war. Johnson characterized him as a "warmonger" and a "warmer"
 Goldwater disenchanted many of his fellow Republicans with his extremism . Goldwater's extremism was a major factor in his party's success in the 1960s .
 Johnson and Congress now had a mandate for the passage of massive wave of legislation . Johnson's victory was a major success for Congress .
 Office of Economic Opportunity was created to oversee most of the ‘War on Poverty’ programs . Headed by R Sargent Shriver, it was created in response to the "war on Poverty"
 Congress allocated $1.1 billion to redevelop isolated mountain areas along the Appalachian range where white poverty was rampant . Appalachian Regional Development Act of 1966 .
 Over $1 billion was given to elementary and secondary education, largely in areas where poverty existed . Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 .
 Head Start established pre-schools for educationally disadvantaged children to prepare them for elementary school . Head Start was established to prepare disadvantaged children for elementary schools . Pre-school is now a national program that prepares children for kindergarten .
 2. Provided medical care for the elderly who were not covered by their own medical insurance . 3.3% of people in the U.S. did not have medical insurance coverage for their elderly . 2.5% of those in the country had medical insurance policies that didn't cover
 The program was popular for millions of Americans being pushed to poverty by skyrocketing medical costs . Millions of Americans are being pushed into poverty by soaring medical costs.
 The program was administered jointly by the federal government and the states . The program is administered jointly between the federal and the state .
 Built 240,000 housing units and allocated $2.2. billion for urban renewal . Built by the government in the 1980s and 1990s . Spent $1.2 billion on urban renewal projects .
 Admission was also based on things such as skills and political asylum . Admission to the country was based on skills and asylum status .
 The act more than doubled the number of immigrants coming in each year, mostly from Latin America and Asia . The act was passed in 1996 .
 Johnson believed that the federal government had a role to play in bringing high culture and educational programming to the masses . Johnson: The federal government has a role in promoting high culture .
 National Endowment for the Arts aimed to bring opera, Broadway musicals, symphony performances, and other ‘high culture’ to Americans via television programming . National Endowment for the arts aimed to . bring opera and musicals to Americans .
 National Endowment for the Humanities provided funds for the creation of educational programming and documentaries 4.4.5 . The Humanities Foundation is a nonprofit organization that supports educational programming .
 Corporation for Public Broadcasting was created to make high quality, educational programming available to everyone 5.5.6 million Americans . Corporation was created in 1970s to provide educational programming to all Americans .
 Conservatives argued the federal government was exceeding its authority by funding such programs . Conservatives argued that the government had exceeded its authority . Conservatives said the government should not have funded the programs .
 B Civil Rights Bill of 1964 1. Abolished poll taxes in federal elections in Canada . Bill also abolished poll taxes for women in the U.S. in 1964 .
 Provisions Forbade segregation in hotels, motels, restaurants, theaters, and theaters that did business in interstate commerce . Provisions were passed by Congress .
 The federal government is now responsible for bringing discrimination complaints to court . Relieved individuals of responsibility for bringing complaints to the court themselves .
 Discrimination based on race, religion gender and national origin in the workplace was illegal in the U.S. in the 1990s . Discrimination based upon race, gender, national origin was illegal under the law .
 Most businesses in the South’s cities and larger towns desegregated immediately . Most of the South's businesses desegrated immediately .
 Existing legislation still did not enforce the 15th Amendment guaranteeing the right to vote . Existing law did not yet enforce the amendment .
 Civil rights leaders in Selma announced a climactic protest march from Selma to Montgomery with federal protection in late March . After 2 marches that resulted in beatings, arrests, and one murder, civil rights leaders announced the march .
 Johnson promised on March 15 to send a bill to Congress that would extend voting rights to African Americans in the Deep South . In response, Johnson promised to send it to Congress .
 Literacy tests are unlawful if less than 50% of all voting-age citizens are registered . Literacy test is unlawful if under 50% are registered in the U.S. state .
 African Americans could be enrolled whether or not they could read . If so, African Americans would be enrolled regardless of ability to read .
 If local registrars would not enroll African Americans, the president could send federal examiners who would . The president could also send federal officials who would enroll African-American Americans .
 President Johnson signed an executive order in 1965 requiring employers on federal contracts to take "affirmative action" to ensure underprivileged minorities and women were hired . Johnson signed the order in order to ensure minorities were hired by federal contractors .
 President Nixon later furthered affirmative action with the Philadelphia Plan . The Philadelphia Plan was a precursor to affirmative action in the 1960s .
 Black, Asian, and Hispanic enrollment increased dramatically in recent years . Students enrolled in colleges across the U.S. for the first time in decades .
 Allan Bakke, a white student, was unfairly turned down to medical school at UC Davis because of admissions program that favored minorities . Bakke case, 1978 Supreme Court ruled in 1978 that Bakke was unfairly denied admission to UC Davis .
 Court declared that preference in admissions could not be given to . members of any group based on ethnic or racial identity alone . Court declared preference in . admissions can not be . given to members of . any group . based on . ethnic or . racial identity .
 Jesse Jackson emerged as the African American community’s leading advocate in the 1970s and 1980s for affirmative action policies and the furthering of civil rights . Jackson was a leading advocate for the greater role of affirmative action .
 The Court ordered school districts to bus children from allminority neighborhoods in the inner-cities to achieve integration of schools . The Court also ordered schools to bus students from all minority neighborhoods .
 Years between 1954 and 1968 can be seen as the ""Second Reconstruction"" The quest for equality before the law was largely achieved in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Other minorities,g. women, Native Americans, Hispanics and gays looked to civil rights movement of the 1950s and 1960s as a model for their own efforts .
 Not all African Americans agreed with Martin Luther King’s nonviolent methods . Rise of Black Power and racial violence was the result of the civil rights movement . Not all black Americans agree with King's nonviolent methods.
 King’s ideas seemed obsolete to many young blacks after the Civil Rights Act and Voting Rights Act of 1965 . King's ideas seemed to be obsolete to some young blacks, but King is still influential today .
 Many questioned whether it was a good idea for blacks to try to integrate with whites . Many questioned the idea of integration with blacks .
 Blacks still continued to experience poverty and discrimination in the nation’s inner-cities . Blacks still . continued to . experience poverty .
 Called for separation of the races in America by occupying an exclusive area of land in the United States supplied by the federal gov’t. Called for the separation of races in the U.S. called for an exclusive land in America .
 The Nation of Islam was the most notable and well-organized of the black separatist groups 2. Inspired by ideas of Marcus Garvey (leader during ""Harlem Renaissance"") who had advocated a back-to-Africa movement .
 Malcolm X’s ideas became the foundation for the Black Power movement later in the decade . Malcolm X's ideas were the inspiration for the movement . The movement was founded by Malcolm X in 1968 .
 Malcolm X was the chairman of SNCC in the mid-1960s . He was inspired by the ideas of Malcolm X and was a prominent figure in the civil rights movement .
 The first popular use of the term was by Carmichael in 1966 who decried James Meredith’s shooting in the March Against Fear . Essentially it was an appeal for racial pride, black nationalism, and struggle against perceived white tyranny .
 It was a revolutionary socialist movement to organize African American men in northern and western cities to fight for liberation . The movement was formed in the 1920s and 1930s .
 Poverty, unemployment, and racial discrimination were common in major inner-cities, despite civil rights victories . Poverty was common in some areas of the nation's inner cities .
 Kerner Commission was appointed by LBJ to investigate the causes of the riots . LBJ appointed the Kerner commission to look into the events in the wake of the 1968 riots .
 King was shot by sniper James Earl Ray while standing on a motel balcony with friends in Memphis . King was assassinated in Memphis, Tennessee, in 1968 .
 Rise of the ""New Left"" and the Counterculture . A Impact of baby boom generation 1. The rise of the "New Left" and the "counterculture" was born in the 1960s .
 75% of college students came from families with income above the national average . 75% came from households with income higher than national average of above average . Raised largely in economic security; 75% college students come from higher income .
 The student protest movement only represented a minority of student population 4.5% of students . Yet the protest movement was only a minority, 4.7% of the population .
 The ‘New Left’ had decidedly socialist views and many supported Marxist ideas . Many of the ‘Left’s ideas were Marxist views .
 Leftist student leaders view universities as bureaucracies indifferent to student needs . Universities were viewed by leftist student leaders as indifferent to students' needs .
 Students for a Democratic Society led by Tom Haydn who called for ""participatory democracy"" in universities where students could exercise increased influence over policies that affected them . Students for the Democratic Society called for increased influence in universities .
 SDS became more militant during the Vietnam War and organized numerous protests . SDS organized numerous anti-war protests in Vietnam .
 Berkeley started sit-ins in 1964 to protest the prohibition of political canvassing on campus . Berkeley started in protest of the prohibition on canvassing in 1964 .
 Like the ‘New Left,’s young people felt alienated by gov’t bureaucracy, materialism, and the Vietnam War . Millions of young people were alienated by government bureaucracy and materialism . Like the New Left, the “New Left” felt alienated
 Many youths turned away from politics in favor of an alternative society . Many youths have turned to alternative society in favour of alternative society.
 Best-selling book argued that the counterculture was leading the way to a new era focusing on personal freedom, egalitarianism and drug use for recreational purposes .
 The folk music protest tradition began by Woody Guthrie during the Dust Bowl era . It was taken up by a new generation in the early 1960s led by Bob Dylan, Pete Seeger, and Joan Baez . Bob Dylan was a major influence in the counterculture .
 The “British invasion” played a large role in the mid-1960s with the Beatles, Rolling Stones, and The Who leading the way . Woodstock festival in August 1969, represented the apex of the counterculture .
 By the early 1970s, counterculture was shrinking as a result of either its excesses or its members re-ententering the mainstream .
 Ironic commentary on mass culture by using items common in advertising 2.2.3.5.5 million dollars in advertising . 2.3 million dollars of advertising dollars are spent on advertising .
 Chief Justice Earl Warren was appointed to the Supreme Court by President Eisenhower in 1953 . President Eisenhower appointed him to the court by President Warren .
 John Marshall is considered to be the first of the great creative periods . His Court is considered one of the two creative periods in U.S. history . John Marshall was considered to have the most creative court in the world .
 Warren’s court stressed personal rights (especially the 1st Amendment), placing them in a preferred constitutional position . Warren's court stresses personal rights, placing them a preferred position .
 Brown Board of Education is the most important of his Court’s decisions . Reapportionment decisions -""one-person, one-vote"" 1. B Brown . Board of . Education is most important .
 Electoral reform shifts voting power from rural districts to urban and suburban areas . Result has been shifting voting power between rural districts and urban areas . Results have been an electoral reform in rural areas .
 Congress according to population so that each district had roughly the same number of people . Congress was divided into districts based on population . Each district was divided according to the population of the district .
 People accused of a crime have the right to a lawyer, even if they cannot afford one . Established that people accused of such a crime can have a lawyer . The case is the first in the country to be heard in court .
 Ruled one has the right to a lawyer from the time of arrest or when one becomes the subject of a criminal investigation . Ruled that one has a right to lawyer from arrest to when one is subject of an investigation .
 Required that accused people be informed of their right to a lawyer and their right not to testify against themselves . Required that they be informed that they could not be accused of lying to the police .
 Birth control pill and antibiotics encouraged freer sexual practices beginning in early 1960s . Promiscuity increased among younger Americans especially as the counterculture took effect .
 Endorsed improvements in education, equal employment, child care, and governmental opportunities for women . Endorsized improvements in . education, . equal employment . and child care .
 Feminine Mystique is considered a classic of women’s protest literature . The book was written by women's protest leaders and activists .
 With other feminists she founded the National Organization for Women in 1966 . She founded the organization with other feminists .
 Sought legalization of abortion 1967, began advocating an Equal Rights Amendment to the Constitution extending the same guarantees contained in the 14th Amendment for racial and religious minorities . Argued for changes in divorce laws to make settlements more fair to women. Argued that changes to divorce laws were more fair
 Corporations forced to provide back wages to female employees who had not received equal pay for equal work . Several corporations forced to . provide back pay to female workers .
 Roe Wade Legalized abortion in all states . Perhaps the most important Supreme Court decision of the last 40 years . Roe Wade hardened the divisions between liberals and conservatives .
 Title IX guaranteed equal access for girls to programs boys benefited from 6.6.7 years ago . Title IX was a federal law that required equal access to programs for girls in the U.S.
 Gloria Steinem was the magazines founding publisher 7. Magazine . The women's liberation movement’s most influential publication, beginning in 1972 .
 Caesar Chavez led the United Farm Workers Organizing Committee . He succeeded in gaining improved work conditions for mostly Chicano agricultural workers .
 Since the 1970s a number of Mexican-Americans have been elected to prominent political positions . Since the 1980s, Mexican Americans have become prominent politicians .
 Native Indians and their supporters occupied Alcatraz hoping to gain the island for an Indian studies center . Between November, 1969 and June, 1971 a group of Native Indians occupied the island .
 American Indian Movement founded in 1968 AIM seized the Indian Bureau in Washington in 1972, protesting desperate conditions in reservations . 1973, militant Indians led by leaders of AIM and the Oglala Sioux occupied Wounded Knee, South Dakota .
 Emerged in the late 60s and used civil rights laws to win discrimination cases . Emerged as a civil rights activist in the 1960s .
 A few presidents had shown more compassion for the poor, the ill educated, and minorities . President Lyndon Johnson’s legacy was marked by his compassion .
 President Obama's first three years of the New Deal have been a success . Obama's administration has been criticized for lack of progress in the economy . The White House has been in touch with Congress since 2009 .
 Anti-poverty programs, such as Head Start, significantly improved the educational performance of underprivileged youth . Head Start is a program aimed at helping children in impoverished areas of the U.S. to learn about poverty .
 Infant mortality rates fell in minority communities as general health conditions improved . Infants were born in a minority community in the United States in 2010 . Infant deaths fell as a result of improvements in health conditions .
 No president since Lincoln had worked harder or done more for civil rights and equality than Lincoln, says President Obama . No president has done more since Lincoln did more than Abraham Lincoln did .
 Civil Rights Act and Voting Rights Act of 1965 reversed failure of Reconstruction to enforce the 14th and 15th Amendments . Reconstruction failed to enforce 14th, 15th amendments . Civil Rights act of 1964 and 1965 reversed that failure . Civil rights Act of 1964 served to reverse the failure to enforce
 Most programs were extremely costly and eventually required increased taxes to fund them . Most programs required increased tax hikes to fund .
 They accused the Great Society as ""social engineering"" that could not be solved simply by allocating billions of dollars . The Great Society was accused of social engineering .
 Many accused the Great Society as having taken the country in a socialist direction . The Great Society was founded in the 1920s and 1930s . Many accused it of taking the country to a socialist state .
 Vietnam War siphoned off much of the energy of the Great Society 1. D. The Vietnam War was a major source of energy in America's Great Society . D. A. C. E. Howard Johnson: The war was a waste of time and energy .
 Johnson’s handling of the war caused the turbulence that characterized the 1960s and led to America's skepticism over its government . Johnson's handling led to the turbulence in the country's turbulent politics .
 France lost control of Vietnam after the battle of Dien Bien Phu in 1954 . The battle took place in Vietnam during the French invasion .
 Agreement temporarily divided Vietnam into north and south along the 17th parallel . A 1956 unifying election would determine the nation’s fate . Agreement was reached in 1956 .
 Ho Chi Minh accepted the agreement based on assurance that the Vietnam-wide elections would occur within two years . The agreement was based on assurances that the elections would be held within the next two years of the agreement .
 B Domino Theory – determined Eisenhower’s policies in Southeast Asia in the 1950s and continued into the 1960s 1. The theory was used to explain Eisenhower's policies in Asia .
 If one country in Indochina fell to communism, other surrounding countries would also fall, one right after the other, like dominoes 2 . "Dominoes" is a series of communist countries that fall to communism in Vietnam .
 Southeast Asia Treaty Organization created by U.S. in order to prop up Ngo’s regime . Southeast Asia treaty Organization was created by the U.N. in the 1990s . Southeast Asian Treaty Organization was formed by the United States in the 1970s .
 Ngo was a nationalist and was fiercely anti-communist . Ngo ruled over a nation of poor Buddhist peasants . He was an aloof and aristocratic Catholic autocrat .
 His reforms were slow to take shape; most resources went to the military 2.2.3.4.5.6.7.9.5 million people . Most resources were spent on the military .
 The Vietcong were communist insurgents in the South supported by Ho Chi Minh and the Vietminh in the North . Ho Chi-Minh was the leader of the Vietcong, which was supported by the South and the North of Vietnam .
 Promised economic reform, reunification with the north, and genuine independence . Officially known as the NLF Supported by China and the Soviet Union . Promised . economic reform .
 Kennedy had to choose between abandoning Ngo or deepening U.S. involvement in Vietnam . Kennedy faced a choice between abandoning Vietnam A. Ngo and deepening involvement .
 A Buddhist monk set himself on fire to protest Ngo’s regime . Photos changed world opinion overnight .
 Three weeks later JFK was assassinated . Tacitly supported by the U.S. due to Ngo’s corruption . Three weeks after JFK assassinated .
 The question of whether or not Kennedy would have pulled out of Vietnam still remains unanswered today . C. C
 Dean Rusk, Secretary of State: major proponent of the domino theory . Robert McNamara, Defense: In effect, he was the architect of the U.S. escalation policy in Vietnam . The Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, 1964 1.1: 1960s B Gulf of
 North Vietnamese torpedo boats attacked two U.S. destroyers in international waters off the coast of North Vietnam in the Gulf of Tonkin . Johnson told Congress that the ""attacks were unprovoked"" 3.
 Gave Johnson more authority to widen the war effort without waiting for Congress to declare war . Gave him more authority without waiting to get permission from Congress .
 Years later, it became known that United States ships were helping South Vietnamese commandos raid North Vietnamese islands . The attacks on U.S. ships were thus not ""unprovoked"" 4.
 LBJ used this episode effectively during the 1964 presidential campaign . Johnson ordered a ""limited"" retaliatory air raid against North Vietnamese air bases, stating he sought no ""wider war""
 Johnson’s major error was using the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution to justify his widening of the war without seeking congressional and popular approval . Johnson used the resolution to justify widening the war in Vietnam .
 He sought to protect his Great Society programs by keeping the war’s decision-making secretive . President Obama sought to keep the war's decisions secret .
 The initial U.S. objective of South Vietnam’s stabilization was no longer viable . As the situation unraveled, the initial United States objective of stabilizing South Vietnam was not longer viable.
 LBJ made the fateful decision to escalate the war on March 2, 1965 . In response, LBJ ordered the war to be escalated in 1965 .
 LBJ ordered the first bombing of North Vietnam which went on nonstop for 3 years . Operation Rolling Thunder was the U.S. response to the Pleiku bombing .
 The Vietcong dug 30,000 miles of tunnels to ship supplies and escape bombing . The tunnels were dug by the Vietcong to escape bombing and escape bombings .
 Napalm was used to burn out heavy jungle areas where the Vietcong and Vietminh operated . To flush out the enemy Napalm used to flush out enemy .
 Agent Orange was used as a defoliant to kill jungle vegetation . Many U.S. soldiers were exposed and later developed cancer .
 Search & destroy missions against guerrilla tactics were common . Westmoreland constantly demanded more troops . The guerrilla wins if he does not lose, the conventional army loses .
 United States soldiers dealt with dense, humid, hot hostile jungle terrain 2.5 years ago . The U.S. soldiers faced dense, hot and hostile terrain .
 The average age of a U.S. soldier in Vietnam was 19 (26 in WWII) C Tet Offensive, 1968, was the first Tet Offensive in Vietnam .
 Tet Offensive was not militarily successful for North Vietnam but psychologically destroyed American hopes of winning the war . Tet offensive was not a success militarily, but psychologically damaged American hopes . Tet Offensive is not only a success but also a psychological failure for American forces .
 Represented the beginning of the end of U.S. involvement in Vietnam in Vietnam .
 Students for a Democratic Society used violence and turned to Marxism for its ideology . Students for the Democratic Society became more militant and used violence .
 The ‘New Left’ lost political influence after it abandoned its original commitment to democracy and non-violence . The New Left lost political power after abandoning its commitment to non-violent democracy .
 Students for a Democratic Society, religious groups, anti-nuclear weapons groups, women, and civil rights groups . Women, and women's groups will also take part .
 The draft was perhaps the biggest cause for protest . Small campus ""teach-ins"" in 1965 escalated to enormous public protests .
 Draft numbers increased from 5,000 per month in 1965 to 50,000 in 1967 . Draft numbers rose to 5,500 per month each year in 1965 . Drafts increased to 50 per month every year .
 The poor were twice as likely to be drafted than the middle class who used college deferments to avoid the draft . A lottery system was instituted in 1970 that was fairer . The draft lottery was introduced in 1970 .
 Thousands of draft dodgers fled to Canada; others burned their draft cards 4.5 million draft cards . 4.6 million draft-dodgers fled the U.S. to Canada .
 Technology allowed Vietnam to be brought into American’s living rooms with very little censoring of the press . Technology allows Vietnam to bring its country to American living rooms .
 Body counts had been used to show the U.S. was killing far more Vietcong and Vietminh . Body counts of total enemy kills were used as a way to show more of the enemy was killed . The body count was used to indicate the United States was killing more than
 D Senator J William Fulbright headed the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations . Fulbright was a member of the Foreign Relations Committee . He headed the Committee of Foreign Relations. Fulbright led the committee on Foreign relations .
 He held widely-viewed televised hearings in 1966-67 during which prominent commentators aired their largely antiwar views . The hearings were held in the wake of the Second World War .
 The public came to feel it had been lied to about the causes and ""winnability"" of the war . The public felt it was being lied to .
 E Hawks and Doves argued over the United States role in Vietnam 1. An increase in numbers of antiwar ""doves"" resulted in an increase in antiwar "doves" in the U.S.
 Hawks defended the president's policy and drew on Truman’s containment policy . Hawks defend the president’�s policy and draw on Truman's containment policy.
 Doves claimed the conflict was a civil war in which the U.S. should not get involved . Doves said the conflict should not be treated as a war, and should not intervene .
 Argued South Vietnam’s gov’t was not democratic . Opposed large-scale bombings, chemical weapons, and killing of civilians . Argued that South Vietnam's gov't wasn't democratic .
 Rejected the domino theory pointing out the increased losses of American lives and the economic cost of the war . Rejected it .
 Most Americans were neither hawks nor doves but disturbed by unsuccessful war and protests . Most Americans are not hawks or doves, but were disturbed by failed war and the protests .
 The Tet Offensive changed public opinion dramatically . Hawks decreased from 62% to 22% of public opinion from January 1968 to March 1968; Doves increased from 22% to 42% F Democratic party challengers for 1968 nomination .
 Eugene McCarthy, a liberal from Minnesota, ran an antiwar campaign in New Hampshire and nearly got 1/2 the vote . Eugene McCarthy inspired Robert Kennedy to run for president as well .
 LBJ announced he would not seek another term . Tet, McCarthy, and Kennedy contributed to LBJ’s decision .
 Robert Kennedy was assassinated in June after winning the California Democratic primary . Robert Kennedy won the state's Democratic primary in June .
 A riot occurred outside the Democratic National Convention in Chicago between police and anti-war activists . The nation and world watched as the riot was televised 2.30 p.m. ET .
 Nixon courted conservative southern Democrats who were disgusted with civil rights and the anti-war protests . Republicans nominated Nixon’s ‘Southern Strategy’ for president .
 Appealed to the fears generated by war protesters and big government policies of the Great Society . Appealed for the fear generated by the fears of the war protesters .
 As the former segregationist governor from Alabama, he appealed to southerners with racist ideologies . The former Alabama governor is a former governor of Alabama .
 As a law and order advocate, he gained support in some northern states . He advocated bombing North Vietnam ""back to the Stone Age"" B Result 1. He was elected to Congress in 1964 .
 Congress remained Democratic as the Democrats got 95% of the African American vote 3.5 years ago . The Democratic Party won the majority of African American votes .
 Nixon thus became a minority president with no clear mandate . He owed his victory to the divisions caused by the war and the protests against the draft, crime, and rioting .
 This sub-unit is an extremely high probability area for the essay portion of the AP exam . The essay is extremely difficult to write for students . This is a very high probability of writing for AP students .
 In the past 10 years, SEVEN questions have come wholly or in part from the material in this chapter . Seven questions have been answered from this chapter in the past decade .
 Below are some questions that will help you study the topics that have appeared on previous exams . These questions will help students understand the topics they will be asked about .
 John F Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson achieved their Cold War objectives . Evaluate the degree of success of JFK and LBJ's Cold War .
 Analyze extent to which the women's rights movement was successful in the 1960s and early 1970s . Analyze the extent of the women’s rights movement in America .
 Analyze the impact of America’s youth on politics, society and culture in the 1960s . Analyze how America's youth influenced society, politics and culture .
 Analyze the ways in which the Vietnam War impacted American society in the 1960s . Analyze how the Vietnam war impacted U.S. society in Vietnam .