 He also wrote the other presidential decisions in the re-creation series .
 Copying of the product or its parts 10200 Jefferson Boulevard for resale is prohibited . Copying is prohibited in the U.S.
 Only those pages of this simulation intended for student use as handouts may be reproduced by the teacher who has purchased this teaching unit from Interact . The simulation is intended for students to use in the classroom .
 No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means—electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording—without prior written permission from the publisher .
 Kennedy and his advisers sought to pressure Russia into removing its missiles from Cuba . The book reconstructs the anger, tension, and agitation they experienced while they sought the best way to pressure them .
 Identifying at least two specific clashes which characterized the Cold War 3.0.0 . Identifying a specific clash between the two sides of the world's most powerful powers .
 Determining the military, political, and psychological implications of the Soviet missiles in Cuba 5.5. The Soviet missiles were launched in Cuba in the 1950s .
 Analyzing President Kennedy’s role in ending the Cuban missile crisis . Analyzing the Cuban crisis at Kennedy's birthplace .
 2. Developing tolerance for how persons’ backgrounds shape their different points of view . Developing . tolerance for . how persons .’s backgrounds shape . different views of views . 2. develop tolerance .
 Appreciating how the structure of a group may help or hinder the free flow of ideas . Appreciative of how structure of group helps or hinders the free flowing of ideas.
 John Kennedy, Robert Kennedy, Dean Acheson, Robert McNamara, and Adlai Stevenson meet to consider alternatives . The role players meet to discuss their alternatives .
 Interact's re-creations chooses his initial option to take only a few hours of class time . The president of Interact chooses his first option . Interact re-creates the president's first choice is to go to school .
 Acting as a commentator in Scene 2, you introduce the president to the TV audience before he makes his address to the nation . Day 3 is Day 3 .
 The Kennedy brothers, Dean Rusk, and General Curtis LeMay discuss the president's next move . Then, recounting the major events between John Kennedy’s speech and the receipt of Nikita Khrushchev's second message, you introduce Scene 3 during which the Kennedy brothers discuss
 Day 4 students discuss debriefing case study and take a test . Day 4 is the final day of the class . Students discuss case study, test and debrief .
 For subsequent classes, duplicate the number in parentheses, using the masters in this Teacher Guide . Use the masters for subsequent classes using the numbers in this guide .
 You will not need to duplicate the bulleted items . If you choose to use the Optional: recommended optional, you will have to duplicate it . You will also be given different colored handouts .
 There are seven roles in this re-creation . Assign roles . The moderator’s role is unusually demanding .
 President Kennedy's and his brother Robert’s roles require intelligence, sophistication, and preparation . President Kennedy and brother Robert Kennedy's roles particularly require intelligence and sophistication . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 This book written for students presents a clear, concise interpretation of the events surrounding the crisis . This book is written by students and is written for them .
 Detzer authors a very readable and interesting account of the Cuban affair . Detzer's account is a very interesting look at the Cuban government .
 He takes a somewhat jaded view of the participants’ motivations and actions in relationship to that of the standard textbook . The author of the book says the participants' motivations are similar to the textbook .
 The book, while an interesting display of Kennedy’s mind and perspective, lacks real depth and analysis since he died before its completion . The book is interesting but lacks depth, analysis .
 This and the CUBAN part of the Xerox Values and Decisions series lays out MISSILE CRISIS the background and personalities involved in the crisis . This and The CUBan is the latest in a series of articles from Xerox .
 Arthur M. Schlesinger, Arthur M., Jr., Jr. Robert Kennedy and His Times, Certain students, was published in 1978 . The Houghton Mifflin, Boston, published the book, Robert Kennedy .
 Kennedy a valuable biography for any Kennedy-phile to read . The author puts together one playing Kennedy .
 Written shortly after JFK’s assassination, the author affectionately and accurately discusses Kennedy's career, his opinions, his values, and his actions .
 Introduce a topic with an interest catcher that will sensitize students to the issues they will examine . Introduce the topic with a interest catcher to help students understand their subjects .
 Be certain you have carefully filmstrip, or an appropriate current events discussion planned how to . integrate this re2.2. A lecture, or a discussion, would achieve this objective .
 Most students don't realize this and will likely be doubly appalled at the prospects in 1962 of nuclear armed rockets . Try asking the students about the length of time it takes creation with the an ICBM fired from the Cold War history Soviet Union to hit Washington, D.C.
 Distribute the Student Guides and have the students read the Purpose and Background Essay . Use the purpose and background Essay to help students understand each other's purpose .
 JFK had several more advisers than the six who take part in this re-creation . Point out that JFK had many more advisers .
 Separate the actual role-players from the audience and distribute the proper handouts . Handouts will be distributed to the audience .
 Move from group to group and satisfy yourself that all students understand their individual tasks . Move from groups to group . Satisfie you that everyone understands your individual tasks.
 If you can, draw circles on the map, with Cuba at the center, indicating the limits of the Cuban missiles . The Cuban missiles are believed to be the largest in the world .
 After heated debate these men will meet with the president to present their refined opinions . After much heated debate they are now to meet with President Obama to discuss their views .
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy; Secretary of Defense to speak passionately . Present besides JFK are his brother, Robert Kennedy, Attorney General, Robert . Kennedy .
 Robert McNamara, Adlai Stevenson and Dean Acheson should be involved in their 3.5 million-strong coalition . Work to get them and former Secretary of State Dean Aideson involved .
 The president announces his quarantine decision next year, videotape the 4.5-meter quarantine . If you have a quality class Implications of the missiles’ presence are discussed . and you are considering The alternatives are analyzed using this re-creation .
 If time permits, set up a presidential press conference and presidential decision so that you can show allow the class to question the president on his reasoning . Set up a photo of the president's decision and press conference .
 Remind all of Day 3’s participants to be thoroughly prepared. stimulate students’ performance. Remind students to be completely prepared. Stimulate students' performance. Get ready for Day 3 .
 Open this day with a summation of yesterday’s events of 2.2.5 million people . Open this morning with a summary of the events yesterday .
 Students gathered before their sets to hear what has only been described as an urgent presidential address . Inform students that they are now the national TV audiyour instruction instruction.)
 After his speech, quickly sum up his points, possibly interview an average citizen for his/her reaction . Interview may also be conducted by the average citizen .
 The military has gone on full alert and American citizens have reacted by practicing air raid drills and hoarding food . Introduce the final scene by carefully tracing the events between JFK’s speech and this October 27 meeting .
 Adlai Stevenson confronts the Soviet U.N. ambassador in a televised debate . Stevenson confronted the Soviet United Nations ambassador . Stevenson has confronted the U.S. ambassador .
 One ship, the Maracula, was boarded, searched, and allowed to continue . One ship was boarded and searched, but the other was not searched .
 Khrushchev offered to remove the Cuban missiles in exchange for a no-invasion pledge from us . A note was sent from the Soviet Union on October 26, 1962 .
 It demanded that we remove our missiles from our bases in Turkey and then the Russians would remove theirs from Cuba . Russia demanded that the U.S. remove its missiles from Turkey, then Russia would remove its own from Cuba.
 If time permits, set up a press conference and allow the students to question the president about his choice .
 The crisis’s outcome for tomorrow will be decided by the next day . However, have experienced try to save the crisis' outcome .
 Doing so will intensify their may enhance the tension and highlight the uncertainty learning .
 Speaking experiences also help of the president’s gamble students’ personal growth. Students’ speaking experiences help them grow up, students say . Such speaking experience also help students' personal growth .
 After the groups have choosen their options, have the chairpersons report to the whole class . After the group has chosen their options have to choose their options .