 Forty years have passed since James D Williams regularly wore an Army uniform, but he says he never really left him .
 Williams, 64, retired two years ago from the private sector . He sought out fellow veterans around Lorena with whom he now drinks coffee each morning and discusses matters big and small .
 A bond thrives with others who have been in the same situation with you, serving in the armed forces . A bond is formed with those who have served in the military in the past .
 Veterans Day is Veterans Day, November 11 . Veterans Day commemorates the day of remembrance for those who have served in the U.S. military . The day is dedicated to veterans .
 Williams says it's only right his past military service remains vital in his life . Williams: "It is only right that his military service is important to his life"
 The temperature of the Cold War fluctuated during the years Williams served in the Army . Williams served as an Army officer in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Williams served in the National Guard after high school and enlisted in the regular Army in 1959 . Williams enlisted in 1959 and joined the Army National Guard in 1961 . Williams served with the Army during the Vietnam War .
 After basic training, he was sent to Aberdeen Proving Ground, Md., where he worked in an Army guided missile program . He worked in the U.S. Army guided missiles program .
 He was responsible for keeping up with various missile components at Fort Hood . He then was transferred to Fort Hood to keep up with missile components there .
 With the Korean War at a truce, the U.S. was trying to make sure the peace held . The Korean War ended in a truce with North Korea .
 The unit Williams was in was originally slated to stay in Korea for one year, but newly elected President John F Kennedy extended its tour for another 12 months . Williams was stationed in the Korean military unit .
 Williams was back at Fort Hood in October 1962 when the nuclear showdown between the U.S. and the Soviet Union occurred over Soviet missiles in Cuba . Williams was stationed in Fort Hood, Texas, when the showdown occurred .
 Kennedy had told the world that the Soviets were secretly building missile bases in Cuba . Kennedy had said the bases were being built in Cuba by the Soviets . Kennedy was killed in the Cuban raid .
 The president ordered a naval blockade to prevent Russian ships from bringing supplies to Cuba . Cuba is only 90 miles from the United States mainland .
 Soviet President Nikita Krushchev authorized his field commanders to use tactical nuclear weapons against U.S. forces in response to the blockade . The blockade was a response to an American embargo .
 Krushchev ordered the removal of missiles from Cuba as well as supply ships from the coast of the country . The Soviet Union then backed down and ordered removal of the missiles and ships .
 Williams says a wife and a new child were the reason he decided to leave the Army in 1963 . Williams says he left the Army because he wanted to be with his wife and child .
 Before he left, he helped the effort to send equipment and men from Fort Hood to the long war in Vietnam . He helped send equipment, men and equipment to Vietnam .
 Manpower in the then-divided Southeast Asian nation would jump from 16,000 soldiers in 1963 to 184,000 in 1965 .
 Williams would not go to the war that divided his own nation . Williams felt a loss from it early on when a friend with whom he had spent 3½ years became a casualty after volunteering for Vietnam .
 Williams visits his veteran friends around Waco and at the Veterans of Foreign Wars post in Hewitt . Williams visits with his friends around the city and at a Veterans' post in Waco, Texas .
 He also sees fellow veterans when he goes for care at the Waco Veterans Affairs Hospital . He sees fellow vets at the hospital .
 Williams says the service in which he grew up continues to surround him and reassure him to this day . Williams: "In that sense, the service ... continues to reassure him" Williams says, "It's a good thing that you can be a good guy"
 As the country honors veterans this week, the Tribune-Herald takes a look at Central Texans who served over the past seven decades . Central Texans have served in the U.S. military for decades .
 Veterans profiled each day reflect on history and share insights about their service, the armed forces, and fellow veterans .
 Vice President Jose Ramon Fernandez organized a similar conference on the Bay of Pigs invasion last year . Fernandez provided no details about documents when announcing the conference on Thursday .
 Cubans will be able to sign petitions beginning on Saturday in support of Cuba's economic, political and social systems, Castro says . Castro says during a live appearance on state television, the petitions will be available to sign .
 More than 120,000 petition stations will be set up around the island, he said . More than 100,000 petitions will be signed by people around the world .
 Opposition activists say the government's appeals are a response to the Varela Project, an initiative that would ask voters if they favor civil liberties . Opposition activists: The government's appeal is response to an initiative asking voters to favor civil rights .
 The event is expected to include people from the United States and the former Soviet Union who played roles in the event .
 Most Russians associated with the crisis have since died, Fernandez says . Several of the late President Kennedy's advisers are still alive, she says . Fernandez: Most of the people involved in the crisis are now dead .
 Conference organizers also are studying the possibility of taking participants to sites related to the crisis in the Havana area . He said conference organizers are also considering taking them to Havana sites .
 The crisis peaked when the United States learned there were Soviet nuclear missiles on the island - just 90 miles from U.S. shores . The conference's aim is to shed light on events leading up to the crisis .
 The previously unknown incident might have pushed the two superpowers closer to nuclear war . The incident was disclosed in a book released this week .
 Four diesel submarines of the Foxtrot type, armed with conventional and nuclear-tipped torpedoes, sailed from the Arctic Kola Peninsula . The four diesel submarines were armed with nuclear torpedoes .
 They managed to break through United States and NATO cordons unnoticed . But they were spotted by the United States Navy as they approached Cuba . They were seen by the U.S. Navy .
 The submarines needed to come to the surface often to charge their batteries . That made them easy prey for the U.S. anti-submarine cordons around the Communist island .
 Valentin Savitsky's B-59 submarine was spotted by U.S. Navy patrol aircraft when it temporarily appeared on the surface . The submarine was temporarily spotted by United States Navy .
 U.S. destroyers rushed to block the submarine and began dropping stun grenades to force it to resurface . The submarine's radio intelligence officer says he was in charge of the submarine's .
 The submarines' commanders had strict orders not to use their weapons without an order from Moscow . The close surveillance by the U.S. Navy made it hard for them to resurface for scheduled communications sessions .
 Savitsky eventually managed to control his anger and ordered the submarine to come to the surface . Savitski eventually ordered the sub to come out of the sea .
 Searchlights from U.S. ships and a United States helicopter buzz overhead . It was dark and the area was brightly lighted by searchlights from United States ships and the helicopter buzzing overhead .
 Costner: "I enjoyed it very much" Costner left the Hotel Nacional for an afternoon showing of the film .
 The movie is told solely from the vantage point of President Kennedy and his staff . The movie focuses on the decision-making process that led to the removal of Soviet missiles from Cuban soil in October 1962 .
 Castro, who was in power at the time of the crisis, and other Cuban officials are not portrayed in the film . The film was released in Cuba in 2009 .
 Costner and Castro were joined in the screening at the Palace of the Revolution, where Castro keeps his offices . Costner was joined by Foreign Minister Felipe Perez Roque and Vice President Carlos Lage .
 They later held a dinner that went into the wee hours of Tuesday, Rivers said .
 Costner arrives at the end of the day with a group of other producers . Costner is a producer for the upcoming film .
 On Tuesday morning, the group was screening the film to Cuban audiences and the New Latin Cinema Film Institute . The film was screened in Cuba and Cuba .
 President Kennedy sought speedy fulfillment of Russia's promise to pull her missiles out of Cuba . The U.S. kept its guard up in the Caribbean Monday while Russia pulled missiles from Cuba .
 American representatives were instructed to be cooperative, but alert to resist any delay that would permit the rockets to stay on their Cuban pads many more days . The U.S. government was told to be alert, but to resist delay .
 The slow defusion of yet another nuclear crisis was coming to fruition . It was coming from the ashes of the U.S. nuclear crisis .
 Cuban leaders, notably Castro, had become convinced in early 1962 that the U.S. was on the verge of nuclear attack . Cuban leaders were convinced that the United States would attack them .
 Relations between the two countries were still touchy after the Bay of Pigs confrontation in April of 1961 . Relations were touchy between the countries after the confrontation .
 Soviet Union sent missiles and materials to build launch pads on Cuban sites . The Soviet Union built launch pads in Cuba in the 1960s .
 Intervention by the United Nations and cogent threats by the U.S. convinced the USSR to remove the missiles . Intervention by U.N. and the United States convinced the Soviet Union to remove missiles .
 Castro raged, calling Soviet Premier Khruschev derogatory names, and accusing him of cowardice, but the interests of world peace had prevailed . Castro raged .
 The Cuban missile crisis in 1962 caused families to stock their basements with canned goods and bottled water . The crisis was the result of the Cuban missile threat .
 Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara wondered if he had seen his last sunset . McNamara was secretary of defense at the time of the war .
 Last week, survivors of the governing officials met in Moscow to exchange what they knew of what actually happened 26 years ago . Neither side yet knows the whole truth .
 War and Peace in the Nuclear Age is an excellent documentary series on public television . Much of what is known about the nuclear age is covered in the excellent series . The series is on PBS and PBS .
 An hourlong segment devoted to the Cuban missile crisis will be broadcast Feb. 8 . The hourlong episode will be devoted to Cuban missile crises .
 One grim possibility that emerged in Moscow is that the world may have been nearer disaster than has been believed . The world may be closer to disaster than it is believed, Moscow officials say .
 Sergei Khrushchev told some Americans he had been urged by Fidel Castro to launch nuclear missiles on U.S. cities in 1962 . Some Americans- so they thought- that Fidel Castro had urged his father to launch missiles .
 The younger Khrushchev and Soviet officials denied that he had told the Americans any such thing, leaving confusion as to whether Mr Castro actually had called for use of the missiles .
 A frustrated American scheme to get rid of Fidel Castro was revealed in a Moscow meeting . But a reason that he might have done so also was disclosed in the Moscow meeting-another reason .
 Americans in Moscow said President John F Kennedy never took Mongoose seriously seriously . Americans in Russia say President Kennedy was never serious about Mongoose .
 Khrushchev turned him down in a hurry . But if Mr Castro did urge the Soviet leader to shower nuclear missiles on U.S. cities, he was turned down . Mr Castro was the leader of the Soviet Union .
 Despite much Khrushchev bluster-the Soviet Union was producing rockets ""like sausages that come out of an automatic machine""-he knew that Moscow actually lagged far behind the United States in nuclear weapons .
 Despite Kennedy's 1960 campaign against the ""missile gap,"" the U.S. knew it, too . The United States knew it too .
 Khrushchev knew that a missile launch from Cuba-he had only 20 nuclear warheads there-would be suicidal for the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union knew that such a launch would be suicidal .
 McNamara and Kennedy knew, for their part, that even after suffering a devastating response the Soviets still would be able to destroy the United States .
 Leaders in Washington and Moscow were coming to realize what is now commonly understood -that nuclear war between them would be suicidal for the attacking as well as the target nation .
 The Cuban crisis dramatically taught the most crucial lesson for the nuclear era . Thus, terrifying as it was at the time, the Cuban crisis taught a crucial lesson .
 As recently as 1980, unfortunately, George Bush had not absorbed the George Bush administration .
 A world that remembers the missile crisis needs to hear it from the horse's mouth . If so, the world needs to know what happened in the 1980s .
 Gorbachev authorized disclosure of reams of new information on the 1962 crisis . Raymond Garthoff, a former United States diplomat who played a role in the crisis, has written a book on it .
 The crisis stemmed from a decision reached by then-Soviet leader Nikita S Khrushchev to send nuclear missiles to Cuba without consultation with other members of the Politburo . Garthoff said the Soviets decided the crisis stemmed .
 Brezhnev and a handful of Politburo members, according to other Soviet disclosures, were among those who were involved in the crimes . The crimes include the assassination of Soviet President Mikhail Gorchkov, who died in 1991 .
 Gorbachev's close attention to the Cuban missile crisis shows his "sensitivity to the dangers'' that nuclear weapons pose, McNamara says . McNamara, who was the U.S. defense secretary during the crisis, says Gorbachachev's attention shows his sensitivity to the
 Garthoff and McNamara interpreted many of the reforms proposed by Gorbachev . The reforms included enhancing the presidency, giving more power to the Soviet parliament and publishing reports on meetings of the ruling Politburo . McNamara: The reforms were efforts to expand the number of people involved
 McNamara, like Garthoff, has taken part in a series of U.S.-Soviet meetings on missile crisis . McNamara has met with Andrei Gromyko, who was foreign minister at the time of crisis, and Anatoly Dobrynin .
 Dobrynin angered U.S. officials during the crisis by telling them that there were no Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba . He angered United States officials by saying that there was no Soviet missile bases .
 Dobrynin assured participants at the conference in Moscow last January that he had not known about the missiles . Gromyko confirmed that, according to McNamara, who took part in the seminar .
 U.S. officials at the time had aerial photos showing launch pads for Soviet SS-4 and SS-5 missiles . They could not confirm that the warheads had been sent to Cuba .
 Soviet disclosures have revealed that 20 nuclear warheads were in Cuba, and that 20 more were en route aboard the Poltava, a Soviet freighter turned back by President Kennedy's naval quarantine .
 Fidel Castro sent a message to Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev at the height of the crisis urging him to fire nuclear missiles based on the island in anticipation of a U.S. attack . The move almost certainly would have triggered massive United States retaliation against the Soviet Union .
 According to one account, Khrushchev agreed to U.S. demands that the missiles be withdrawn . The message convinced him that the confrontation had gone too far . The Soviet leader agreed to the United States' demands .
 Soviets taking part in the conference said the United States cities were targeted for attack by the Cuban-based Soviet missiles . At least half of the 42 missiles deployed on the island were operational with nuclear warheads .
 Cuban officials refused to confirm the report of Castro's message to Khrushchev . The message was conveyed to United States participants privately and did not form part of the conference record .
 The Cuban leader sent a message to the Kremlin during the final weekend of the crisis warning that a U.S. air strike or invasion would probably take place within the next 72 hours .
 Former Soviet ambassador to Cuba Alexander Alexeev revealed that Castro spent the night of Oct. 1962, in an embassy air-raid bunker because he feared a United States attack . Castro spent that night in a bunker because of fears of a U.S. attack .
 The Cuban leader was depicted as agitated but ready to die for the cause in which he believed . He was depicted in the Cuban leader's portrait as agitated and ready to kill .
 Several participants in the two-day conference said they had underestimated the extent to which Cuban and Soviet officials thought that a U.S. invasion of the island was a real possibility . Several United States participants said that they had previously underestimated the . extent to . which Cuban officials thought . that
 Participants in conference included former Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko, former ambassador to Washington Anatoliy Dobrynin and Sergei Khrushchev . Other participants in the conference included Andrei Gromyko and his father ordered the deployment of Soviet missiles .
 Details about the readiness of the Soviet missiles in Cuba were provided by Gen. Gen. George S. Eisenhower . Gen. Eisenhower said the missiles were ready for Cuba .
 Dmitri Volkogonov, a military historian, reviewed archive material on the subject . He said he reviewed archives of the Russian government .
 U.S. officials have debated for years whether the missiles were equipped with nuclear warheads . Experts assumed that the United States naval blockade had prevented such weapons from reaching the island .
 Volkogonov said that it would have taken four to five hours to make the missiles ready for launching . He said it took an additional 15 minutes to fire them . Volkogsonov: It would have been more than four hours to prepare for launch .
 Khrushchev said that although the warheads were in Cuba, they were not actually mounted on the missiles . Khrushchevsvsvs: "The warheads were actually in Cuba but not in Cuba" Heavily-armed Soviet Union says it was a mistake .
 This was the first time high-ranking Soviet and Cuban participants had agreed to discuss the missile crisis with former U.S. officials and academics .
 The GCHQ base has been operational in the town since World War One, when it observed the movements of the German naval fleet, and moved to its current site beside a caravan park during World War Two .
 Scarborough's personnel were required to track Soviet naval traffic in the Baltic and merchant shipping in European waters . During the Cold War, Scarborough was tasked with tracking Russian naval traffic .
 Monitoring the cargo vessels was seen as a relatively mundane task . It suddenly took on high importance when the Cuban missile crisis broke out . The mission became more important when the missile crisis erupted .
 The tension arose when the U.S. were told that the Soviet Union were secretly shipping nuclear missiles to Cuba . The tension arises when the United States were told .
 There was talk of an American invasion, but instead a blockade on further shipping was enforced . The blockade was enforced by the British government .
 There was a fear that some ships en route would attempt to break the sanctions . However, there was also a fear some ships were attempting to break sanctions .
 The operators in Scarborough's secret bunker reported the positions of these threatening vessels . The operators reported the locations of these vessels .
 The Kislovodsk appeared to have ended its journey and turned back towards the Baltic . The report was sent to the White House by the Soviet Merchant Ship Changes Course .
 The Secret History of GCHQ will be broadcast on October 21 at 8pm . The reports are discussed in a new BBC Radio 4 documentary .
 The Yorkshire Post visited GCHQ Scarborough in November 2018, to coincide with the launch of a new work experience scheme to boost awareness of employment opportunities on the base .
 The site was built on what was once the town's racecourse in the 1970s . Staff were moved from their wartime bunker to a more modern building above ground level .
 It has the capability to function as Britain's main GCHQ base if the primary nerve centre in Cheltenham is destroyed . It also has the ability to function in place of the main nerve centre .
 Intelligence analysts monitor threats such as cyber security, human trafficking, child sexual exploitation and drug smuggling . Analysts monitor threats like cyber security. network defence, child sex exploitation, drug smuggling.
 Twenty years ago, most of the messages they intercepted were in written form . But the sheer volume of digital communications has made their roles significantly more challenging .
 Former foghorn station near Whitby for sale . Museum about the history of the facility . It began life as a wireless signal station on the coast .
 Everyone was on edge over the possibility of a nuclear conflict that never came . "Everyone on edge" over possibility of nuclear conflict never came, but never did .
 Missouri native spent much of his childhood in Ohio . He earned his bachelor's degree in economics and psychology from Albion College in Albion, Michigan .
 He made his wish come true, enlisting in 1961 and reporting to Naval Station Newport in Rhode Island .
 Following basic training, he went to the Boston Naval Shipyard and underwent training to become a communications officer . He was trained in the Boston naval shipyard .
 In February 1962, Butcher was assigned to the USS Camp, an Edsall-class destroyer escort . Butcher died at the age of 92 .
 The Camp was part of the blockade off of Cuba during the 13-day standoff from Oct.-28 . The Camp is part of a blockade of the island nation .
 The standoff between the U.S. and the Soviet Union was over the Soviet installation of armed nuclear warheads on the communist island 90 miles from American shores . The standoff was centered over the presence of nuclear weapons on the island .
 To end tensions, Soviet leadership offered to remove missiles in exchange for a promise that the U.S. wouldn't invade Cuba . Soviet leaders agreed to remove the missiles as part of a deal to end tensions .
 It was arguably the closest the two global superpowers came during the decades-long Cold War to initiating a nuclear conflict . The two superpowers were at odds during the Cold War .
 Butcher recalled there were times when ships nearly brushed against each other, which also had the potential to prompt an international incident . Butcher recalled the potential for international incident between ships .
 Cuban refugees adrift on boats were often picked up and turned over to the United States Coast Guard . During part of his tour aboard the Camp while in the Caribbean, Cuban refugees were frequently picked up by the U.S. Coast Guard.
 Butcher served as an interpreter whenever refugees were picked up by Camp Camp . Eventually, Butcher became an interpreter for refugees .
 The captain asked if anyone was able to speak Spanish to assist in communication . At the time, the captain asked anyone who could speak Spanish would be able to help .
 The Camp spent time in the North Atlantic, based out of Grenock, Scotland .
 When he returned to the U.S., he bnecame a base administrative officer at the Naval Weapons Lab in Dahlgren, Va. When he was stationed in the United States, he was a base administrator at the lab .
 After stints in Washington, D.C., Pittsburgh and Minneapolis, he was transferred to Minot . He stayed in Minot for about 12 years .
 His wife, Dina, was set to be appointed Deputy Agriculture Commissioner, a post she held for seven years . Dina held the post for 7 years .
 Butcher said the missile crisis was a time in which everyone was on edge . He said he has no regrets from his service and is proud to have been a part of it .
 Mr McCain and Mr Trump were two of a number of politicians and Trump Administration officials to make appearances on U.S. television on Sunday . A North Korean mid-range ballistic missile apparently failed shortly after launch, the third test-fire failure in April .
 North Korean launch seen as a clear act of defiance after weeks of rising tensions in the region . Launch comes amid rising tensions over the threat posed by North Korea . North Korea has launched a rocket rocket into the sea in recent weeks .
 Ballistic missile tests by the North are banned by the U.N. because they're seen as part of the North's push for a nuclear-tipped missile that can eventually hit the United States mainland . The country is seen as pushing for a nuke that can be hit by the
 The threat of such missiles also has North Korea's regional neighbours, South Korea, China and Japan, on high alert . The threat is also has regional neighbours - including China and South Korea .
 Mr Trump said he believed China's President Xi Jinping was putting pressure on North Korea . But he was coy about the use of U.S. military force against the country .
 Mr Trump said he did not say North Korean leader Kim Jong-Un should not test a missile, but that Mr Kim knows further such action would not make the U.S. happy, he said .
 Asked about the failure of a number of the missile launches, Mr Trump also refused to give much away .
 Mr Trump also said he was not going to talk about U.S. military options with North Korea . Mr Trump said he would not discuss military options because "we shouldn't be announcing all our moves"
 Mr Trump called the North Korean leader, ""a pretty smart cookie"" for being able to hold onto power after taking over at a young age . Mr Trump also called Mr Kim a 'smart cookie'
 North Korea poses a 'grave threat' to the U.S. and Asian allies, President Obama says . He says North Korea is a threat not just to the United States and its allies, but also to China .
 McMaster said it was important to confront the regime that is pursuing the weaponisation of a missile with a nuclear weapon . Mr McMaster added that it is important for all of us to confront this regime .
 U.S. working with partners in the region and globally on enforcing current UN sanctions, he said . That means, he added, "ratcheting up those sanctions even further" He said .
 Mr Trump spoke with the leaders of Singapore and Thailand on Sunday, inviting both to the White House . Mr Trump has invited both countries to the US.
 Mr Trump also spoke to Philippines President Rodrigo Duterte about North Korea . White House Chief of Staff Reince Priebus said Mr Trump was in regular contact with Japan's Prime Minister Shinzo Abe . Priebus said the president had become ""very close"" to Mr Xi .
 Priebus said the conversations were prompted by the ""potential for nuclear and massive destruction in Asia"" and eventually in the U.S.
 The North Korea missile launch comes after a nuclear-powered submarine and an aircraft carrier were sent to Korean waters .
 The United States and South Korea also started installing a missile defence system that is supposed to be partially operational within days . Their two navies are also staging joint military drills .
 The Terminal High-Altitude Area Defence system remains a controversial topic in South Korea . Presidential front-runner Moon Jae-in has vowed to reconsider the deployment if he wins a presidential election next month .
 Mr Trump raised eyebrows in South Korea last week when he said he would make Seoul pay $1bn for the missile defence system . Seoul's presidential Blue House said on Sunday that the White House National had confirmed that the United States will not be seeking money for the system .
 Analysts say the missile apparently fired by North Korea on Friday was a new Scud-type missile . The KN-17 is a new missile developed by the North Korea, analysts say . North Korea is believed to have fired the missile on Friday .
 The North fired the same type of missile on 16 April, just a day after a massive military parade where it showed off its expanding missile arsenal . United States officials called that launch a failure, just as another launch on 5 April was .
 Friday's missile was fired in the west, from an area near Pukchang, just north of Pyongyang . The two earlier launches were conducted from an eastern coastal area, but Friday's launch was from the west .
 In “Back Channel,” Steven L Carter keeps the KGB chief but substitutes an unlikely American for Scali . Margo Jensen, 19, replaces Scali in the novel's first novel .
 Jensen finds herself one night in a bedroom in Washington with none other than John F Kennedy . Through an incredibly complicated path of events that begins with a trip to Bulgaria with real-life chess whiz Bobby Fischer .
 KGB agent says Khrushchev's efforts to work around Kremlin hard-liners pushing for showdown with U.S. She meets with Kennedy on several evenings to report on what she says are efforts to avoid showdown with United States .
 She meets with the KGB agent to report that Kennedy has problems with hard-liners in places like the Pentagon, the CIA and even the State Department . Then she meets with a KGB agent, reports that Kennedy is having problems with the Pentagon and the CIA .
 Margo finds it hard to believe that she’s at the center of an international drama . Margo will be featured in a new series of American Horror Horror Horror Stories .
 Carter’s insights into the pressures on blacks who live in largely white surroundings . But the reading is fascinating, in large part because of his insights .
 Carter peppers his pages with reallife people like Bobby Kennedy, McGeorge Bundy and Gen. Gen. George Bundy . Carter's pages include photos of the Kennedy family, the Kennedicks and Bundy .
 Although much of their dialogue is fictional, their words seem to stay well within what we know about them . The dialogue seems to stay within what is known about the characters .
 Whether the male law professor Carter is on safe ground inside the head of a 19-year-old student seems like a dicier question . Carter has also written “The Emperor of Ocean Park,” ‘The Impeachment of Abraham Lincoln” and others .
 The two had never slept together, but if she were headed to his place rather than her dorm, she had no doubt that tonight would be the night . The two were going to her dorm .
 We all know how the Cuban missile crisis played out, we can find fascination in reading Carter’s version . Although we all know what happened, we find fascination with Carter's account .
 The pristine air, glorious foliage and football season are enthralling . Football season is on the way to the world's most beautiful cities .
 The Russians had secretly planted a nuclear arsenal in Cuba and the warheads were aimed in our direction only 90 miles from our border . This was 90 miles away from the US border .
 John Kennedy was a youthful president who had been in office less than 20 months . He was in office just 20 months before he was assassinated in 1968 .
 He told the Russians to take their nuclear weapons out of the western hemisphere and give them a short deadline to dismantle and go home . He gave the Russians a deadline to go home and go away .
 I remember vividly a clear beautiful October afternoon during the 10-day standoff . The standoff lasted 10 days and lasted 10 hours .
 I was 10 years old and was practicing with my peewee football team for our biggest game . But even as 10 year olds it was hard for us to concentrate. We were practicing with our peewees football team . Even as 10-year-olds it was difficult for us
 "We did not know what the results of a nuclear war would bring to the world," says Kim Jong Jong-Hussein .
 On this same October afternoon another story took place in rural south Alabama . It was the same day another story occurred in rural Alabama .
 Bill Baxley was a young district attorney for Houston and Henry Counties . He served as a district attorney in Houston, Henry and Houston counties .
 Houston has about 90% of the people in the circuit with Henry County being the home to about 10% of that . Henry County is home to around 10% . Houston is the largest city in Texas .
 This hamlet is a fork in the road exactly halfway between Abbeville and Headland . Headland is a small hamlet in the north-east of the country .
 This general store also served as a gas station . Squatlow was the mechanic for the store . He was a mechanic .
 Squatlow was nicknamed that because he would squat down close to the ground whenever he would talk with his folks . He was nicknamed "Squatlow" for squatting close to his folks when he was talking with his parents .
 "Old Squatlow would hunker down with a chew of tobacco in his mouth and gossip and swap stories all day," he said . "Squatlow" would sit in his chair and gossip with friends and family all day .
 Baxley, like most politicians, would stop at this Tumbleton country store on his way to court and drink a coke and visit . He would drink a drink and visit and visit the store .
 He had never been out of his native Henry County yet he was in rare form prophesying that day .
 Baxley said, “There ain’t a place in Alabama that would even be on the Russians radar to bomb, maybe Huntsville because of the Redstone Arsenal .
 Squatlow looked at Baxley like he was the most stupid person he had ever seen . Squat low looked at him like he had never seen him before . He looked back at him, looking like he'd been in a dream .
 Kennedy’s standoff with Khrushchev and the Russians saved Abbeville . Fortunately, Kennedy's standoff with the Soviets saved the town .
 Kaiser died of aspiration pneumonia at Sibley Hospital in Washington, his family said . Kaiser died at the hospital, where he was raising money for charity .
 He had been admitted to the hospital three days earlier after he started to slur his words . He was admitted to hospital after he had become slurping words .
 Kaiser served as United States ambassador to Senegal and Mauritania from 1961 to 1964 . Kaiser was an assistant secretary of labor during the Truman administration .
 Kaiser earlier had accompanied President Leopold Sedar Senghor on a visit to the White House . Kaiser had a warm meeting with President John F Kennedy .
 Kaiser asked Senegalese president to deny the Soviets access to the airport at Dakar . Senghor agreed when Kaiser went to see the president and asked him to deny access .
 President Jimmy Carter named Kaiser ambassador to Hungary in 1977 . Kaiser played a key role in convincing the Carter administration to return the Crown of St. St. Louis .
 The important religious relic had been in United States hands, under guard since 1945 at Fort Knox, Kentucky, where the United States gold reserves are kept .
 Kaiser recalled in an oral history interview at the Harry S Truman Library . Kaiser: "We got a trade agreement"" giving Hungary favored trade status . We got a . trade agreement."" giving Hungary favor trade status."
 Kaiser's parents emigrated in 1905 from Ukraine, then part of Russia, where he was born . Kaiser's four oldest siblings were also born .
 Robert G Kaiser is an associate editor of The Washington Post newspaper . David Kaiser is a professor of history in the strategy department at the U.S. Naval War College . Charles Kaiser is also a journalist and author of a book .
 Charles Kaiser explains why all Kaiser's sons have become writers . Charles Kaiser: All of his sons are writers . Kaiser: "I love writing. I love writing"
 President Kennedy initiated talks of peace and maintained safety for all parties involved . A 13-day standoff ensued, but instead of resorting to a preemptive strike as many advised, President John F Kennedy initiated peace talks .
 George W Bush wants to take a very different approach to the situation in Iraq and its president, Saddam Hussein, than Kennedy used in Cuba . Fearing powerful weapons of another country, our own president, George W. Bush, wants to be very different .
 We may, this time, choose to initiate a preemptive strike against a nation that we believe to harbor weapons of mass destruction . The U.S. could launch a strike against such a nation, President Obama says .
 No one can predict the true effects of such a decision, it would be wise for our current government officials to take a closer look at Kennedy's actions in 1962 .
 Pulitzer Prize-winning historian Arthur Schlesinger Jr. recently spoke in a panel discussion at the JFK Library and Museum in Boston . The panel discussion was held in honor of the JFK Museum .
 He compared the events of October 1962 to today, saying, "There were people in favor of a preventative war during the Cold War and they were regarded as a bunch of loonies"
 Schlesinger's point reflects the opinions of many political scholars . While ""loonies" may not be the most eloquent word to describe government leaders, it reflects the opinion of many scholars .
 Oftentimes the complications of working through situations peacefully may be difficult, and it appears to be more effective just to go initiate a battle . The author says it's more effective to initiate a fight than to work peacefully .
 Hussein has not proven to be the most cooperative individual the U.S. has had to deal with . Peaceful negotiations has benefits over the initiation of a war, costing soldiers and possibly civilian victims their lives .
 The technology of the weapons of mass destruction that Iraq is feared to harbor greatly surpasses that of the missiles in 1962, and Iraq is not in quite the position of world power as the Soviet Union was thought to be in the 1960s . Iraq's technology is not the same technology of
 President Kennedy's actions then should be replayed to our government officials today . The overall message gained from President Kennedy is that government officials should re-evaluate their actions .
 While it may seem more efficient to fight for our protection, effective peaceful negotiations require the most valiant of leaders . Peaceful negotiations require a valiant leader to lead a nation in peace .
 The Soviet officers commanding those missile batteries had been authorized to fire nuclear warheads if attacked without having to call Moscow first . Not only that, the Soviet officers had to fire nukes if attacked, they also had to be authorized to do so .
 A ""brigade"" of four diesel-powered ""Foxtrot""-class submarines of the Soviet navy were cruising to Cuba just as President Kennedy deployed a United States Navy armada to quarantine the island .
 Each of the four subs was equipped with a nuclear-tipped torpedo, intended to sink U.S. aircraft carriers and kill anything within a 10-mile radius . The four subs were equipped with nuclear weapons .
 The four captains had orders to fire torpedoes if attacked and in danger of being sunk or captured without prior orders from the Soviet Politburo or fleet headquarters . Like their ground-based counterparts, they were ordered to fire those torpedoes .
 Captains had to tune to the Voice of America to find out if their nation was at war . Captains would have to tune in to the voice of America for news .
 Huchthausen's account is not a comprehensive account of the incident or of the duel of wits and wills between JFK and Nikita Krushchev .
 It's a sailor's-eye view of the conflict, by and about those who cruised the Caribbean in those dangerous days . Instead of a war, it's a sailors' eye view of what happened .
 Huchthausen was a newly-minted ensign aboard the USS Blandy, one of the many Navy destroyers assigned to the Cuban blockade . He was a new ensign in the Navy .
 Later, he would serve as U.S. naval attache in Moscow, acquiring close knowledge of the Soviet submarine program .
 The Enemy Below is a new version of the old Soviet-era movie starring the U.S. submarines . The film alternates from the point of view of the Soviet submarine crews and of the American sailors and aviators .
 Several reviews have compared October Fury to Tom Clancy's novels, but this nonfiction account is really closer to Das Boot than The Hunt for Red October . October Fury is based on October Fury by Tom Clancy .
 Huchthausen presents a picture of competent but cynical officers and sailors trying to carry out their duty in submarines that were falling apart . The book is published in Germany and Austria .
 One sub had key gears that cracked in midvoyage; another had a damaged hatch that leaked dangerously . The sub was damaged by a leak in the middle of the mission .
 In the best of times, all four vessels stank and had to risk dangerously high levels of carbon dioxide when submerged . All four vessels had to be submerged to avoid dangerously high carbon dioxide levels .
 Sonar and other key pieces of equipment worked erratically and had to be fixed with the Russian equivalent of chewing gum and ingenuity . Sonar, other equipment and other equipment were broken up by the Russians .
 Even at the height of the crisis, the Russians enjoyed a freedom that their American counterparts, back in the U.S.R., could only envy . The Russians enjoyed the freedom they enjoyed in the United States during the crisis .
 Huchthausen slips into the sin of inventing dialogue he couldn't possibly have heard or verified to heighten the drama of his text . The author of the novel has been accused of the same sin .
 October Fury proves a shipshape narrative, with vivid, three-dimensional character portraits, with more than enough suspense to carry its readers along .
 He died at Massachusetts General Hospital, which would not disclose the cause of death .
 He served as special assistant for national security from 1961 to 1966 . He was a special assistant to national security for the U.S. government .
 People always had confidence in Mac,"" said John Kenneth Galbraith, a Kennedy economic adviser and ambassador to India .
 Bundy supervised the staff of the National Security Council . Bundy was among a group of young, bright advisers Kennedy had called on that also included Ted Sorensen and Arthur Schlesinger Jr. Bundy was one of Kennedy's top advisers .
 He was a scholar-in-residence at the Carnegie Corp. at the time of his death . He died in 2007 .
 His books included On Active Service in 1948, The Strength of Government in 1968 and Danger and Survival in 1988 .
 Bundy was a grade-school classmate of Kennedy's at the Dexter School in the Boston suburb of Brookline, Boston . Bundy ran for office himself once, as a Republican candidate for the Boston City Council in 1941 . Bundy was also a classmate of JFK at the school .
 In 1953 he became the youngest dean of the faculty of arts and sciences, serving until 1961 . He joined the Harvard faculty in 1949 and served until 1961, when he retired in 1961 .