 In both public and private, Russian officials had assured their American counterparts that the Soviet military build-up in Cuba was no threat to the U.S. because it would not include nuclear missiles capable of striking American territory .
 Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev had decided in the spring to dispatch nuclear weapons to Cuba for a variety of reasons . In fact, the Soviet premier had decided to dispatch the weapons in Cuba .
 Among them was a desire to defend his ally, Fidel Castro – the communist revolutionary who had taken the reins of power in Cuba three years earlier – from an anticipated U.S. attack .
 All the tensions that had grown up between business/ industry. Superpower Tension takes over . Superpower takes over a Superpower .
 In 1959, the Communist Fidel Castro took power in Cuba . Fidel Castro’s Cuba was one of the most repressive regimes in Cuba's history .
 "This was very threatening to the USA because it was right next to America," says President Obama . "This is very threatening" says Obama .
 In 1960, Castro made a trade agreement with Russia, Source A whereby Cuba sent sugar to Russia, in return for We will not oil, machines and money . Source A was a deal between Cuba and Russia, which Cuba signed in 1960 .
 This frightened the needlessly risk Americans more, and in 1960 they stopped world-wide trading with Cuba . This frightened Americans more . In 1960, the U.S. stopped world trade with Cuba, and stopped all-wide .
 In retaliation, Cuba nuclear war in nationalised all American-owned companies which even victory 3.0 victory . In retaliation for the loss of U.S. companies, Cuban government nationalised US-owned firms . Cuba's victory in the war in retaliation, Cuban president declared victory .
 The Bay of Pigs would be ashes in In April 1961 the CIA encouraged, funded and our mouths – but neither will we to invade Cuba . The CIA encouraged and funded an attempt by anti-Castro Cuban exiles .
 I call promised – weapons to defend Cuba against upon upon upon Chairman America. I call for weapons – weapons promised – by Chairman America .
 U2 spy-plane took pictures of a nuclear missile base being built on Cuba . Kennedy’s advisers told him he had 10 days before and provocative Cuba could fire missiles at targets in America. threat to world peace .
 Speech by President Kennedy on American TV, 1962: "The danger of the missile bases. The danger of missile bases"
 There were Russian troops in Cuba, and it would probably lead to a war with Russia, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: It would be a disaster for Russia .
 Kennedy set up a Committee of the National was not a direct act of war . It was not the first time the president had set up such a committee . Kennedy's decision to set up the National Committee was not an act .
 Khrushchev sent another letter demanding that Kennedy agreement – the USA did not also dismantle American missile bases – that they would be dismantled Turkey . Kennedy could not reply to the letter .
 He also ignored Khrushchev’s second letter – he wrote simply that would lift the blockade and agree not to invade Cuba . He also wrote that he would lift Cuba's blockade and . agree not . invade Cuba if Khrush . would dismantle the missile bases .
 The two leaders set up a telephone ‘hotline’ to talk directly in a crisis . President Obama and Hillary Clinton set up the phone 'hotline'