 James ""Traffic Jam Jimmy"" Uhrin Dies At 65, Family Says . James Uhrins died of a heart attack on Saturday morning, family says .
 Taiba Will Rise Above His Inexperience. Taiba will rise above his inexperience .
 Churchill Downs opens its first Saturday in May at Churchill Downs on the first Saturday of May . Churchill Downs has been hosting the race for decades . The horse race has been running for decades at the track in the past .
 WJZ First Alert Weather Team has declared today an Alert day in anticipation of severe storms . Heavy rain, strong winds and the potential for flooding expected .
 State Highway Administration Asks People To Delay Travel Due To Potential Freezing Rain Sunday morning . Some organizations around Maryland are preparing for the potential of freezing rain Sunday .
 WJZ's 2022 Black History Oratory Competition is underway . The competition will take place in 2022 .
 The Baltimore Museum of Art's Jazz in the Sculpture Garden series returns this summer . Best OfJazz In The Sculptures Garden returns to the Baltimore museum .
 Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev ordered a secret deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba in the fall of 1962 . The missiles were soon detected by United States spy planes .
 The standoff with Khrushchev over 13 days became “the most dangerous moments the world has ever faced, either before or since — the closest we came to nuclear destruction,” historian and journalist Michael Dobbs .
 "One thing that this exhibit points out is that a nuclear confrontation can happen and it almost did happen. I think one thing . This exhibit points to the fact that this . can happen," says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 As the blockade went into effect, Soviet ships approached, along with submarines, leading to tense moments . The blockade was never delivered .
 Dobbs: "One of the things that struck me ... was the extent to which the president of the United States didn’t really know" what was happening on the ground, he says . Dobbs has written a book on the crisis .
 Fan Cam seen on WJZ morning Edition: Manic Monday, Academic Monday and Academic Monday . CBS+Best OfBaltimore School Closings, Paramount+ Corporate Advertise .