 The picture is a less threatening perspective of the awesome picture below . So let's approach the issue from the less threatening view of the photo .
 Next, he does a steep climb to reconvert some of that speed into altitude so he can turn and land . The plane lands safely at the end of the runway .
 Given that the glider has no engine, you might wonder how the pilot can be sure he can't gain enough altitude in the climb to safely turn and land . The glider is powered by an engine .
 The laws of physics tell us exactly how altitude is traded for speed and vice versa . The laws tell us how altitude and speed can be swapped for speed .
 While there is a loss due to the air resistance of the glider, that is a known quantity which the pilot takes into account by starting from a higher altitude than needed for the landing phase .
 It's important to read the fine print in that guarantee provided by the laws of physics . But it's also important to be careful of the law of physics, says author .
 If there's a slight wind the difference is negligible, but if the air movement is unusually strong all bets are off . A friend of mine had safely executed the maneuver many times before . If there‼s a slight breeze the difference in the maneuver is negligible .
 The model of stationary air was no longer applicable and he had no way of knowing his predicament until he approached the runway with much less speed than needed for a safe landing .
 He managed to land without damage to himself or his glider, but was so shaken that he no longer does that maneuver . He landed safely but was shaken by the incident .
 While most experienced glider pilots sometimes do low passes, I've opted not to because I regard them as a 99.9% safe maneuver – which is not as safe as it sounds .
 One chance in a thousand of dying sounds a lot riskier than 99.9% safe . Even though they are clearly equivalent, one chance is a lot more riskier .
 The fatality rate is one in a thousand per execution of the maneuver . The perspective gets worse when it‼s recognized that the fatality rates are one in 1,000 per execution .
 The fear that he feels the first few times dissipates as he gains confidence in his skill, he says . Worse, the fear that the first time he feels dissipates, dissipates in time .
 Complacency is really complacency, which pilots know is our worst enemy . But that confidence is really dangerous, pilots know it is their worst enemy, says the pilot .
 Many people point to the absence of global war since the dawn of the nuclear era as proof that these weapons ensure peace . The absence of war since nuclear weapons is proof that they ensure peace, many say .
 Since World War III would mean the end of civilization, no one would dare start it . World War I would be the end to civilization . No one would start it, since World War II would end civilization .
 Each side is deterred from attacking each other by the prospect of certain destruction . Each side will be deterring from attacking the other by prospect of destruction .
 It is true that no one in his right mind would start a nuclear war, but when people are stressed they often behave irrationally . Even seemingly rational decisions can lead to places no one wants to visit, such as London .
 Less well known nuclear near misses occurred during the Berlin crisis of 1961 and the Yom Kippur War of 1973 . NATO's Able Archer exercise of 1983 was also a near miss .
 The law of unintended consequences combined with the danger of irrational decision making under stress created an extremely hazardous situation . In each of those episodes, the Law of Unmanual consequences combined .
 The last date for a nuclear near miss listed above was 1983 . It might be hoped the end of the Cold War removed the nuclear sword hanging over humanity's head .
 A closer look shows that the Cold War, rather than ending, merely went into hibernation . Aside from the fact that other potential crises such as Taiwan were unaffected, a closer look at the Cold Cold War shows that .
 In the West, the reawakening of this specter is usually attributed to resurgent Russian nationalism . But as in most disagreements, the other side sees things very differently .
 Article 5 of NATO charter states that an attack on any NATO member shall be regarded as a NATO attack on them all . For our purposes, this concerns is the most relevant because it involves reading the fine print .
 President Bush is pressing for Georgia and the Ukraine to be admitted to NATO . It is partly for that reason that a number of former Soviet republics have been brought into NATO .
 Once these nations are in NATO, the thinking goes, Russia would not dare try to subjugate them again . That would invite nuclear devastation by the United States, which would be treaty bound to come to the victimʼs aid .
 The law of deterrence which seems to guarantee peace and stability is model-dependent . But, just as the laws of physics depended on a model that was not always applicable during a glider's low pass .
 The assassination of Austria's Archduke Ferdinand by a Serbian nationalist led Austria to demand that it be allowed to enter Serbian territory to deal with terrorist organizations . Austria demanded that the Serbian government be allowed into Serbia's borders to combat terrorism .
 Interviews with captured assassins had shown complicity by the Serbian military . The head of Serbian military intelligence was a leader of the secret Black Hand terrorist society, it was determined .
 War between Austria and Serbia resulted, and alliance obligations similar to NATO's Article 5 then produced a global conflict . War between Serbia and Austria resulted, resulting in a global war . NATO  obligations such as Article 5 are similar to Article 5 .
 In August 2008, the conflict has escalated to front page news of a low-intensity, undeclared war . As it is being revised, this article is being updated .
 If President Bush is successful in his efforts to bring Georgia into NATO, we would face the unpleasant choice of reneging on our treaty obligations or threatening actions which risk the destruction of civilization .
 A similar risk exists between Russia and Estonia, which is already a NATO member . Estonia is already an already member of the NATO alliance .
 Returning temporarily to soaring, although I will not do low passes, I do not judge my fellow glider pilots who choose to do them . I will no longer fly in a glider, but I will fly again .
 The pilot in the photo has over 16,000 flight hours, has been doing low passes at air shows for over 30 years . He has radio contact with a trusted spotter on the ground who is watching for traffic .
 The fact that such an experienced pilot exercises that much caution says something about the risk of the maneuver . It's not the first time a pilot has exercised such caution in the past .
 In the same way, I am not arguing against admitting Georgia to NATO or suggesting that Estonia should be kicked out of NATO . In the past, I'm not arguing that Georgia should be admitted to NATO, but I'm concerned about its membership .
 Russia-U.S. relations are fraying, says President Bush . U.S.-Russian relations are at risk of a nuclear war, he says .
 The danger isn't so much in admitting former Soviet republics into NATO as in becoming complacent with our ability to militarily deter Russia from taking actions we do not favor . The danger is not in admitting ex-Soviet republics to NATO as being complacent .
 The circle on the left represents the current state of the world, while the one on the right represents the world after a full-scale nuclear war . The circle represents the state after a nuclear war, and the one after nuclear war represents the future .
 Because World War III is a state of no return, there is no path back to our current state, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "There is no way back to the current state. There is no other path back"
 An arrow is shown to indicate the possibility of a transition from our current state to one of global war, that path seems impossible to most people . Even though an arrow shows that, most people think that path is impossible, it seems impossible .
 The answer lies in recognizing that what is depicted as a single, current state of the world is much more complex . The world is not a single state, it is a complex world, says CNN.com .
 Society is partly correct in thinking that a transition from our current state to full-scale war is impossible . Most of the time, we occupy one of the substates far removed from World War III .
 It is possible to move from our current substate to one slightly closer to the brink, and then to another closer yet yet . But it is possible that it could move from one to one very near the brink .
 Fyodr Burlatsky, one of Khrushchev's speechwriters, was in the forefront of the Soviet reform movement . The view has been recorded by one of his close advisors and close advisors .
 A matter of six or seven minutes missiles launched from that base could devastate major centres in Ukraine and southern Russia .
 Khrushchev realized that America would find this deployment unacceptable and therefore did so secretly, disguising the missiles and expecting to confront the United States with a fait accompli . In spite of the similarity between the Cuban and Turkish missiles, the U.S. would find it unacceptable and
 Khrushchev did not adequately envision what might happen if, as did occur, he was caught in the act . However, he did not think what might have happened if he were caught .
 The world is on the brink of disaster, says CNN.com's John Sutter . He says the steps taken by Obama administration have brought the world to the brink .
 During the crisis, there were additional, fortunately unvisited substates that would have made World War III even more likely . The substates would have prevented World War II from happening .
 Burlatsky: Pressure to remove Castro with a powerful American invasion force intensified after Cuban missiles were discovered . The Bay of Pigs fiasco was just one example of the pressure to correct the fiasco, he says . The U.S. was pressured to correct it after the discovery of Cuban
 Those arguing in favor of invasion were ignorant of the fact – not learned in the West until many years later – that the Russians had battlefield nuclear weapons on Cuba . The Russians came close to authorizing their commander on Cuba to use them without further approval from Moscow in the event of an American invasion
 Risk Analysis uses quantitative risk analysis to estimate the probability of nuclear deterrence failing . The risk analysis is based on the probability that nuclear deterrence fails .
 This approach is a bit like Superman disguised as mild-mannered Clark Kent . But, before I can explain why it is extraordinary, we need to explore what it is and overcome a key mental block that helps explain why no one previously had thought of applying this valuable technique .
 To understand this mental block, imagine someone gives us a trick coin, weighted so heads and tails are not equally likely, and we need to estimate the chance of its showing heads when tossed .
 The chance of heads is somewhere between zero and 6% per toss, but that leaves way too much uncertainty . The probability of heads being tossed is between 0% and 6%, but that's too much uncertain .
 We are moderately confident that the chance of nuclear war is somewhere between zero and 6% per year . Thinking of the fifty years that deterrence has worked without a failure as the fifty tosses of the the coin, we are confident of the .
 There is a big difference between one chance in a billion per year and 6% per year, both of which are in that range . But there is a lot of a lot more of a chance of finding out if you're going to find out .
 At one chance in a billion per year, a few more years of business as usual would be an acceptable risk . The risk is one in one billion a year, but it's worth one in a million more .
 Current nuclear strategy would be the equivalent of playing nuclear roulette – a global version of Russian roulette . But 6% corresponds to roughly one in 16 odds, in which case our current nuclear strategy is the equivalent to playing a global roulette once each year .
 Risk analysis breaks down a catastrophic failure of nuclear deterrence into a sequence of smaller failures, many of which have occurred and whose probabilities can therefore be estimated . In the same way, risk analysis also breaks down the failure probabilities of a nuclear attack .
 Modern risk analysis techniques first came to prominence with concerns about the safety of nuclear reactors . The Rasmussen Report was produced for the Nuclear Regulatory Commission in the 1975 .
 In Risk-Benefit Analysis, Wilson and Crouch note “ used event tree analysis … This new approach originally had detractors, and indeed the failure … to use it may have contributed to the occurrence of the Three Mile Island Accident . This approach was used in the aftermath of the
 An event tree starts with an initiating event that stresses the system . The tree tree is a tree of events that stress the system in order to get the tree to grow .
 For a nuclear reactor, an initiating event could be the failure of a cooling pump . An initiating event would be a failure of the cooling pump, experts say . For nuclear reactors, the initiating event is a failure .
 Unlike Chernobyl, such initiating events occur frequently enough that their rate of occurrence can be estimated directly . Unlike the catastrophic failure which has never occurred (assuming we are analyzing a design different from Chernobyl)
 The event tree then has several branches at which the initiating event can be contained with less than catastrophic consequences . For example, activating a backup cooling system can contain the event tree . The tree tree has a number of branches that can contain events such as a cooling system .
 If a failure occurs at every one of the branches, then the reactor fails catastrophically . But if a failure occurred at every single branch, the reactor will fail catastrophistically . The reactor is not only a failure at every branch .
 Probabilities are estimated for each branch in the event tree and the probability of a catastrophic failure is obtained as the product of the individual failure probabilities . Probabilities of each branch is estimated and is based on the probabilities of each individual failure .
 Applying risk analysis to the catastrophic failure of nuclear deterrence, a perceived threat by either side is an example of an initiating event . The risk analysis is based on risk analysis from a risk analysis of the failure of a nuclear system .
 If either side exercises adequate caution in its responses, such an initiating event can be contained and the crisis dies out . If both sides exercise enough caution in their responses, the crisis will be contained .
 The Cuban crisis almost happened with the 1962 Cuban crisis . The U.S. has a history of nuclear power .
 The probability assigned to the last branch in the event tree will involve subjectivity and have more uncertainty . Because nuclear deterrence has never completely failed, the probability is more likely to be subject to subjectivity .
 Confidence in the final result can be increased by incorporating a number of expert opinions and using a range instead of a single number for that probability, as well as providing justifications for different opinions .
 Kennedy's Secretary of Defense, Robert McNamara, wrote that he didn't expect to live out the week, supporting an estimate similar to Kennedy's . Kennedy's secretary of defense wrote that McNamara didn't think he would live out .
 I discounted Bundy's 1% estimate because invading Cuba was a frequently considered option . No Americans were aware of the Russian battlefield nuclear weapons which would have been used with high probability in that event .
 Military operations looked like they were becoming increasingly necessary, another member of Kennedy's advisory group wrote . As an example of faulty reasoning due to this lack of information, Douglas Dillon wrote, “military operations looked ... increasingly necessary .
 The current conflicts between Russia and a number of former Soviet client states are similar . Step #1: Conflict between America and Castroʼs Cuba is a conflict between the U.S. and Castro's Cuba .
 Russia demanding to be treated as a military equal and being denied this status: The same is true today . The same was true today. Russia is being denied access to the U.S. military .
 Repeated American statements that we defeated Russia in the Cold War add fuel to that fire . Russians feel they were equal participants in ending that conflict . Repeated U.S. statements about defeating Russia add fuel fuel to the fire .
 Several potential crises are brewing which have similar potential . The Berlin Crisis and the Bay of Pigs invasion were similar to the Berlin Crisis .
 A missile defense system we are planning for Eastern Europe bears an ominous similarity to those Turkish missiles . The American deployment of IRBMʼs in Turkey is similar to that of the U.S. system in Europe . The U.N. says it is planning to deploy IRBM
 While there is not yet a modern day analog of this step, serious warning tremors have occurred . Khrushchev’s deployment of the Cuban missiles: While not yet an analog of the modern-day analog, this step has occurred .
 The fact that we are not yet staring at the nuclear abyss is little cause for comfort . We need to be careful not to be drawn to the brink of nuclear war .
 In terms of the sequence of events that turn a 99.9% safe maneuver into a fatal accident, we are already at a dangerous point in the process . As in soaring, we need to recognize complacency as our true enemy .
 Even minor changes in our nuclear weapons posture have been rejected as too risky, even though the baseline risk of our current strategy had never been estimated . The risk of the current strategy was never estimated .
 A preliminary risk analysis indicates that relying on nuclear weapons for our security is thousands of times more dangerous than having a nuclear power plant built next to your home . The risk analysis was carried out by a risk analysis .
 Equivalently, imagine two nuclear power plants being built on each side of your home . Equivalent to imagine a nuclear power plant being built side-by-side of your house . Equivalously, imagine a two-house-to-side nuclear plant each side .
 Thousands of nuclear reactors surround you . Thousands of reactors are surrounded by nuclear plants .
 Each of us faces a risk from a failure of nuclear deterrence . That is the level of risk that my preliminary analysis indicates each of us is at risk, he says .
 The analysis that led to that conclusion involves more math than is appropriate here, but an intuitive approach conveys the main idea .
 In science and engineering, when trying to estimate quantities which are not well known, we often use ‘order of magnitude” estimates . The order of magnitude estimates are often used in engineering and science and science .
 In this intuitive approach I first ask people whether they think the world could survive 1,000 years that were similar to 20 repetitions of the last 50 years . I then ask them if they think they could survive a 1,00-year period similar to the last 20 years of the
 When asked that question, most people do not believe we could survive 1,000 years . Most people don't believe we can survive such a long period of life .
 Most say they think we can survive another 10 years of business as usual, and most say we probably can . I then ask them if they think they can survive the next 10 years, they say they can .
 There‼s no guarantee, but we‼ve made it through 50 years, so the odds are good that we can make it through 10 more . Thereʼt be a guarantee that we will survive the next 10 years .
 The time horizon for a failure of nuclear deterrence is greater than 10 years and less than 1,000 years . In the order of magnitude approach, we have now . We have now bounded the time horizon .
 On an annual basis, that makes relying on nuclear weapons a 99% safe maneuver . The U.S. relies on nuclear arms on a year-round basis, making it 99% safer to rely on them .
 As with 99.9% safe maneuvers in soaring, that is not as safe as it sounds and that's no cause for complacency . As with . 99. 9% safe maneuvering, that's not as . safe as the sounds and not as easy as . sounds .
 If we continue to rely on a strategy with a one percent failure rate per year, that adds up to about 10% in a decade and almost certain destruction within my grandchildren' lifetimes, says author . "Almost certain destruction" within grandchildren' lifetime .
 The actual risk could be as much as three times greater or smaller . Because the estimate was only accurate to an order of magnitude, the actual risk may be higher .
 Even 3% per year adds up to roughly a 25% fatality rate for a child born today, and that's with high probability, consign that child to an early, nuclear death .
 The usual standards for industrial safety would require the time horizon for a failure to be well over a million years before the risk might be acceptable . Given the catastrophic consequences of a failure of nuclear deterrence, the usual standards would require a time horizon .
 Even a 100,000 year time horizon would entail as much risk as a skydiving jump every year . But with the whole world in the parachute harness, the world is at risk .
 In-depth risk analyses are needed to correct or confirm those indications . Business as usual entails far too much risk, says John Defterios .
 Richard Garwin, IBM Fellow Emeritus, former member of President’s Science Advisory Committee and Defense Science Board . Adm. Richard G. Garwin: ‘I’ve been here for more than 30 years. I’m. proud to be able to
 Initial studies will identify the most likely trigger mechanisms, thereby allowing attention to be directed where it is most needed . This second phase effort will be aided by the initial studies because, in addition to estimating the risk of a failure of nuclear deterrence, they will .
 A nuclear terrorist incident is found to be a likely trigger mechanism for a full-scale nuclear war, then much needed attention would be directed to averting that smaller, but still catastrophic event . For example, if as seems likely, a terrorist incident was found to have a likely triggering mechanism
 For ease of exposition the remainder of this article assumes the conclusion reached by my preliminary study – that the risk is far too great and urgently needs to be reduced . While definitive statements about the risk we face must await the results of the proposed in-depth studies .
 Whit Diffie and Ralph Merkle invented public key cryptography in the mid 1970s . The technology now secures the Internet and has won the three of us many honors . The Positive Possibility is a positive possibility for the Internet .
 When we first conceived the idea many experts told us that we could not succeed . Yet, many experts said that we would not succeed. Yet, when we started, we were told we couldn't succeed .
 What was missed is that “the key” might become “two keys,” a public key for enciphering and a secret key for deciphering . What was missing is that "the key" might become "two keys" and "two key"
 Everyone could encipher messages using my public key, but only I could understand them by deciphering with my secret key . Everyone could use public key to decipher messages using public key .
 Most people have difficulty envisioning a world in which the nuclear threat is a relic of the past . Just as many cryptographic experts thought we couldn't split the key, experts used arguments based on years of accumulated wisdom that were not applicable to the new possibility, most people have trouble envisioning
 For the risk to truly be acceptable, this new state also must be a state of no return . Its risk would not be acceptable if the world could transition back to our current state with its unacceptable risk .
 In this new figure, our current substate is near the middle of the current state of the world . The new figure is based on the current level of state of world .
 "We are not close to World War III, but neither are we close to an acceptable level of risk," says President Obama . We are not near World War II, but we are close to acceptable levels of risk .
 Much as people had difficulty envisioning public key cryptography before we developed a workable system, they also have difficulty imagining a world that is far better than what they have experienced in the past . Much of the world is still struggling to imagine a better future, says John Defterios .
 The evolution of the movement to abolish slavery in the U.S. provides a good illustration of that difficulty . The evolution is a good example .
 In 1835 a Boston mob attacked the abolitionist William Lloyd Garrison and dragged him half naked through the streets . Garrison was dragged half naked by a mob in the streets of the city .
 Few people could envision the end of slavery within thirty years, much less that citizens of Massachusetts, Illinois and Pennsylvania would give their lives to help bring about the end .
 Anti-abolitionist riots of the 1830s were actually a sign that a new substate had been reached and change was beginning to occur . The riots were seen as evidence of insurmountable barriers to ending slavery .
 There were no such riots in 1787 because the abolitionist movement was almost non-existent . The abolitionists were not involved in the riots because of the lack of abolitionism .
 By the 1830s abolition was beginning to be seen as a serious threat to the supporters of slavery, resulting in the riots .
 History shows that people have tremendous difficulty envisioning both negative and positive possibilities that are vastly different from their current experience . History shows people often fail to envision both negative or positive possibilities .
 As an example of the difficulty imagine imagine the reaction if someone, prior to Gorbachev's coming to power, had predicted that a leader of the Soviet Union would lift censorship, encourage free debate, and not use military force to prevent republics from seceding .
 I had a milder version of that problem in September 1984 when I started a project designed to foster a meaningful dialog between the U.S. and Soviet scientific communities in an attempt to defuse the threat of nuclear war .
 I was aware of the limitations that Soviet censorship imposed, but believed there still was some opportunity for information flow, primarily unidirectional . I was also aware that there was still some opportunity to information flow in the USSR .
 It had been eight years since my last trip to the Soviet Union and this visit was an eye-opening experience . It was the first time I had been to visit Russia since the 1980s .
 I was meeting with people who were in the forefront of the nascent reform movement which would bring Gorbachev to power six months later, with some of them directly advising him .
 Scientists with whom whom I met could not agree with those of my views that contradicted the party line . Censorship was still the law of the land, so the scientists disagreed with me, he says .
 On returning to the United States I was often seen as extremely naive for believing that meaningful conversations were possible with persons of any standing within the Soviet system . I sensed something very different was brewing, but on returning to U.S. I sensed it was brewing .
 It is counterproductive to lay out too explicit a road map to that goal, it says . It is therefore counterproductive to talk about the future of the U.S. economy .
 Risk analysis provides an implicit, rather than an explicit map, for example . Until I realized the applicability of risk analysis, I didn't see how that could be done . Risk analysis can be applied, but risk analysis provides a map, not a map .
 "No single step can reduce the risk a thousand-fold, so if the risk analysis approach can be embedded in society's consciousness, then one step after another will have to be taken until a state with acceptable risk is reached . No single step  can be taken to reduce risk a
 The first critical step therefore is for society to recognize the risk inherent in nuclear deterrence . The first step is to acknowledge the risk of nuclear weapons .
 Share your thoughts with us at CNN iReport.com . Share your own version of this article with us . Please share it with us.
 Email is particularly effective since friends who agree can then relay your message to others . Email is especially effective since it can be shared with friends who agreed to do so .
 This article, a sample email, and other tools can be found on the resource page at NuclearRisk.org.org .
 Peter Finn,“Russian Bombers Could be Deployed to Cuba”, Washington Post, July 22, 2008, Page A10 .
 Martin E Hellman, “Risk Analysis of Nuclear Deterrence,” The Bent of Tau Beta Pi , Vol. 1 . Hellman’s book, The Bent, is published by The Bent .
 David Morgan, “ United States general warns against Russian bombers in Cuba,” July 22, 2008 Reuters dispatch. David Morgan .
 Vladimir Putin, “Press Statement and Answers to Questions following the 20th Russia-European Union Summit, Marfa, Portugal,” October 26, 2007 . Putin: “Russia-EU Summit is a very important part of the world’s relationship with the EU .