 It remains unclear whether Mikoyan reversed or circumvented the decision on his own or convinced Khrushchev of its perils . But they told a news conference Wednesday that they say it remains unclear .
 The conference is the latest manifestation of Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev's glasnost policy . The conference will be held in Moscow, Russia .
 Kennedy Jr. and son, John F Kennedy Jr., will join McNamara, Bundy, Bundy and Sorenson . Kennedy press secretary Pierre Salinger, Gen. Gen. McGeorge Bundy, former special counselor to Kennedy, will join them .
 The authors suggested that Alekseev, along with others in the Soviet diplomatic corps, were not receiving accurate information from Moscow about the missiles . But the authors said they were not getting accurate information .
 J. Edgar Hoover as a villain but not mentioning Nikita Khrushchev opened in a Moscow theater Wednesday to a lukewarm reception . The film opens in a theater Wednesday in the Soviet capital .
 The audience gave polite applause to The Burden of Decision . The audience seemed unsure how to respond to the characterizations of former President Kennedy .
 There were no curtain calls and only one bouquet of flowers was given to the actor playing Robert Kennedy . Robert Kennedy was described by author Fyodor Burlatsky as the hero of play .
 The play was scheduled for only two performances at the Satirical theater .
 The work opens with Pierre Salinger talking with Soviet envoy Alexander Fokin . The White House press secretary talks with Fokin on a revolving stage . Salinger and Fokin meet for the first time in a week .
 Salinger complains that the crisis, which occurred in October 1962, is shrouded in secrecy . A clock ticks slowly in the background as Salinger talks about the crisis . Salinger: "The crisis occurred in 1962, and it's shrouded in secret"
 He tells her he has monitored 70 calls from the President to a night club singer with connections to the Mafia . He hints at blackmail and hints at blackmailing .
 Kennedy's life could be in danger if he does not take a tough line on Cuba, says Kennedy . He also warns that he could lose his job if he doesn't take a tougher line on the island nation .
 The scene ends with the entrance of Frank Sinatra and a woman described as Kennedy's lover, Judith Campbell Exner, a buxom blonde in a scanty lace dress .
 In another scene Kennedy seeks advice on the likelihood of war over the Cuban missiles . Kennedy sought advice from the White House on how to prepare for war .
 He secretly dispatches his brother Robert to negotiate a missile withdrawal in return for a pledge of non-intervention in Cuban affairs . Horrified by the possiblity of millions of deaths, he secretly negotiates his brother .
 Drama is created by the ticking of the clock ticking louder and faster in the background of a video game . Drama was created by a clock ticking ticking louder than the background .
 The play ends after the crisis has been resolved and Kennedy walks off stage saying, ""I'm off to the theater, like Lincoln. Like Lincoln" Kennedy walked off stage .
 The curtain goes down on Kennedy standing at the back of the dark stage . Kennedy's final moments on the stage of the play are captured in a dramatic moment .
 A young Soviet said the play brought home events he had heard little about when they occurred during his childhood . The play is the latest in a long line of Soviet-era Soviet films to be released in Russia .
 The play presents Kennedy as a religious man haunted by the burden of office . Kennedy is plagued by a debilitating back injury and with a weakness for beautiful women .
 Hoover and administration rightwingers engineered Kennedy's assassination because of his handling of the crisis . Hoover's handling of crisis left impression that Hoover and his administration right wingers engineered JFK's assassination .
 The Soviet envoy, portrayed as a reasonable and human character, is the sole representative of the Soviet side . The envoy is portrayed as the only representative of Soviet side.
 Burlatsky's suggestion that Kennedy's handling of the missile crisis led to his assassination is the official Soviet view . The Soviet view is official Soviet views .
 He said 'technical difficulties' prevented introducing Khrushchev, the Soviet Union's premier at the time, into the drama .
 President Kennedy describes the capabilities of the Soviet nuclear missiles stationed in Cuba in a televised speech . President Kennedy says the missiles were capable of hitting Cuba .
 U.S. naval ships form a blockade to go into effect on Wednesday, Oct. 10, at 10m. at 10pm . United States naval ships formed a blockade on Wednesday morning .
 Military forces go to DEFCON 2 for the first time in U.S. history when Soviet tanker Bucharest continues toward the quarantine line . Military forces will be on high alert for first time since World War II .
 The aircraft carrier USS Essex and the destroyer USS Gearing hail the Soviet tanker Bucharest and then allow it to continue on to Cuba . The two aircraft carriers were able to hail the ship Bucharest .
 Khrushchev offered to remove Soviet missiles in Cuba if the U.S. would remove Jupiter missiles in Turkey . The United States removed Jupiter missiles from Turkey in exchange for removing them from Cuba .
 Nikita Khrushchev agreed to have Soviet missiles removed from Cuba in 1962 . The missiles were removed from the Soviet Union in October 1962 .
 Soviet ship traveling away from Cuba, carrying missiles and transporters, seen in 1962 . Soviet ship traveled with missiles and cargo .
 A retired Soviet general said short-range atomic weapons were in place in Cuba . At the meeting, a retired . general said .
 Nine shortrange rockets with nuclear warheads had been placed in Cuba . Anatoly Gribkov, later chief of staff of Warsaw Pact forces, said that nine rockets had been planted .
 Gribkov told those at the Havana meeting that he had visited the island before the crisis with orders to use the short-range nuclear weapons without further approval from Moscow . He said in case of a U.S. invasion of Cuba, the senior Soviet commander was authorized .
 The intermediate-range Soviet weapons that were the focus of the missile crisis could have been fired only with the authorization of Nikita Khrushchev, Gribkov says . The intermediate range weapons could have wreaked devastation on much of the United States mainland, he says .
 McNamara and U.S. experts on crisis said they had not known of short-range weapons until the recent Soviet statement . McNamara said intelligence reports had been made about the weapons at the time .
 The short-range rockets did not have enough range to reach Florida, 90 miles away . They could have been used against invading U.S. forces .
 A retired Russian general says short-range weapons were ready for firing in 1962 . He says 'CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS was even SCARERER than in 1962'
 The book recounts several previously undisclosed instances in which key military sensors transmitted false signals or military officers took imprudent actions that could have caused U.S. or Soviet officials to conclude that a nuclear attack was under way .
 In "The Limits of Safety,"" Sagan wrote that his survey uncovered safety violations, unanticipated operational problems, bizarre and dangerous interactions, and unordered risktaking" in the handling of U.S. nuclear weapons . The survey was conducted during the Cuban missile crisis and the late 1960
 None of the incidents brought the country to the brink of a nuclear disaster, Sagan wrote . Sagan wrote, there ""were more close calls"" than previously known to the public .
 Sagan says the record of unanticipated problems with U.S. nuclear operations bodes poorly for countries that only recently have acquired nuclear arms . Sagan says countries with small nuclear arsenal lack sophisticated understanding of nuclear risks the United States acquired .
 Among the problems disclosed were efforts by some Minuteman missile engineers to hot-wire some of the missiles . They bypass safety controls and certain command links to ensure they could be launched .
 Some U.S. nuclear forces in Europe were ordered to a higher state of readiness for war without approval from the Joint Chiefs of Staff . Air defense fighters were dispersed with nuclear warhead-equipped, air-to-air missiles that lacked safety controls . Some United States nuclear forces were
 At Incirlik Air Base, pilots of nuclear weapons-equipped F-100 fighters sat for hours in their cockpits and slept under the planes at night during the crisis .
 During the crisis, top civilian and military officials, including President John F Kennedy, ordered that no actions be taken to provoke Moscow into believing that a U.S. nuclear attack was imminent .
 Air Force test-fired an intercontinental ballistic missile from California into the Pacific Ocean in October . Air Force officers followed a long-standing schedule and tested the missile . The test-fire was the first of its kind in decades .
 Other missiles at the Vandenburg missile test site were loaded with nuclear warheads . The test site was then loaded with warheads .
 Later that day, another U.S. intercontinental ballistic missile was test-fired from Florida over Cuba . The test nearly caused panic at the Omaha headquarters of the Strategic Air Command, which had not been warned in advance .
 Pyongyang will soon have a missile that can reach the U.S. and when it does, a second Cold War will begin . Soon Pyongyang will have a missiles that can . reach the United States .
 The failed launch buys the United States some much needed time to revise its strategy for coping with a new set of nuclear-armed enemies . The U.S. needs time to revamp its strategy to cope with the threat of nuclear weapons .
 The world survived the first Cold War in large measure because the United States faced rational opponents who did not think like terrorists . U.S. faces rational opponents, not terrorists, in the Cold War .
 The United States will face incomprehensible foes that cannot be counted on to respond as traditional Cold War models would predict . But in the second Cold War, the U.S. faces incomprehensible foes . The U.K. will face an incomprehensible foe that can't count on responding as predicted .
 The danger is that heads of state who think like terrorists will not be deterred by the prospect of U.S. nuclear retaliation . The danger of this is that they will be not deterred from the threat of a nuclear strike .
 They may be suicidal and willing to make ""martyrs" not only of themselves but of their countrymen . They may also be willing to kill themselves and make 'martyrs' of themselves and their people .
 They may refuse to believe the U.S. would kill millions in retaliation . They may not believe the United States would kill them .
 Or they may just behave in ways that are radically at odds with their nation's self-interest . The U.S. government may not be interested in its own interests of the U.K.
 The U.S. will have to find new strategies to replace its current deterrence doctrine, a legacy of the first Cold War . In the face of this threat, the United States will need to find a new strategy . The United States must find a way to prevent attack by threatening overwhelming
 North Korea's failed launch does not mean the need for this re-thinking is any less urgent . North Korea needs to re-think its launch strategy, says CNN.com .
 Pyongyang will soon have a rocket capable of boosting a satellite into orbit . It won't be long before will Pyongyang have a satellite capable of launching it into orbit.
 A successful 2007 launch would have particular historical resonance . It would come 50 years after the Soviet Union sent up the world's first artificial satellite in 1957 .
 Once North Korea gets its rocket science down, it will replace the old Soviet Union as the nation with the capability to destroy U.S. cities with a strike from the blue .
 A two-stage version of a North Korean missile could reach parts of the U.S. A three-stage variant could reach all of North America . The North Korea missile could also be a missile capable of reaching parts of America .
 Iran is ready to stand in for our other Cold War communist adversary, China, which exploded its first A-bomb seven years after the first Soviet missile launch . Meanwhile, Iran is standing in for its Cold War rival .
 Iran is developing a nuclear weapon that could be used to build a nuclear bomb . Iran has been developing nuclear weapons since 2003 . The country is expected to develop a nuclear device within years .
 Iran too would be able to destroy U.S. cities at the push of a button . With the help of North Korea's rocketry experience, Iran could destroy American cities . North Korea has a history of launching rockets at the hands of the West .
 These two nations present an asymmetrical nuclear threat that the U.S. is no more prepared to deal with than it has been with non-nuclear terrorism . The United States, with its traditional Cold War theories of deterrence, cannot deal with such a threat .
 Deterrence worked in the first Cold War because the men who led the Soviet Union and China, however rash they may have seemed, made the same rational calculations about national selfinterest as their U.S. counterparts .
 Pentagon planners were given the tools to think about nuclear war in the same way economists calculate, and predict, the behavior of consumers . This gave Pentagon planners the tools they needed to prepare for a nuclear war .
 Kim Jong Il is accused by South Korea of ordering the bombing of two airliners in the 1980s . The North Korean leader is also known for his bizarre behavior in the country .
 The danger is that Kim may think less like the leader of a nation of 23 million and more like a terrorist . Kim Jong-won may think more like the North Korean leader than a terrorist, writes CNN.
 Iran's newspaper ads openly solicit suicide bombers . The country has a history of recruiting suicide bombers in the past .
 Deterrence was also effective in the first Cold War because the U.S. nuclear arsenal contained an implicit threat of annihilation . Deterrence also was effective because the overwhelming United States nuclear arsenal was also implicit .
 The traditional theory of nuclear deterrence was grounded in the World War II era, when civilian populations were bombed without mercy . The traditional nuclear deterrence is based on the theory of bombing without mercy in the war .
 The second Cold War arrives at a time when precision strikes that minimize ""collateral damage"" are considered politically necessary . Precision strikes are seen as politically necessary in the Cold War era .
 U.S. war planners must consider whether they can any longer threaten to kill millions, if not tens of millions, of innocent people . The United States should consider whether it can threaten millions of innocents .
 The U.S. should consider itself lucky that North Korea's test failed but should use the time to prepare for Pyongyang's inevitable success . The United States should prepare for the inevitable success of Pyongyang's test .
 Sergei Khrushchev will be joined by son of downed U-2 pilot Francis Gary Powers . The son of the late Soviet dictator Nikita Khrushchchev will also be the son of U.2 pilot and U.1 pilot .
 American spy and his parachute floated down . He watched as parts of his doomed Utility-2 surveillance aircraft fell onto the Russian countryside .
 Powers was attempting the first U-2 flight over the entire width of Russia . Powers was shot down by Russian missiles on May 1, 1960, when he was flying over Russia .
 The Cold War Museum will be open in Virginia next year . The museum is a collaboration between Russia and the U.S. and Russia .
 Tickets, $35, are available until noon today by calling Dianne Caton of the St. Louis-area St. Genealogy Club . Tickets are $35 .
 Khrushchev will be signing copies of his book at 2 to 4 p.m. N. in New York City . The former Soviet Union leader will also be signing his book on the day of the event .
 The pilot's son, who heads the chamber of commerce in Vienna, Va., spoke Saturday at the Polk County Historical Museum in Bartow . He is concerned that many young people don't realize the existence of this uneasy period in history .
 His new museum will preserve memories of U-2 flights, fallout shelters, the Bay of Pigs, civil defense drills, spy trials and the Berlin Wall . The museum will be open at the end of the year, opening in New York City .
 From Polk County, the museum has received containers of water canned by Chalet Suzanne in Lake Wales for nuclear war survival kits . The museum received containers from the Lake Wales area .
 Powers said his father was flying at 70,000 feet when his plane was shot down . Powers said that his father never revealed this figure to his captors or to anyone else until it was declassified . Powers' father was pilot of a World War II aircraft when he was killed .
 He said President Eisenhower issued a cover story when his father's plane was found to be missing . He said the cover story was issued by President Eisenhower when the plane went missing .
 Powers kept the poison to use in the event of torture, his son said . Powers was not under orders to commit suicide and kept it in case of torture . Powers kept it for torture purposes .
 Powers was subjected to hours of interrogation but never tortured . Powers was never tortured. Powers says he was never charged with any crime committed .
 Convicted of espionage in Russia, he was returned to the U.S. in 1962 in an exchange involving Rudolph Abel . Convicted in 1962 of espionage, he returned to Russia in exchange for Rudolph Abel in 1962 .
 His son knew little about the U-2 incident until after his father's death . His son was killed in the crash .
 Powers visited Russia, viewed the U-2 wreckage and toured the cell in which his father was imprisoned . Powers visited the cell where his father had been imprisoned in the U.2 crash site . Powers' father was killed in the crash crash .
 In the five decades since the nuclear standoff, much of the long-held conventional wisdom about the missile crisis has been knocked down . The common belief that Kennedy's bold brinkmanship ruled the day is knocked down, including the common belief .
 He engaged in intense behind-the-scenes diplomacy with the Soviets, other countries and the U.N. secretary-general .
 It was ""the darkest, most dangerous day of the crisis,"" Cuba analyst Peter Kornbluh said . Cuba analyst: "It was the darkest day of crisis. It was a very dangerous day"
 Secretary of State Rusk made famous statement reacting to supposedly up-to-the-minute intelligence . That means that on Oct. 11, the vessels already were hundreds of miles away, steaming home .
 Forget Dr Strangelove, the real-life records of our narrowest escape make for explosive reading .
 Two books based on hitherto-unseen Soviet documents, the other on secretly recorded tapes of White House meetings . The publication of these two detailed and authoritative books blows all such questions out of the water .
 Fursenko and Naftali start at the beginning of Castro's victorious entry to Havana on New Year's Day, 1959 .
 The revolutionary government's gradual alignment towards Moscow is a far from preordained outcome . They examine closely closely the revolutionary government’s gradual alignment to Moscow .
 One of Cuba's strengths is that it treats the Cubans as more than simply a chip in the global game of superpower poker . One of their strengths is to treat them as more important than simply chips in global poker .
 The book shows how extraordinarily dangerous a game that was, and how high the stakes were . The book also shows how dangerous it was to try and win the game .
 Kennedy, Khrushchev and Castro look as though they are recklessly spoiling for a scrap . From this distance, the major players look like they're recklessly getting ready for scrap .
 The book argues convincingly that the Soviet commander in Cuba came within an ace of being authorised by Moscow to use tactical nuclear weapons in the event of a United States invasion .
 The locker-room machismo that fuelled the crisis is partly offset by the disarming naivety of some of the stratagems employed, in particular on the Soviet side . Yet the locker room machismo . fuelled by the . machismo fuelled the . crisis, but the . dis
 The Cuban nuclear shipment was actually heading for Siberia rather than the Caribbean . It was loaded up with sheepskin coats, felt boots and fur hats to fool U.S. intelligence .
 Kremlin desperately seeking any indication of what the White House was thinking . The Kremlin relied heavily on what Johnny Prokov, the barman at the National Press Club in Washington, overheard at the bar .
 This isn't the Cold War of John Le Carre and Frederick Forsyth; more like Abbott and Costello . "This isn't a Cold War. It's more like a two-sided Cold War," says John Costello. "It's like a real Cold War: Abbott
 The Kennedy Tapes, on the other hand, is an unremitting white-knuckle ride through the 14 crucial days in which the world seemed to be hurtling towards nuclear wipeout . The Kennedy tapes will be released in September 2015 .
 Kennedy recorded meetings of the Executive Committee which he assembled to debate the options open to him . Unknown to anyone except his secretary, Kennedy recorded the meetings . The meetings were recorded by his secretary .
 The tapes were released in full late last year; now they have been painstakingly transcribed and expertly edited . The tapes are painstakingly edited and painstakingly .
 The febrile, closeted atmosphere in the Oval Office and Cabinet Room comes through strongly . The Ex Comm debates lurch between "eliminating the Cuban problem by actually eliminating the island" as Secretary of State Rusk puts it .
 The book grips the reader with all the macabre compulsiveness of a Stephen King thriller . The book is long but grips the . reader with the . macabre compulsion of Stephen King .
 The frequent elisions, where poor tape quality has defeated the editors' attempts at decipherment, only serve to crank up the tension . Poor tape quality only serves to keep the tension alive .
 This is a chilling drama, all the more so for the apparent sangfroid with which the most horrendous consequences are anatomised . This is the most chilling drama in the world, all so far this season .
 The Kennedy Tapes gives an extraordinary insight into high-level decisionmaking at a time of unprecedented crisis . The JFK Tapes will be shown to the world for the first time .
 These two books form the nearest thing to a definitive account of the period one could hope for . Taken together, these two books are the closest thing to an accurate account of that period .
 Gregor Gregor died last month after his 96th birthday . Gregor was a native of Racine, Wisconsin, and Apple Valley resident .
 He was remembered with military honors on Sept. 9 at Riverside National Cemetery .
 Gregor said he was among the first Americans to register for the draft after the Japanese bombed Pearl Harbor in 1941 . Gregor says he was a 'good old boy'
 He graduated from Colton Union High School in 1942 and was drafted the next year . He graduated high school in Colton, California .
 Gregor was baptized in a sea of bloodied bodies as an Army medic during the June 1944 allied invasion of Normandy . Gregor earned that ""good old boy" moniker after he was baptized during the invasion .
 Gregor Little was impressed by the strength and integrity of many of the wounded soldiers he treated on the battlefield in France . Little, who lives in Oak Hills with her husband, Russ, said Gregor was impressed with the strength of the men he treated .
 "He pulled off his blanket and I saw that his right arm had been blown clean off," says the victim . "I saw that he pulled off blanket and he pulled his arm out of blanket," she says . The victim's right arm was blown off, she said .
 Little said Gregor revealed a secret several years ago when she and her husband helped him move out of his mobile home . Gregor kept a secret for decades, she said .
 Gregor Gregor was a joy to everyone at the senior care center in Apple Valley, California . Gregor's funeral service was held at Crystal Garden Assisted Living .
 Ebadpour: "The shock of what happened or the ache for what never will be" "The ache of what will never be" is the grief of those who have lost their lives, Ebdpour says .
 Some members of Ebadpour's staff attended Gregor's memorial in Riverside . Gregor Gregor was a member of the staff at the foundation for the foundation .
 Gregor's friends say they loved him for his humility, humor, humor . Gregor can belt out a song and stand from wheelchair with assistance to perform a few dance moves .
 Gregor Gregor was legally blind, but the Littles and Ebadpour often escorted him to Los Angeles or Anaheim when the Yankees played the Dodgers or Angels . Gregor is legally blind .
 Little said Gregor spoke often of his love for the people at Crystal Garden, as well as the food and his favorite weekly indulgence — pizza and champagne on Friday nights . Little said he spoke often about his love of the people and the food .
 Little said Gregor lavished his caregiver with gifts nearly every week and birthdays . Gregor's caregiver said he lavished her with gifts almost every week .
 When the European conflict ended, Gregor departed for Boston and stayed in the U.S. Army Camp Myles Standish . Gregor: "A military man. A military man"
 Later, he boarded a Los Angeles-bound train, spending Christmas Eve in St. Louis . He boarded a train to Los Angeles .
 Gregor Gregor and his wife, Joan, married in 1952 after meeting in San Francisco . Gregor was married to Joan in 1952 .
 Ten years later, he was sent to Vietnam, where he served as a military advisor for four years . He served as an advisor for Vietnam, serving four years in the country .
 He managed the Hesperia Maple Motel and the Mojave Mobile Home Park in Victorville . He later moved to the High Desert, where he managed a motel and mobile park .
 The unpublicized incident occurred Oct., 1962, at one of the tensest moments of the 13-day crisis . The U-2 spy plane photographed Soviet nuclear missiles being installed in Cuba nine days earlier .
 The Air Force denies having any evidence of the errant flights . Former pilots remember in varying degrees of detail a top secret mission that was aborted at the last minute .
 James Reynolds and Frank M Eichler lifted off from Florida's Homestead Air Force Base in two F-100s in 1962 . Their mission was so secret that even now, 30 years later, it remains a mystery .
 It is unclear whether one or both F-100s were armed with nuclear weapons . It was unclear if one or two of the planes carried nuclear arms .
 Two of Reynolds' relatives say he confirmed the nuclear incident to them years after the event . Reynolds' family says he confirmed it to them that he was killed by a nuclear device .
 The Air Force placed a number of fighters with nuclear weapons on alert in Florida during the crisis in 1962 .
 Nine tactical nuclear artillery rockets had been secretly deployed on the island undetected by U.S. intelligence agencies . The rockets were deployed by the U.N. without being spotted by the intelligence community .
 That could have impelled the Kennedy administration to launch an invasion of Cuba . That, in turn, could have led to a Cuban invasion .
 The flight itself was totally out of character for the F-100 units that scrambled to bases in Florida and other Gulf Coast states in anticipation of a war over the Soviet missiles in Cuba . The flight was a flight that was unusual for the aircraft .
 The pilots were ordered to take off at 4m., well before sunrise, even though the F-100 had practically no night-fighting ability . Pilots were told to fly at 4.m. before sunrise .
 The fliers did not know the full aspects of their operation, a number of pilots and relatives said . A number of pilot and family members said the fliers were unaware of the operation .
 Charles B Hoskins, a squadron mate of the two fliers, said neither man was told specifically what the objectives were . Hoskins: Neither man was given specific details of the mission .
 Foster, a veteran of tactical nuclear alert operations, said he is baffled by the allegations of nuclear weapons involvement . Foster: "I'm baffled by allegations that nuclear weapons are involved" Foster says he is "baffled" by allegations .
 To launch with nuclear weapons at that time, ''a whole echelon of people would have had to be involved,'' he says . The launch would have required a 'whole echellon' of people to take part, he adds .
 Former Air Force pilot said it would not have taken long to load a tactical nuclear gravity bomb onto the F-100 . But he said it could have taken just a few minutes to load the bomb into the plane .
 The mission was supposed to be flown in strict radio silence, several sources say . Despite the proximity of Homestead to Cuban airspace, the mission was meant to be radio silence .
 A senior commander at Homestead during the crisis said he never knew the mission had been ordered and carried out . The mission was ordered by the Homestead commander .
 He said he was the only officer at Homestead with the authority to launch aircraft but that he was never told about the mission or the incident . He says he was not told about mission or incident .
 Reynolds and Eichler allegedly intercepted by two U.S. Air Force air defense fighters from another base in Florida . They were intercepted seconds before they would have penetrated Cuban airspace .
 Woodfin Sullivan, a friend of Reynolds' and commander of the 307th Fighter Squadron at Homestead during the crisis, said in 1987 . Reynolds' death was "the most significant loss of life in American history"
 Graham, the Air Force general at Homestead, said he was unable to resolve the mystery . Graham: "I'm not sure what's going on"
 Official: Kennedy letters may contain some clarifications of the agreements Moscow and Washington reached in late October 1962 when the crisis was resolved . The official, asking not to be identified, said the Kennedy letters could contain clarifications . The Kennedy letters were sent to Washington in 1962 .
 Five Kennedy letters sent to Khrushchev before the crisis have been released, according to Brenner . An equal number of messages were also released during the same period . Brenner: Kennedy letters were sent to Soviet leader before crisis .
 Kennedy letters written after the crisis remain classified . He said five Kennedy letters are still classified . Kennedy letters were written after his death .
 A United States official said at least one of the letters has not been released because no copies were placed in State Department correspondence files . A U.S. official said no copies of letters have been placed in correspondence files in the State Department . The letters are believed to have been found in
 We're not talking about a dispute on the level of the 1962 Cuban missile crisis . This is not the same level of a dispute that occurred in 1962, the U.S. says .
 The standoff in Taylorsville is over a replica Sergeant missile and whether it can stand curbside along Redwood Road . Instead of a replica, the standoff is over the replica of a missile . The replica is a replica of the Sergeant missile .
 For many, the missile had become a landmark, a point of reference in front of John Mannos' General Army Navy Outdoor store . Mannos: "For many, it's a landmark"
 Taylorsville became a city six years ago . Purchased from a private collector, it stood in front of the store for nearly seven years . The store was purchased by a private buyer .
 Mannos moved the missile when he decided to remodel and add a strip mall on his property last year . Mannos is moving the missile along with his new strip mall .
 The city demoted the missile's storefront status to the back door . He tried to move it back earlier this year, but he was demoted it back to the storefront .
 Even Mannos' beautification award for his new store and development couldn't get the city to budge . Mannos: "I'm not going to let it go. It's time to get back on the street"
 The missile violates a strict sign ordinance by drawing attention to the store . The missile was spotted by a store owner in New York .
 Mannos went before the City Council in defense of showcasing his missile . Mannos: "I'm not afraid to fly. I'm not scared to fly," he said .
 The council decided it needed a city ordinance that would allow it to declare Mannos' faux ordnance a landmark . The city council decided to use an ordinance to declare the landmark landmark a landmark.
 Law allows council to designate community landmarks on a caseby-case basis . Council enacted law that allows it to designate landmarks on case case cases .
 Council says it needs a site plan to determine whether the missile is a hazard before it could act . Mannos' missile was declared as a landmark at the same meeting .
 Sergeant missile was first deployed in 1962 as a short-range, surface-to-surface missile . It was deployed in the UK as part of the U.S. Air Force in the 1960s .
 It's been cleaned up and painted, weighing in at over 1,000 pounds -certainly no Scud missile . It was cleaned up, painted, and it's been painted, but it's not a missile .
 The site plan could be as simple as a crude drawing of where the missile would be placed on his property, Mannos says . Mannos: It could be simple to prepare a crude map of the missile's location .
 Councilman and mayoral candidate Keith Sorensen expects Taylorsville will have its first community landmark under the new ordinance by Thursday . Councilman says he expects the landmark will be unveiled by Thursday morning .
 Mannos remains positive as well, buoyed by council members who, however reluctantly, support his plight . Mannos: "I'm not going to give up on my job, but I'm going to do it"
 The previously unknown incident might have pushed the two superpowers closer to nuclear war is disclosed in a book just released .
 Four Soviet submarines engaged in a cat-and-mouse game with the U.S. Navy off Cuba at the height of the Cuban missile crisis . The book was written by Russian journalist Alexander Mozgovoi .
 The four diesel submarines were armed with both conventional and nuclear-tipped torpedoes . The four submarines sailed from the Arctic Kola Peninsula in the summer .
 They managed to pass unnoticed through U.S. and NATO cordons in the northern Atlantic . But they were spotted by the Navy as they approached Cuba .
 The submarines needed to come to the surface often to charge their batteries . That made them easy marks for the U.S. anti-submarine cordons around communist island .
 Valentin Savitsky s B-59 submarine was spotted quickly by Navy patrol aircraft when it appeared on the surface . The submarine was seen by Russian patrol aircraft .
 U.S. destroyers rushed to block the submarine and began dropping stun grenades to force it to resurface . The submarine's radio intelligence at the time was in charge of the submarine s radio intelligence .
 The Americans encircled us and began dropping grenades that were exploding right next to us, Orlov was quoted as saying in the book . Orlov: "We were surrounded by the Americans. The Americans began to drop grenades that began to explode next to them"
 "It felt like sitting in a metal barrel with someone hitting it with a sledgehammer," says the author of the book . "It was a very difficult experience," she says .
 Savitsky ordered an officer in charge of a nuclear-tipped torpedo to arm the weapon, Orlov said . Savitski got furious after an especially strong explosion shook the submarine, he said .
 Submarine commanders could use conventional torpedoes only on order from navy chief . Use of nuclear torpedoes could be authorized only by direct order from defense minister, book says .
 Close surveillance by the U.S. Navy made it hard for submarines to resurface for scheduled communications sessions . However, the close surveillance made it difficult for the submarines to surface .
 Under control Savitsky eventually controlled his anger and ordered the submarine to the surface . The submarine was ordered to surface by the Soviet leader .
 Searchlights from United States ships and a United States helicopter buzz overhead . It was dark but the area was brightly lit by searchlights from U.S. ships and the helicopter buzzing overhead . The area was brightened by search lights from the United States .
 A spokesman for the Russian Defense Ministry refused to comment on the incident described in the book .
 Mozgovoi is deputy editor of Russia's military trade magazine, Military Parade . His book is considered quite credible by the mouthpiece of the military-industrial complex .
 Mozgovoi said Savitsky was the only one of four submarine commanders to consider unauthorized use of a weapon . Mozgovo said it was hard to blame him for the decision to use a weapon on his submarine .
 Savitsky s crew was under terrible pressure both psychologically and physically, Mozgovoi says . Savitsy s crew is under pressure from the moment, both psychological and physically . The crew of Savitski s crew were under tremendous pressure, he says .
 Savitsky is not quoted in the book; he had died by the time Mozgovoi began work on it . Savitski died in 1941 .
 The Cuban missile crisis was triggered by the discovery in the fall of 1962 that Moscow had sent nuclear missiles to Cuba . The U.S. discovered that Moscow sent the missiles to the island nation .
 The crisis ended with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev s agreement to withdraw missiles in exchange for President Kennedy s no-invasion pledge . President Kennedy agreed to withdraw the missiles from the Soviet Union .
 Many citizens still claim it was Kennedy's ''finest hour'' - a judicious use of threat and restraint to force the Soviets to back down and remove their missiles .
 JFK's fear of seeming weak at home and abroad and possibly his concern about the voters in the November congressional elections, analysts say . To an increasing number of analysts, analysts, however, it was an unnecessary confrontation .
 Minutes for a White House meeting of Oct. 1962, while not directly addressing some of these larger issues, sheds useful light on the administration's decisionmaking in moving into that fateful crisis .
 Kennedy publicly announced the presence of Soviet ''offensive'' missiles in Cuba . The next day Kennedy announced the imposition of a naval quarantine around the island .
 The White House has been embroiled in a crisis in the wake of the White House's decision to withdraw from the National Guard . President Barack Obama made the decision after months of secret deliberations .
 That Sunday meeting with the president was attended by only five advisers -McNamara; Gen. Gen. Robert Gen. Michael Flynn and Gen. David Petraeus . Flynn met with President Obama at the White House on Sunday .
 After five days of deliberations, the president had tentatively decided on a quarantine as his initial response . Until the meeting, after five days, he'd tentatively planned a quarantine .
 He was still mulling over more bellicose strategies - most notably, bombing the Soviet missiles in Cuba and then launching an invasion of the island . But he was not fully committed to that strategy, and was not committed .
 Dean Acheson, secretary of state under President Harry Truman, endorsed the acts of war by most of the Joint Chiefs as well as most of his colleagues . The act of war had been repeatedly endorsed by most Joint Chiefs .
 The group realized that since each launcher could fire two rounds -one missile each time -there ''would normally be'' 80 missiles on the island . The group also realized that there would normally be ''80 missiles'
 Only about 30 missiles have been located, CIA says . CIA thought there were about 48 missiles in the Soviet ship believed to be carrying the weapons .
 The group knew that the addition of 48 or even 80 Soviet missiles in Cuba did not tip the strategic balance against the United States . The U.S. knew that adding up to 80 missiles would not tip off the balance against them .
 The CIA estimated that the Soviets had between 60 and 75 ICBMs in their country . The Soviets estimated that they had up to 60 ICBM missiles . The U.S. had an ICBM range of 60 to 75 .
 Even if the Soviets added 80 shorter-range missiles in Cuba, the U.S. still had a slight advantage -between 14 and 37 missiles . The United States would still have a slight lead over the Soviet Union .
 If there were only 48 missiles in Cuba, the American advantage was even greater - between 46 and 69 . The American advantage would be even greater if there were just 48 missiles .
 The U.S. is roughly doubling the size of its ICBM arsenal in the next nine months, experts say . And they knew that the United States was roughly doubling that size in nine months .
 The group knew that either side needed at least a 2-to-1 superiority, before the other side should reasonably fear a first-strike attack - unless the attacker intended to commit national suicide .
 The Soviet MRBMs in Cuba had a range of only about 1,100 miles, and thus could not even reach America's ICBMs . Moreover, as the group understood, the group said, the Soviet MRBM had only a 1,000 mile range .
 All 30 missiles spotted in Cuba were MRBMs . The Soviets were even further short of having a first-strike capacity .
 There was support among the military chiefs for a so-called ''surgical'' air strike against the Soviet missiles in Cuba . Nevertheless, there was support for a 'surgical' strike .
 A few Soviet MRBMs not destroyed by a ''surgical'' bombing attack could do to U.S. cities within their range . No one had to tell the group what even a few . U.N. cities in range could be targets .
 JFK's decision not to side with most of his military chiefs and Acheson was a measure of greatness . JFK made a decision to take a stand against most of the military chiefs .
 If he took the military's advice and launched an attack, there would be nobody around to tell the chiefs they had been wrong . As the president once told his brother, if he . took the advice, he would not be able to tell his brother they were wrong, he said .
 President didn't seem to realize how easily even seemingly carefully managed events might hurtle out of control, escalate the crisis and lead to war . Despite the April 1961 debacle at the Bay of Pigs, the president did not seem to know how easily events might get out of hand .
 In dealing with the Soviet missiles, Kennedy should have first sought private negotiations, he says . Kennedy's ambassador to the Soviet Union, Charles Bohlen, had urged him to seek private talks .
 Too often American presidents, along with many American citizens, have preferred confrontations . But too often U.S. presidents prefer confrontations, too often they prefer confrontation .
 In 1962 Kennedy acted in accord with his own inclinations and popular desires . In 1962, Kennedy acted by accorded his own interests and popular wishes .
 To have acted otherwise would have cost him political support at home and, he thought, even have risked impeachment . He thought he would have risked losing political support in the U.S.