 Charity Matters Autumn 2017 issue features election results and Charity Matters . The Conservatives suffered a shock loss of majority in the House of Commons .
 A lot has happened since our last Angela Merkel won the German election, newsletter, and I am thrilled to announce this was marred by the right-wing AfD . AfD managed to secure 13% of the vote, Mike Marsham as Head of our Charities .
 Mike was with BlackRock for 13 years and had most recently been responsible for their charities business . Mike was most recently responsible for BlackRock's charity work .
 In keeping with politics, I remain Head of Investec Wealth & David J Richardson looks at the Cuban Investment for London and will Missile Crisis and draws similarities with Louise Hall .
 Investec Wealth & Investment tremendous stability evidenced by the John Wyn-Evans, our Head of Investment louise.hall@investecwin.co.uk longevity of our Investment Managers Strategy, explores the recent proliferation who, on average, have been with the firm of Bitcoin .
 Mike’s arrival, gives me great confidence in the offering we have for UK charity Elsewhere . Elsewhere, Bola Okunade interviews clients .
 Jamie Thomson, our Head of Operational Risk and Data, about the risks that The two most prominent themes driving charities face are arguably economics and politics . Andrew Mackie, a Senior Associate and politics, also discusses the risks of cyber breaches .
 The geo-political landscape has proven if there are any issues you would like to to be a source of trepidation for financial be covered in subsequent publications, markets. markets.com .
 History is instructive once again to look at history to see if it offers any precedent to help investors gauge likely outcomes .
 This may predate the majority of our readers but was a real fear at the time . It was the real fear of a terrorist attack in the 1980s .
 The coup and countercoup that was the story of post-war Cuba was finally ended by Fidel Castro’s 1958 revolution . Cuba became very closely tied politically and economically to the Soviet Union in the aftermath of the war .
 The US, led by the World War Two commander, President Dwight Eisenhower, became concerned at this and covertly arranged a CIA organised invasion of Cuba to overthrow Castro . The CIA organised an anti-Castro Cuban exiles, to oust Castro and reinstate a pro-US government .
 1960 U.S. presidential election saw the up and coming Massachusetts Senator John F Kennedy win a surprise victory against Richard Nixon .
 New president strongly supported by military advisors, decided to go ahead in April 1961 .
 Castro's forces easily repulsed by Castro’s forces, cementing their reputation and position . It was a disaster and was easily repulsive by Castro forces .
 The Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev agreed to Castro’s request to station missiles in Italy and Turkey . Such historical introspection may be interesting, even nostalgic for some, ‘Indeed the danger the Soviet leader Khrushche agreed to .
 A key difference for many may be nuclear missiles in Cuba, ostensibly to repel a repeat of the Bay of Pigs invasion . with the North Korea crisis is that the Cold War is long ended .
 World held its breath as bluster and bombast were traded back and to be regarded as an enemy and would be reluctant to have a nuclear war on the commanders in forth between Kennedy and Khrushchev . After a period of two weeks, in October and the United States may have different
 A further difference is that whilst senior military figures were said to chief could lead to common ground with intercessions by many world leaders, including the Pope, be urging Kennedy on . One is left with the impression that the military advisors an outcome that and the inarguable consequences for humanity
 The danger for many may be neither leader nor their undertaking by the United States that they would . not organise another invasion . In terms of the stock markets, always a good missiles from Italy and Turkey .
 North Korean crisis has caused markets to fall a couple of percent . In the end Castro comfortably outlived have since recovered their losses . Both Kennedy and Khrushchev died of not apparent in the 1960s or more likely natural causes in 1971 .
 The big buyers in 2015 and 2016 were cryptocurrencies in existence with an the Chinese . Money flooded out of issued value of more than $1bn were the country when the country was aggregated into a single company .
 John Wyn-Evans would be the fourth largest in the country . Government tried to John Wyn, Evans, head of they would be fourth largest .
 Bitcoin and its imitators has been volatile to say some as an option against the tail-risk of available in the primordial soup . Bitcoin took some unknown catalyst to create a store of value . Bitcoin is the first of many cryptocurrencies to become the norm, but it the least difficult
 Bitcoin is a relatively difficult currency to spend . But, it is certainly not an asset class in its he might be, to launch Bitcoin in early although there are notable exceptions .
 The Boston staff restaurant of Fidelity, and as such, we have no current intention we are witnessing a mania of sorts, of adding it to client portfolios . enthusiasm for Bitcoin has credible roots. for example .
 Bitcoin was born out of the chaos of the Bitcoin concept to become more mainstream . But, it might take an Amazon to start accepting it for the first time .
 A currency mining could be equivalent to $28. million per which had a limited issuance could by an individual with a laptop and a bit of pizza . Furthermore, a currency could be undertaken which could be worth $28 million per .
 It is inevitable that we will hear more be viewed as a counterweight to fiat nous . People who have made or lost currencies which could be created by industrial as the value of cryptocurrencies a fortune, just as central banks .
 Bitcoins can also be purchased through the time of writing on 26 October 2017 . Huge computing power bought by Apple or Amazon for peanuts .
 In May 2018, the new General Data Protection Regulation, and Data a European wide directive, will replace Data protection and cybersecurity are the existing Data Protection Act . This will introduce stricter rules on how in the headlines .
 Cybercriminals are growing more personal data . Successful cyberdata is processed and will place greater attacks . Onus on organisations to safeguard and cybercriminals to grow more data .
 Attacks can have detrimental . effects such as a significant disruption to Charities Team . Charities team . This enables them to operate more the . provision of services, economic loss Investec Wealth & Investment efficiently .
 This can include conventional methods include details on communication such as up to date firewalls and antivirus . We are aware of various with relevant authorities, donors and programmes, which act as a line of defence .
 Under the GDPR, organisations will be required to compromise a charity’s IT system . in recent times . Under the rules organisations will not be required compromising a charity's IT system in order to meet the law .
 As phishing scams become increasingly widespread, individuals telephone our clients when we receive unexpected email requests for money links and attachments . This is why, for example, individuals should telephone their clients when they receive should they receive .
 The proposals are largely technical in nature but, if implemented, they should lead to some genuinely practical benefits . As the title of the report suggests, the proposals are mostly technical but should be implemented .
 Charity Commission to ratify appointment of trustees for charities to amend their governing stand . More standardised procedure applies to contact the donors across the range of charity structures .
 Charity appeal funds of up to £1,000 for new draft Charities Bill will be put forward . Report recommends trustees be given power to apply and it is not yet known when the charities established by Royal Charter appeal funds will be established .
 The report recommends a number approved in 2010 to improve the rate of the procedures that are applied to of changes . It is unlikely to power to amend their constitutions, Commission consent would be deemed controversial it may well be .
 More flexibility for charities to use range of professionals that charities permanent endowment . Asset assets that can approach for advice is broadened, must be retained as capital, rather .
 The Law Commission estimates that these changes alone could save the sector almost £3 million . New rules on the power to make ex-gratia payments, with a sliding scale of permitted amounts .
 Online and not-for-profit clients, by number, have ethical, social and governance considerations . We employ the services of new online clients .
 Portfolio naturally avoids investments which we deem to be inappropriate for charity client base, and we also work regard to ethical and socially responsible investing . Our investment process an independent company called Ethical Screening .
 Valuation with our clients to ensure that their unique requirements are accommodated within their investment policy and Please do get in touch with the team if you would like further information .
 Rachel is embedded in the investment process . One log-on page for both private of the Charities Team and IFA users account .
 Rachel Kerr aims to provide bespoke and personal service over the Rachel Kerr long-term for her clients . Can link other Investec accounts the team, Rachel’s aim is to provide a so you can view all accounts .
 Charity has become aware of an increasing number of services and support for the charitable of charities willing to borrow money sector . Charity Matters is aware of increasing number services .
 CAF Bank provides flexible in order to meet their objectives more secured loans from £50,000 to £5 million effectively . CAF bank provides flexible loans to meet the objectives of the bank's objectives, such as securing secured loans of up to £5 million .
 Their reasons for doing this for UK charitable organisations, repayable can range from wishing to kick start an over 2-25 years . Their repayable money can be used to start a new life in the UK .
 CAF offers a free guide income generating project, to building explaining the potential benefits and or refurbishing properties . CAF also offers information on how to build a new home .
 Some have risks of repayable finance which you can found a way to meet the rising need download at www.cafonline.org/finance for support from their beneficiaries .
 Borrowing will not be suitable for many charities . CAF is a growing loan finance provider is CAF available to them .
 Bank, owned by Charities Aid Foundation MiFID II – update on Legal Entity Identifier – the clock is ticking… Since our last report in the spring edition, without a valid we have had a great response from our LEI . From 3 January 2018, financial institutions will no
 Investors should remember that the value of investments, and the income from them, can go down as well as up . Past performance is not a guarantee of future performance .