 E Thomas Coleman, Elton Gallegly, Henry J Hyde, John J Rhodes, Jan Meyers, John Edward Porter, Carl D Purseil, John E. Porter, John John J. Rhodes, Edward J. Henry J.
 Ill f AZ) Harold Rogers Lamar Smith, Robert C Smith, Olympia J Snowe, William M Thomas, Barbara F Vucanovich, Frank R Wolf C.W. W. Young Ex Officio Willis D Gradison.
 As we consider what constitutes stable reductions, it's worth studying the role we expect nuclear missiles to play in our strategic relationship with the Soviet Union . The U.S. is considering what it needs to do to reduce the threat of nuclear weapons .
 President Kennedy called ""the first direct test"" between the Soviet Union and the U.S. involving the political utility of nuclear weapons . One of the most important lessons learned then and still relevant today is the first direct nuclear test between the two countries .
 Many of the leading participants on the American side have switched their views on the nuclear question . What makes this issue interesting today is that many of them have switched views since October 1962 . The issue is interesting today, since those weeks in October 1962, according to the historian .
 The most accepted points among President Kennedy's aides during the crisis was that America's nu ""ear superiority gave the U.S. political and military leverage over the Soviets .
 This position was put forth in three ways, each showing that key officials acknowledged this role for nuclear weapons . This position is put forth three ways to show that this role is necessary .
 Both advisers appeared to argue that the U.S. would have to assume the greatest of risks, including the chance of a nuclear exchange .
 "All these moves were signals the Soviets could see and we knew they could see them," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 No one would deny that America's overwhelming conventional superiority in the region contributed to the outcome of the crisis . The U.S. has been in the Middle East for decades .
 Participants made clear that nuclear forces were also effective instruments for dealing with the Soviets . But neither should anyone deny that, as these participants made clear, it was also effective tools .
 The best that can be said about these recantations years after the fact is that, as Betts writes, "United States leaders may not have recognized, agreed about, or relied consciously on, an advantage inherent in numerical superiority"
 At issue is an ongoing debate over the role of nuclear weapons versus conventional weapons in military confrontations . According to many defense strategists, at issue is a debate over nuclear weapons vs. conventional weapons .
 Most of these players argue that we cannot and should not rely on nuclear coercion to effect desired results . In their retrospective writings, most of these . players are arguing the case that we can't rely on . nuclear coercion .
 The argument goes that conventional capabilities are the only instrument available to military planners . Instead, so the argument goes, military planners must rely on conventional capabilities .
 The best way to judge the validity of this claim is to examine just what influenced the Soviets at the time . The Soviet Union's claim is that it was influenced by the Soviets .
 There is, of course, no way to get inside the Kremlin's document room to see what their participants thought and said during the crisis .
 U.S. involvement in Russia's actions in the 1980s and '90s is key to understanding what Russia did in Russia . Russia's involvement in the Cold War was key to its success in Russia, says Putin . Moscow's actions were influenced by what the United States did in
 Strategic Air Command moved up to DEFCON 2 on October 24 . This is the level just below deployment for combat for combat . The move is the highest level of readiness in the Air Force .
 CIA prepared a daily memorandum on the responses that Russia made to every U.S. move . During the crisis, the CIA prepared daily memos on Russia's responses .
 Khrushchev "never alerted a bomber or changed his own military posture one bit" General Burchinal has aptly summed the effective coercion of America's nuclear forces by saying that Khrushvic never alerted a . bomber . The conclusion that many have drawn is that their strategic inferiority had
 Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Kuznestov to John McCloy: "You Americans will never be able to do this to us again" The remark makes perfect sense, he says .
 The Soviets told Castro Castro that U.S. nuclear superiority was the reason they withdrew the missiles . The Soviets said they withdrew missiles because of the threat . Castro was Castro's first president .
 A reasonable conclusion from the above evidence is that America's nuclear superiority at the tiro was a significant factor during the crisis . U.S. nuclear superiority was a major factor in the crisis, according to the evidence .
 The U.S. lacks both the capability and intention of again taking advantage of its nuclear weapons in the same way, it should be wary of letting the reverse happen . So although the United States appears to lack the capability to take advantage of nuclear weapons, the U.K. should
 There is no reason why the United States one day could not find itself backed into a corner by Soviet nuclear intimidation . The U.S. could not be backed in a corner, the author says .
 The missile crisis teaches us that nuclear weapons do have this capability . It is a nuclear weapon that can be used to launch a nuclear strike . The missile Crisis teaches us this capability, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 The SS-18 was designed to attack and destroy ICBMs and other hardened targets in the U.S. It could take out 65 to 80 percent of United States ICBM silos using two nuclear warheads against each .
 The Soviets maintain the world's largest ballistic missile submarine force . In addition, the Soviets maintain a large submarine force in addition to its submarine fleet .