 President John F Kennedy announced a naval blockade to prevent the arrival of more missiles . President Kennedy demanded that the Soviets dismantle and remove the weapons already in Cuba . The blockade was imposed by the Soviet Union .
 The situation was extremely tense and could have resulted in war between the United States and the Soviet Union . At the last minute, Khrushchev turned the Soviet ships around that were to deliver more missiles to Cuba and agreed to dismantle and remove the weapons that were already there .
 The apparent capitulation of the Soviet Union in the standoff was instrumental in Khrushchev’s being deposed in 1964 . Kennedy and his advisers had stared the Soviets down and the standoff helped in the aftermath .
 Originally known as “Liberty Enlightening the World,” the statue was proposed by the French historian Edouard . Originally known to be known as Liberty Enlightening The World, the statue is now known as Freedom of Thought .
 The Volstead Act provided for the enforcement of the 18th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, also known as the Prohibition Amendment . The Act was passed by Congress in 1903 .
 The movement for the prohibition of alcohol began in the early 19th century . Landmarks include St. Paul's Cathedral and St. George's Cathedral .
 Mussolini’s army, already occupying Albania, invades Greece in what will prove to be a disastrous military campaign . The Gateway Arch, designed by Finnish-born, was built in 1940 in Greece .
 Berry was convicted of transporting a minor across state lines for immoral purposes in violation of the Mann Act . His earlier conviction was thrown out on appeal, the prosecution decided to retry Berry .
 Leif Erickson Tunnel completes 1,593-mile I-35 . Duluth, Minnesota mayor Gary Doty cuts the ribbon at the mouth of the new, 1,480-foot–long tunnel . Chuck Berry, Chuck Berry and others helped build the tunnel in 1992 .
 With the opening of the tunnel, that highway—which stretches 1,593 miles—was finished at last . The tunnel is the longest stretch of the highway in the world .