 Kennedy and Khrushchev's decisions were "rational" in the sense of maximizing expected value . If not, their choices tend to conform to prospect theory’s prediction that people tend to engage in risk-acceptant, though not value-maximizing, behavior .
 When a utility function is concave, the utility for outcomes increases at a decreasing rate as outcomes are more preferred . The utility of outcomes increases when outcomes are preferred, according to the study .
 Prospect theory does not predict that some people will be risk-acceptant or risk-averse, but that the same individuals will demonstrate both proclivities depending on domain . It must be remembered, however, that prospect theory doesn't predict some people are risk-adverse .
 This article does not claim that its analysis of the relative explanatory power of expected-utility and prospect theories for the events of the Cuban missile crisis is final and definitive . It is only that it is a fair one given the information that is currently available .
 Kennedy believed that not responding aggressively to the installation of missiles in Cuba could lead to world war . In other words, Kennedy believed not to respond aggressively would lead to a world war in Cuba .
 In this new situation, the dangers of accepting the missiles are not as high as they were before the crisis began, says CNN's John Defterios . The dangers are still high, he says .
 Kennedy’s choice to continue to threaten military action to remove missiles was likely not a value-maximizing policy, given his own estimations of the costs, benefits, and probabilities of success associated with the available policy alternatives . The blockade was established and respected by the Soviets,
 Khrushchev was not willing to take excessive risks to try to recoup all his losses . He was willing to do so in an attempt to try and recoup some of the losses he had suffered .
 Prospect theory specifies the conditions under which particular outcomes are likely to result . It runs a smaller risk of becoming an unfalsifiable theory than a theory that is unfalsable .
 American military personnel stop and board a Lebanese freighter under charter to the Soviet Union . U.S. military personnel stopped and boarded the freighter in Beirut .