 May 2022 Donate Merch Register Subscribe to view the monthly magazine of opinion. The monthly magazine, The Monthly Magazine of Opinion. Email Reset password Go back .
 Khrushchev started from Square One in which he knew himself to be way behind in strategic nuclear capacity and way behind conventional capacity, except in Europe . He knew that he was way behind, except for Europe .
 He aimed for a huge increase in his nuclear capability by installing the missiles in Cuba . Bluffing magnificently, he aimed to increase his nuclear capabilities by installing missiles .
 He had only one real asset in the theater of the operation --Fidel Castro . After the crisis was over, he was back to Square One, and nothing had changed .
 All land-based Jupiter medium-range ballistic missiles, which were a real danger to the USSR, would be taken down and removed in six months . The U.S. agreed, without consulting Turkey, Italy, or NATO, that the missiles would be removed . The United States agreed
 Turkey, Italy, and NATO realized full well that the Soviet missiles had been taken out of Cuba at the cost of European security, without even a by-your-leave . The move was made by Turkey, the U.S. and NATO in Cuba .
 The U.S. promised formally and openly never to invade Castro’s Cuba . The promise might mean nothing to a state like the USSR, but which was a real inhibition on a state . And more .
 The Soviets got out of Cuba as far as the missiles were concerned, but stayed in every other way . The Soviets retreated with three prizes for their audacity .
 The Camelot mythmakers would say JFK had earlier ordered the removal of the Jupiter missiles because they were obsolete . America did not intend to invade Cuba anyway, and that international inspection of the Cuban missile removal turned out to be unnecessary .
 There is no evidence whatever that the President had earlier ordered the Jupiters to be taken down . The whole story was apparently concocted after the crisis to make it appear that a major concession by the United States was not a concession at all .
 In the unlikely event that the President had issued such an order in early 1962, it was a strange order indeed, made without consultation with Turkey, Italy, or NATO, and affecting as it did not United States government forces .
 The United States is trying desperately to put theater nuclear missiles into Europe under NATO auspices . Recall that at present the U.S. is trying to put theaters nuclear missiles in Europe . The U.N. is currently trying to get theater nuclear missile missiles into NATO under NATO .
 His argument that he had secured Cuba against invasion did not seem to impress his comrades . The Cuban president's argument was not impressed by the result .
 The U.S. paid a huge price for missing opportunities in the crisis and lulling itself into complacency afterward . Kuznetsov’s warning to the Soviets: “You Americans will never be able to do this to us again!”—hardly
 Mr Bowling is correct, for example, that the removal of the land-based Jupiter MRBM’s, jointly operated by the United States and its allies, only opened up the problem we are facing today of having to redress the ‘decoupling’ effect of sea
 The real problem was the political blindness of the systems-analysis methodology that dominated too many decisions during the period . But this reflects something bigger than Cuba, it says, and it reflects a bigger problem than Cuba .
 Even with a no-invasion pledge, these errors need not have been committed . Even with an invasion pledge, the errors were not committed .
 The administration came out of the crisis with some of the same soft-headed attitudes that tempted the Soviets to think they could get away with such an adventure in the first place . The U.S. government has a history of having a tough time dealing with the Soviets .
 This is a much more fundamental indictment of the Kennedy and Johnson policies. This is an indictment of their policies. It is not only about the Kennedy-Johnson policies, but also about the Johnson-Kennedy policies .
 Nothing agreed to in October 1962 required us to halt our strategic missile construction a few years later or to fight the Vietnam war stupidly . No Cuban “deal” prevented us from taking forceful action to block the Soviet-Cuban take-over in Angola thirteen years later .
 President Kennedy acted against the missiles in Cuba without the benefit of any pre-existing ‘understanding’ that they shouldn’t be there . The United States remains free to act in its supreme national interest against any new Soviet or Cuban threat, writes CNN.
 "No tactical victory will ever relieve us of the permanent responsibility of understanding our interests and defending them with vigilance and determination," says President Obama .
 John Podhoretz: Joe Biden is more than Gaffe-Prone-prone than Joe Biden . He says Biden is a "gaffe-prone" politician .
 You will be directly supporting our mission to deliver high-quality, well-reasoned commentary on the world's most important issues to as wide an audience .