 President Kennedy convenes his Executive Committee to consider America's options . President Kennedy meets with members of the committee to discuss the options .
 An SS-5 IRBM site, the first of three to be identified in Cuba, is detected in Cuba . The site was detected in Havana, Cuba, on October 17 .
 President Kennedy meets with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrie Gromyko and advises him that America will not tolerate Soviet missiles in Cuba . Kennedy: "America won't tolerate Soviet missile attacks in Cuba"
 Airdrop nuclear test over Johnston Island area . 59 Megaton yield Hydrogen bomb test. 59 Megataton yield . Hydrogen Bomb test. Airdro drop .
 Friday, October 19 President Kennedy meets with the Secretary of Defense, Robert McNamara, and the members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . President Kennedy met with the secretary of defense and the Joint chiefs of staff .
 President Kennedy returns to Washington to discuss the discovery of additional Soviet missiles in Cuba . Saturday, October 20, is October 20 . President Kennedy meets with President Nixon to discuss discovery of Soviet missiles .
 President Kennedy decides on a naval blockade of Cuba . Sunday, October 21, President Kennedy decided on the blockade . The blockade was the first of its kind .
 President Kennedy addresses the American public and announces his plan to implement a naval blockade of Cuba . Monday, October 22, President Kennedy announced his plan .
 U.S. military alert is set at DEFCON 3 and Castro mobilizes all of Cuba's military forces . United States military alert set at DeFCON3 and Cuba mobilizes military forces. United States is on standby for possible attack .
 High Altitude Russian Nuclear Test at Kapustin Yar Hydrogen Bomb on Rocket . Russian nuclear test was carried out at a height of 10,000 miles .
 The OAS supports the decision to quarantine Cuba. Kilotons Tuesday, October 23 . The decision was made by the U.N. to quarantine Cuba .
 Reconnaissance photos reveal that Soviet missiles are ready for launch . Soviet missiles were launched in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Discussion of diplomatic efforts at the UN and the vote by the Organization of American States . Discussion of diplomacy efforts at UN .
 Soviet ships reach quarantine line, but receive radio orders from Moscow to hold their positions . Wednesday, October 24 Soviet ships arrive the quarantine line .
 Consideration of civil defense options and planning for possible Soviet responses in Berlin . Plan for possible responses to possible Soviet response in Berlin was discussed .
 President Kennedy concludes that if we invade in the next ten days, the missile base crews in Cuba will likely fire at least some of the missiles at U.S. targets . President Kennedy concluded that if . we invade Cuba, the missiles would be fired at . United States targets .
 Detailed briefing on new reconnaissance photos from Cuba . Discussion of the need to disperse planes at Florida bases in the event of attacks by MIGs based in Cuba .
 McNamara talks of a very dangerous situation since ships approaching the quarantine line are being shadowed by a Soviet submarine . McNamara says the situation is very dangerous for the U.S.
 U.S. Ambassador Adlai Stevenson confronts the Soviets at the United Nations but they refuse to answer . Thursday, October 25, was October 25 . The Soviets refused to answer the question .
 American military forces are instructed to set DEFCON 2 the highest ever in U.S. history . American forces are told to set it at the highest level ever in history .
 Review of movement of ships toward quarantine line and potential U.S. responses . Review of the movement of the . ships toward the quarantine line .
 EX-COMM receives a letter from Khrushchev stating that the Soviets would remove their missiles if President Kennedy publicly guarantees the U.S. will not invade Cuba . President Kennedy says President Kennedy will not give President Kennedy a reason to keep the missiles in Cuba .
 The CIA reports that the construction of the missile sites is continuing and accelerating . The CIA says the missile construction is accelerating .
 RFK meets secretly with Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin and agrees removal of U.S. missiles from Turkey is negotiable as part of a comprehensive settlement . RFK agrees after a phone call to the president that the removal of . United States missiles from . Turkey is a non-
 Khrushchev receives a cable from Castro urging a nuclear first strike against the U.S. in the event of an invasion of Cuba . The cable was sent by Castro to the White House in the wake of a Cuban invasion .
 One U-2 spy plane accidentally flies into Russia, another is shot down over Cuba . The U.2 plane was shot down by a Cuban missile missile strike .
 EX-COMM receives a second letter from Khrushchev stating that, in addition to a public promise not to invade Cuba, the United States remove its missiles from Turkey . The U.S. removed its missiles in Turkey from Turkey, the letter states .
 Khrushchev announces the dismantling of Soviet missiles in Cuba and does not insist on his demands concerning the removal of U.S. missiles from Turkey . In a speech aired on Radio Moscow, he says he does not want to remove the missiles .
 President Kennedy orders U.S. ships to remain on quarantine line . President Kennedy authorizes continuation of low-level reconnaissance flights .
 President Kennedy terminates quarantine when Khrushchev agrees to withdraw Soviet IL-28 nuclear bombers from Cuba . Kennedy ends quarantine after several weeks of tense negotiations at UN .