 As bombs fall on Ukraine, many European governments are waking up to the sorry state of their own civil defenses . European governments need to be more prepared to deal with the crisis, says David Cameron .
 A new book identifies and misunderstands the structural forces behind today’s geopolitical chaos . Report | John Last How to Get Recent History All Wrong is published on Tuesday .
 Pekka Haavisto once spearheaded efforts to engage with Russia and broaden cooperation . Now he is Finland’s Foreign Minister on why Helsinki is moving Toward NATO .
 Rushing to further monetize gaming adds to global social and environmental risk . NFTs in video games bring Laundered Money and Angry Players . Rushing gaming adds a global social risk to the gaming industry .
 This year marks the 50th anniversary of the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962 . The crisis was the nerve-wracking peak of the Cold War . Special Report: 50 years after the crisis, the U.S. remains at odds with Russia .
 Foreign Policy is tweeting the Cuban missile crisis in real time, chronicling the days, hours, and minutes when the world stood on the brink of nuclear destruction . To commemorate this event, Foreign Policy will tweet the events in real-time .
 This year marks the 50th anniversary of the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962 . The nerve-wracking peak of the Cold War .
 Join us as we retell the story of the Cuban missile crisis as it was actually experienced by John F Kennedy, Nikita Khrushchev, and Fidel Castro -forward rather than backward, in all its cliff-hanging excitement .
 Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro on the Brink of Nuclear War, will draw topical lessons from the gravest national security crisis of the Cold War . The film will be released on July 28, 2015 .
 The Thirteen Days A day-by-day examination of the events of the crisis . A day by day examination of events of that week .
 This year marks the 50th anniversary of the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962 . The crisis was the nerve-wracking peak of the Cold War .
 Michael Dobbs' blog on the world’s most dangerous nuclear confrontation . On the Brink: On The Brink, Michael Dobb explores the possibility of a nuclear war .
 FP takes a look at the month before the crisis . Join FP's new joint contest with the Kennedy School’s Belfer Center in September .
 Russian and U.S. flags at G-20 summit in 2019 amid rising nationalism in both countries . Russian President Vladimir Putin stands in front of Russian and United States flags at the summit . Putin is expected to attend the summit in Moscow, Russia .
 Russia, the U.S. and the European Union are each suffering from resulting disasters . Russia and the United States, the EU are all suffering from nationalisms all wrong . Russia, Europe and Russia are suffering from similar problems .
 President Joe Biden meets with Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Mark Milley . Biden also meets with members of the National Security Council and combatant commanders at the White House on April 20 .
 With his strategy to ‘weaken’ Russia, the U.S. president may be turning the Ukraine war into a global one . No endgame .
 Russia's navy ships take part in a military exercise called Kavkaz 2016 at the coast of the Black Sea in Crimea on September 9, 2016 . The exercise is part of Russia's annual military exercise .
 The Black Sea has been the world’s bloodiest body of water since the Cold War . Not just because of Ukraine, but because of the Ukraine crisis . The region is now the world's bloodiest water in decades .
 Foreign Policy’s Morning Brief Brief is written by Colm Quinn . Use this weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on foreign policy .
 Danish philosopher Soren Kierkegaard once noted that history is \""lived forward'' but understood backward . History is lived forward and understood backward, he said .
 Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro on the Brink of Nuclear War . Will draw topical lessons from the gravest national security crisis of Cold War .