 The Grand Alliance formed by the U.S., USSR and the UK in World War II managed to defeat European fascism and Japanese expansionism, but began to crumble even before Allied troops occupied Berlin . Juan Carlos Ocaña Aybar Geography and History – Bilingual Studies – IES
 The Cold War began, a long period of rivalry which pitted the U.S. against the Soviet Union and their respective allies and determined international relations .
 The Cold War was fought on the political, economic, and propaganda fronts . The alliance started to crumble, July 1945 Potsdam conference .
 In almost all of these conflicts, the two superpowers and their allies supported diplomatically and armed the contenders . In almost every conflict, the superpowers supported the contenders, and armed them, in almost all .
 Weapons did not defeat the USSR, but the ineffectiveness of its economic system and the lack of political freedoms, the author says . The USSR's economic system was ineffectively ineffective, he says .
 Churchill proclaimed in 1946 that an ""Iron curtain" separated communist Europe from free Europe . Churchill proclaimed an 'Iron curtain' between communist Europe and free Europe in 1946 . The Iron curtain was created by Churchill in 1946 to separate communist and democratic Europe .
 In 1947, United States President Truman expressed their willingness to implement a policy of ""containment of communism"" to prevent its expansion to Greece and other parts of the world . President Truman said they wanted to prevent the expansion of communism to Greece .
 To achieve this goal, the United States implemented the Marshall Plan, an economic plan that sent aid to Europe . The Marshall Plan was intended to send aid to the continent .
 The goal of this plan was to prevent the impoverishment of the populations that favoured European communist expansion . The goal was to keep the population from being impoverished .
 The first stage of the Cold War took place in the defeated country of Germany . Germany was defeated in the war .
 Western and Soviet authorities had differences between Soviet authorities . Soon there were increased differences between the two countries .
 In 1949, the Federal Republic of Germany, in the western zones, and the German Democratic Republic in the Soviet zone, were born . The two countries were born in 1949 . The Federal Republic was formed in 1949 from the West to the Soviet Union .
 Throughout the Cold War, there existed two Germanys, one a democratic and capitalist, the other a Soviet-style communist dictatorship . Henceforth, throughout the 1950s and 1960s, the Germanys were a democratic, capitalist and communist .
 The victory of Mao Zedong's communist forces led to the proclamation in October 1949 of the Republic of China . Mao's victory in China was the victory of his communist forces .
 Thereafter the two nuclear powers could face off anywhere in the world . Thereafter, they could face each other in a nuclear war .
 Joe-1, the American nickname for the first Soviet atomic test, referred to Joseph Stalin . Joe was the nickname of the first atomic test in the Soviet Union, which took place in 1945 .
 The Korean War led to the partition of Korea into two antagonistic countries . Korea is now divided into two countries .
 The North was a tight communist regime backed by the USSR and China, while the South was a US-backed military dictatorship .
 Each block defended its hinterland against the advance of their opponent block . Thereafter, each block defended itself against its own block .
 The great Western bloc military alliance is still in existence to this day . It was formed in the 1950s and 1960s . The alliance was formed by the Western bloc .
 Washington pushed the European integration process that culminated in 1957 with the birth of the European Economic Community . Second, Washington pushed for European integration in the 1950s .
 The United States wove a network of anti-Soviet alliances worldwide . The U.S. was one of the world's most successful nations .
 USSR signed military agreements and cooperation with communist China of Mao . The USSR signed agreements with China of the 1950s and '60s .
 In 1955, the Warsaw Pact created a military alliance that joined the USSR with all European countries of the communist bloc with the exception of Yugoslavia . The Warsaw Pact was created in 1955, with Yugoslavia the only member of the alliance .
 Stalin's death in 1953 and the rise of a new Soviet leader, Khrushchev opened a new period in the Cold War . Peaceful Coexistence 1955-1962 was peaceful .
 The new environment did not mean the end of international crises, says CNN's John Sutter . However, this new environment does not mean an end to crises, he says .
 The two communist giants, China and the USSR, broke their alliance and became antagonistic powers . It was also during these years when, to the delight U.S., 5 that China and Russia broke their alliances . The two countries were the most powerful allies of the Cold War .
 The main factor that led to the ""thaw"" in relations between the two superpowers was what was called the ""balance of terror" The situation created after the conversion of the USSR to atomic power and accelerated rearmament for both powers .
 There was a general certainty that a war between the superpowers would lead to mutual destruction of both and much of the planet . A war would have led to the destruction of many of the world's planets .
 From 1951 to 1958 the German Democratic Republic saw more than two million East Germans flee to West Germany . More than 2 million people fled to the West in the 1950s .
 The differences in living standards and lack of freedoms prompted this exodus of the population . The population has been driven by poverty, living standards, living conditions .
 On August 13, 1961, before the astonished eyes of the Berliners, the GDR authorities began building an impenetrable wall that would surround the entirety of western Berlin . The wall was built in 1961, with the help of the West .
 As it was known in the West, the ""wall of shame"" became the great symbol of the Cold War . The ""Wall of shame" became the greatest symbol of Cold War.
 Hostility culminated when the United States failed to invade the island and were repulsed by Castro's forces in Playa Girón . Two years earlier, with the triumph of the Cuban Revolution, Fidel Castro took the Cold War at the gates of the US .
 The Cuban Revolution was, in principle, was not communist, but the revolutionaries sided with the communist bloc . The Cuban revolution was, for principle, not communist .
 The United States aggression allowed Cuban dictator to ask the USSR to deploy nuclear missiles to its territory . The U.S. aggression allowed Cuba to ask for the Soviet Union to deploy the missiles .
 Kennedy declared a blockade of the island in October 1962 . The U.S. Navy would prevent the passage of any Soviet ship routed to the island .
 The world held his breath at the prospect of an incident that could lead to fatal nuclear escalation . World held its breath at prospect of the incident .
 On October 29, Khrushchev relented and gave the order to their ships to turn back . The order was finally accepted by the Soviet Union on October 29 .
 The USSR agreed to remove the missiles from Cuba in exchange for the United States commitment not to invade the island . The U.S. made the deal with the USSR in return for the removal of the missiles in Cuba .
 The two communist giants, the USSR and China, broke relations and initiated a period of deep hostility . China and the USSR broke relations with each other in the 1970s and 1980s .
 The Détente 1962-1975 is a systematic and enduring policy of détente . Kennedy and Khrushchev decided to start a more systematic policy . The two leaders were able to reach an agreement in 1975 .
 This opened a new Cold War period in which agreements between the superpowers did not prevent serious conflicts such as Vietnam or the Middle East . The agreements opened the Cold War era in which they were not prevented serious conflicts .
 Among the treaties highlighted was the NPT , signed in 1968 by the U.S., the USSR, and the United Kingdom and the SALT I Agreement which limited the number of intercontinental missiles that the USSR and the USA could own .
 The détente did not prevent local conflicts from degenerating into bloody wars in which both superpowers intervened . Nixon and Khruschev signed SALT treaty .
 The Middle East conflict began with the birth of the state of Israel in 1948 . The conflict reached a peak with the ""Six Day War"" in 1967 and the Yom Kippur War in 1973 .
 Israel, with U.S. support, went from being a small country besieged by enemies to becoming the hegemon of the region . Israel has occupied Palestinian territories and part of Syria .
 The oil price increases that followed the Yom Kippur War in 1973 triggered the ""oil crisis"" that marked the end of a long period of expansion of capitalism in the developed countries . The crisis was the end to a period of capitalism that began in 1973 .
 The war in Vietnam is the biggest humiliation of the United States during the Cold War . Vietnam is a country ravaged by conflict since the Second World War . U.S. was humiliated by conflict in Vietnam during Cold War.
 After a long war in the that saw the United States shipping half a million soldiers and not hesitating to use chemical weapons and massive bombings, the U.S. government had to accept defeat .
 Russia's economy entered a period of stagnation that ultimately led to the collapse of the communist system . However, its economy had entered an economic stagnation that led to its collapse .
 President Reagan in the eighties returned to a policy of confrontation with the Soviet Union . The USSR could not cope with the new challenge that came from Washington . The Soviet Union was unable to cope .
 The USSR international misread the situation and launched an expansion of its international influence regardless of the serious difficulties that depleted its economy . The USSR had to deal with the problems and expand its international reach .
 Starting in 1974, pro-Soviet regimes in Ethiopia, Angola, and Mozambique were established . Pro-Russian regimes were established in Ethiopia and Angola starting in 1974 .
 Gorbachov launched a reformist program called the “Perestroika’s” which eventually dismantled the communist bloc and led to the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 . The end of the Cold War was the result of Gorbachova's reforms .