 Historians say the world has never been closer to nuclear conflict than it was during the Cuban missile crisis . JFK's secret speech could have signaled the start of WWIII .
 It could have been the start of a war the likes of which the world had never seen . It could be the beginning of a world war .
 The hair's-width margin that separated the U.S. and the Soviet Union from nuclear war was the height of the Cuban missile crisis in 1962 .
 Speech is highlight of archive containing nearly 3,000 pages of notes, transcripts, and other documents kept by Robert Kennedy, the president's brother and close adviser .
 It was posted online by the John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum last week to coincide with the 50th anniversary of the crisis . The Kennedy Presidential Museum posted the photo online last week .
 The newly released material offers a fascinating glimpse of the limited options open to the U.S. leader during the tense standoff between the United States and the Soviet Union . The material was released in the wake of the Cold War .
 Kennedy's speech, of course, was never delivered . Kennedy: "I'm not going to give that speech. I'm going to do that"
 The U.S. leader enacted a naval blockade of Cuba and as the world held its breath, the approaching Soviet ships turned back . The United States leader instead enacted a . naval blockade .
 The specter of war allegedly compelled the president's usual speech writer to turn down the assignment . John F Kennedy Presidential Library director Thomas Putnam says Kennedy's speech writer turned down the job .
 Moscow pledged to withdraw its weapons and Washington pledged to stay out of Cuba . After days of nail-biting diplomacy, Russia and the U.S. pledged to pull weapons from Cuba .
 Memos detail the botched Operation Mongoose, a plan to overthrow Cuban leader Fidel Castro . Nikita Khrushchev convinced Soviet leader to send nuclear weapons to Cuba .
 CIA documents describe failed Bay of Pigs invasion and a 1964 mafia-linked plan to assassinate Castro . There are also notes referring to a secret deal for the United States to withdraw missiles from Turkey .
 Graham Allison says one detail from the archive has particularly resonated with him . Graham Allison: "It's a good life story. It's a life story" Allison says he hopes to learn more from the archives .