 Canada was one country in the Western Hemisphere to share a close military alliance with the U.S. The events of October 1962 were profoundly affected by the events of that day .
 Evidence-gleaned from presidential papers, recent memoirs, and oral history interviews--offers the basis for a reassessment of Canada's political and military response to the crisis .
 No less anti-Communist than cans, Canadians were more flexible and pragmatic in with Communist governments . Canada was more pragmatic and pragmatic during the Cold War era .
 Heavily dependent on trade, they had little use for economic sanctions . They view that maintaining normal relations did not signify of a particular regime .
 Many Canadians felt th shared with Cuba the status of economic satellite to American industry . Many Canadians also felt the U.S. shared with Cuban industry .
 Castro expropriated U.S. property as the "legitimate efforts of a sma economy to free itself from excessive foreign influence" Castro's expropriations were seen as a legitimate attempt to free himself from excess foreign influence .
 Canadians regarded American involvement in the B of Pigs fiasco as deplorable and condemned a presumed Ameri can right of forceful intervention as a means of blockin ""communist penetration"" of the hemisphere . Canadians further regarded American intervention in the 'B of Pigs' fiasco .
 Prime Minister John G Diefenbaker made a personal effort to offset public and parliamentary criticism of American participation in the Bay of Pigs invasion .
 The sale of nonstrategic goods to Communist countries was opposed by only 26% of the public, according to a Gallup Poll published in the Toronto Star, January 30, 1963 .
 See ""Why We Won't Join the Blockade to Starve Castro Out of Cuba,"" MacLean's, LXXV (April 21, 1962), 2.2.3.4.5 .
 They were upset by Howard Green's public suggestion that Canada might help by mediating the Cuban-American dispute . They were particularly upset by his suggestion in May 1961 .
 President John F Kennedy was personally concerned Green's statements, for in the American view, they refle ""distressing"" inattention to the facts . Green had noted the nationalist rather than communist elements in the Cuban revolution .
 Canada co-ed in the American strategic embargo, sales of othe rose until the U.S. cut off Cuba's foreign ex-Cuba trade . Despite regular assurances that no bootleg goods were being exported, criticism of the policy persisted in the United States .
 Canadians thought the Americans had vastly over estimated and were seriously overreacting to Cuba's potenti threat . Canada thought the U.S. overreacted to the Cuban threat .
 Americans expected Canadians to cooperate in contai ing Cuban communism . Canada was not only part o the Western Hemisphere, but part of an alliance system signed to contain Russian communism .
 These became consential factors in determining political behavior pattern during the missile crisis . These became quential factors .
 President Kennedy expressed growing U.S. concern with the Russian build-up of Cuban military power in 1962 . Kennedy expressed concern in a second statement on September 13 .
 Washington is being pushed into a more extreme position by Republicans campaigning in the off-year elections .
 On October 16, 1962, the President was shown aerial reconnaissance photographs which revealed what flight surveillance patterns had previously missed .
 This intelligence was not imparted to the allies until October 22, after the Kennedy leadership had debated and decided upon a response . With one exception, this intelligence was kept from the allies . The Kennedy leadership later decided on a response to the intelligence .
 Kennedy warned Prime Minister Harold Macmillan of the imminence of a crisis three days prior to informing the other allies of the crisis .
 Kennedy explained to Britain's Prime Minister need to make unilateral decisions and offered, from that p on, the most intimate consultation . In addition, day before sending personal emissaries to Paris, Rome, and Ottawa, he explained to the British Prime Minister that he needs to consult with him
 To President DeGaulle, Kennedy sent Dean Acheson Prime Minister Diefenbaker . Kennedy sent former Uni States ambassador to Canada, Livingston Merchant . Kennedy also sent Livingston Merchant to Canada .
 Diefenbaker's coolness may also be dictated by his recent receipt of a letter from the President .
 Kennedy stated that he had learned to his ""distress,"" that Canada intended to support a new UN resolution calling for an unverified moratorium on nuclear tests . Kennedy said he was "distressed" by the resolution .
 The Canadian vote will be seen by the Soviet Union as a successful breach of the West, Kennedy wrote . Kennedy wrote that the Canadian vote would be tantamount to Canada's abandoning the Western position .
 The longest part of the presidential communic however, served notice of a resolution to be proposed at an urgent meeting of the Security Council for withdrawal of the missiles under UN supervision in for lifting the quarantine .
 In the much s note to Diefenbaker, therefore, the Pr was placing a greater emphasis on a solution throu United Nations .
 If Diefenbaker did have previous intelligence, it could only have been of the vaguest sort . Indeed, if he did have such information, it was only of the sort of sort .
 Defence Minister, Air Chief of Staff, and chairman of the Chiefs of Staff recall nothing more than an indefinite sense of 'something being up' which had filtered through the Canadian-American military network .
 Merchant reported an incident which Diefenbaker does not mention in his memoirs-the Prime Minister's request that one sentence in the President's s characterizing Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko in unflatt terms, be deleted . Merchant also requested that one of the sentences be deleted
 The ambassador telephoned Dean Rusk him that he agreed with Diefenbaker's objection and ha offending phrase removed . The ambassador told Rusk that the offending phrase had been removed .
 Prime Minister discussed his view of Khrushchev's intentions with Kennedy, as well as the merits of a U solution, and that he complained about the lack of consultatio ""t"
 Howard Green was interviewed, but his recollection of the encounter is vague . Howard Green says he was interviewed by Howard Green, but he's vague about the encounter .
 Later that evening, in the House of Commons, he had little to say beyond urging calmness . He urged calmness in the face of the public .
 He commented on only one of the seven points in the President's speech, namely the resolution to be placed before the United Nations . He said only one point in the speech was to put the resolution before the UN .
 The eight unaligned members of the UN disarmament committee should make an on-site inspection of Cuba, he says .
 None had any comment on the projected U.S. counteraction in the Caribbean .
 In Vancouver, the national leader of the New Democratic party repeated the obvious skepticism of statements in the House . But he put his feeling in stronger terms in Vancouver .
 The request for additional evidence about the existence of an offensive base was a reflection of Canada's particular perception of Cuba and the Cuban-American issue . Canada's request for extra evidence is a reflection on Canada's view of Cuba .
 Political leaders feared that the U.S. might once more be overreacting, while also worried that it was not . National political leaders worried that the United States might once again overreacted, but also worried it not .
 The White House log of telephone calls is not open to scholars and the receipt of this call cannot be verified . The receipt of the call can't be verified.
 Both his versions of a telephone call may have been a case of confusing what should have happened with what did happen .
 Canada has consistently supported the UN . Canadian statesmen had played a major role in strengthening it . Canada had consistently supported UN .
 The UN was one arena of world politics where the Canadians believed they could exert some influence . The UN is one of the world's most important arenas of power .
 Prime Minister Diefenbaker shared his colleagues' faith in the UN, but unlike the heads of other parties, he had seen photographic proof of the threat .
 Parliamen had to make an immediate public statement after being called before . He had been given little time to make a statement .
 Stressing the r that the UN might play, therefore, was not only the na Canadian response but probably seemed the wisest and s course for the time being .
 Defence Minister Harkn was informed by the chairman of the Chiefs of Committee, Air Chief Marshall Frank Miller, that the en military apparatus of the U.S. had gone on alert .
 NORAD commander was to 'operate within a concept of air defence approved by the appropriate authorities' Under the loosel phrased NORAD agreement, its commander, an American .
 The question of who had the appropriate authority t ment an alert posed far more difficulty . Patterns of policy coor and communality of interest demanded that NORAD be brought to equivalent status immeme .
 The account of this meeting, w until approximately 2m. on October 23, has been put together from inte Harkness, Miller, Dunlap, and an interview with General G Walsh (Chief Staff) on October 25, 1974 .
 Harkness also talked about his actions on the October 22 during the television broadcast ""The Tenth Decade"" (transcri from the CBC) on November 24, 1971 . Harknesses was a member of the Royal Canadian Army .
 Telling the Chiefs to ""get ready,"" he lef to confer with the Prime Minister, completely confident th the matter would be a mere formality . Telling Chiefs to get ready, he told them to "get ready"
 Diefenbaker refused to give his permission for an alert until the Cabi could meet and discuss the situation the next morning . The next morning, the President of the U.S. was in the midst of a crisis .
 Harkness authorized the alert on h own . Believing that he had no other recourse, he returted to the Chiefs of Staff meeting and authorized it .
 Apart from a few minor details, all of the requirements were met . Apart from an announcement of the offi announcement and the recall of men on leave would have attracted the attention of both the public and the Prime Minister .
 Ships are not as easily dispersed as aircraft, and they must not be caught in harbor . Ships must be dispersed and not caught in harbors .
 The Chief of Naval Staff ordered the Atlantic fleet based in Halifax to ready for sea . He received information through his own channels, he said .
 Of secondary accounts, only Reford, Canada and Three Crises, 178, correctly places the alert on the evening of October 22 .
 The integration of the Atlantic fleet into SA -a NATO headquarters at Norfolk, Virginia-meant that the Ca navy had a role to play during the Cuban missile crisi that has been ignored or noted with only passing i in standard accounts .
 Canadia deployment involved the detection and tracking of Canadia . For example, the recall of men on longer leave and evacuations was part of the operation . Canadia was deployed to the U.S. base in Canada .
 Peter C Dobell, Canada's Search for New Role Policy in the Trudeau Era, 26 . Dobell: Canada's search for new role policy in Trudeau era . He says Canada needs to have a new role in leadership .
 None of the accounts written from the United States point of view mention it . MSNone of the accountants' accounts mentioned it in the U.S. account .
 Lyon states that ""in vi steps the RCAF and RCN were taking,"" Harkness's answer to a question in concerning Canada's military response was misleading . Lyon states in a footnote that in vi steps were taking .
 Reford mak statement but neither source deals with NATO implications . Reford said statement but did not mention NATO implications. Reford made statement but didn't discuss NATO .
 U.S. naval units move south into the blockade zone . This activity in turn permitted units of the American navy to move into the zone .
 Given the central part played by the USN during the missile crisis, the Canadian contribution offered significant military support . The Canadian contribution to the U.S. was significant .
 It is probably safe to conclude that Canada was the only power to activate forces committed to NATO in order to aid the Americans . Canada was one of the only countries in the world to activate NATO forces to assist the U.S.
 Washington has been urging a NATO ""Alert,"" with all that this implies , I told him that we would not repeat not agree at this stage. Washington... been urging . Washington ... been urging [NATO] to "alert,"" President Obama said .
 N. N agreed with this, and said he thought NATO powers would take the same view . He said he expected NATO powers to follow suit .
 Prime Minister Diefenbaker and his Cabinet were under the impression that the decision to support or not support the United States militarily still rested in their hands .
 The Cabinet met to discuss the situation twice on October 23 and again on October 24 . No decision ever emerged from the meeting .
 Secondary accounts have placed blame for this outcome on Prime Minister Diefenbaker and to a lesser extent on External Affairs Minister Green . Secondary accounts also placed blame on Prime Minster Diefinbaker .
 Sources have paid insufficient attention to the divisions wi the Cabinet and have misunderstood the reasons behind the government's hesitation, sources say . But these sources have paid too much attention to Cabinet divisions, they say .
 In believing that Canada's security interests were best served by the U.S., these sources have tended to downpla perceptions of those interests, they have said .
 One group within NORAD agreed with Harkness that the nation's security interests could served by declaring an alert . Another group agreed that NORAD should declare an alert.
 Diefenbaker and Green felt those interests would be better served by avoiding any action that might appear ative to the Soviet Union . But a second group felt that the interests of the U.S. were better served .
 T agreement was renegotiated in 1975 and modified to provide that Canad would not go on alert at American command . The agreement was modified in 1975 .
 Robert Keohane and Joseph N. N. have recently drawn attention to the im of transgovernmental activity in international relations-direct interactio governmental subunits that is not controlled or closely guided by the respective national governments .
 Diefenbaker and Green initially supported Harkness, but later supported the U.S. decision to consult Canada . Their differing degrees of resentment over the United States' failure to consult with Canada .
 Most knew only what they had seen on television or read in the newspapers . When the ministers gathered together on the morning of October 23, most knew nothing .
 None of them, except the three ministers who had been briefed by Merchant, had seen the photographic evidence .
 The British government has been asked to make a decision on whether to support the U.S. on the basis of essentially secondhand information . The U.N. has been in contact with the British government for more than a decade .
 This information had to be fitted, moreover, into existing images of the Cuba-U.S. issue . Images centered on the belief that the Americans had been overestimating and overreacting to the Cuban threat .
 At no time during the crisis did Kennedy get in touch with Diefenbaker, Rusk or Green, or even McNamara with Harkness, he says .
 The only U.S. official to speak to his Canadian counterpart was Maxwell Taylor, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs, who had one conversation .
 Miller was in constant contact with the Americans at subordinate military levels through NORAD channels . Miller was also in constant touch with the U.S. at subordinate militaries at subordinate levels .
 The absence of communication at the political level, however, fed existing fears that States was too excitable and too quick on the tri Cuba was concerned .
 Diefenbaker telephoned Harold Macmillan to find out what the reaction had been in Great Britain to the Cuban crisis . The crisis was the first time the U.S. government had been involved in the crisis .
 Macmillan told him that the United Kingdom had not gone on alert and would at this stage, since additional mobilization could be interpreted as a provocative measure by the Russians . The U.K. told him he would not go on alert .
 Approval of the alert could have meant that U.S. would request the movement of nuclear-equ interceptors to their bases in Canada, an action that w appear both provocative and perhaps compromise f government attempts to keep nuclear weapons off Can soil .
 A nonalert was also in keeping with the traditional C an attitude towards a crisis situation-that of attempti avoiding provocation, trying to avoid provocation, and taking the dispute to the UN before end unilateral action .
 Leaders of all parties in the House of Commons voiced support for the President's speech . This approach had been voiced b leaders of all national parties in Commons .
 Macmillan's memoirs now however, that this support was only political and that the British Prime Minis strongly opposed to an alert and considered it provocative . MacMillan said in his memoirs that the support was political .
 Macmillan wrote that he was "not prepared to add anything statement I have already published in my books regarding the matter in which especially interested"
 Canada and Three Crises, 243. Canada, 243 . Canada . Canada. Canada. 243. The Crises .
 External Affairs Minister Green answers to questions in TV interview . Green: "I am not a politician. I am a humanist. I'm not a political person."
 I think it is essential that Canada should show some steadiness in this whole situation . "I think it's essential that [Canada] should show [Canada's] steadiness," she says .
 Government has been ... k the people just as much informed as we possibly can do, and the same time not endangering our defensive position and not m trouble abroad . e're going to do everything we can to g crisis settled .... e don't want a nuclear war. And that's
 A good part of the questioning in the interview was an attempt to elicit a satisfactory response about the degree of sup Canada was offering the United States . But Green avoide endorsement of Kennedy's blockade of Cuba .
 Given the successful outcome of the blockade, Diefenbaker's judgment prove wrong . The resentment of the majority of ministers at the American ""S.E. was the reason for the blockade .
 Some were outraged at the American assumeptio Canada would offer immediate and unqualified suppor matter what the situation was . Others would have been sa with at least the courtesy of token consultation .
 On October 23, the OAS approved the quarantin only three countries abstaining from that section of the natio which authorized OAS members to use force against Early . On Wednesday, October 24, the naval blockade went effect and Russian ships were reported to be advancing st towards Cuba
 The only new information available to m the rapidly increasing danger, however, was channeled through the military network .
 It gave Harkness a di advantage in pressing his view on the majority . On the other hand, it gave him an advantage .
 Cabinet had set other considerations aside and supp the Harkness position . By the en the third meeting on the morning of the 24th, three-four the Cabinet had already set aside .
 External Affairs Minister Green never understood those who subsequently found fault with Cabinet behavior during crisis . Green said: "I don't understand why I'm so critical of the government's handling of the crisis"
 Had the entire Cabinet initially favored an alert, Dief baker would have concurred . It is also likely, howeve that had the entire cabinet initially favored the alert, he would likely concur .
 The Prime Minister d eventually approved it on the basis of new information which did not attempt to bring before his colleagues .
 Strategic A Command and certain elements of U.S. naval forces have moved from a ""Defcon 3" alert to a "Defcon 2" alert . The Defence Minister tried once more to get the poli authorization he wanted .
 He convinced Diefenbaker that Canada's security was now gravely endangered by the preparations of the Soviet Union . This time he succeeded, for he convinced Canada's . security .
 With the American alert increased and actual hostilities apparently s imminent, the question of nonprovocation seemed less impo tant than that of preparing for war . With the U.S. alert increased, it seems that it's more important to avoid war .
 To this day, the Prime Minister rejects the ide of any authorization other than his own . The Prime Minister rejected the idea of any mandate from anyone else .
 Harkness later admitted that he had carefully phrased his answers to opposition questions . He later admitted he had chosen carefully to answer the questions .
 Naval units were not under special orders, nor were actually blockading Russian ships- they were merely repeat a NATO exercise . All of the steps included in an alert had not bee authorized and the alert was not officially proclaime .
 Opposition members pressing the Prime Minister for information . Opposition members also pressing the PM for information on the issue .
 One plea for assurance that the government was ""doing everything possible to halt this race toward international suicide" was ruled out of order . Diefenbaker responded by asking for restraint . Other requests for information from the public were also ruled out .
 NORAD's Canadian component had ""been place upon the same level of readiness"" as the forces of the Unit States . NORAD announced that all Canadian military forces have taken precautionary measure .
 It was later made clear that the same level of readiness did not mean that Canada's weapons systems had been nuclear armed . It was made clear, however, that it was not the case .
 Canadians stand by their allies and their undertakings, and we intend in th present crisis to do the same . Canadians are standing by the U.S. and its allies .
 "On the other hand, we shall not fail to fail to d everything possible to seek solutions to these problems without war," he said .
 Diefenbaker: "i would be dangerously premature to assume that the critic phase"" had passed. Taking encouragement from the fact that some Soviet ship had turned back from Cuba, Diefensbaker still cautioned that it would be "dangerously premature"
 He stated that the ""greatest hope" of finding a peaceful solution lay in the U.N. He said that the United Nations is the key to finding peace in Syria .
 Diefenbaker praised U Thant for discharging his responsibilities and for his proposal of standstill which would permit time for negotiation . While avoiding any expression of personal confidence in American leadership .
 Opposition Leader Lester Pearson spoke even more intensely of a debt to the United Nations . Pearson was less supportive than Diefenbaker had been o the quarantine as a security measure .
 Criticism of the government's failure to declare an immediate alert and stand forthrightly beside the United Stat emerged in the aftermath of Green's television appearance .
 The censure became widespread and even extended to the ranks of the Diefenbake Conservative party .
 The Kennedy administration was undoubtedly dis pointed at the level of the political response, but that response exposed no weakness and posed no threat to national secur interests . Kennedy administration's response to the threat posed no weakness, says historian .
 The informal ""agreed procedure"" p viding for presidential-prime ministerial consultation in event of NORAD alert had not been followed . The informal procedure had not followed .
 The success of Kennedy's action in forcing Khrushchev back down was widely lauded both in Canada and abroad . Kennedy's actions in the wake of the crisis were widely lauded .
 The idea that Canada failed militari to back, immediately, the United States lingers on . Canada failed to back the U.S. in the early 1980s .
 Diefenbaker with the lack of consultation and its consequent infringement of Canadian sovereignty as the only possible public justification for delay . Such sentiment left him with . The delay is only possible justification for the delay .
 How could you act at the same time as your partner acted if you had no knowledge beyond an hour and a half prior to the speech. acted immediately. If you have no knowledge of the speech, you could not have acted immediately .
 In view of the American triumph, the Prime M was not able to explain Cabinet hesitation on the issue . A segment of Ca political leadership had perceived the nation's security in to be best served by avoiding any action that might provocative to Khrushchev .
 Norstad's decision to use non-military force was criticized by critics . Force had clearly won the battle with the president .
 Canada in World Affairs, 57, 62, co Diefenbaker's reaction with that of DeGaulle, noting that the French Preside accepted the American explanation and offered immediate support .
 Lyon mention that three years later one of the reasons behind DeGaulle' to have NATO bases in France removed was the lack of consultation during the crisis . Lyon mention, however, that three . years later three years after the crisis, one . reason behind the removal of NATO bases
 A summary of the foreign press response to the blockade, found in President Kennedy's office files, makes it clear that a differing perception was not expected from the Canadians .
 Canada is the only country in the Western Hemisphere to share a military alliance with the U.S. Canada is only country to share alliance with United States .
 The military integration of the two countries meant that Canada was inevitably involved . But the President and his advisors ignored this, and made no attempt to deal with th complications of integration at the political level .
 A personal presidenti message and photographs of missile sites would sufficfficfficed, they believed that a personal message and photos of the missile sites .
 The diplomatic channels were blocked, such that even the token consultation given Macmillan was denied . Even the . token consultation was denied, such as even the . consultation .
 There was no intimacy between the President and the Canadian ambassador as there was between Kennedy and his friend the British envoy . Kennedy and the British ambassador were friends and friends .
 The President's disdain for and contempt of the Prime Minister precluded the kind of communication Kennedy had with Macmillan . Indeed, the President's contempt of and contempt for the PM was completely precluded .
 Kennedy and his advisors expected that given the measure of the threat, Canada would offer full and immediate support . In spite of this, Kennedy's advisors expected Canada would support the U.S.
 In face of same threat, Diefenbak and most of his Cabinet had expected consultation . In face face of the same threat of the . threat, most of the Cabinet had . expected consultation.
 Th expectations were not fulfilled and the resulting disappoi ments provoked a further response, accelerating the spiral misunderstanding . Th expectation was not fulfilled . Th expectations prompted a further reaction to the situation .
 Canadians wondered what had happene to their special relationship . Diefenbaker became con vinced that the President intended to push him and Cana around .
 Americans wondered what had become of their steadfast ally, and Kennedy became more certain that harmonious relations with Canada would only be possible once Diefenbaker was out of office .
 Canada was the only NATO ally to back the U.S. military, yet criticized for insufficient suppred other repercussions as a result of the missile cris next months . The government was subjected to pressures from domestic sources and from outside sources .
 The impotence of C weapons systems during the crisis came as a shock Canadians who had not previously focused on the issue . The impotentness of the weapons systems shocked Canadians .
 Diefenbaker's administration ended after the crisis brought the issue to a head . Those who opposed nuclear weapons were determined to keep them out of the world .
 The Cuba confrontation was harrowing for everyone beneath the veneer of "playing it cool" The crisis may well have been even more frightening to the Canadian political le ship than it was to the American .
 Canadian fears inten because Canadians found themselves at the brink without consent . Canadians were helpless to influence the course of in which they were nonetheless inextricably involve .
 "In the middle of the night awakened by the explosion of a faulty electrical transfor thought that was it,"" he later reflected . "I was awakened by an explosion," he said of the explosion .