 Martin Luther posts his 95 theses on the door of theCastleChurch in Wittenberg . Martin Luther posted the theses at the entrance to the castle . Luther's 95-the-ses were posted on the doors of the castle in the city of Wittenburg .
 Union General Winfield Scott resigns as Commander of the United States Army . Citing failing health, Scott cites failing health as reason for resignation .
 Battle of Britain ends – The United Kingdom preventsGermany from invading Great Britain . Battle of the British Civil War ended in defeat of Germany in 1918 .
 F4U Corsair accomplishes the first successful radar guided interception . The F4C Corsair was the first aircraft to be intercepted by a radar-guided interceptor .
 The Algerian National Liberation Front begins a revolt against French rule in Algeria . Algerian Liberation Front was formed in 1953 .
 The United Kingdom and France begin bombing Egypt to force the reopening of the Suez Canal . The U.K. and France bombed Egypt in an effort to reopen the canal .
 President Johnson orders cessation of all air, naval, and artillery bombardment of North Vietnam effective November 1 . Citing progress with theParispeace talks, US president cites progress with Paris peace talks .
 Wells’s The War of the Worlds, causing a nationwide panic in the United States, caused a national panic . Wells's The War Of the Worlds was based on the novel, which was published in 1897 . Wells' War of The Worlds was the first time Wells had appeared in
 Franklin Delano Roosevelt approves United States $1 billion in Lend-Lease aid to the Allied nations . Roosevelt approved the aid to Allied nations in the early years of the war .
 The Soviet Union detonates the hydrogen bomb Tsar Bomba overNovaya Zemlya . At 58 megatons of yield, it is still the largest nuclear device ever detonated . The Tsar bomb was still the world's largest nuclear weapon detonated .
 Just miles fromDa Nang, United States. Marines repel an intense attack by wave after wave of Viet Cong forces, killing 56 guerrillas .
 A sketch of Marine positions was found on the body of a 13-year-old Vietnamese boy who sold drinks to the Marines the day before . Among the dead, a sketch of a Marine position is found on a Vietnamese boy's body . The sketch of the positions was also found on
 Sir Walter Raleigh is beheaded for allegedly conspiring against James I ofEngland . Raleigh is an English adventurer, writer, and courtier . Raleigh was beheaded in 1618 .
 William E Broughton spotted the mountain near the mouth of the Willamette River . William E. Brought was the first person to spot the mountain .
 Battle of Wauhatchie – Forces under Union General Ulysses S Grant ward off Confederate attack led by General James Longstreet . Confederate forces under General Longstreet led the attack .
 Leon Czolgosz, the assassin of William McKinley, executed by electrocution . McKinley's assassin of President McKinley was executed by electricity .
 In the United Kingdom, leading clergymen and political figures hold a public meeting to register outrage over Nazi Germany’s persecution of Jews . The meeting was held in response to the Nazi persecution of the Jewish community .
 Truth and Reconciliation Commission presents its report, which condemns both sides for committing atrocities . InSouth Africa, the report was presented by the Truth and . Reconcilation Commission . In South Africa, both sides committed atrocities .
 Pilot tricked hijacker into thinking he was landing in Bulgarian capital of Sofiato . Plane instead lands in Turkish capital of Ankara . Pilot tricked the hijacker and hijacker out of landing in Bulgaria .
 Turkish forces under the Grand Vizier Sinan Pasha defeat the Mameluks near Gaza . Turkish forces were defeated by the Turkish forces near Gaza in the 17th century .
 Imam Ahmad ibn Ibrihim al-Ghazi defeats the army of Lebna Dengel, Emperor of Ethiopia . Imam Ahmad defeated the Emperor of the Ethiopian Empire .
 Battle of White Plains – British Army forces arrive at White Plains, attack and capture Chatterton Hill from the Americans . British troops arrive at the White Plains and attack the Americans, capturing the hilltop . British forces capture the hillside in the Battle of Plains .
 Second Battle of Fair Oaks ends – Union Army forces under General Ulysses S Grant withdraw from Fair Oaks, Virginia, after failing to breach Confederate defenses around Richmond, Virginia . Confederate defenses failed to breach the Confederate defense around Richmond .
 Italian fascists led by Benito Mussolini march on Rome and take over the Italian government . Mussolini's fascist government was overthrown by Mussolini in 1940s .
 German SS forces arrange the massacre of more than 9,000 Jews of the Kaunas ghetto . The massacre took place in the city of Kauna, Lithuania, in 1944 .
 After the victims assembled on the Demokratu square at 6 am to be shot they are buried in gigantic ditches . The victims assembled at 6 a.m. to be killed they were shot .
 SS directive orders all Jewish children’s mittens and stockings to be sent from the death camps to the SS families . SS directive: All Jewish children's mittens, stockings should be sent to the death camp .
 Nikita Khrushchev ordered the removal of Soviet missile bases in Cuba . The move was part of a plan to remove missile bases from the island .
 Pope Paul VI announces that the ecumenical council has decided that Jews are not collectively responsible for the killing of Christ . In short, he says the council decided not to blame Jews for killing Christ .
 Lewis Libby, Vice-president Dick Cheney’s chief of staff, is indicted in the Valerie Plame case . Libby is accused of leaking details of the CIA's covert operation in the CIA .
 Negus Mikael is defeated by Fitawrari Habte Giyorgis, securing the throne for Empress Zauditu . The Emperor Iyasus V is defeated in the Ethiopian capital in support of his son .
 Stock markets around the world crash because of fears of global economic meltdown . Fears of a global meltdown hit the world's stock markets in 2008 and 2009 .
 All companies formed the national ITV1 with regional references only before regional programmes . Regional references were used only before programmes .
 October 27th is the feast day of the following Roman Catholic Saints: Abban of Magheranoidhe Abban . Saint Vincent and the Grenadines . United States is Navy Day Greece . Turkmenistan is Flag Day .
 Giuseppe Garibaldi, conqueror of the Kingdom of Two Sicilies, gives it to King Victor Emmanuel II of Italy . Giuseppo Giroppi, conquerors of the two Sicilies and Italian conquerors, receives it .
 The city of Thessaloniki is unified with Greece on the feast day of its patron Saint Demetrius . The city is united with Greece every day on its patron's feast day . The feast day is the feast of the saint Demetrios .
 Italy suffers a catastrophic defeat at the forces of Austria-Hungary and Germany . Battle of Caporetto was Italy's first major defeat in the war . The battle was fought in Italy in the early 1900s . Italy was defeated in the battle .
 One U.S. aircraft carrier, Hornet, was sunk in the Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands during the Guadalcanal Campaign . Another aircraft carrier was heavily damaged in the battle .
 WHO and CDC consider this date the anniversary of the eradication of smallpox . Smallpox eradication was the most spectacular success of vaccination . The WHO and the CDC consider it the greatest success of vaccine vaccination .
 Choi Kyu-ha becomes the acting President; Kim is executed the following May . Kim was executed the next May . Choi was acting President of Korea .
 Mossad agents assassinate Islamic Jihad leader Fathi Shikaki in Malta hotel in Malta . Mossad agent kills Shikakis in hotel room in Malta in bid to kill him . Fathi was killed by Israeli forces in Malta, Malta .
 Canadians and Mohawks defeat the Americans in the Battle of Chateauguay . The battle took place in the early 1900s .
 The wreck of Confederate submarine Hunley was found off Charleston, South Carolina, by pioneer underwater archaeologist, Dr. Dr. Adlai Stevenson . Dr. Stevenson shows photos at the UN proving Soviet missiles are installed in Cuba 1970 .
 U.S. and its Caribbean allies invade Grenada . Prime Minister Maurice Bishop and several of his supporters were executed in a coup d’état .
 Three months after the end of the Ten-Day War, the last soldier of the Yugoslav People’s Army leaves the territory of the Republic of Slovenia .
 The Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth was completely divided between Austria, Prussia and Russia 1812 – Napoleonic Wars: The Battle of Maloyaroslavets .
 The Japanese aircraft carrier Zuikaku and the battleship Musashi are sunk in the Battle of Leyte Gulf . The battle took place in Leyte .
 An R-16 ballistic missile explodes on the launch pad at the Soviet Union’s Baikonur Cosmodrome . Over 100 people were killed in the explosion .
 Veterans Day is observed on the fourth Monday in October for the seventh and last time . Among the dead is Field Marshall Mitrofan Nedelin, whose death is reported to have occurred in a plane crash 1964 .
 After the verdict, the United Kingdom breaks diplomatic relations with Syria, claiming that Hindawi was helped by Syrian officials . The United Kingdom says Hindawi helped by Syria .
 British Prime Minister, Robert Walpole, reluctantly declares war on Spain . Walpole's war was the first of its kind in Britain .
 Battle of Westport – Union forces under General Samuel R Curtis defeat Confederate troops led by General Sterling Price at Westport, near Kansas City . Union forces defeated Confederate troops in the battle .
 Italian pilot takes off from Libya to observe Turkish army lines during the Turco-Italian War . Italian pilot observes Turkish troops during the war .
 Field Marshal Georgy Zhukov takes command of Red Army operations . Operation designed to prevent further advance into Russia of German forces . Operation to prevent the German armies from capturing Moscow .
 Romanian Lieutenant-Colonel Nicolae Deleanu administered the executions . The executions were carried out by Romanian soldiers .
 At El Alamein in northern Egypt, the British Eighth Army under Field Marshal Montgomery begin a critical offensive to expel the Axis armies from Egypt, never to return . The Second Battle of El-Alamein began in March 1942 .
 The Battle of Leyte Gulf begins – The largest naval battle in history begins in the Philippines; and also the Soviet Red Army enters Hungary . The largest battle in the history begins at the beginning of the year .
 President Richard M Nixon agrees to turn over subpoenaed audio tapes of his Oval Office conversations about the scandal . Nixon agreed to hand over the tapes to the House of Representatives . Nixon was president of the United States in the 1970s and '70s .
 A French army barracks in Lebanon was also hit that same morning, killing 58 troops . A French soldier was killed in the attack on the same day .
 Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Palestinian Chairman Yasser Arafat reach a “land for peace” agreement . Netanyahu and Arafat agreed to a land for peace deal in 1998 .
 A period of civil war and disorder began when King Fernando died without a male heir to the Portuguese throne . The Portuguese throne was ruled by King Fernando, who died without an heir .
 Millerites anticipated the end of the world in conjunction with the Second Advent of Christ . Millerites were followers of William Miller, followers of the Millerites .
 Those widows and orphans who were unable to support themselves were evicted by the mine owners and likely sent to the Poor House . Widow and orphans were likely evicted from the mine .
 A run on Knickerbocker Trust Company stock sets events in motion that will lead to a depression . The run on the trust's stock could lead to the collapse of the trust .
 Crippen was convicted at the Old Bailey of poisoning his wife and was subsequently hanged at Pentonville Prison in London . He was subsequently found guilty of the poisoning and hanged in prison .
 RAF conducted an air raid on the city of Kassel, killing 10,000, rendering 150,000 homeless . Kassel was the largest city in Germany, with 236,000 people living there .
 The city of Aachen was the first German city to fall to the Allies in three weeks .
 U.S. President John F Kennedy announces that American spy planes have discovered Soviet nuclear weapons in Cuba . He orders a naval ‘quarantine’ of the island nation .
 Henry Kissinger and South Vietnamese President Nguyen Van Thieu meet in Saigon to discuss a proposed cease-fire . Kissinger and Thieu were discussing a proposed truce between the U.S. and North Vietnamese in Paris .