 Information has reached this Government in the last four days from a variety of sources which establishes without doubt that the Soviets have provided the Cuban Government with a number of anti-aircraft defense missiles with a slant range of twenty-five miles .
 The number of Soviet military technicians now known to be in Cuba or en route is about 8,500 . The number is consistent with assistance in setting up and learning to use this equipment .
 "As I stated last week, we shall continue to make information available as fast as fast it is obtained and properly verified," says President Obama . "We will continue to provide information," says Obama .
 There is no evidence of any organized combat force in Cuba from any Soviet bloc country . No evidence of military bases provided to Russia; of a violation of the 1984 treaty relating to Guantanamo; of the presence of offensive missiles .
 The Cuban question must be considered as a part of the worldwide challenge posed by Communist threats to the peace. Were to be otherwise, the gravest issues would arise. The gravest issue would arise .
 It must be dealt with as a part of the larger issue as well as in the context of the special relationships which have long characterized the Inter-American System .
 President John F Kennedy requested 150,000 troops to deal with a possible international crisis . JFK met with congressional leaders before issuing the statement . JFK: Increased Cuban armaments will be a heavy burden to the unhappy people of Cuba .
 He rejected an invasion, saying the missiles were not a threat to the U.S. and did not have nuclear warheads . The missiles did not carry nuclear warheads, he said .
 As Seen by the USSR August 30, 1962 Khrushchev met with the Cuban emissary, Che Guevara . The USSR became the world's most powerful state of the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev continued to resist Cuba’s request for a defense treaty, but assured Cuba that if the U.S. invaded, the Soviet Baltic fleet would respond .
 Khrushchev believed that the U.S. would accept and not respond to the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba . The United States would not have responded to the Soviet missile threat .
 Khrushchev accepted Kennedy and British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan’s August 27 proposal to ban nuclear tests in the atmosphere, underwater and in outer space . September 4, 1962, Khrushche accepted Kennedy's proposal .
 Khrushchev learned the U.S. had discovered anti-aircraft missiles in Cuba . September 5, 1962, was the first time the United States had discovered missiles in the country's Cuba .
 His reaction was to speed up the delivery before the U.S. learned more . The delivery was sped up before the United States learned more.
 Khrushchev summoned United States Interior Secretary, Stuart Udall, to his villa . September 6, 1962, Khrushche summoned Udall to meet with the U.S. Secretary of State .
 Khrushchev said western troops had to leave Berlin . Military traffic would no longer be allowed to Berlin, though civilian traffic would be allowed . The decision was made in the wake of the fall of the Soviet Union .
 Udall led Udall to believe that the Soviet government would sign a peace treaty with East Germany . Udall believed that a peace deal would be signed by the Soviets .
 Khrushchev claimed that JFK didn’t have the courage to solve the Berlin question so he would force him to sign a peace treaty with East Germany or go to war . JFK was forced to sign the peace treaty or face war with the East Germany .
 Khrushchev admitted he had provided Cuba with modern weapons, but said they were for defense . He said the weapons were meant to protect the country .
 Additional weapons were considered ‘tactical’ as their purpose was to protect the more strategic weapons, in the event of attack and ground invasion . These additional weapons would be considered “tacticals”
 The Soviet objective was now to be equipped for conflict – not merely to deter an invasion or achieve nuclear parity . The Soviet aim was to be armed with nuclear weapons, not just to deter or achieve parity .
 Malinovsky signed instructions to Commander Pliev of the Cuban Task Force that he could use nuclear weapons to counter an invasion upon receiving orders from Moscow . Malinovis signed new instructions . Pliev could use weapons if ordered by Moscow .
 Instructions to allow Pliev to make decision were prepared, but not signed . Instructions were prepared to allow him to make the decision in case communications with Moscow were not possible . Pliev: "I'm not going to go to Moscow, but I'm going to do it"
 JFK requested authorization from Congress to call up 150,000 troops, if needed, in 1962 . JFK asked Congress to authorize the call-up of 150,00 troops if needed . September 8, 1962, JFK asked for authorization for Congress to approve the call .
 Embarrassed by two U-2 incidents, the U.S. State Department asked the CIA to fly only over international waters and not over Cuba . The State Department claimed the recent incidents inhibited negotiations on Berlin .
 A compromise was reached restricting CIA flights to cross over the width of the island where they couldn’t be tracked and shot down . CIA flights couldn't be shot down because they crossed over the whole island .
 Udall later said he didn’t believe Khrushchev had said that . Frost was ill and tired when he spoke with reporters . Udall said Frost was sick and tired at the time .
 JFK reaffirmed the conclusion that Soviet shipments to Cuba do not constitute a threat to the Western Hemisphere . JFK made the remarks at a news conference in 1962 .
 CIA chief John McCone was still on honeymoon in France in 1962 . September 16, 1962 CIA chief was still in France when he was killed .
 He had received daily cables reviewing the Cuban situation and worried about the SAMs in Cuba . He said he was worried about SAMs .
 A Special National Intelligence Estimate said that Soviet presence in Cuba was for political purposes, to build up the Communist regime . It was unlikely the Soviets would put nuclear weapons there .
 Estimate: Fewer than 4,000 Soviet troops were in Cuba . Estimate was prepared by the CIA and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Air Force, and NSA .
 McCone learned that a CIA source had seen a ballistic missile being moved in Cuba on September 12 . September 20, 1962 A Congressional resolution authorized a United States invasion of Cuba . A CIA source told McCone that a missile missile was being moved .
 Khrushchev complained of U.S. ships following and harassing Soviet ships and overflights . September 28, 1962, was October 31, 1962 .
 Kennedy replied they should try to meet their target date for the treaty of 1/1/63 but did not mention Cuba . Kennedy replied that they should meet the target date of the treaty, but didn't mention Cuba.
 McCone recommended to JFK that U-2 overflights be resumed to check the accuracy of MRBM sightings and the readiness of SAM sites . October 9, 1962, McCone wrote to JFK to resume overflights .
 Kennedy and his advisors believed there would be a 1 in 6 chance of a U-2 being shot down . Kennedy believed there was a 1-6 chance of the U.2 being hit down . U.S. President George H.W. Bush believed the chances of being shot
 The CIA couldn't risk having a CIA pilot shot down and captured, so decided to use Air Force pilots . They couldn’t risk being shot down or captured .
 The mission was delayed 3 days to train an Air Force pilot to fly the U-2, and was further delayed by bad weather . Bad weather also delayed the mission .
 The pilot was to fly from California to Florida and stray somewhat over western Cuba . He was flying over the Cuban border .
 When reviewed by CIA experts on October 15th, the films revealed that Soviet MRBMs had been deployed . CIA experts reviewed the films and reviewed them in depth to reveal that the Soviets had deployed the weapons .
 Eisenhower was campaigning across the country on behalf of Republican Congressional candidates . Eisenhower was in the U.S. to campaign in support of congressional candidates .
 Eisenhower calls President Weak on Foreign Policy . Eisenhower: "We lost no inch of ground to tyranny" Eisenhower: In those eight years, we lost no . inch of . ground"
 "We accepted no compromise of pledged word or withdrawal from principle," says President Obama . "No compromise of pledges or withdrawal of principle," he says .
 Medium-range ballistic missiles could be launched on 10-hours notice, the time required to deliver nuclear warheads to launch sites . The time required is the time needed to deliver warheads to the launch sites, experts say .
 In his Memoir, Khrushchev explicitly stated that the USSR didn’t use submarine escorts for the delivery of weapons to Cuba . The USSR did not use escorts to deliver the weapons .
 Meredith attended his first class with a bodyguard of six federal marshals and soldiers waiting outside in Army trucks . Military police arrived 8 hour later and arrived 8 hours later .
 As a work of the U.S.federal government, the image is in the public domain .