 Virginia and United States History Learning in Place 2020 Week 1 Task Text . Write Virginia & U.S. History textbook 1.1.0.0 .
 The United States was involved in the Cold War during the 1950s and '60s . The Cold War was the first two decades of Cold War in the United States .
 Write a paragraph describing Pgs.3-668 how the US’ foreign policy changed over this series of events . Also write a paragraph about how the U.S. changed its foreign policy over the years .
 Discuss the evidence presented by Presidents Kennedy and War” Johnson on the reasons why the U.S. needed to become involved . Discuss the reasons each President did, or said they would, take .
 Use specific quotes or evidence from the documents to support your answer . Use specific quote or evidence to support the answer .
 Week 2 Task Text Write Virginia & United States History textbook Pgs.8-622 . Virginia & U.S. History textbook: Virginia & Virginia & History textbook .
 U.S. History Module 9, 11 Virginia & United States History textbook 2 . Digital_Learning: Virginia and Virginia History . Virginia textbook 2. Virginia textbook .
 Digital_Learning United States History Module 10 . What impact did Brown Board and Davis have had on the U.S. 2.2.3 million people .
 Background and key players determine who you believe to be the four most important people involved in these two landmark Civil Rights cases . Background and other key players will be revealed at the bottom of this article .
 The civil rights movement has been in the forefront of civil rights since 1964 . Civil rights activists have been involved in civil rights movements in the past .
 Write a paragraph that discusses the role of Pgs.2-767 American citizens and the government in effecting these changes . Additionally, write a paragraph about the role Americans have in effect on the changes .
 Compare and contrast the approaches to gaining Civil Rights in the 1950s/60s and U.S. History Module 10 1970s . Use this week's History Module to learn about the civil rights movement in the United States .
 This action contradicts assurances of Soviet spokesmen, both publicly and privately delivered, that the arms buildup in Cuba would retain its original defensive character . Neither the United States of America nor the world community of nations can tolerate deliberate deception and offensive threats on the part of any nation, large or small
 It shall be the policy of this Nation to regard any nuclear missile launched from Cuba against any nation in the Western Hemisphere as an attack by the Soviet Union on the United States, requiring a full retaliatory response . Under the Charter of the United Nations, we are asking tonight that an emergency
 We are prepared to discuss new proposals for the removal of tensions on both sides, including the possibility of a genuinely independent Cuba, says President Obama .
 President Johnson's Message to Congress August 5, 1964 . President Johnson directed air action against gunboats and supporting facilities used in these hostile operations .
 This air action has now been carried out with substantial damage to the boats and facilities . The air action was carried out in an attempt to damage the boats, facilities and aircraft .
 President Obama asked Congress for a resolution expressing the unity and determination of the U.S. in supporting freedom and in protecting peace in Southeast Asia . He also announced a decision to ask the leaders of both parties in Congress for the resolution .
 These latest actions of the North Vietnamese regime has given a new and grave turn to the already serious situation in Southeast Asia . The latest actions by the North Vietnam regime have given a 'new and grave' turn to Southeast Asia's situation in the region .
 They were further defined in the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty . The treaty was approved by the Senate in February 1955 . It was later ratified by the U.S. Senate .
 This treaty with its accompanying protocol obligates the United States and other members to act in accordance with their constitutional processes to meet Communist aggression against any of the parties or protocol states . This treaty is based on a treaty signed by the U.S. and other countries .
 Our policy in Southeast Asia has been consistent and unchanged since 1954 . We have a policy in the region that has remained consistent since then .
 A threat to any nation in that region is a threat to all, and to us, says President Obama . "A threat to the region is an important threat to us," says Obama .
 "This is not just a jungle war, but a struggle for freedom on every front of human activity," says President Obama . "We are fighting for freedom everywhere," says Obama .
 Our military and economic assistance to South Vietnam and Laos in particular has the purpose of helping these countries to repel aggression and strengthen their independence . Our military assistance to these countries will help them repel aggressors and strengthen independence .
 The North Vietnamese regime has constantly sought to take over South Vietnam and Laos . The regime has tried to take control of the two countries .
 It has systematically conducted a campaign of subversion, which includes the direction, training, and supply of personnel and arms for the conduct of guerrilla warfare in South Vietnamese territory .
 In Laos, the North Vietnamese regime has maintained military forces, used Laotian territory for infiltration into South Vietnam, and most recently carried out combat operations . This is in direct violation of the Geneva Agreements of 1962 . The North Vietnam regime has used Laos' territory to infiltrate into South
 President asks Congress to join in affirming national determination that all such attacks will be met . U.S. will continue in its basic policy of assisting the free nations of the area to defend their freedom .
 As I have repeatedly made clear, the United States intends no rashness, and seeks no wider war . The United States will not engage in any wider war, Obama said .
 "We must make it clear to all that the United States is united in its determination to bring about the end of Communist subversion and aggression in the area," says President Obama .
 President Reagan argued that through a massive defense build-up, the U.S. would pressure the Soviet Union to keep pace . The United States would ultimately deplete the Soviets of their resources, he said .
 During the 1980s defense spending increased from $134 billion in 1980 before Reagan took office to $253 billion in 1989 when he left office . Defense spending was $134billion in 1980s .
 U.S. defense spending was seven percent of Gross Domestic Product in 1989 . Defense spending had dramatically increased the federal deficit . This meant that American defense spending increased dramatically .
 The Soviets increased their defense spending from 22 to 27 percent of GDP in the first half of the 1980s . They did not increase the production of civilian goods . Yet the Soviets responded to this increase in spending and increased defense spending .
 Reagan said the aim was to research a way to repel missiles launched by the Soviet Union . Reagan explained that the aim of the project was to find a way of repel Soviet missiles .
 Reagan hoped that this proposed technology would make nuclear war obsolete . Reagan hoped it would make nukes obsolete . The technology was proposed in the 1980s .
 The Soviet Union was horrified, believing that the initiative would destabilize the careful Cold War balance between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The initiative would give the United States firststrike capability .
 We maintain the peace through our strength, says President Obama . "We maintain peace through strength," he says . "Weakness only invites aggression. We maintain peace by strength," says Obama .
 After careful consultation with his advisers, including the Joint Chiefs of Staff, I believe there is a way . "I believe there's a way," he says .
 I know this is a formidable, technical task, one that may not be accomplished before the end of this century . It's a daunting task, but it's possible that it could be done before end of the century .
 Current technology has attained a level of sophistication where it's reasonable for us to begin this effort . Yet, current technology has . It's reasonable to start this effort. Yet, it's not just a matter of necessity, it says .
 There will be failures and setbacks, just as there will be successes and breakthroughs, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The U.S. must remain constant in preserving the nuclear deterrent and maintaining a solid capability for flexible response, officials say .
 On May 17, 1954, Supreme Court Justice Earl Warren delivered the unanimous ruling in the landmark civil rights case Brown Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas . The ruling was the result of a unanimous vote in the 1954 Supreme Court decision .
 State-sanctioned segregation of public schools was a violation of the 14th Amendment . It was therefore unconstitutional . The 14th amendment was passed by the Supreme Court .
 This historic decision marked the end of the ""separate but equal"" precedent set by the Supreme Court nearly 60 years earlier . The decision served as a catalyst for the expanding civil rights movement during the 1950s .
 When Linda Brown was denied admission into a white elementary school, her father challenged Kansas's school segregation laws in the Supreme Court . Linda's father, Oliver Brown, challenged the laws in a Supreme Court case .
 The NAACP and Thurgood Marshall took up their case, along with similar ones in South Carolina, Virginia, and Delaware, as Brown Board of Education . Similar ones in Virginia, Delaware, and South Carolina also took up case .
 Oliver L Brown, a minister in his local Topeka, KS, community, challenged Kansas's school segregation laws in the Supreme Court . Brown challenged the laws in Kansas's Supreme Court.
 Linda Brown’s 8-year-old daughter, Linda, was a black girl attending fifth grade in the public schools in Topeka when she was denied admission into a white elementary school . Linda was a fifth-grader at a white school .
 The NAACP and Thurgood Marshall took up Brown’s case along with similar cases in South Carolina, Virginia, and Delaware as Brown Board of Education . The NAACP took up the case .
 Social scientists provided evidence in the Briggs case on segregation's devastating effects on the psyches of black children . Carter secured the pivotal involvement of social scientists, particularly Kenneth B Clark .
 As Attorney General of Kansas, Harold Fatzer argued the case for the appellees in Brown Board of Education of Topeka . Harold R Fatzer was the attorney general of Kansas during the Brown Board .
 Mr Fatzer served as Kansas Supreme Court Justice from February, 1949, to March, 1956 . Fatzer was a member of the Kansas State Supreme Court .
 Jack Greenberg argued on behalf of the plaintiffs in the Brown Board of Education of Topeka case . Greenberg also worked on the briefs in Belton Gebhart .
 Jack Greenberg served as director-counsel of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund from 1961 to 1984 . Greenberg served in the NAACP from 1961 until 1984 .
 Marshall also served as lead counsel in the Brown Board of Education case . Marshall went on to become the first African American Supreme Court Justice in United States history . Marshall was lead counsel for Brown Board case .
 Mr Reeves was the first African American appointed to the District of Columbia Board of Commissioners . Mr Reeves declined the position, although he declined the role .
 Charles Scott Topeka, KS based lawyer who initially began the Brown case on behalf of Oliver Brown and the other litigants . Charles Scott started the Brown Case in 2010 .
 John Scott Topeka, KS based lawyer who initially began the Brown case on behalf of Oliver Brown and the other litigants . Oliver Brown was the subject of a lawsuit against the government .
 Chief Justice Earl Warren secured unanimous decision in Brown Board of Education decision in 1891 . Brown Board upheld the doctrine of "separate but equal" doctrine .
 Warren delivered the opinion in the District of Columbia case, Bolling Sharpe . Warren also delivered an opinion in a similar case in the D.C. case .
 Moton High School students participated in the two-week protest . Four hundred fifty African American students took part in the protest . Moton students from Moton high school participated .
 The student strike committee requested assistance from the NAACP branch office in Richmond, Virginia . The NAACP has been assisting the committee .
 The students believed that the deplorable conditions at the school deprived them of equal educational opportunities . Students believed that they were deprived of equal opportunities .
 Moton had no gymnasium, cafeteria, infirmary or teachers restrooms . overflow of students was housed in an old school bus and three buildings covered in tar paper .
 Local parents repeatedly sought improvements from the local school board without success . Local parents had repeatedly sought improvement from the school board . The school board failed to find a solution to the problem .
 In May 1951, Spottswood Robinson and Oliver Hill from the local NAACP filed suit on behalf of one hundred seventeen students . The suit was filed in May 1951 .
 The plaintiffs asked that the state law requiring segregated schools in Virginia be struck down was struck down . The plaintiffs want that the law requiring segregation in Virginia schools be struck back .
 The school board was ordered to proceed with plans to equalize the African American students’ school . The board was also ordered to continue with plans for equalizing the African-American students' school .
 White Virginians launched a campaign of massive resistance after the Supreme Court overturned the ruling and ordered desegregation . When the decision was overturned, white Virginians fought back against the decision .
 The Board of Supervisors for Prince Edward County refused to appropriate any funds for the County School Board for the period 1959-1964, effectively closing the public schools rather than integrating them . The Board refused to fund the public school board .
 It asked that the state law requiring segregated schools in Virginia be struck down . The state law requires segregated schools to be segregated in Virginia .
 Hill’s most famous case, Davis Prince Edward County, Virginia, became part of the Brown Board of Education decision . Hill's most famous decision was the decision to allow racial segregation in public schools .
 The suit began as a result of a student strike organized and led by 16 year-old Barbara Rose Johns, in an attempt to force the county to provide facilities equal to those provided to white high school students as required by law .
 Their case eventually became one of five included in the landmark 1954 case, Brown Board of Education . The case was one of the five that became part of the landmark Brown Board case .