 Fidel Castro seized power in Cuba in January 1959, at the age of 31 or 32 . Health problems forced him to give up partial control in 2006 .
 The World's 20 Worst Living Dictators, I included a chapter about Castro . Castro is one of the world's 20 worst living dictators .
 Cuba is an island about the size of Pennsylvania in the Caribbean Sea . Cuba is ninety miles south of Florida .
 Cuba has a population of more than 11 million, including several smaller islands . The nation of Cuba is home to several islands, including a number of smaller islands.
 Cuba was known as little more than a producer of sugar and as a gambling haven . In the midst of the Cold War, Fidel Castro turned his country into the Soviet Union’s leading client state in the Americas .
 Fidel Castro was born on August 13, but like much of his life, the year in which he was born is surrounded by controversy . Fidel Castro is one of the leaders of Cuba .
 Castro himself claims the year was 1926, but his sisters have said that he was actually born a year later in 1927 . Castro claims to have been born in 1927, but sisters say he was born in 1926 .
 Manacas is a farming community in the Mayarí region of northern Oriente . It is literally closer to Haiti, Jamaica, and even the Bahamas than it is to Havana .
 Castro’s father, Ángel Castro y Argiz, was born in Lancara, Galicia, Spain, and emigrated to Cuba in 1898 . Castro's father emigrated from Galicia in 1898 to Cuba, where he was born .
 He spent five years working in a brick factory owned by his uncle before moving to Mayarí, which was then dominated by the United Fruit Company . He spent the time working in the factory owned in the city .
 He went from town to town selling goods and merchandise . He used the profits to expand his business .
 Ángel leased land from the United Fruit Company, planting sugarcane and employing small farmers . Eventually he leased land to small farmers and eventually employed small farmers in the area .
 Castros lived in a two-story country house built in the Galician style with wooden stilts and a space underneath for farm animals . The Castros built the house in Galicia, Spain, in the 1930s .
 María died after the birth of her second child . Juana Castro, Fidel’s younger sister, insists that she simply left the family .
 With María gone, Ángel soon took up with young Lina Ruz González, who had been working in the Castro household as a maid or cook . Lina was working as a cook or maid .
 Although wealthy and powerful for the region, their lifestyle remained extremely rural . Their lifestyle remained rural, with livestock and chickens wandering throughout the house .
 To bring the family in for meals, Lina would shoot a gun outside the kitchen door . To bring in the family, she would shoot outside the door .
 Fidel was named after Fidel Pino Santos, a wealthy Oriente politician and a close friend of Ángel Castro . Fidel is named after a wealthy friend of Castro, who was a close ally of Castro .
 Fidel also means ‘faithful,” a fact that Castro would later use in speeches . Fidel means “faithful” in Latin America . Fidel is the name of Fidel, which means "faithful"
 Like his father, Fidel was prone to violent tempers, and he could be a very sore loser . Fidel was also prone to violence, like his father .
 His sisters recall him starting a baseball team in Birán with equipment bought by his father . His sisters remember him starting baseball team with equipment from his father's .
 If a game was going poorly or his team began to lose, Fidel would simply stop the game, gather up the equipment and walk off . Fidel would walk off from the field and gather up equipment .
 Castro’s close friend, novelist Gabriel García Márquez, wrote, “I do not think anyone in the world could be a worse loser.” Castro was a close friend of the late Castro .
 As a child, Fidel was sent to study in Santiago, the second-largest city in Cuba . Fidel was also sent to Santiago, Cuba, to study .
 He spent his first two years in Santiago living with his godparents, during which time he was homeschooled . He also spent two years living in Santiago with godparents .
 He was enrolled in the Marist school La Salle, along with his older brother Ramón and his younger brother Raúl .
 Fidel quickly gained a reputation as a troublemaker and a bully . He started fights with the other boys as well as with the priests . Fidel quickly became a popular figure in the Catholic community .
 Fidel, who was in the fourth grade, responded by threatening to burn down the house . Fidel was in fourth grade when he threatened to burn it down . Fidel, now in his eighth grade, was in fifth grade .
 Fidel was reenrolled in school, but this time at a more demanding Jesuit institution . Fidel re-enrolled into college at a Jesuit institution, where he was enrolled .
 Fidel forged his report cards with the highest marks to take home, while forging his father’s signature on his real report card . When his father threatened to cut off his allowance if his grades slipped, he forged his highest marks . Fidel forged the real report cards to get the highest
 Fidel was known for his almost photographic memory . Although he was a mediocre student, the young Fidel had a photographic memory, he was known .
 A fellow classmate, José Ignacio Rasco, recalled Castro reciting the pages of their textbook from memory . Rasco: Castro impresses the other students by reciting pages from their textbook .
 The children would call out a page number and Fidel would repeat the exact contents of the page, including whether or not the last word ended in a hyphen . Fidel would ask the children to read the page number, including if it was a book with a missing word .
 "I like to hear the radio, and I am very happy, because I heard in it, that you will be president of a new era," she says . She says she hopes she will be a "very successful president"
 I am a boy but I think very much, but I do not think that I am I to the President of the United States. I am not a boy, but a boy who thinks very much but I am very much . I do think very little of what I am to the
 Fidel continued his education at the exclusive Jesuit Belén College in Havana . Fidel continued to attend exclusive Jesuit college in Havana, Cuba .
 Fidel learned the skills of public speaking and oration for which he eventually became famous . Fidel learned his skills from Fidel Castro's speeches . Fidel became famous for his public speaking skills .
 He was rejected twice after failing to complete a 10-minute speech without notes . He attempted to enroll in the Avellaneda Literary Academy, the oratory school at Belén, but was rejected .
 Eventually, he earned acceptance and learned to control the stage fright that had paralyzed him . He earned acceptance .
 Fidel bit the student and ran out of the room, only to return with a pistol and brandish it until a priest subdued him . A priest subdued Fidel after he returned with the pistol and returned with it .
 Despite rumors to the contrary, he did not graduate at the top of his class . Despite rumors, he was not a top student at college .
 He was remembered for having received the longest and most enthusiastic ovation from his fellow classmates .
 At the time, the university was an autonomous and self-governing body, and neither the police nor the army were allowed to enter the campus . Neither the police or the army was allowed to .
 As a result, the university became a haven for gangsters and political movements . The university was known for its connections with gangsters, political groups .
 President Ramón Grau San Martín approved a rise in bus fares that provided the impetus for Castro’s first political action . Guevara would later recall Castro as “a boy who will be José Martí or the worst of the gangsters”
 He organized a demonstration against the fare increase . He led a group of students on a march to the presidential palace .
 The students were beaten by police forces and Castro was slightly injured . Castro was injured in the attack .
 Castro was quick to use the incident to his advantage, gaining newspaper coverage . Castro says he is proud of his actions and is proud to be president of Cuba .
 Castro was part of a student delegation that went to meet President Grau . Three days later, Castro was in a delegation that met with Grau's president .
 Castro joked with the other three students that when Grau entered they should pick him up and throw him from the balcony, then get on the radio and proclaim the victory of the student revolution . As they waited in the president’s office for Grau to arrive, Castro joked that
 When Castro entered the university he began to maneuver between the two groups . Castro entered into the university in order to gain access to the university .
 Initially he tried to foster a relationship with the MSR’s Manolo Castro, then president of the Students’ Federation, he said . Initially he was trying to foster his relationship with Castro, who was president of MSR .
 Lionel Gómez, a member of the UIR, was shot in the lung in December of 1946 . Lionel was shot by a fellow UIR member .
 Fidel Castro named as his attacker, although there was little evidence actually linking Castro to the crime . He named Fidel Castro as his .
 Emilio Tró, the head of UIR, took Fidel under his wing, giving him a pistol, which he took to carrying with him at all times .
 Castro volunteered for a planned invasion of the Dominican Republic . Instead, Castro volunteered to go on a mission to invade the country . Castro: "Instead of invading, I'm going to attack the country"
 The campaign was being led by a group of Dominican exiles, including future president Juan Bosch . It was largely a response to the horrors of the regime of Rafael Trujillo, who had been in power since 1930 .
 Trujillo’s troops had massacred at least 12,000 Haitians along the border, and he personally killed people at his opulent home, dumping their bodies in the river . During this time, he had personally killed at least 10,000 people .
 On July 29, 1947, Castro and his companions sailed to Cayo Confites, the launching point for the invasion . Castro and others sailed to the island on the way to the launch of the attack .
 Fidel received his first military training, although it lasted only a week . Fidel received only one week of military training .
 The rest of the time was spent on the mosquito-infested island for the order to launch .
 Trujillo had long since heard about their plans and had had time to prepare his defense and even to complain to the United States . Unfortunately for the would-be invaders, Trujillillo had already heard about the plans .
 On September 27, after the invading fleet was already on its way, the leadership called off the attack . The attack was called off by the leadership of the United States .
 Castro chose to jump ship and swim for shore . With the campaign officially over and the Cuban military rounding up the revolutionary vessels, Castro jumped ship and swam ashore .
 After swimming for eight or nine miles, he reached shore the next day . He reached shore and appeared at his family home . The swimmer reached shore by the next morning .
 Emilio Tró was killed in Havana by MSR thugs in a gun battle that lasted hours . While Fidel was on Cayo Confites, Emilio died in Havana .
 Manolo Castro was killed outside of a Havana movie theater that he owned . Less than six months later, he was killed .
 Castro, sensing a more promising direction for his future, moved away from gangsters and became more involved in political actions . Castro: "I'm not a gangster. I'm a politician. I want to make a difference"
 He once declared that Al Capone was a stupid man because he had never formed an ideology . He once said that Capone never had an ideology and that he was stupid .
 Castro insisted he would have been world famous if he had lived in a different way . Castro insisted that he would not have been remembered only as a gangster .
 In 1947, Castro participated in a trip by law students to the Isle of Pines, the location of Cuba’s new “model” penitentiary . Castro participated . In 1947 he visited the new ‘model’ prison in Cuba .
 Fidel criticized the prison and the treatment of the inmates . Fidel returned to Havana to criticize the prison's treatment of inmates .
 Six years later, Castro would end up a prisoner in the same penitentiary . Castro was in prison at the time of his death .
 The trip was part of a Latin American student congress and was financed by Juan Perón, the leader of Argentina . The trip is part of an international student congress .
 Less than an hour before their scheduled meeting, Gaitán was shot and killed by a mentally deranged man . Juan Roa Sierra, a mentally ill man, was also killed .
 During riots, he became involved in the takeover of a police station . During the riots he was involved in taking over police station in London .
 By the time the riots subsided, approximately 3,500 people had been killed and a third of the city had gone up in flames . The riots were the largest riots in the history of British Columbia .
 Back in Cuba, Castro aligned himself with Senator Eduardo "Eddy" Chibás, the voice of the anti-Grau opposition . Castro aligns himself with the opposition .
 Fidel presented himself as Chibás’ protééé and political heir, in private . In private, the two were never close . The two were not close .
 Chibás resented the young Castro, while Fidel saw him as an obstacle to his own power . Fidel saw Chibas as a threat to his power, while Chibés resented him .
 In order to be taken seriously as a politician, Castro knew he had to break free of his gangster ties . Castro was a gangster in the 1980s and '90s .
 In late November 1949, he decided to make a clean break, denouncing the actions of the gangsters in front of a large crowd at the university and naming names and pacts .
 Castro eventually graduated with a law degree and briefly started a law practice . He actually practiced little law, concentrating instead on politics . Castro eventually focused on politics, focusing instead on the economy .
 He was never known to dance, something exceedingly uncommon in Havana in the 1940s . He was generally awkward and shy around women, and he was shy around them .
 Mirta was considered an exceptionally beautiful woman, with blonde hair and green eyes . She was considered to be the most beautiful woman in the world .
 She came from one of the wealthiest families in Cuba, with close ties to Batista . She was born in Havana .
 At their wedding, Mirta's father gave the young couple $10,000 for a three-month honeymoon in the United States . $1,000 in spending money provided by Cuba’s dictator, Fulgencio Batista, was also provided .
 Castro later recalled going into a bookstore in Manhattan and being shocked to see Karl Marx’s Das Kapital available . Castro: "Das Kapital" was available in a New York City bookstore .
 Newlyweds moved into a hotel across the street from a military camp . Upon their return to Cuba, the newlyweds lived in a hotel near the camp .
 On Sept 1, 1949, Mirta gave birth to Fidel Castro Díaz-Balart, nicknamed Fidelito . Fidelito is Fidel Castro's first child .
 Castro would never be close to his first son, but he was protective of him . Castro never had a close relationship with his first child, but was protective .
 Senator Eduardo Chibás accused education minister of using political funds to buy a large mansion . Eduardo accused Aureliano Sánchez Arango of using funds for a mansion . Chibas was a senator in the Mexican Senate from 1951 .
 At the end of his radio show, Chibás urged the Cuban people to wake up to the corruption in government . The Cuban government has been accused of corruption .
 Chibás was taken to a hospital, where he lingered for eleven days before dying . He lingered in the hospital for 11 days before he died .
 Castro tried to convince Captain Máximo Rávelo, the army captain commanding the escort of the gun carriage transporting the casket, to divert the procession route to the presidential palace .
 President Carlos Prío himself had packed a bag and prepared a plane in the event that a mass uprising did occur . President Carlos Prío had packed a plane and was prepared for a plane .
 Castro continued his political pursuits by running for the Chamber of Deputies in 1952 . Castro continued to run for the chamber of deputies in 1952. Castro was elected to the Senate of Representatives in 1953 .
 With broad support from the urban and rural poor, Castro was in line to be elected . Castro was expected to be the next president of Cuba .
 In fact, he would have been a strong contender for an eventual seat in the senate, and perhaps ultimately might have been elected president through democratic means . He would have also been a candidate for a senate seat .
 The planned elections were disrupted on the morning of March 10, 1952, when Batista walked into the army’s Camp Columbia in Havana along with his officers . Batista was the Cuban president of the Cuban army .
 By the time dawn broke Batista had taken power and Prío had fled the country . They met no resistance, and by dawn broke the country had been overtaken .
 Fidel and his brother Raúl immediately went into hiding . When news of Batista’s coup spread, Fidel and Raúel immediately went in hiding . Fidel was one of the most prominent figures in Cuba .
 Hours later the secret police arrived at both their houses looking for them . Hours later they were both arrested and taken into custody by police .
 She was well educated, having been raised in France and the United States . She was married to a well-known Cuban heart surgeon, Orlando Fernández-Ferrer .
 She was also a secret admirer of Castro, and offered him the use of her apartment as a hiding place . Castro was also known to be a member of the Castro family .
 Naty became central to Fidel’s revolution, providing money and distributing pamphlets . Eventually, Naty agreed to let him store firearms and ammunition in her house . Naty helped print and distribute pamphlets, and even allowed him to store firearms .
 The two became lovers, and when Mirta found out, she asked for a divorce in July 1954 . The two were married in 1954 .
 He lost no time in gathering a movement for liberation, choosing to create his own organization rather than working with the Communists . He chose not to join the Communist Party, choosing instead to work with them .
 Castro saw the Communists as out of touch with the masses and too large for him to control . The Communists, who enjoyed some support from Batista, had no need of the young revolutionary . Castro saw them as out-of-touch .
 He and his supporters set up a small revolutionary newspaper . They printed it on a mimeograph machine that they hid inside the trunk of a car .
 Castro secured two small two-way radios and began broadcasting regular programs . Castro secured the radios and secured regular radio sets . Castro also secured small radios to broadcast programs .
 During this time of organizing, he drove more than 30,000 miles, some forty times the length of the island . He drove over 40 times as long as he did .
 From the outset, Castro ran his movement like a military organization, with no democratic processes whatsoever . Castro ran from the outset of his movement, he says . Castro's movement was like a 'military organization,' he adds .
 He passed down orders to his officers and they were expected to obey without question . He passed on orders to the officers and ordered them to obey them .
 Castro forbade the drinking of alcohol and imposed strict sexual standards . Several times forcing his men to marry their girlfriends . Castro also banned men from drinking alcohol and forcing them to marry girlfriends .
 He also ordered weekly meetings be held to analyze the conduct of the movement’s members . Infractions could be punished by expulsion or even death .
 Castro rarely attended military training sessions that his group held on university grounds . He used the basements of buildings as well as the rooftops of the science building . When another group of student revolutionaries was betrayed by an insider and thrown in prison, Castro became more security conscious .
 Castro developed guerrilla tactics that are still used by underground movements and terrorists today . Castro developed and employed guerrilla tactics, still used today .
 Nobody within a cell knew people in other cells . Nobody in the cell knew other cells, and nobody in other cell knew each other . He based his organization on cell structure .
 Although he had the men, he did not have the weapons needed to undertake an armed revolution . He had to rely on men and women to carry out the revolution .
 Not only that, he did not have enough money to purchase arms for all his men, he also didn't have enough funds to buy arms . He said: "I'm not going to be able to buy weapons for all my men."
 Batista chose the military base in Moncada because it was located in the traditionally rebellious province of Oriente . It was far enough away from Havana that it would take some time for the action to become known to Batista .
 Castro fantasized that the attack would spark a larger armed rebellion throughout the province . Castro also fantasized he wanted to spark an armed rebellion . Castro: "I want to see a bigger uprising in the province"
 The arms seized from the military base would be handed out to the population . The population would then join in securing the zone from Batista’s military .
 Moncada would attack the Bayamó Barracks, farther to the west, gaining more munitions and closing off the roads into the province, thus creating a “Liberated Zone” within Cuba . Simultaneous to the attack, a smaller force would attack a smaller .
 The Moncada attack was planned for the morning of July 26, 1953, but it ran into problems from the start . The attack was scheduled to take place on July 27, 1953 .
 One car had a flat tire almost immediately after leaving the farm that served as the staging area . One car left the scene with a tire problem almost immediately .
 Another car took a wrong turn into the center of town and did not arrive until after the attack had already begun . The attack was carried out by a car driven by an unknown motorist, police say .
 A group of four students decided not to participate in the attack at all . The attack was the first of its kind .
 Fidel told them to wait until the rest of the cars had left, but they wound up leaving in the middle of the convoy . Fidel said they would wait until all the other vehicles had left .
 When they took the turn for Havana, the car behind them mistakenly followed . The car behind the car mistakenly followed them into Havana, Cuba .
 By the time the would-be revolutionaries in this car realized their error, they had gone well past Santiago . They were too far away to participate in the attack .
 The plan had been to attack the morning after Carnival, while most of the government soldiers would be sleeping off the previous night’s excesses . The plan was to attack in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 Many soldiers were just getting back from their partying, and they had brought back with them to the base . They had brought with them even more soldiers to join them in further festivities .
 Eight revolutionaries were killed and, within a week, the rest of the rest had all been captured . Eight of the revolutionaries died and the rest were all captured .
 Sixty-nine of the rebels were brutally tortured and then killed in prison . Most of them were tortured before being killed in jail .
 Castro used the trial as an opportunity for publicity, railing against the Batista regime . Castro denounced the torture and murder of the prisoners and demanded that the perpetrators be brought to justice . The trial was the first of its kind in Cuba .
 His defense statement, “History Will Absolve Me,” would become the most famous of his speeches . However, his defense statement would be his most famous .
 The text would later be smuggled out of the prison, written in lemon juice between the lines of letters he would write to his friends and family . The text was later smuggled out to be smuggled into the prison .
 Castro ended up in the Isle of Pines prison, which had been built by General Machado in 1931 . The prison was built to house increasing numbers of political prisoners . It was built in 1931 to house growing numbers of prisoners .
 When Castro and his rebels arrived, they quickly adopted it as a training ground and school . The Castro regime used it to be a training school and a rebel training ground .
 Castro maintained more strict controls on the behavior of his men than did the guards themselves . Castro maintained strict control of his guards' behavior .
 If the men were ordered by the guards to get up at 6:00 a.m., Castro would make them get them up at 5:30 . Castro would order the men to get out of bed at 5.30 p.m. if the guards ordered them to do so
 The rebels became noted for their impeccable behavior and were given more freedoms . The rebels were noted for being impeccable and given more freedom . They were also noted for having impeccable behaviour .
 They eventually began offering classes in Cuban history, grammar, geography, and English . They eventually offered classes in Cuba history and grammar .
 Castro was put in solitary confinement for 14 months as punishment for organizing fellow prisoners to sing a revolutionary anthem during a visit by Batista . At one point, Castro was placed in solitary for fourteen months . Castro was not allowed to see Batista's visit .
 By the following year, enjoying the support of the U.S. government, he felt secure in his control over the country . The next year, he would be able to control the country again .
 Less than two years after their failed attack on Moncada, Castro and his men walked out of prison . Castro's men were sentenced to 15 years in prison .
 Castro continued to publish attacks on the government . After two dissidents were severely beaten by Batista’s thugs and one was killed, he was increasingly worried about his safety .
 Two months after leaving the Isle of Pines, Castro decided to leave Cuba for Mexico . Two months later, he decided to move to Mexico . Castro left Cuba in 1961 .
 Castro contacted Alberto Bayo, a former soldier in the Spanish Civil War and expert on guerrilla warfare . Bayo was running a small furniture shop in Mexico . Castro contacted Bayo and asked him to travel to Mexico to meet Bayo .
 Castro's forces in Mexico began as a small group of sixty or seventy, living in six rented houses . Castro’s forces in . Mexico began . as a group of . sixty or . seventy, he said .
 The members of each house were kept under strict control, forbidden to leave without permission or to visit any of the other houses . The members were forbidden from leaving without permission .
 Each house included a rebel tribunal that enforced the rules and meted out punishment, which, in at least one instance, included death . Each house was made up of members of the rebel council . The tribunal met with punishment, including death .
 Castro contacted former Cuban president Prío, who was living in Texas . Castro next contacted former President Castro, who is now in the U.S.
 The two met only once, but the elder politician agreed to give Castro $100,000 to finance the revolution . Castro and Castro met just once in 1961 . Castro was the leader of the Cuban revolution .
 Castro agreed to give Prío advance warning before his assault, so that the two could coordinate their efforts . In exchange, Castro agreed that he would give him advance notice of the attack .
 Castro planned his attack to coincide with a simultaneous uprising on the island, led by Frank País, the head of a separate revolutionary movement . In fact, Castro had to intention of doing so, and instead planned to attack the island .
 Fidel met a man who would become central to the Cuban revolution . Fidel met him in Mexico in the early days of the Cuban Revolution .
 Ernesto “Che” Guevara was born in Rosario, Argentina, into an upper-class family . Che was born into an affluent upper-classes family .
 The son of a doctor and the eldest of five children, Guevara suffered from frequent and debilitating asthma attacks which would plague him his entire life . He suffered from severe asthma attacks throughout his life and suffered from asthma attacks .
 A doctor by the age of twenty-three, he set out on an odyssey through Latin America . He eventually moved to Mexico with his Peruvian wife Hilda .
 Guevara was already a self-described Marxist and was far more of an ideologue than Fidel . Fidel Castro and Chevara met at the start of the Cuban Revolution .
 Castro chose to launch his revolution from the Mexican port of Tuxpan . Castro chose the port to launch the revolution from his homeland .
 He found a small, sixty-foot boat called the Granma that he bought from an American for $20,000 . He bought the boat from a man in the U.S.
 The boat was designed to carry at most twenty-five people and was powered by two small diesel engines . It is powered by a small diesel engine .
 The boat sat so low in the water that they were in constant danger of capsizing . When the eighty-two rebels finally took off, the boat was so low that it had to sit low in water . The rebels were eventually forced to abandon the boat .
 Like the Moncada attack, the assault on Cuba ran into problems from the start . The assault on the island of Cuba has been beset by problems .
 Two days into the voyage it became clear that the crossing would take at least seven days, instead of the estimated five . The landing would therefore miss the planned uprising in Cuba .
 On the fifth day, still at sea, the rebels heard news over the radio of País’ attempted revolt, and its bloody defeat by Batista . The rebels were still on the ship when they heard news of the failed revolt .
 On December 2, 1956, the rebels landed, or as Che would describe it, shipwrecked, at a muddy place called Purgatory Point . Che would later describe it as a "prisoner of war"
 Within an hour, Batista had learned of the force and had sent planes to strafe and bomb the area . Batista learned of his actions and had ordered planes to bomb and strafe planes .
 Castro says only twelve men survived the initial landing and attack . Castro: "Only twelve men survive" Castro says .
 The number was probably chosen more for its religious significance than its accuracy . Other historians have estimated the force to be either eighteen or twenty .
 The men marched for three days through the forest, covering just twenty-two miles . They were hounded by bombings and ground troops . The men covered just 22 miles .
 Che was wounded in the shoulder during the third day of the siege . Che was surrounded and attacked by a group of soldiers, during which he was wounded . Che died in hospital .
 The rebels hid in a sugarcane field, but with no food or water, they were forced to drink their own urine to survive . The rebels have been forced to live with no water or food and drink their urine to live .
 Eventually, the rebels reached the Sierra Maestra, where they settled among the rural peasants and began to regroup . Eventually, they settled in the rural countryside, and eventually regrouped with peasants .
 The locals, who felt no allegiance to Batista, received them warmly, providing food and supplies . The locals provided them with supplies .
 On January 17, 1957, Castro led his men, now numbering thirty-three, on their first attack, against a small garrison in La Plata . Castro's men now numbering 30, now number 33 .
 The rebels killed two soldiers and wounded five, and carried off a number of guns and munitions . Two soldiers and five wounded, including five wounded . Rebels killed two of the soldiers, wounded five .
 They also behaved according to their strict rules of morality, allowing wounded soldiers to receive medical aid and releasing all prisoners after the initial attack . The Taliban are known for their strict morality .
 Castro sent a rebel to Havana to bring back a foreign journalist . A month later Castro felt the time was right for some controlled media coverage, so he sent it to Havana . Castro felt it was the time to control media .
 Castro ordered columns of men to march past camp, then change uniforms and march back again, to make it appear that their forces were larger than they really were . Although the rebels still numbered less than fifty, Castro orders columns of troops to march back and change uniforms .
 Castro even had one of his officers interrupt the interview to say that a separate regiment of troops had just arrived, a regiment that never in fact existed . At one point one of Castro's officers interrupted the interview and said that a new regiment was just arriving .
 The ploy worked, and Matthews wrote a three-part story about the massive build-up of rebels in the mountains .
 Castro began to clash with other members of the revolution, especially Frank País . As the movement grew, Castro clashed with others, especially País, who were involved in the revolution .
 País continued to lead the guerrilla movement in the cities, a much more difficult and dangerous operation . País had survived the failed uprising in December, but had continued to fight for the government .
 A strong, handsome, and charismatic leader, he was one of the few people who dared to challenge Castro's control . He often clashed with Fidel Castro on how to organize the rebellion .
 País came from an upper-class background and was vehemently anti-Communist . País was vehemently opposed to the Communist Party .
 He wanted to replace Castro’s strict top-down hierarchy with a more democratic and decentralized structure . Castro wanted to change the structure of the Cuban government . He wanted a democratic and democratic structure .
 País was being tracked ever more closely by Batista and his men . Batista's men were following País closely closely . País died in 1953 at the age of 25 .
 Despite appeals for support to Castro, País was eventually surrounded in one of his hideouts and killed by an assassin . País had appealed to Castro for support but was eventually killed by a sniper .
 Popular support for the rebels continued to grow, and more and more Cubans joined their forces . The rebels' popularity grew in Cuba in the 1980s .
 In March 1958, Raúl Castro was given command of the Second Front, based in Oriente . The Second Front began to operate semi-independently of the Sierra Maestra group .
 Raúl showed his talent as a military tactician, capturing or destroying many of Batista's planes, trains, and military vehicles . Although still under his brother’s command, he captured or destroyed many of his brother's planes .
 In April of the same year, Fidel called on the people of Cuba to participate in a general strike, which he hoped would spark a nationwide uprising . Fidel hoped that the strike would spark an uprising .
 When Batista heard about the strike he gave orders to execute anyone who participated . Batista ordered the execution of anyone who disobeyed him .
 Batista's harsh response only served to increase Castro's popularity . Batista’s harsh response to the Castro assassination only increased his popularity . However, the response to Castro's assassination of Fidel Castro was only positive .
 By the end of the summer it was clear that the tide was beginning to turn . The tide began to turn in the summer .
 Batista's troops put up practically no resistance, either giving up town after town or deserting to rebels . Batista’s troops were either deserting or giving up towns or actually deserting the rebels .
 By November the rebels controlled almost all of the transportation lines in Oriente . They were moving slowly but surely toward Havana . By November they had control of almost all transportation lines .
 On the night of December 31, 1958, Batista resigned and fled the country .
 Castro and his men left at dawn for Santiago, arriving on January 2 . Fearing a takeover by a military junta, Castro's men left for Santiago . Castro arrived in Santiago, Chile, a month after the coup .
 Archbishop Enrique Pérez Serantez had baptized him and helped get him freed from prison . He was flanked on one side by the new president, Manuel Urrutia, a quiet judge who joined the rebel army .
 Che Guevara and Camilio Cienfuegos entered Havana and took control of Cuba on the same day . The Cuban Revolution was first organized by the Cuban Revolution in the 1920s .
 In grand style, Castro chose a symbolic march toward Havana at the head of the victorious rebel army . Castro chose the symbolic march to Havana in grand style . Castro's march was a symbolic victory for the Cuban rebels .
 The march took five days, and he used every opportunity to showcase in front of the masses .
 He started in the back of a jeep, wearing his olive-green uniform with his precious M-2 rifle with its telescopic sight slung across his shoulder and a cigar clenched between his teeth . He started with his beloved rifle, his precious rifle .
 Fidelito joined Fidelito for the final entrance to Havana . Fidelito was riding on the back of a captured military tank when he entered the Cuban capital .
 The victorious rebel army, numbering only 7,250 fighters, had defeated Batista’s 46,000 U.S.-armed troops . The victorious rebels had defeated the Batista army, which had been in control of the country since 1953 .
 Castro had warned his soldiers against looting and destruction of property . Castro had told them not to loot and destroy property in advance .
 Afterward, the Student Directorate sheepishly returned the arms . The arms were returned to the students .
 Castro’s base of power lay in his blindly loyal rebel army, most of whom were illiterate peasants . Most of Castro's loyal army was illiterated peasants . Castro was overthrown by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 He realized that he would need the help of educated people to actually run the country, he said . He said that he realized that . He realized . He would need to help him to run the government .
 Castro himself was content to be supreme commander of the armed forces, while keeping his closest allies in the background . Castro's closest allies were kept back from the public eye . Castro was content with Castro himself as supreme commander in Cuba .
 Castro began to lay the foundation of a parallel system of power, in which he held complete control . Behind the scenes, Castro began the foundation for a parallel power system, he says .
 Fidel brought together many of his old friends from the movement, including Raúl Castro, Che Guevara, Camilio Cienfuegos, and Alfredo . Under the name “Bureau for Revolutionary Planning and Coordination,’s “
 The worst incident occurred in Santiago de Cuba, where seventy prisoners were killed by rebel soldiers at the command of Raúl Castro . The prisoners were then dumped in a mass grave .
 Three of Batista’s most notorious thugs were put on public trial in the athletic stadium in Havana . The trial was held in the sports stadium in the city of Havana .
 In May 1959, Castro instituted a program of agrarian reform, nationalizing foreign holdings on the island, especially those of the U.S. sugar producers . Castro instituted the program in May 1959 .
 He also created the National Agrarian Reform Institute, which gave structure to his hidden government .
 INRA was responsible for nearly all decisions, including the building of infrastructure . In fact, INRA is now responsible for almost all decisions .
 InRA was supported by the reconsolidated military, the Revolutionary Armed Forces, under the control of Raúl Castro . INRA was backed by the reconolidated military under Castro . In the 1980s, INRA became the first state-run state of
 With the INRA, backed by the Revolutionary Army, making the political decisions, there was little need for the puppet government . If you don’t support me, YOU are the ENEMY, you are the enemy, he says .
 By July, Castro had decided that he no longer needed President Urrutia . Castro decided to step down from the post .
 Castro announced his resignation on July 16, saying he could no longer work with the president . Castro accused the president of betrayal and accusing him of betrayal .
 As planned, the Cuban population responded with massive protests and calls for Urrutia’s removal . The Cuban government responded to the protests, calling for his removal .
 Urrutia disguised himself as a milkman and took refuge in the Venezuelan embassy before going into exile . Humiliated and fearing for his safety, he hid himself in the embassy .
 He cemented his control by placing his most loyal allies in key positions of power . He placed loyal allies into key positions in power positions .
 Fidel put Raúl Castro in control of the military and made Che Guevara director of Cuba’s Central Bank, despite his complete lack of any relevant economic experience, director of the Central Bank . Fidel also made Raúal Castro control the military, while Che G
 In October, Huber Matos, a former Sierra Madre fighter, sent Fidel Castro a letter of resignation . He was in charge of the economically important Camagüey province, Cuba . Castro has been in power for more than a decade .
 In it he expressed his concern with the direction of the government and his wish to return home . In the letter, he also expressed his desire to return to the UK .
 He did emphasize that he continued to support Castro and wished him success in the future . He did say that he still supports Castro .
 Castro ordered Matos’ arrest, as well as that of forty officers who shared his views . To Castro, however, anyone not wholly supportive of his regime was his enemy, he said .
 Fidel settled with having Matos sentenced to twenty years in prison . Raúl wanted Matos shot, but Fidel settled for having him sentenced to 20 years . Matos was convicted of a crime of attempted murder .
 Camilio Cienfuegos died under suspicious circumstances . Soon afterward, he was reported to have died of suspicious circumstances in a car crash .
 Having removed all allies even remotely suspected of being disloyal, Fidel and Raúl turned their attention to external security . Having removed allies, they turned the attention to the external security.
 After taking power, they incorporated many soldiers and officers from Batista’s army into the Revolutionary Armed Forces, which numbered approximately 100,000 by the beginning of 1960 . Many soldiers from the Batista's army were incorporated into the revolution .
 The army was supported by hundreds of thousands of lightly armed militias, recruited from the general population . Additionally, the army was also supported by thousands of heavily armed militias .
 Militia members were expected to use guerrilla tactics to combat any attempted invasion . These militia members are expected to fight back any attempt .
 With Castro’s blessing, interior minister Ramiro Valdés created a new secret police organization . The G-2 was supported by the Committees for the Defense of the Revolution . Their task was to track down suspected saboteurs and traitors .
 Castro soon began to silence critical media, shutting down newspapers, radio stations, and television stations . Like Batista before him, Castro soon shut down critical media outlets .
 Castro traveled to the U.S. less than six months after taking control of Cuba . Castro's first visit as head of state was in April 1959 .
 President Dwight Eisenhower went on a golfing vacation, leaving Vice President Richard Nixon to meet with Castro . President Eisenhower was in the midst of a crisis in the United States .
 CIA was already making plans for Castro’s removal, and the U.S. government applied pressure to block the international sale of arms to Cuba . In fact, the CIA was making plans to remove Castro from Cuba .
 Castro signed an agreement to trade Cuban sugar for various Soviet products in February 1960 . Castro made contact with the Soviet Union, and signed a deal to trade sugar for Soviet products .
 In July, Raúl Castro traveled to the Soviet Union and reached an agreement with Nikita Khrushchev for a program of military aid . The Castro-led Cuban government reached a deal with the Soviet leader in July .
 The leadership of the USSR was wary of the Castro brothers and not yet convinced that it wanted Cuba as an ally . Nevertheless, the leaders of the Soviet Union were wary .
 Castro ordered the American-owned refineries in Cuba to process oil imports from the Soviets . Castro also ordered the U.S. owned refineries to process the Soviet-made oil .
 Eisenhower cut 700,000 tons from the United States annual purchase commitment, in what Castro would describe as the American “Dagger Law” The law was designed to stab the revolution in the back, Eisenhower said .
 Castro countered by nationalizing all U.S.-owned agricultural and industrial firms on the island . Castro then nationalized all large commercial businesses still under private control .
 The American Mafia alone had to write off about $100 million of their holdings in the tourist industry . The Mafia wrote off more than a quarter of their profits in tourist tourism .
 Cuban nationalizations created a huge expatriation of the Cuban middle class . These nationalizations also created a massive expatriating of the country's population .
 Between 1960 and 1962, 200,000 highly educated citizens fled the island, mostly settling in Florida . The island's most educated citizens settled in Florida, most settling in the state .
 These included doctors, engineers, technicians, economists and scientists . Scientists, engineers and technicians were among those at the top of the list .
 He planned to speak at the United Nations and wanted to attract the world’s attention, he said . "He planned to talk at the U.N. and wanted the world's attention," he added .
 Castro’s convoy gathered up their luggage, piled into cars and drove to the U.N. building . Castro's convoy was followed by dozens of reporters . Castro was accompanied by hundreds of other dignitaries .
 Castro confronted the secretargeneral, Dag Hammarskjøld, and told him they would either sleep in the UN building or in Central Park . Castro confronted Hammarsjøld and said they would sleep either in the building or Central Park.
 The entire convoy set off for the seedy Hotel Theresa, in the middle of Harlem, where they settled in .
 Fidel received the leaders of the non-aligned movement, including Indian premier Jawaharlal Nehru and Egyptian premier Gamal Abdel Nasser . Nikita Khrushchev welcomed Fidel with a big bear hug .
 The Cubans had been offered a steeply discounted room rate of only $20 per day at the Shelburne Hotel . They wound up paying more for their rooms at the Hotel Theresa .
 Castro was offered free rooms at the Commodore Hotel near the UN building . Castro had stormed out of the Shelburne and stormed into the building .
 Castro spoke for four and a half hours, until even his allies were on the verge of falling asleep . Castro spoke at the UN General Assembly meeting, where he spoke for hours .
 President Eisenhower gave the green light for the organization and training of a group of Cuban exiles to invade Cuba in 1960 .
 On January 3, 1961, the United States officially broke diplomatic ties with Cuba . The U.S. broke diplomatic relations with Cuba in 1961 . Cuba was the first country to officially break diplomatic ties to the U.K.
 When John F Kennedy replaced Dwight Eisenhower as president of the U.S. less than three weeks later, he inherited the planned invasion .
 The CIA and State Department considered several landing sites for the invading forces . The Bahía de Cochinos, or Bay of Pigs, was the site of the invasion of Cuba .
 The bay covered a thirty-mile long stretch of coast, in an isolated and swampy region . The bay was covered by a 30-mile-long stretch of coastline .
 On April 15, the United States made a surprise attack on the Cuban air force in an attempt to disable Castro’s planes . Prior to the invasion, the U.S. made an attack on Cuba's air force .
 Castro ordered mass arrests of anyone suspected of being involved in an invasion force . Castro ordered the mass arrests after the air raids . Castro says the arrests were made in response to the raids .
 By the time the invaders landed, between 100,000 and 250,000 people had been thrown in prison, scuttling chances for a larger popular revolt . Between 100,00-250,000 were thrown in jail by the invaders .
 Invasion Brigade 2506, escorted by American destroyers, reached the southern coast of Cuba on April 17, 2014 . The invasion brigade was the first to arrive in Cuba .
 The force, which had left from Nicaragua three days earlier, numbered 1,511 men, all of them Cuban exiles . The force had left Nicaragua 3 days earlier . All the men were Cuban exilees .
 The troops landed at dawn at Girón and Larga beaches, but had great difficulty slogging through the swamp to the shore . The troops had to slog through a swamp to shore .
 Many of their small boats got stuck in the reefs, and when they waded ashore their walkie-talkies became wet, cutting off communication . Many of the men's small boats were stuck in reefs .
 The Americans were so confident that they had destroyed the Cuban air force that they did not even put anti-aircraft guns in place for defense .
 Cuban planes had scuttled the largest ship, the Houston, and forced a second ship back out to sea, leaving the invading force completely unsupported . By 6:30m., the Houston was scuttling and the Barbara was forced back to sea .
 At the same time, there were 25,000 Cuban troops and more than 200,000 armed militia in the area . The area was also home to more than 250,000 people .
 The battle ended when the invading force ran out of ammunition . Within sixty-five hours, after heavy losses on the Cuban side, the battle was over .
 The rest escaped into the swamp or disappeared into the Cuban population . The rest of the survivors are now living in the swamp .
 Five were executed, and the rest were eventually traded back to the U.S. in exchange for medical supplies worth $53 million . Five of the executed, five were executed . The rest were traded back in the United States .
 Dozens of trials were held in front of revolutionary tribunals, resulting in nine executions . Dozens of people were executed in the revolutionary trials .
 At the same time, his regime began cracking down on anyone suspected of disloyalty to the revolution . The regime cracked down on those suspected of being disloyal .
 Catholics, Protestants and members of the Santería cult were also thrown into labor camps . Catholics and Protestants were thrown in labor camps as well as members of Santeria cult .
 Male and female prostitutes were jailed, as were homosexuals . Homosexuals had to wear prison uniforms with a large letter “P” on their back, for “pimpillo” or pretty boy’s .
 Soviet leaders in Moscow were still dubious about taking responsibility for Cuba’s national defense . The Soviet leaders still were skeptical about the Cuban defense .
 In traditional New Year’s message to friends and allies, they wished Castro, “success in the creation of a new society,” but made no mention of his statement . In their traditional New Years message, the Obama administration wished Castro success .
 State Department moves to bring charges against Cuba in the Organization of American States . State Department calls for a meeting of foreign ministers to discuss Castro’s removal .
 In February 1962, the U.S. government imposed a total economic blockade of Cuba, causing the loss of some $600 million in foreign currency earnings . The blockade was caused by a total embargo of Cuba . Cuba was forced to withdraw from Cuba in February 1962 .
 The following month, Castro was forced to place restrictions on basic products . Castro's government placed restrictions on food and other products .
 Cubans were given a book of coupons which were supposed to guarantee them access to a fair share of food and other products . Rations were imposed, and Cubans given a small book of coupon coupons . Cubans had to be given a ration of food, other food, and other
 Castro blamed the shortages on the U.S. embargo and the move pushed Cuba even closer to Moscow . Castro blames the shortage on the United States embargo on Cuba .
 In May, the Politburo in the USSR decided to offer Castro the stationing of Soviet missiles on the island . Castro was offered the offer in May .
 The original plan called for forty mobile ballistic missile launching pads, with a range of between 1,100 and 2,200 nautical miles . It was originally intended to launch forty mobile missile launch pads . The launch pads were designed to launch 40 missiles at a distance of 1,000 n
 By mid-July, shipments of equipment and weapons began to arrive in Cuba . The Cuban government began sending weapons and equipment to the island .
 Major Richard S Heyser flew a U-2 plane over the San Cristobál area of Western Cuba and recorded evidence of nuclear missile launch sites .
 For five days President Kennedy and his advisors struggled over whether to take preemptive military action or blockade the island until weapons were withdrawn, or to reach a political deal .
 They reasoned that a military air strike might not guarantee the destruction of all missile sites and nuclear weapons, but it would almost certainly result in a Soviet response . The Soviets feared a strike would not guarantee destruction of missile sites .
 Kennedy announced a military blockade around the island, which would be lifted only after all nuclear weapons had been withdrawn . The blockade would only be lifted after the withdrawal of nuclear weapons was complete .
 A military strike by Cuba on any country in the Western Hemisphere would be countered with a nuclear attack on the Soviet Union by the U.S. President George W. Bush also announced a military strike on Cuba would be countermandated by the United States .
 All U.S. strategic missile units were placed on highest level of alert . 250,000 troops were put on standby for a possible military landing on Cuba .
 Castro sent a letter to Khrushchev urging the Soviets to launch a nuclear strike against the U.S. if it attempted to invade the island . Castro also urged the Soviet Union to attack the United States if it tried to invade .
 American U-2A spy plane was shot down over Cuba by Soviet ground-to-air missile . Major Rudolf Anderson, Jr. was the pilot of the plane . He was killed in the attack .
 The missiles would be removed from Cuba in exchange for a U.S. agreement not to mount an invasion of Cuba nor support an invasion by a third party . Kennedy was urged to respond with force, but he resisted and the next morning Khrushchev officially announced that the missiles had been
 Neither Khrushchev nor Kennedy had consulted him, and in the end he only heard about the agreement through radio and newswire reports . The agreement was signed by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 From then on, the Soviets would continue to offer significant economic aid to Cuba . The relationship would be little more than one of convenience .
 Khrushchev invited Castro to cover up his humiliation by making a forty-day trip through the Soviet Union . Castro was humiliated by the humiliation of his trip .
 The gesture of reconciliation included assurances of generous amounts of economic aid . The gesture was part of an agreement between the two countries .
 The U.S. government also took several steps to improve ties with Cuba .
 Back-channel communications were restarted between Havana and Washington . Kennedy hinted at ending the economic embargo if Castro stopped supporting guerrilla groups in Latin America .
 This warming of U.S.-Cuban relations was derailed when Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, on November 22, 1963 .
 Castro was outraged when he heard about attempts being made to link him to the assassination . Castro said he was outraged that attempts had been made to connect him with the assassination attempt .
 Che Guevara, meanwhile, had grown into the ideological brains of the revolution . He was a key figure in the Cuban revolution .
 By 1963, Che’s socialist idealism had begun to conflict with Soviet economic plans for Cuba . Che's idealism clashed with the Soviet plans to develop Cuba's economy .
 The nation’s agricultural output fell by 23 percent, leaving a foreign trade deficit and lower living standards . Cuba's agricultural output dropped 23 percent leaving living standards lower throughout society .
 As the regime’s industry minister, Che was held responsible . He openly criticized aspects of the regime, including its close ties to the Soviets . Che was also held responsible for the regime's close ties with the Soviet Union .
 Castro signed a five-year agreement to sell Cuban sugar to the Soviet Union at a price above the world-market rate . The following year, he signed a deal to sell the sugar at a higher rate .
 In 1964, Castro agreed to remove Che from his ministry post and allow him to deal instead with foreign policy . Che was removed from his post and allowed him to focus on foreign policy in 1964 .
 Che began making long trips abroad to support foreign struggles for independence and armed revolutions . Che publicly denied having quarreled with Castro, but he spent less and less time in Cuba .
 Castro agreed to send a battalion of Cuban soldiers and tanks to help Algeria in its armed conflict with Morocco . Castro traveled to Algeria, after agreeing to send troops to help the Algerian government in its conflict .
 Previously, he had given Cuban military aid to the Algerian National Liberation Front in its struggle against France .
 Che visited Angola, Mozambique, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, the Congo, Senegal, Ghana, Tanzania, and Egypt . Che visited various areas in Africa where colonial struggles were taking place .
 Che gave a speech criticizing the Soviet Union’s economic practices in Algiers, Algeria . Che called for an end to Cuba's trade agreements with the Soviets . Che died at the age of 50 in 1953 .
 When Che returned to Cuba on March 15, 1965, he was brought before Fidel and Raúl . During their closed-door meeting, the friendship among the three finally ended .
 Che left Cuba on April 2, without saying goodbye to Fidel, and set off for the Congo . Che left the country without saying farewell to his father, Fidel .
 He joined a group of guerrilla fighters around Laurent Kabila, who would eventually become that nation’s dictator . He joined the guerrilla movement in the 1990s .
 Back in Cuba, Castro had announced sweeping changes to the agrarian system . Castro had embarked on what would be a series of agricultural fiascos .
 The Cuban trade deficit with the USSR had mushroomed to $4 billion, so Castro tried to increase agricultural production . Castro wanted to increase production of agricultural products .
 His first plan revolved around the sugar harvest, and he announced a target of 5. million tons for 1965, increasing to 7 million tons and eventually reaching 10 million tons by 1970 .
 Castro called 1970 “the year of the ten million tons,” but from the beginning, more realistic observers doubted whether the target could be achieved . Castro calls 1970 ‘the year’s year”
 Castro poured all of Cuba’s energy into the sugar cane harvest, leaving almost all other economic activity at a standstill . Castro poured the country's energy into a sugar crop harvest .
 Virtually the entire Cuban population was put to work cutting cane . Mothers, children, pensioners, white-collar workers, and the military were among those who worked .
 Castro himself cut cane for four hours almost every day . Even visiting foreign dignitaries were asked to cut cane, and Castro himself .
 Christmas was abolished for 1969, and growing cycles were changed to allow for more production . Growing cycles were also changed in order to allow more production to be made .
 It soon became clear that the target was indeed impossible to achieve. Worse yet, it soon became . Worse . Yet, it was soon clear that it was impossible to . achieve.
 In July 1970, Fidel was forced to announce that the ten million tons had been a failure . The ten million tonne of cocaine was found to be a failure.
 In his usual style, he made an impassioned plea to the people and announced his resignation . He made a speech at the end of his speech to the nation .
 The Cuban population responded with their support and he quickly returned to power . The Cuban government responded to their support .
 Castro became increasingly interested in the techniques and science of farming and animal husbandry in the early 1960s . Castro became interested in farming techniques and farming techniques in the 1960s and '60s .
 His ideas and schemes to improve Cuban agriculture abounded . His ideas included a campaign to rid the island of all weeds, and a plan to produce a Cuban Camembert .
 In 1964, he invited a noted French agronomist, André Voisin, to make a lecture tour of Cuba . He invited André to Cuba for a lecture on agriculture .
 When Voisin arrived, Castro arranged an exuberant series of dinners, social events, lectures, and sightseeing tours . Castro arranged dinners, lectures and tours of the city .
 On December 21, after three weeks of being feted, Voisin suffered a heart attack and died while visiting a state farm .
 Castro continued to look for ways to improve the Cuban agricultural industry, this time in dairy production . Undaunted, Castro continued his efforts to improve Cuba's agricultural industry .
 Cuba had a population of cattle in the millions, mostly the indigenous Cebú variety . Prior to the revolution, Cuba had had a cattle population of millions .
 The cattle were well-adapted to the tropical climate, but were notoriously poor producers of milk . They were well adapted to the climate but poor milk producers .
 American Holsteins languished during the dry season but produced far more milk . American Holsteiners languished in dry season, but produced much more milk during dry season . Holstein's milk production peaked during the wet season .
 Fidel ordered the purchase of several thousand of the most expensive Holsteins from Canada from Canada . Fidel ordered several thousand more of the highest-end Holstein .
 Within a few weeks, nearly one-third died in the intense Cuban heat . Within the first few weeks of the Cuban summer, nearly a third died .
 Castro ordered the construction of special air-conditioned dairy farms, a move that might have benefited André Voisin had he thought of it earlier . Castro then ordered the . construction of air-constructed dairy farms .
 Castro next announced a plan to cross-breed the Cebú cattle with the imported Holsteins . Castro also announced plans to cross breed the cattle with imported Holstein .
 The resulting F-1 hybrid, he claimed, would inherit the vigor of the tropical cows with the productive capacity of the purebreds . The resulting hybrid will inherit the strength of tropical cows and productive capacity, he said .
 Castro poured resources and propaganda into the project . Ignoring the protests of animal husbandry experts and breeders, Castro pounced on the idea .
 One cow, named Ubra Blanca, or White Udder, became so famous that after her death Castro ordered her stuffed and placed in a museum . After her death, Castro ordered that she be stuffed .
 The resulting F-1s were still producing less than half the milk of the average American Holstein . Even fifteen years later, the resulting F1s still produced less than 50% of the milk .
 Fidel Castro had dreams of glory . Fidel Castro was the ruler of a small country . He was trying to gain international recognition .
 By the end of the 1970s he was providing aid to thirty-five Third-World countries . By the 1980s he had given aid to over 30 countries .
 Cuba has a lower infant mortality rate and a higher life expectancy than the U.S. Even today, Cuba's infant mortality rates are lower than the United States .
 Castro wasted a lot of his nation’s limited resources in support of dubious military ventures, including the bloody civil war in Angola and a war between Ethiopia and Somalia . However, Castro also wasted his country's limited resources on dubious ventures .
 Castro’s international efforts reached their peak when Havana played host to the Sixth Non-Aligned Conference . Castro made Castro its official spokesman for the next four years . Castro was Castro's spokesman at the conference .
 In 1965 the U.S. declared its willingness to accept any Cubans who sought asylum . In 1965, the United States said it would accept Cubans seeking asylum in the country . Cubans were granted asylum in 1965 .
 Over the next six years, so many Cubans chose to flee the country that there were fears that almost one in every five Cubans would emigrate . Over the past six years there was fears that one in one of every five Cuban citizens would leave the country .
 The loss of income and of skilled labor, the “brain drain, was considerable,” Castro said . Castro finally forbade the flights .
 Between 1959 and 1980, a total of 800,000 people are estimated to have left the island . The island was home to more than 1,500,000 inhabitants .
 A bus crashed through the front gates of the Peruvian embassy in Havana, killing a guard . The exodus came to a head on April 1, 1980, when a bus crashed into the embassy's front gates .
 Castro made a tactical error, removing all protection from the embassy . Outraged, Castro removed all protection . Castro removed the embassy from Havana Square .
 Cubans flooded into the compound after news spread that no one would be prevented from entering or leaving the grounds . Cubans were allowed to enter or leave the compound when the news was announced .
 10,000 people descended upon the embassy, occupying nearly every square inch . Within five days, the embassy was filled with people .
 Costa Rican President Rodrigo Carazo offered to allow Cubans to go to his country . The Peruvian government refused to accept the refugees . Costa Rica's president has offered to accept Cubans .
 Castro responded by announcing that anyone in the embassy grounds could go home, pack their bags, and leave for wherever they wanted . Castro responded to the situation by saying that anyone who wanted to go home could pack up their bags .
 The next day hundreds of families from all over the country left Cuba . Hundreds of boats packed with families left Cuba for the next day .
 By September, an estimated 125,000 people had fled the country, many headed for the U.S. Many of them were headed to the United States .
 Photographs and video of the massive exodus were shown around the world, delivering a blow to Castro’s image of Cuba as a socialist paradise . The exodus was seen as a major blow to Cuba's image of a communist paradise .
 Between 1959 and 2000, 10 to 15 percent of Cuban population fled the country, with a majority of them settling in Florida . It is estimated that between the 1959 revolution and the year 2000, between 2000 and 2009 .
 A worldwide slump in sugar prices drove Cuba’s debt to the West from $2. billion in 1983 to $6 billion in 1987 . The debt to Cuba rose to $7 billion in 1986 . Cuba's debt to West rose to nearly $10 billion in 1988 .
 Cuba's debt to the Eastern bloc rose to almost $19 billion . Even worse, the Cuban debt to Eastern blocs rose to nearly $20 billion .
 The Soviet Union tried to save Castro’s Cuba by increasing trade between the two countries . Castro's Cuba was ruled by the U.S. in the 1950s .
 In 1989 the Communist governments in Eastern Europe fell apart and all economic agreements with them became worthless . In 1989, all economic deals with them with them were worthless .
 In the early 1990s, a series of hurricanes swept across Cuba, decreasing sugar production even more and causing almost $1 billion in damage . To make matters worse, in the early 90s, the hurricanes also decreased sugar production .
 The struggling economy meant that military spending had to be scaled back . Restrictions placed on food and household supplies were also imposed .
 Milk was available only for children and those with special needs, and soap, detergent, toilet paper, and matches were precious commodities .
 Cooking oil and flour were distributed only on a limited basis, as were fruit, jam, and butter . Fruit, jam and butter were also distributed in limited quantities .
 Every two years citizens were entitled to buy four pairs of underwear or bras, two pairs of socks, one shirt or blouse, and four meters of material to make trousers or dresses . Citizens also had to buy socks, socks, shirts, blouses and trousers .
 At the same time, the black market shot up from $2 billion to $14. billion in less than four years . The black market has shot up to $15 billion in value .
 Energy consumption was slashed by fifty percent, and electricity became sporadic throughout the country . Energy consumption cut by 50 percent .
 Tractors were replaced with ox carts, and people began to wait two to three hours for infrequent city buses . Tracters were replaced by ox carts and people were forced to wait for hours for buses .
 In 1993 Castro gave Cubans permission to start private businesses, mostly in the service sector . Faced with an economy on the verge of collapse, Castro gave permission for Cubans to start their own businesses .
 President Obama signed a law allowing foreign investors to own Cuban businesses in almost every area of the economy . The right had been limited to the tourist industry . The following year, he enacted a law that allowed foreign investment in almost all areas of Cuba's economy .
 Cuba’s economic output, which had declined 40% between 1989 and 1994, stabilized and began to grow . Cuba's economic output was stabilized and grew in 1994 .
 The Helms-Burton Act strengthened the thirty-five-year-old embargo against Cuba in 1995 . It included a ban on any loan or financial assistance to the island . A stipulation that the embargo could only be lifted once a transition government was in power in Cuba that moved
 The act also required the return of all property seized by the rebels from U.S. citizens .
 The biggest beneficiary of Castro’s economic reforms has been the military, which is run by his brother Raúl . The military has been a major beneficiary of the economic reforms .
 The Ministry of Armed Forces manages GAESA, a conglomerate of businesses involved in tourism, mining, consulting, construction and international trade . GAESA employs at least 20% of Cuban workers .
 Since the early days of his revolution, Castro had had difficulty with the Catholic Church . Castro had been involved with the church since the revolution began .
 In 1962, Pope Pius XII excommunicated Castro after his announcement that he was Marxist-Leninist . Castro was ex-communicated by the Pope in 1962 after he announced he was a Marxist Marxist .
 From that point on, Castro restricted and persecuted the church and its followers . Castro's persecution of the church began in 1959 .
 Much of its property was confiscated and many members of the clergy were expelled from the country . Much of the church's property was seized and many of its clergy members were expelled .
 In 1998, Pope John Paul II was invited to tour Cuba and give large public masses . In 1998 he toured Cuba and gave a large public mass .
 The pope spoke out against the human rights abuses within the country . He encouraged greater cooperation and reconciliation between the church and Cuba .
 Castro approved nineteen visas for foreign priests to take up residence in the country . Castro approved the visas in the same year that same year . The visas were approved for priests to live in the United States .
 Cubans allowed to celebrate Christmas as a holiday for the first time since the 1960s . He also allowed Cubans to celebrate a Christmas holiday for first time in decades .
 The 1990s found Fidel an aging, lonely dictator . Fidel Castro was a lonely dictator in Cuba .
 He quit smoking his trademark cigars in 1985, as part of an anti-smoking campaign on the island .
 He kept up his practice of not sleeping in the same place more than two nights in a row . He now travels in a column of three bullet-proof Mercedes limousines with a heavily armed guard .
 By 1999, the Cuban National Assembly approved a series of measures that increased penalties for crimes . The measures included a death penalty for drug-related crimes and longer prison sentences for robbery .
 Sentences of up to twenty years were threatened against anyone providing information to the U.S. government or any foreign enemy or collaborating by any means with foreign media .
 At the time, an estimated 110,000 people, roughly one percent of the population, was serving time in prison or labor camps . At the same time, around one per cent of the country's population was in jail or labor camp .
 Castro was imposing more restrictions on domestic liberties . Cuba was rising to power in the international sphere, but Castro imposed more restrictions .
 In 1971, an open letter was published in the French paper Le Monde in response to the arrest of Cuban poet Heberto Padilla . The letter criticized the repressive system in Cuba .
 Signatories included authors of both the left and the right, including Jean-Paul Sartre, Simone de Beauvoir, Mario Vargas Llosa, Carlos Fuentes, Susan Sontag, and Gabriel García Márquez . The signatories included Jean-
 Arnaldo Ochoa Sánchez was a general in the Cuban army . He was a veteran of the Sierra Maestra, the Bay of Pigs and guerrilla campaigns in Venezuela, the Congo, Ethiopia, Angola, and Nicaragua .
 The popular Ochoa had become a magnet for disaffected army officers and veterans . He gathered at his house in increasing numbers of people .
 Castro ordered Ochoa and three other high-ranking officers arrested for drug smuggling . Castro: Sensing a threat, Castro ordered the arrests . Castro says the arrests were a response to a drug threat .
 The trial was a sham, and it received worldwide attention when all four were given death sentences, despite the fact that the maximum sentence for drug smuggling was twenty years in jail . All four were sentenced to death sentences . The maximum sentence in drug smuggling is 20 years in prison .
 Ochoa maintained his innocence, and his allegiance to the regime, until his execution by firing squad . He maintained that he was innocent until his death .
 With Ochoa’s execution, Castro sent a strong message to the increasingly disillusioned military that he would tolerate no dissent within the armed forces or society in general . The execution is a strong signal that Castro would tolerate dissent .
 In March 2003, Castro took advantage of the world’s preoccupation with the U.S. invasion of Iraq to crack down again on political activists and dissidents . Castro used the situation in Iraq to take advantage of that, and then again cracked down on dissidents .
 Cuban police arrested seventy-eight journalists, political students, and independent librarians . They were charged with conspiring to overthrow the government . Cuban police also arrested political students and journalists .
 Most were sentenced, in closed-door trials, to between fifteen and twenty-eight years in prison . Most of them were sentenced to between 15 and 20 years in jail .
 Over the next year, fourteen of the dissidents were released, but the majority have remained in prison . The majority of those who have been released have remained behind bars .
 Cuban activist Oswaldo Paya delivered a petition to the Cuban National Assembly with more than 14,000 signatures . Paya is demanding a referendum to change the Cuban political system and protect civil liberties .
 Marita Lorenz recruited by the CIA in a plot to kill Castro using a pill made from shellfish toxin . Lorenz was Fidel Castro’s former translator and lover .
 At the last moment, she could not bring herself to go through with the plan, and instead flushed the pill down the toilet . At the end of the procedure, she flushed it down the drain .
 Two years later, a barman by the name of Santos de la Caridad was hired to slip a botulism pill into Castro’s milkshake during his weekly visit to the bar .
 The pills stuck to the inside of the freezer and shattered as they were being removed . The plan was foiled, however, when the pills stuck inside .
 Santos was too nervous to pick up the pieces of the pills and put them in the drink . Santos said he was nervous to put the pills in his drink because he was scared .
 The CIA even devised a plan to slip Castro a substance that would make his beard fall out, thus humiliating him and causing him to lose the respect of the Cuban people .
 Fidel Castro remains superstitious about certain dates and numbers . The former Cuban president is superstitious over certain numbers .
 He attaches great importance to the number 26, having been born in 1926, on April 13 . He started his conspiracy against Batista in 1952, at the age of twenty-six . He was born April 13, 1926, and is believed to be the most important number 26 .
 The attack on the military base in Moncada, for which Castro chose the date, took place on July 26, 1953, and his revolutionary movement took the name The 26th of July Movement . Castro chose his date of attack, which was the date of the attack .
 Le Pen lost to None of the Above in the French presidential election . The French presidential candidate has not been invited to the Beijing Winter Olympics .
 I was granted access to the 2022 Beijing Winter Games, but I will not be going . I'm not going to Beijing, but will not go to the Games. I was given access to access to 2022 Winter Olympics, but not the Games .
 Marjorie Taylor Greene, in Reversal, Promotes Vaccinations . Most victims of Covid are not vaccinated and most of them are Republicans, she says . Greene says she is not going to China because of the intrusive surveillance bubble imposed by the Chinese government .
 In the days following the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, many people could not understand why anyone, anywhere, would not like Americans, even if it was just a few dozen fanatics . A 20-year update of the attacks on 9/11 has been updated to reflect on
 President Joe Biden announced that United States troops were launching an invasion of the Caribbean island nation of Grenada . Back in 2001, I tried to address this question in a short essay I wrote one month after the attacks .
 Pentagon officials predicted that complete takeover of Grenada would go quickly and without U.S. casualties . Considering that Grenada does not have an army, Pentagon officials predict it would happen quickly . Grenada is not an army .