 Lessons Learned” Wednesday at 6 p.m. in the City View Room at 1957 E Street . Wednesday is 6m. at 6p. ET .
 All-day symposium will discuss new evidence on the crisis in the State Room . GW Professor of History and International Affairs James Hershberg recently provided insight into the events leading up to it .
 President Kennedy warned not to send such “offensive’s weapons to Cuba . Both types of missiles reached the island with their warheads despite the U.S. “quarantine” Kennedy imposed .
 Khrushchev initially blasted the quarantine as piracy on the high seas and vowed to defy it . But within less than two days, before it went into effect, he ordered Soviet naval commanders to turn around rather than confront American ships . That avoided firing the first shots and killing hundreds or thousands
 Both Kennedy and Khrushchev feared it might be spiraling out of control and acted to end it before that happened . Then, as the crisis climaxed, they acted to stop it before it spiraled . Kennedy passed the word to the Soviets that those missiles would be gone if the
 Kennedy laid the groundwork to accept such a trade publicly or tighten the blockade around Cuba rather than actually order an invasion of Cuba and risk uncontrollable escalation . He was appalled to receive a letter from Castro urging him to launch a nuclear strike against the United States .
 Both Kennedy and Khrushchev agreed that it was too dangerous to keep meeting at the brink . The most important impact of the crisis was that it scared the two leaders out of meeting .
 As for the ‘lessons’ of the crisis, these can be, and are, endlessly debated . The lessons of this crisis can be endlessly debated, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 History never repeats itself precisely precisely, but it can sometimes rhyme . As the cliché goes, history never repeated itself precisely . But it does rhyme, and history can rhyme.
 Khrushchev ultimately was willing to do so—and if he hadn’t ‘blinked’ first, Kennedy would probably have done so as well . Kennedy would have probably done so if he had been able to, he did .