 None Dare Call It Conspiracy was completed in December, 1971, when the text for our book was completed, it was December 31, 1971 .
 Nixon imposed wage and price controls in August of the same year . Inflation had been ‘harnessed’ thanks to the wage controls Nixon imposed in August .
 Gerald Ford's only claims to fame were that he had been appointed to the Warren Commission which investigated President Kennedy’s death as safely as possible . He was second banana on the popular ‘Ev and Jerry show’ where Senate Minority Leader Everett Dirksen dragged House Minority leader
 George McGovern was talking about running for president but nobody took it seriously except George himself, and Jane Fonda . Jane Fondes was one of the first women to run for president in the '60s .
 Ronald Reagan was Governor of California, and as such was disappointing his loyalists by appointments and policies which seemed so at odds with his campaign promises . Reagan was disappointed by appointments which seemed to be so far from his campaign promise .
 Angola and Mozambique were still part of the Portuguese colonial holdings . Angola was part of Portugal's colonial holdings of Mozambica and Angola . It was the first time the country had been granted independence .
 Kaddafi had recently been an enlisted nobody in the Libyan army, and who knew anything at all about Libya other than Bunker Hunt, whose oil and equipment holdings were expropriated by the Libyans the follow . The West’s governments and the “Seven Sister”
 There were no Sandinistas, no “contras,” and if someone said Grenada, we conjured up images of a Spanish love song . Grenada was Grenada in the 1980s and '90s, but Grenada is still Grenada .
 Mao was still doing his best to toss the Chinese people, body and soul, back to the dark ages . Mao was trying to toss them back to 'dark ages' Mao was doing his utmost to keep them alive .
 Members of the ‘Gang of Four’ were not in prison, they were the wardens . They were wardens, not prison wardens. The gang was members of the Gang of Four .
 The Soviet Union had just suffered its umpteenth crop failure, but had firm control over its Eastern European satellites . The world was going to be a much safer place, thanks to the SALT I treaty . The treaty was signed in 1961 .
 The Reagan administration still honors it years after it legally lapsed . Maybe that’s why the Reagan administration is honoring it .
 The only energy crises in August of 1971 was that felt by the owner of your friendly local service station . August 1971 was the only energy crisis in August 1971 . August was the first month of the month that the country was experiencing an energy crisis .
 Gloria Steinem still looks good enough to be invited to share her opinions on the “Tonight” show . Steinem was invited to appear on "Tonight" show .
 In less than fifteen years, the whole world has been tossed upside down and then back again . The whole world was thrown upside down in less than 15 years, says President Obama .
 No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means without the prior written permission of the Publisher, except brief quotes .
 Dedication For my children, Bick, Kye, Keely, Kerry, Birch, Larry Jr., Joseph, Patrick, Genny, Lorin and Lorin, and Joshua .
 May they know the peace that comes with ‘the fight for freedom’ and the self respect that is the result of meeting ones responsibilities—no matter what the cost . May they also know the self-respect that comes from meeting responsibilities .
 For my mother and late father who always encouraged me to “be my own man,” I’m grateful for them, and for their support, they say .
 I shall thank those who were so much a part of my work, that without them it couldn't have happened . And since I don’t want to try and list them all for fear of the embarrassment of excluding someone, I will thank them for their support .
 Gary North, whose unrelenting pressure on me to “get it done” was only surpassed by his brilliant contributions and technical help . Gary North was the force behind the development of this article .
 Next is William Hoar, for his genius as a researcher and crystal clear understanding of the enemy we face . Next is Hoar for his work in the field of research .
 Without Bill, even Gary’s nagging would have delayed this effort untold months,’S. ‘Bill’ said. “Without Bill, this effort would have been untold months," he said . ‘Without Bill’
 A special thanks goes to my friend, Chip Wood whose talents are only surpassed by his patience . Chip Wood is a great writer and photographer .
 I can’t thank enough my cherished friend Scott Stanley for his encouragement and suggestions, or my assistant, Nancy Potts for all her dedicated attention to getting all the pieces in the right place at the right time .
 Pat Easter bought the first copy months before there was a manuscript . Bobby Hansen, whose contribution will help “sell a million” and Pat Easter who bought the . first copy of the manuscript .
 Gary Allen gave a three-hour speech on the subject of conspiracy which Gary Allen heard . He gave the speech to Gary Allen, who also gave a speech on conspiracy .
 Gary suggested that they flesh out the presentation and make it into a book . Gary suggested making the presentation available to make it a book.
 People on my various mailing lists still send it to me from time to time, in order to introduce me to the story of the Conspiracy —fifteen years later . People still send me the story to me .
 The events of the last fifteen years have served Larry’s thesis quite well, he says . Larry says, “The events of this year have served him quite well.”
 As far as Larry is concerned, the history of 1970-85 has been a kind of giant grab-bag of goodies that reinforce his original thesis . David Rockefeller of the Trilateral Commission in 1973, and the creation of Jimmy Carter in 1976, he says .
 The Conspiracy View of History is a view of the conspiracy view of history . The conspiracy view is the view of American history .
 "The world is not now, nor has it ever been, an impersonal product of random material forces," he says . The world has never been a product of material forces, he says. The world is now a matter of fact .
 This struggle is not simply personal, however, it is inherently conspiratorial . This struggle not only is personal, but it's also conspiratorial, and conspiratorial. This is not only personal, it's conspiratorial: conspiratorial and conspiratory .
 It is a conspiracy which affects every area of life, including politics, it is claimed . It affects every aspect of life - including politics - and it affects the world, it has been claimed .
 In David’s day, there was a conspiracy among the kings of the earth against God . David's day, David says, was the day of a conspiracy against God against the king .
 "For as long as there is history and sin, members of this conspiracy will be enraged at righteousness," says Obama . "They will be enraged at righteousness" says Obama's administration . "The conspiracy will never be able to be satisfied with righteousness"
 They ‘breathe together’ against God and God’s law, and also against all those who are faithful to God, or who may not even believe in God, but who are . faithful to . God's precepts, they say .
 Lewis creates a science fiction story about a government-funded scientific research organization . The organization is hierarchically controlled by systematically evil men who intend to suppress the liberties of the whole population .
 Lewis understood that rationalism and materialism can combine with magic is remarkable enough; that he understood it in the 1940’s is astounding . Lewis understood rationalism, materialism and magic can combine .
 Conspiracies are organized groups of people who maliciously plot to undermine whatever it is you believe in . Conspiracy is organized groups that maliciously try to undermine what you believe about .
 There are always fringe groups who have not yet “seen the light,” and who plot against goodness and true justice . Those who believe in goodness need to defend themselves by stamping out these illegal groups .
 These groups are clearly illegal, since good and just people get their rulers to pass laws making such conspiracies illegal . These groups were clearly illegal in the U.S., since good people get laws making them illegal .
 It is not like the conspiracy of the Bolsheviks against the Czar’s establishment, it is said . It was not like a conspiracy by Bolsheviks, it was by Czar's establishment . It's not like Bolsheviks. It's a conspiracy against the establishment .
 What we are facing is a successful conPrologue XV spiracy of the American Establishment against the Constitution of the United States . Everyone who was intended by its authors to be protected by that Constitution should be protected .
 Everyone knows this, even when the evidence points to other conclusions, it's always wrong . Everyone knows that, even if the evidence is wrong, it is wrong .
 The Establishment interpretations of every presidential assassin after John Wilkes Booth invariably conclude this. Booth was the assassin of President Lincoln Lincoln . Booth was assassinated by Booth in 18th century . Booth shot Lincoln Lincoln to death in 1865 .
 We know that several boarders at Mary Surratt’s boarding house were involved . Several boarders were involved in the murder of Mary Suratt .
 After all, one of them tried to kill Secretary of State Seward the same night . One of them was killed by a member of the Seward family .
 An amateur historian named Otto Eisenschiml got a book published, Why Was Lincoln Murdered? The book reveals evidence that points to Stanton, the Secretary of War, and other anti-Lincoln Radical Republicans, as possibly involved .
 This is not the sort of conspiracy which is discussed in college classrooms in U.S. history—or any other history . The conspiracy is not discussed in the United States history .
 Rushdoony remarked in 1965 that “The successful and continuing conspiracies of history are never admitted to be conspiracies.” He added that history “never admitted to conspiracies”
 Their known activities are extolled as virtues and patriotic works, never as illicit activities . The men's known activities were extolling as virtues, never illicit activities, never .
 None Dare and Cleon Skousen argue that America’s present rulers are the heirs of a band of “bloodless revolutionaries” They pulled off a true revolution in the United States, though a nearly invisible revolution, in the early decades of this century .
 The kinds of questions they want asked are the only kinds of . wise (and prudent) men do ask, and wise and prudent men do .
 The kinds of answers that they want investigators to come up with are the answers that wise men do come to with . The answers are the only kinds of questions wise men have come to, says CNN's John Sutter .
 In short, they have established that elusive but powerful ‘climate of opinion” which governs the affairs of men . In the world, the world has a powerful but powerful climate of opinion, which governs its affairs .
 The clergy, the judiciary, and university professors were targeted a century ago by conspiratorial groups . Those institutions in Western civilization that have been marked by robes were targeted by conspirators .
 "They did everything they could to capture the leadership of each group, in order to mold public opinion," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "They tried to capture everything from leadership to public opinion"
 "You can eventually lose control to other dedicated conspiratorial groups," he says . "I don't want to see you lose control of the world," he adds .
 Control over people’s access to information, and more importantly, control over the moral and theoretical principles that govern their interpretation of information, is essential . Therefore, control is essential for people to understand what they see and what they think about .
 "No civilization has ever fallen to outsiders that did not first suffer a loss of faith in its first principles," says George W. Bush . Bush: No civilization ever fell to outsiders, but it did not fall to outsiders who had faith in first principles .
 It argues that what the conspirators have done is to short-circuit the true meaning, and true limitations on the federal government, of the U.S. Constitution .
 XVili Call It Conspiracy challenge the prevailing misinterpretations of the Xlioni Call it Conspiracy . XVili call it Conspiracy challenges prevailing misinterpretation .
 Most people are afraid of calling attention to this capture of power, for in doing so, they would themselves become targets of the accusation that they had become ‘treasonous” or “conspiratorial” They would be accused of being ‘conspirators against
 In short, the success of the conspirators can be seen in their ability to make their critics look like conspirators . The success of this is seen in making their critics appear to be conspirators, says the author .
 It is a shift which they find difficult to control any longer, and which threatens their monopoly of influence . It is the shift they find hard to control, and threatens their influence .
 This shift has taken place since 1972, the year None Dare was published . It is the first time None Dare has been published since that year .
 This is why the new edition could become far more influential (and far more dangerous to the conspirators) than the first edition . The new edition of the book could become more influential and dangerous than the original .
 Federal legislation will protect the People, for the People have so willed it, says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: Federal legislation is needed to protect the people . Cruz says the bill will be passed by Congress .
 We can almost see Dorothy in front of the screen, with the Wizard’s glaring face looking out at her . We can also almost see the Wizard's glaring face staring at her as Dorothy .
 Toto is behind the curtain, pulling at the old man’s pants leg . Meanwhile, Toto pulls a toto out of Toto's pants leg and pulls at his pants leg.
 They’ve even gone to the expense of training and employing three generations of professional historians to explain to you why nothing important is going on back there . ‘I’m not going to be able to go back there,’ says the historian .
 So, go ahead, tear back the curtain, read this book, and then you be the judge .
 Rushdoony, “The Conspiracy View of History,” in his book, The Nature of the American System, 140.5 . He says the conspiracy view of history is a conspiracy theory .
 Mr Nixon was sitting comfortably in the White House in 1972 . Vietnam war was being “wound down” by an “accord,” inflation had been “harnessed” thanks to the wage and price controls that Nixon imposed in August of the same
 Gerald Ford’s only claims to fame were that he had been appointed to the Warren Commission . He had been the second banana at the popular “Ev and Jerry show,” when Senate Minority Leader Everett Dirksen would drag out House Minority Leader Jerry for weekly press conferences
 | went from a conservative young idealist who thought he knew how the world worked to an investment banker and “deal doer” who found out first-hand . During the intervening years he went from an idealist to a banker and deal doer .
 In these past 14 years, I have traveled in most regions of the world; I have sat in board rooms of some of the very banks and multi-national corporations mentioned in the original book . I have had an opportunity to see “up close and personal” some of those
 The arguments for the existence of a Conspiracy are stronger today than they have ever been, especially when we lay them alongside what was said and written before . The arguments are strong today than ever were, especially in the modern world .
 Chapters one through seven will remain the same as in None Dare Call It Conspiracy . Chapter seven is going to remain a part of the book .
 The bracketed updates are new, and so are chapters eight through 13, plus appendices . The brackets are new .
 It has often been said that the best way to value what anybody says or writes is to look back at what he had said in 6 Call It Conspiracy the past .
 It is without apologies that I say to you now, gentle reader, “Check the record.” So it is without apology that he says, ‘Check the records.’
 Rare books are still the only really critical accounts of Reagan that are written by a conservative . Steffgan now refuses to allow the books to be reprinted .
 Mosr OF United States has had the experience of trying to discover the “hidden picture” within another picture in a children’s magazine . Mosr of U.S. has written a book about how to find the hidden pictures in a magazine .
 Usually you are shown a landscape with trees, bushes, flowers and other bits of nature . This is the first time you have been shown a new landscape in the new series of episodes .
 Try as you might, usually you could not find the hidden picture until you turned to a page farther back in the magazine which would reveal how cleverly the artist had hidden it from us . The hidden picture was often found in the pages of the magazine .
 If we study the landscape we realize that the whole picture was painted in such a way as to conceal the real picture within, and once we see the “Teal picture,” it stands out like the proverbial painful digit .
 We believe the picture painters of the mass media are artfully creating landscapes for us which deliberately hide the real picture . We believe that they are artful creating landscapes .
 In this book we will show you how to discover the ‘hidden picture’ in the landscapes presented to us daily through newspapers, radio and television . The book will also show how to find the “hidden pictures’s hidden picture”
 Once you can see through the camouflage, you will see the donkey, the cart and the boy who have been there all along all along . The donkey, cart and boy who has been there were all along.
 Millions of Americans are concerned and frustrated over mishappenings in our nation . Millions of us are concerned about our nation's national security . Millions are frustrated and concerned about the government .
 They feel that something is 7 8 Call It Conspiracy wrong, drastically wrong, but because of the picture painters they can’t quite put their finger on it . They feel something is wrong, they can't quite put it on it, they say .
 We keep electing Presidents who promise faithfully to halt the worldwide Communist advance, put the blocks to extravagant government spending, douse the fires of inflation, and toss the criminals into the hoosegow where they belong . We need to reverse the trend which is turning the country into a moral sewer
 Despite high hopes and glittering promises, these problems continue to worsen . Yet, despite high hopes, they are continuing to worsen, they continue to do so .
 Each new administration, whether Republican or Democrat, continues the same basic policies of the previous administration .
 It is considered poor form to mention this, but it is true nonetheless. It is true that it is considered 'poor form' to mention it .
 We are supposed to think it is all accidental and coincidental and that therefore there is nothing we can do about it . We should think it's all accidental, coincidental, and therefore there are no laws to stop it happening .
 We believe that many of the major world events that are shaping our destinies occur because somebody or somebodies have planned them that way . We believe the major events that occur in the world occur because of someone or somebody planning them .
 Half of the events affecting our nation’s well-being should be good for America . If we were merely dealing with the law of averages, half of the things affecting our country's well being good for the nation .
 If we were dealing with mere incompetence, our leaders should occasionally make a mistake in our favor, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "If we're dealing with incompetence, we should be dealing with it."
 We shall attempt to prove that we are not really dealing with . coincidence or stupidity, but with planning and brilliance . We shall try to prove this is not . coincidence, stupidity or stupidity . But with planning, brilliance and brilliance, we will be able to win .
 This small book deals with that planning and brilliance and how it has shaped the foreign and domestic policies of the last six administrations . It deals with the planning and brilliant planning of the U.S. government .
 We hope it will explain matters which have up to now seemed inexplicable, that it will bring into sharp focus images which have been obscured by the landscape painters .
 Don’t Confuse Me With Facts 9 believes in the conspiracy theory of history . Of course, no one in this modern day and age really believes in conspiracy theory .
 When you think about it, there are really only two theories of history, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "There are two theories: History and science," he says . Sutter: "History and science are very different"
 Either things happen by accident neither planned nor caused by anybody, or they happen because they are planned and somebody causes them to happen . Either way, someone causes something to happen, or somebody causes it to happen.
 In reality, it is the ‘accidental theory of history’ preached in the unhallowed Halls of Ivy which should be ridiculed . The “accidental history” of history should be mocked, says the author .
 If you believe it is all accidental or the result of mysterious and unexplainable tides of history, you will be regarded as an ‘intellectual’ who understands that we live in a complex world . If you think it is accidental or a result of unexplained and unexplained tides of
 Most scholars follow the crowd in academic thinking just as most women follow fashion . Primarily, most scholars follow academic thinking like fashion .
 Professors and pontificators profess to be tolerant and broadminded, in practice it’s strictly a one way street — with all traffic flowing left . In practice, professors and pontiffs profess to being tolerant, broadminded .
 A Maoist can be tolerated by Liberals of Ivory-Towerland or by the Establishment’s media pundits . The Establishment can tolerate a Maoist, even though it is not a Communist Party .
 To be a conservative, and a conservative who propounds a conspiratorial view, is absolutely verboten . But to be conservative and a conspirator is absolutely banned, he says .
 People have over the years acquired a strong vested emotional interest in their own errors. Secondly, these people have over . The people have acquired a . strong vested . interest in the . own errors, they say . Secondly, they have a strong . vested . emotional interest .
 Most people are reluctant to admit they have been conned or have shown poor judgment . Most people don't admit they are conned, or show poor judgement .
 To inspect the evidence of the existence of a conspiracy would force many of these people to repudiate a lifetime of accumulated opinions, he says . The evidence would force them to repudate a lifetime .
 It takes a person with strong character 10 Call It Conspiracy indeed to face the facts and admit he has been wrong even if only because he was uninformed . It took a strong character to admit he was wrong even though it was wrong .
 It was only because he set out to prove the conservative anti-Communists wrong that he happened to end up writing this book . The book is only available in the UK now .
 Politicians are attracted to the concept that events are propelled by some mysterious tide of history or happen by accident . Politicians and “intellectuals” are attracted by the concept of some mysterious tides of history .
 Most intellectuals, pseudo or otherwise, deal with the conspiratorial theory of history simply by ignoring it . Most intellectuals ignore it by ignoring the conspiracy theory .
 “objective” scholars resort to personal attack, ridicule and satire . If and when the silent treatment doesn’t work, they resort to ridicule, satire, satire .
 The idea is to force the person exposing the conspiracy to stop the exposure and spend time and effort defending himself, the author says .
 The most effective weapons used against the conspiratorial theory of history are ridicule and satire .
 These extremely potent weapons can be cleverly used to avoid any honest attempt at refuting the facts . These extremely powerful weapons can't be used to defeat any honest attempts to refute the facts, say experts .
 Rather than be ridiculed most people will keep quiet; and this subject certainly does lend itself to ridicule and satire . Rather than being ridiculed, most people keep quiet, says the author .
 One technique is to expand the conspiracy to the extent it becomes absurd, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com . The conspiracy to expand conspiracy to become absurd, he says .
 Some conspiratorialists do indeed overdraw the picture by expanding the conspiracy to include every local liberal activist and government bureaucrat . Some conspirators do indeed over-rearce the picture .
 These people do not help to expose the conspiracy, but, play into the hands of those who want the public to believe all conspiratorialists are screwballs . These people are not helping to expose conspiracy, they are playing into the public's hands,’s .
 To ascribe everything to the machinations of a small group of power hungry conspirators is overly simplistic, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 On the other hand nothing is more simplistic than doggedly holding onto the accidental view of major world events . On the contrary, it is a simplistic view of the world events.
 In most cases Liberals accuse all those who discuss the conspiracy of simply being paranoid . Liberals accuse liberals of being paranoid, but they say they are not . Liberals say conspiracy conspirators are simply paranoid .
 With the leaders of the academic and communications world assuming this sneering attitude towards the conspiratorial (or cause and effect) theory of history, it is not surprising that millions of innocent and well-meaning people, in a natural desire not to appear naive, assume the attitudes and repeat the
 These persons assume their mentors’ air of smug superiority even though they themselves have not spent five minutes in study on the subject of international conspiracy . These persons, in their attempt to appear sophisticated, assume their mentor’ .
 Organized conspirators use PID, real and imagined, as an excuse to build a jail for us all . They ignore the fact that organized conspirators are using PID as a jail, they say .
 Most of the world has been in PID since time immemorial and it takes incredibly superficial thinking to ascribe to PID the U.S. government to the idea .
 Czechoslovakia was one of the world’s most modern industrial nations . Cuba had the second highest per capita income of any nation in Central and South America .
 It's not true that there are no members of the intellectual elite who subscribe to the conspiratorial theory of history . It is not true, however, that there is no member of the elite who subscrib to conspiracy theories .
 Quigley has all the ‘liberal’ credentials, having taught at the Liberal Establishment’s academic Meccas of Princeton and Harvard . He has taught at Princeton, Harvard and Yale .
 Quigley reveals the existence of the conspiratorial network which will be discussed in this book . The conspirator network is revealed to be the reason for the book .
 The Professor is not merely formulating a theory, but revealing this network’s existence from firsthand experience . "The Professor" reveals the existence of the network from firsthand experiences .
 He also makes it clear it is the network’s secrecy and not its goals to which he objects .
 In other words, this power seeking clique wants to control and rule the world . In other . words, they want to rule and control the world. In . other . ways .
 Don't Confuse Me With Facts 13 all individual actions . Even more frightening, they want total control over Don’t Confuse me With Facts . The group also wants total control of Don‘Confusion Me with Facts 13 .
 It wants control over all natural resources, business, banking and transportation by controlling the governments of the world . It wants to control the world's finances, business and transportation .
 In order to accomplish these aims the conspirators have had no qualms about fomenting wars, depressions and hatred . The conspirators are not afraid to foment wars, they say, but they want to create wars and create hatred .
 They want a monopoly which would eliminate all competitors and destroy the free enterprise system . They want to eliminate all . competitors and eliminate the free . enterprise system, they say .
 Professor Quigley is not the only academic who is aware of the existence of a clique of self-perpetuating conspirators whom we shall call Jnsiders . We shall call them "Jnsiders"
 Other scholars find the same individuals at the scenes of disastrous political fires over and over again . Other scholars have concluded that there is obviously an organization of pyromaniacs at work .
 If they challenged the Jnsiders head-on, their careers would be destroyed . But intellectually honest scholars realize that if they challenged them, they would have been destroyed . Jnsider: "If they challenged, they'd be destroyed"
 The author knows these men exist because he has been in contact with some of them . The author has spoken to some of these men in the past . He has also spoken to many of the men in his life .
 There are also religious leaders who are aware of the existence of this conspiracy . There is also a belief that religious leaders are aware .
 Godless society operates in an extremely efficient manner at least in its higher levels of leadership . Godless societies operate in an efficient manner, says President Obama .
 It makes use of every possible means at its disposal, be they scientific, technical, social or economic . It is the first time the government has taken steps to tackle the problem .
 It holds almost complete sway in international organizations, financial circles, in the field of mass communications; press, cinema, radio and television . It also holds sway in financial circles .
 Call It Conspiracy ing a person of the possible existence of a conspiratorial clique of Insiders . Insiders who from the very highest levels manipulate government policy . There are a number of problems to be overcome in the book .
 We are dealing with history’s greatest “whodunit,” a mystery thriller which puts Erle Stanley Gardner to shame . We're dealing with the greatest ‘whodunits,’ according to the author .
 If you love a mystery, you’ll be fascinated with the study of the operations of the Insiders . If you do study this network of which Professor Quigley speaks, you will find that what had at first seemed incredible not only exists, but heavily influences our lives .
 It must be remembered that the first job of any conspiracy, whether it be in politics, crime or within a business office, is to convince everyone else that no conspiracy exists . The first job in any conspiracy is to persuade everyone else to believe it exists .
 The conspirators’ success will be determined largely by their ability to do this, writes CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The elite of the academic world and mass communications media always pooh-pooh the existence of the Jnsiders merely serves to camouflage their operations . The elite in the media and academic world is always trying to hide their operations, the author says .
 Probably at some time you have been involved with or had personal knowledge of some event which was reported in the news .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Submit your best shots of life in New York City . Send photos of your favorite spots in the gallery for next week's featured news stories . Share them with CNN iReport .
 The reporter had time and space problems and there is a good chance the persons involved deliberately did not reveal all the facts . The reporter was unable to get the full story .
 Possibly the reporter’s own prejudices governed what facts went into the story and which were deleted . The reporter's own prejudices govern what facts were deleted from the story .
 Our point is that most people know from personal experience that a news story often is not the whole story . We're happy to clarify that there is a lot more to the story behind the story of the story .
 Many people assume that their own case is unique when really it is typical . But many of us assume that our own cases are unique . We assume that we are unique, but we are not unique to others .
 What is true about reporting of local events is equally true about the reporting of national and international events, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Psychological problems are also involved in inducing people to look at the evidence concerning the Jnsiders . Psychological problems also involved .
 Columbus told people the world was a ball and not a pancake, they were highly upset . Columbus said people were upset when he told them that it was not a ball, but a ball .
 They were being asked to reject their way of thinking of a lifetime and adopt a whole new outlook . They were asked to . reject their . way of . thinking of the . life and adopt new outlook.
 The ‘intellectuals’ of the day scoffed at Columbus and people were afraid they would lose social prestige if they listened to him . People were Don’t Confuse Me With Facts 15 .
 Flat-earthers heaped abuse on Columbus for challenging their view of the universe . And typical flat-arthers had such a vested interest involving their own egos, they heaped it on Columbus .
 Anyone exposing the Insiders will be the recipient of a continuous fusilade of invective from newspapers, magazines, TV and radio . Because the Establishment controls the media, anyone exposing Insiders is likely to be the target of a fusileade .
 In this manner one is threatened with loss of ‘social respectability” if he dares broach the idea that there is organization behind any of the problems currently wracking America . The idea of organization behind the problems is threatened by the left .
 Social status comes before intellectual honesty . Unfortunately, for many people social status comes first . Social status should be considered a matter of social status .
 Social position is more important to many people than is the survival of freedom in America . Although they would never admit it, social position is often more important than freedom . The U.S. is not a nation without freedom, but it is a nation of people who want freedom .
 If you ask these people which is more important — social respectability or saving their children from slavery — they will tell you the latter, of course . If you asked them which was more important, they would say the latter of course.
 People have infinite capacity for rationalization when it comes to refusing to face the threat to America’s survival . People have an infinite capacity to rationalize, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 Deep down these people are afraid they may be laughed at if they take a stand, or ostracised, they say . Deep down, they are afraid of being laughed at . Deeply down they fear they may have been laughed at by the public .
 Instead of getting mad at the Insiders, these people actually get angry at those who are trying to save the country by exposing the conspirators . Instead of being mad at them, they are actually getting angry at them .
 One thing which makes it so hard for socially minded people to assess the evidence is that conspirators come from the highest social strata . One thing that makes it hard for . socially minded . people to . assess evidence objectively is that . conspirator come from . the highest . strata
 Nobody enjoys being put in the position of accusing prominent people of conspiring to enslave their fellow Americans, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Many business and professional people are particularly vulnerable to the “don’t jeopardize your social respectability” pitch given by those who don't want the conspiracy exposed . Those who want to keep the conspiracy out of the public eye are especially vulnerable to it .
 The Insiders know that if the business and professional community will not take a stand to save the private enterprise system, the socialism through which they intend to control the world will be inevitable . 16 Call It Conspiracy takes a stand against socialism .
 They believe that most business and professional men are too shallow, too status conscious, too tied up in the problems of their jobs and businesses to worry about what is going on in politics . They say that most men are tied up with the problems and businesses of their lives .
 Such men are told it might be bad for business, or jeopardize their government contracts if they take a stand . They are told they might jeopardize government contracts or lose their business .
 We are hoping that the conspirators have underestimated the courage and patriotism remaining in the U.S. We hope that they have underestimated that the American people remain patriotic .
 We feel there are sufficient number of you who are not mesmerized by the television set; who put God, family and country above social status . Who will band together to expose the conspiracy of the Insiders?
 Diogenes scoured the length of the length and breadth of ancient Greece searching for an honest man . The philosopher spent his life looking for a man to be honest .
 We are scouring the length and breadth of America in search of hundreds of thousands of intellectually honest men and women who are willing to investigate facts and conclusions .
 Unlike 1971, the American people now have an inherent distrust of the national news media, and well they should . The American people are distrustful of the news media .
 Time after time we watch the handsome and mellow voiced anchormen of NBC, CBS, and ABC trash the defenders of freedom and glorify the high priests of Communist revolution . We are proud of the freedom of speech and freedom of expression .
 Nguyen Cao Ky of South Vietnam, Rhodesia, General Samoza of Nicaragua, and the Shah of Iran, are among the leaders of Rhodesia and Nicaragua .
 In every case, these men were replaced by overt Communists, or in the case of Iran, a madman . In Iran, Iran, they were replaced with overt Communists or madmen . In the past, Iran's leaders have been replaced by Communists .
 At this very moment we are watching the destruction of the anti-Communist leadership in South Korea, Taiwan, El Salvador, Chile, Chile and South Africa, and the Philippines . We are also watching destruction of anti-communist leadership .
 Before Professor Quigley died, Gary Allen and I had a chance to debate him about the contents of his book, Tragedy and Hope . Gary Allen: "Before he died, I was a great admirer of his work, I debated him about his book."
 In the fall of 1972, None Dare was starting to generate heated debate, especially on some radio talk shows . None Dare is one of the most popular radio stations in America .
 Abraham, Allen, and Quigley are the principal players in the film series . Abraham and Allen will appear in a special edition of this week's edition of The Rock and Roll .
 He accused us of not only quoting him out of context but fabricating statements out of whole cloth . He said we were fabricating quotes and fabricating them out of a whole cloth.
 Antony Sutton's career was destroyed when he challenged the Insiders head-on, he says . Sutton is the one of the most honest scholars in the world, Sutton says . He says he is proud of Sutton’s courage to stand up for the truth .
 Sutton’s access to State Department decimal files and other highly sensitive records produced results absolutely devastating to the Insiders . Sutton's access to the State Department files produced results that were devastating to Insiders.
 He proved conclusively that Western technology and money had not only propped up the Soviets but had actually saved them from disintegrating from within . Western money and Western technology had actually propped the Soviets up .
 95% of all Soviet technology has been imported or stolen from the West, he says . His estimate is that 95% have been stolen or imported from the west .
 Hoover Institute director says his services are no longer needed . Hoover Institute says he is no longer employed by the Hoover Institute .
 Socialism—Royal Road to Power for the Super-Rich Nosopy DISPUTES that Adolph Hitler existed . Chapter II Socialism: Royal Road to power for the super-rich .
 "The terror and destruction that this madman inflicted upon the world are universally recognized," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Hitler came from a poor family which had absolutely no social position . Hitler was born in poor conditions and had no social status . Hitler's family was poor and he had to live in a poor home in the poor .
 Lenin spent most of his adult life in poverty, yet he has been responsible for the deaths of tens of millions of our fellow human beings, and the enslavement of nearly a billion more . Lenin was the son of a petty bureaucrat, Lenin, but has been blamed for millions of
 Like Hitler, Lenin sat up nights in a dank garret scheming how he could conquer the world . Lenin sat nights in the garret, scheming what he could do to conquer world, says historian . Lenin was born Lenin in 1903 in the name of Lenin, Lenin died
 These men would be superbly educated and command immense social prestige . They would be able to pool astonishing amounts of money to carry out their purposes . The men would also command social prestige and would pool vast sums of money .
 It is difficult for the average individual to fathom such lust for power . It is not easy to imagine such lusts for power in the United States .
 The typical person wants to enjoy success in his job, to be able to afford a reasonably high standard of living complete with leisure and travel . He says the typical person is happy to have a good job and enjoy a good life .
 He wants to provide for his family in sickness and in health and to give his children a sound education . He said: "I want to give my children a good education. I want them a good job"
 He has no desire to exercise power over others, to conquer other lands or peoples, to be a king, he says . He says .
 Since he has no ‘lust for power,” it is difficult for him to imagine that there are others who do... others who march to a different drum, he says .
 There have been Hitlers and Lenins and Stalins and Caesars throughout history . Alexander the Greats throughout history. But we must realize that there have been . Hitlers . Lenins, Lenins . Stalinins, Caesarins and Alexander the .
 Like Columbus, we are now faced with the task of convincing you that the world is not flat . The world is flat, but it's not flat, and we need to convince you that it is .
 "The men at the apex of this movement are not Communists in the traditional sense," he said . The men are at the top of the movement, he said. "They're not Communists ... in a traditional sense"
 "These men certainly do not believe in the clap-trap pseudo-philosophy of Communism," he says . And these men certainly don't believe in Communism, he adds .
 Socialism is a philosophy which conspirators exploit, but in which only the naive believe . Socialist ideology is a 'philosophy' that only the 'naive' believe it is .
 How finance capitalism is used as the anvil and Communism as Socialism — Royal Road to Power for the Super-Rich 21 the hammer to conquer the world will be explained in this book .
 The concept that Communism is but an arm of a larger conspiracy has become increasingly apparent throughout the author’s journalistic investigations . The concept of Communism is becoming increasingly apparent in this article .
 He has had the opportunity to interview privately four retired officers who spent their careers high in military intelligence .
 Author has interviewed six men who have spent considerable time as investigators for Congressional committees . The author has also interviewed six people who have worked for Congressional investigators for Congress .
 In 1953, Norman Dodd headed the Reece Committee’s investigation of tax-free foundations . Dodd was one of these men who headed the investigation . Dodd is now a Republican senator .
 Mr Dodd began delving into the role of international high finance in the world revolutionary movement . The investigation was killed on orders from the Eisenhower White House .
 Mr Dodd discovered it is permissible to investigate the radical bomb throwers in the streets, but when you begin to trace their activities back to their origins in the ‘legitimate world,” the political iron curtain slams down .
 You can believe anything you want about Communism except that it is a conspiracy run by men from the respectable world. You can't believe anything about Communism . You can. believe anything . about Communism. except that . it is run by . men from a respectable world .
 It’s understandable to be concerned about Communism in Africa or Asia or South America with poverty, ignorance and disease, it's understandable to worry about Communism . It's not only about poverty and ignorance in Africa, it also about ignorance in South America and poverty .
 CNN.com's John Sutter writes a book on American attitudes toward Communism . The book is published by Simon Tisdall, a Pulitzer Prize-winning author .
 "If we stick to our survey we would find that ninety-nine percent of the people are anti-Communist," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 "We would probably be hard put to find anybody who would take an affirmative stand for Communism," says the Communist Party leader . "It's not easy to find somebody who would be willing to take a stand against Communism," he says .
 On the surface it appears that the charges made against anti-Communists concerned with the internal threat of Communism are valid . So, on the surface, they appear to be valid .
 Rather than the near unanimity previously found, we now have an incredible diversity of ideas . Rather than a near unanimous consensus of opinion, we have a 'incredible diversity' of ideas, experts say .
 "That is a totally simplistic question about an extremely complex situation. That is a completely simplistic question," he says . "That's a completely complex situation," he adds .
 Communism today, quite unlike the view held by the right wing extremists in America, is not an international monolithic movement . Communism is not monolithic, unlike the views held by right-wing extremists in the U.S., it is not a monolithic .
 It is a polycentric, fragmented, nationalistic movement deriving its character through the charismas of its various national leaders . It is not a single movement, but a nationalistic, fragmented movement with nationalistic character .
 If you think we are being facetious here, you haven’t talked to a political science professor lately . We're not joking here, but we're serious about it .
 For the above is the prevailing view on our campuses, not to mention in our State Department. For the reasons, it's not surprising that the U.S. State Department does not support the views of the American public .
 We have something here that almost everybody agrees is bad, but we cannot agree on just what it is we are against . Almost everybody agrees it is bad but not what it's against . We need to find out what we are fighting for, but it's not easy to do .
 You could take a sand lot team and successfully pit them against any major league team . Sand lot is a sandlot team that could be a major league contender .
 We have been watching one country of the world after another fall behind the Communist curtain, simply because we still do not understand the enemy . Thus it is not strange that for three decades we have been . watched one country . after another falling behind the . Communist curtain simply because . we still
 In keeping with the fact that almost everybody seems to have his own definition of Communism, we are going to give you ours . Then we will attempt to prove to you that it is the only valid one .
 Call It Conspiracy ism. You will notice that we did not mention Marx, Engels, Lenin, Trotsky, bourgeois, proletariat or dialectical material . We also mention Marx and Engels .
 "We said nothing of the pseudo-economics or political philosophy of the Communists," says the Communist Party . We said nothing about the pseudo economics or politics of the Communist party .
 These are the TECHNIQUES of Communism and should not be confused with the Communist conspiracy itself . The Communist conspiracy is not the same thing as Communism .
 Unless we all understand the conspiratorial nature of Communism, we don’t understand it at all . Unless we understand it, Communism is conspiratorial and conspiratorial .
 The way to bring down the wrath of the Liberal press Establishment or the professional Liberals is simply to use the world conspiracy in relation to Communism . The world conspiracy is a world conspiracy .
 We are not supposed to believe that Communism is a political conspiracy . We are supposed to be told that it is not a conspiracy, it is a conspiracy .
 We can believe that it is brutal, tyrannical, evil, or even that it intends to bury us, we will win the plaudits of the vast majority of American people, he says . We can be brutal or evil, we can believe it's evil, and we will
 Don't ever, ever use the word conspiracy if you expect applause, for that is when the wrath of Liberaldom will be unleashed against you . But don’t ever, never use the term conspiracy .
 We are not disallowed from believing in all types of conspiracy, just modern political conspiracy . We are allowed to believe in all kinds of conspiracy. Just modern political conspiracies. We need to be able to find out more .
 We know that down through the annals of history small groups of men have existed who have conspired to bring the reins of power into their hands . We know there have been conspirators in the past, including those of the past .
 Life magazine believes in conspiracies like the Cosa Nostra where men conspire to make money through crime . Life magazine even believes in conspiracy theories .
 Joseph Valachi testified before the McClellan Committee several years ago . Valachi's testimony was part of a series of articles published by Life magazine Life .
 That is how little we know about this group, despite the fact that it was a century old and had been operating in many countries with a self-perpetuating clique of leaders . The group's self-proclaimed clique has been operating around the world for decades .
 Today, one can hardly pick-up a newspaper or magazine without reading something on organized crime’s involvement in the drug trafficking business . Socialism— Royal Road to Power for the Super-Rich 25 is published by the Socialist Party .
 Life magazine, Time and Newsweek believe in some sort of conspiracy . We see that even Life magazine and Time magazine believe in conspiracy .
 Men like Lucky Luciano who have scratched and clawed to the top of the heap in organized crime must, of necessity, be diabolically brilliant and ruthless .
 Almost without exception, the men in the hierarchy of organized crime have had no formal education . But, almost without exception to some of the men, they have had little formal training .
 The book sold more copies in three months than Puzo sold of The Godfather in three years . Yet, our book sold . more copies than the Godfather sold in three .
 Let us suppose someone with this same Cosa Nostra type amoral grasping personality was born into a patrician family of great wealth . Then Harvard, Yale or Princeton, followed by graduate work possibly at Oxford . Then Yale, Princeton, Princeton or Princeton .
 In these institutions he would become totally familiar with history, economics, psychology, sociology and political science . He would also be familiar with economics, economics and psychology, psychology and sociology .
 Become a politician and work for political power or, better yet, get some politicians to front for you . Get some politicians for you.
 Conspiracy to seize the power of government is as old as 26 Call It Conspiracy government itself . Conspiracy to take over the government is old as government itself itself .
 We can study the conspiracies of Alcibiades in Greece or Julius Caesar in ancient Rome, but we are not supposed to think that men today scheme to achieve political power . We can learn from Alcibiade in Greece but not from Julius Caesar, says historian .
 You will find overwhelming evidence of patient planning . Whether you are studying Hitler, Alcibiades, Julius Caesar or a contemporary conspirator, you will find evidence of planning .
 In reality, Communism is a tyranny planned by power seekers whose most effective weapon is lying . Communism is planned by the power seekers, says the author of the book .
 Communism is a movement of the downtrodden masses rising up against exploiting capitalism . Communism is inevitable, and Communism is the result of the masses rising against capitalism, says Lenin .
 Let us go back to our imaginary survey and analyze our first big lie of Communism — that it is inevitable . Let us recall our first lie: 'It is inevitable' Communism .
 We asked our interviewee if he was for or against Communism and then we asked him to define it . You will recall that we asked about Communism in the interviewee's first question .
 Giving your opponent the idea that defending himself is futile, is as old as warfare itself, says the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 If you study Marx’s Communist Manifesto you will find that in essence Marx said the proletarian revolution would establish the SOCIALIST dictatorship of the proletariat . Marx said in essence that in . essence Marx . said the . proletarian revolution . would establish . the SOCALIST . dictatorship
 Marx said when the dictatorship of the proletariat had accomplished these three things globally after some undetermined length of time, the all-powerful state would miraculously “wither away” and state socialism would give way to Communism . Marx said that when the dictator of the . proletariat had
 Everything would be peace, sweetness and light and everybody would live happily ever after . Everything would have been peace, light and light .
 Socialism would be the excuse to establish the dictatorship, he says . " Socialism is the bait," he says. "It's the excuse for the dictatorship," he adds .
 Since dictatorship is hard to sell in idealistic terms, the idea had to be added that the dictatorship was just a temporary necessity and would soon dissolve of its own accord . The idea had the idea that dictatorship would soon be replaced by a democracy .
 The drive to establish SOCIALISM, is at the core of everything the Communists and the Insiders do, says the Communist Party . Socialism is a key to the Communists' success .
 If you hear an official Communist speaker, he never mentions Communism . "If you hear a communist speaker, you never mention Communism," he says . "I'm not a Communist. I'm a Communist," he adds .
 "He will speak only of the struggle to complete the socialization of America," he said .
 At a Communist bookstore you will find all their literature pushes this theme . At Communist bookstore, you find all the literature pushing this theme. At Communist bookstores, you can find all your literature pushing the theme .
 Others must be rubbing their eyes, for certainly the portents seemed all to the contrary . The portents seem all to be the contrary, but others are rubbing their shoulders .
 Galbraith then proceeds to list the giant steps toward socialism taken by the Nixon Administration .
 Many extremely patriotic individuals have innocently fallen for the conspirators’ line. Many innocent people have innoclessly fallen for it. Many are innocent .
 “Conservatives should be realistic enough to recognize that this country is going deeper into socialism and will see expansion of federal power,’s author says .
 Establishment promotes idea of inevitability of Communism through its perversion of terms used in describing the political spectrum . Establishment promotes the idea of the inevitability .
 We are told that on the far Left of the political spectrum we find Communism, which is admittedly dictatorial . We are also told that Communism is a dictatorial state of mind .
 We are also told that equally to be feared is the opposite of the far Left, i.e., the far Right, which is equally feared . The far Right is a totalitarian state of mind, but we are not afraid of the Left .
 Anarchy Communism Communism Communism Constitutional Fascism Republic . Republic Socialism Limited Govt.
 Chart 1 depicts a false Left-Right political spectrum used by Liberals which has Communism on the far Left and Fascism on its twin, Fascism . The ‘middle of the road” is Fabian Socialism .
 Chart 2 is a more rational political spectrum with total government in any form on the far Left . The entire spectrum is Socialistl Chart 2 . Chart 2 has total government or anarchy on the right .
 The U.S. was a Republic with a limited government, but for the past 60 years we have been moving leftward across the spectrum towards total government . Each new piece of socialist legislation. labeled Fascism. labeled Fascist. The United States. has been a Republic of limited
 We are constantly told that we should all try to stay in the middle of the road, which is termed democracy, but by which the Establishment means Fabian socialism . We are told we should try to stick with the Establishment, which means Fabians socialism .
 We are given the choice between Communism on one end of the spectrum, Naziism on the other end, or Fabian socialism in the middle . We are asked to choose between Communism and Fabian Socialism .
 Socialism— Royal Road to Power for the Super-Rich . 31 by a probably ninety percent of the people of the nation . He is not represented here, yet this spectrum is used for political definitions Socialism .
 If you have total government it makes little difference whether you call it Communism, Fascism, Socialism, Caesarism, or Pharaohism, it's not a matter of whether it's Communism or Fascism . If you want total government, there is little difference in whether it is Communism,
 It’s all pretty much the same from the standpoint of the people who must live and suffer under it . It's the same thing you say: "It's all pretty similar to the people living under it"
 If total government (by any of its pseudonyms) stands on the far Left, then by logic the far Right should represent anarchy, or no government . The far Right represents anarchy or anarchy, as well as total government, as far Left .
 Our Founding Fathers revolted against the near-total government of the English monarchy . The Founding Fathers were overthrown by the British monarchy .
 So they set up a Constitutional Republic with a very limited government, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The free enterprise system is not mentioned specifically in the Consitution, it is the only one which can exist under a Constitutional Republic . Free enterprise is not specifically mentioned in the Constitution, but it is only one that can exist in a Republic .
 All collectivist systems require power in government which the Constitution did not grant . The Constitution didn't grant the power of collectivist government to collectivists .
 Our Founding Fathers had no intention of allowing the government to become an instrument to steal the fruit of one man’s labor and give it to another who had not earned it, says President Obama .
 Jefferson knew that if the government were not enslaved, people soon would be . Jefferson knew if he didn't, people would soon be enslaved .
 Jefferson’s view that government governs best which governs least is best . Jefferson's view was that government governed best which governed least, Jefferson said . Jefferson: Government governs best and governs least .
 "Our forefathers established this country with the very least possible amount of government," says President Obama . President Obama has been criticized for his lack of government .
 Although they lived in an age before automobiles, electric lights and television, they knew human nature and its relation to political systems far better than do most Americans today . They understood human nature better than today's political systems better than most Americans do .
 Government was to provide for national defense and establish a court system . Primarily, government was to establish a national defense system .
 We have burst the chains that Jefferson spoke of and for many years now we have been moving leftward across the political spectrum toward collectivist total government . But we have burst Jefferson's chains, he says, but we have broken the chains .
 Every proposal by our political leaders carries us further leftward to centralized government . Every proposal is supposed to have the very opposite effect .
 Since all Communists and their Jnsider bosses are waging a constant struggle for SOCIALISM, let us define that term . Let us define the term: SOCIALism .
 Socialism is usually defined as government ownership and/or control over the basic means of production and distribution of goods and services . Socialism is defined by ownership and control of basic production, distribution and production .
 When analyzed this means government control over everything, including you . When analyzed, this means that government control of everything is controlled by the government .
 If the government controls these areas it can eventually do just exactly as Marx set out to do, it can destroy the right to private property, eliminate the family and wipe out religion .
 There is a vast difference between what the promoters define as socialism and what it is in actual practice . In reality, there is a huge difference between socialism and socialism, says David Cameron .
 The idea that socialism is a share-the-wealth program is strictly a confidence game to get the people to surrender their freedom to an all-powerful collectivist government, says Julian Zelizer . The idea of socialism as a share the wealth program is a confidence-game to get people
 While the Jnsiders tell us we are building a paradise on earth, we are actually constructing a jail for ourselves . We are not only constructing a prison for ourselves, but we are also building a jail .
 Men like Rockefeller, Ford and Kennedy are for every socialist program known to man which will increase your taxes . Rockefeller, Kennedy and Ford are for all socialist programs that increase taxes .
 An article published by the North American Newspaper Alliance in August of 1967 tells how the Rockefellers pay practically no income taxes despite Socialism — Royal Road to Power for the Super-Rich 33 .
 The article reveals that one of the Rockefellers paid the grand total of $685 personal income tax during a recent year . The article also reveals that a recent tax payment was $685 .
 The Kennedys have their Chicago Merchandise Mart, mansions, yachts, planes, etc. all owned by their myriads of family foundations and trusts . The family is wealthy enough to own many of the world's largest properties .
 If they were really concerned about the poor, rather than using socialism as a means of achieving personal political power, they would divest themselves of their own fortunes . The Labour Party should divest itself of its own fortunes, says David Cameron .
 There is no law which prevents them from giving away their own fortunes to the poverty stricken . There are no laws preventing them from donating their fortunes to poverty stricken people .
 We usually told that this clique of super-rich are socialists because they have a guilt complex over wealth they inherited and did not earn . We are usually told they are socialists . But this is not the case, it is the case that they are not .
 They could relieve their supposed guilt complexes simply by divesting themselves of their unearned wealth . The U.S. Senate could also relieve their alleged guilt complexes, says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 There are many people who have been given a guilt complex by their college professors . But that doesn’t explain the actions of Insiders like the Rockeys and Fords .
 The Kennedys, Rockefellers and their super-rich confederates are not being hypocritical in advocating socialism . But they are being hypocritical, they say, because they advocate socialism .
 If it appears to be a contradiction for the super-rich to work for socialism and the destruction of free enterprise, in reality it is not, says Simon Tisdall . The super rich should not work for the government, he says .
 Most of us believe socialism is what the socialists want us to believe it is -- a share-the-wealth program . Our problem is that most of us think socialism is socialism . We need to find out what socialism is really about, and how to deal with it .
 Let us examine the only Socialist countries — according to the Socialist definition of the word — extant in the world today . The Socialist definition is that of a Socialist country, not a Socialist state .
 The Communists themselves refer to these as Socialist countries, as in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics . The Communist Party refers to these countries as Socialist Socialist countries .
 A tiny oligarchial clique at the top, usually numbering no more than three percent of the total population, controls the total wealth, total production and the very lives of the other ninety-seven percent .
 Even the most naive observe that Mr Brezhnev doesn’t live like one of the poor peasants out on the great steppes .
 If one understands that socialism is not a share-the-wealth program, but is in reality a method to consolidate and control the wealth, then the paradox of super-rich men promoting socialism becomes no paradox at all .
 Instead it becomes the logical, even perfect, tool of power-seeking megalomaniacs . Instead it is the logical and even perfect tool of megalomaniacs .
 Communism, or more accurately, socialism, is not a movement of the downtrodden masses, but of the economic elite, says Julian Zelizer . Communism is not an economic movement for the masses, he says, but an economic elite . Communism, he writes, is a movement for
 The plan of the conspirator /nsiders then is to socialize the United States, not to Communize it . The plan for the U.S. not to communize it, but socialize it with socializing it, not with it .
 Chart 3 shows the structure of our government as established by our Founding Fathers . Chart 3 is based on the structure established by the Founding Fathers of the U.S. Constitution .
 The Constitution fractionalized and subdivided governmental power in every way possible . The Constitution is fractionalizing and subdividing government power . It's a waste of time for the Constitution, but it's important to keep it from the public .
 The Founding Fathers believed that each branch of the government would be jealous of its powers . Each branch would never surrender them to centralized control, they said .
 Many phases of our lives (such as charity and education) were put totally, or almost totally, out of the grasp of politicians . Charity and education, such as education, are put totally out of politicians' grasp of them .
 No segment of government could possibly amass enough power to form a dictatorship, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com . The government has been accused of corruption in the U.S.
 In order to have a dictatorship one must have a single branch holding most of the power . A single branch of the government must hold most power in order to be a dictatorship .
 A dictatorship was impossible in our Republic because power was widely diffused, says Lebor Finen . A dictatorship is impossible in the Republic because of power diffused .
 Today, as we approach Democratic Socialism, all power is being centralized at the apex of the executive branch of the federal government . All power is now being centralized in the executive power of the president .
 These men lived after our Constitution was written, but our forefathers already understood such principles completely . The Constitution is written after our Founding Fathers lived after the Constitution was .
 All the reins of power are being concentrated in the executive branch of the federal government . As we move along the political spectrum towards socialism, all the political power is being concentrated .
 This is being done by buying, with legislation or with “free” federal grants, all the other entities . This is not only being done, but it's being done with legislation, with ‘free’ federal grants .
 If you wanted control over the United States, it would be impossible to take over every city hall, county seat and state house . The U.S. is a nation of nations, but it's impossible to control all of them .
 You would want all power vested at the apex of the executive branch of the federal government . Then you would have to control only one man. You would be in control of only one person.
 If you wanted to control the nation’s manufacturing, commerce, finance, finance and natural resources, you would need to control only the apex, the power pinnacle of an all-powerful SOCIALIST government . You would have to control most of the nation's manufacturing and commerce,
 If you want a national monopoly, you must control a national 36 Call It Conspiracy socialist government . Then you would have a monopoly and could squeeze out all competition . Then, you would be able to control a monopoly of all competitors .
 If you want to control a worldwide monopoly, you must control a world socialist government . You need to control the world's socialist government, says David Cameron .
 Listen to the words of Mr John Haley, Vicepresident of Chase Manhattan Bank . Listen to John Haley's words about Chase Manhattan .
 This program was part of the series Bill Moyers Journal . I intend to quote at great length from the transcript of this program .
 Bill Moyers introduces himself to the show as part of his introduction to the program . Moyers: "I'm glad that I've been able to find a way to get back in touch with the world" Moyers says, "I hope that we'll be able to talk to
 We'll see just how redundant conSocialism is. We're going to see how redundant it is.
 I went and saw Sadat for him and... when he can’t do it himself. draw less attention than he does. I went to see Sadat . He said: "When he can't do it [Sadat] himself. ... I went ... for him"
 It's amazing to me that in his world the bank operates as, like a country does. It’s amazing that in . His world, he said, "in his world, the banks operate as like a . country does" The bank is the world's largest bank,
 Former Secretary of State John Kerry says doors open more easily when he says he's coming for David Rockefeller . Rockefeller: "It’s fantastic. I’ve never seen doors open"
 Moyers, Rockefeller and friends head to Belgrade, Yugoslavia, for a meeting of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund . World's financial leaders are gathering in Belgrade for an IMF and World Bank meeting .
 David meets with such luminaries as Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker, a former Chase officer, and of course meets the host, Marshall Tito . David also meets with Secretary of the Treasury William Miller and Secretary of Treasury William .
 Tito and Rockefeller talked finance, while Tito spoke with Murray Seeger of the Los Angeles Times . Seeger: Tito, Rockefeller, Rockefeller were both men in finance .
 Chase Manhattan opened the first American office in Moscow when it opened its American office there . Chase was working as a correspondent for Chase Manhattan when Chase opened the office .
 Mr Rockefeller came in and they rented space for the bank and arranged a mammoth cocktail party . Rockefeller came into the bank in typical fashion to celebrate .
 39 lives. They took over the dining room of the Metropol Hotel in Moscow . They put on the greatest spread anyone ever saw in their Socialism — Royal Road to Power for the Super-Rich 39 lives .
 No one in America could believe anything like this, but here these people were standing out in the street in Moscow, Russia . "No one in U.S. could believe this," says CNN's John Sutter .
 The week before the official Soviet press denounced the Rockefellers by name for their investments in Chile and Peru, and in Latin America in general . What was ironic?
 Referred to David Rockefeller’s brother, Nelson, especially, as being one of those of the Rockefellers who were financial imperialists in the Third World, Latin America specifically . Referred to as being a financial imperialist in Latin America .
 They probably hadn't even read the article, or if they read it they didn’t pay any attention, and may not have associated this charming capitalist banker standing there in the Metropol Hotel .
 "I can recall only one sentence I telegrapraphed from Moscow which was wholly true," he said .
 It may even be the only true sentence ever to be telegraphed from Moscow . It may be the first true sentence to be sent from Moscow.
 An American journalist asked for Soviet man-in-the-street’s reactions to the lavish scale of entertaining in Soviet embassies abroad . This was when he was temporarily standing in for the correspondent of an American news agency .
 Chase Bank deals with most of the so-called communist countries of the world on a basis that has worked out very well . Chase Bank says relations with governments regardless of the political label that’s attached to them depends on people and human relationships .
 I could go on for pages quoting the text of this remarkable travelogue, but let’s let Bill Moyers do it for me. I could. go on to quote the text .
 One Chase executive likened multinational banks to a “giant heart which pumps the blood that sustains the world’s world” Chase exec likened banks to “a giant heart” that pumps blood into the world .
 Karl Marx was hired by a mysterious group who called themselves the League of Just Men to write the Communist Manifesto as demagogic boob-bait to appeal to the mob . Karl Marx wrote the Manifesto for a group of unknown men .
 Marx’ name was widely enough recognized to establish his authorship for this revolutionary handbook . In actual fact the Communist Manifesto was in circulation for many years before Marx' name was recognized .
 All Karl Marx really did was to update and codify the very same revolutionary plans and principles set down seventy years earlier by Adam Weishaupt, the founder of the Order of the Illuminati in Bavaria .
 The League of Just Men was simply an extension of the Illuminati which was forced to go deep underground after it was exposed by a raid in 1786 conducted by Bavarian authorities .
 To think of writing a complete history of a nation covering even a year is 'incredible' 'It's absolutely incredible. It is absolutely incredible,' says historian Mark O'Brien .
 Many of the most important happenings never appear in the papers or even in somebody’s memoirs . Historians' ability to write an ‘objective’ history is limited by volume of happenings, says historian .
 A historian must select a miniscule number of facts from the limited number that are known . Historians must select facts from a limited number of known facts to build their case .
 Professor Stuart Crane has pointed out that every book ‘proves’ the author’s thesis . This is why every book "proves" the author's thesis .
 The information in it is true, but the book is not 43 44 Call It Conspiracy objective . The book is based on the book's title, "Call It Conspiracy"
 Most of the facts which we bring out are readily verifiable at any large library. Most of them are easily verifiable in any large libraries .
 We have arranged these facts in the order which most accurately reveals their true significance in history . But our contention is that we have arranged them in order to best reveal their significance in the world .
 All the evidence made it look as if the butler were the murderer, but in the final scenes you find out, surprisingly, that it was the man’s wife all along .
 This situation is very similar to the one in which millions of Americans find themselves today, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 "They have come in as the movie, so to speak, is going into its conclusion," he says . "They've come in ... as they're going into their conclusion," the actor says .
 The earlier portion of the mystery is needed to make the whole thing understandable . It's needed to be made clear, but it's not clear what happened to the family .
 In order to understand the conspiracy it is necessary to have some rudimentary knowledge of banking and, particularly, of international bankers . The conspiracy is not just a conspiracy, it is a conspiracy involving international banking .
 It would be an over-simplification to ascribe the entire conspiracy to international bankers, but they nevertheless have played a key role . International bankers are key players in the global financial crisis .
 Professor Quigley was speaking when we quoted him earlier as stating that their aim was nothing less than control of the world through finance . But it was the international bankers of whom he was speaking was speaking . He said the aim of the bankers was to control the world with finance .
 Governments often spend more than they are willing to tax from their citizens and so are forced to borrow . Most of the money comes from taxation, but most comes from government borrowing . Government often borrows from citizens and is forced to rely on borrowed money from them .
 Our national debt is now The Money Manipulators 45 $455 billion—every cent of it borrowed at interest from somewhere . The Money Manipulators 45 billion .
 The public is led to believe that our government borrows from ‘the people’ through savings bonds . The public should not be led to believing that the public borrows money from savings bonds, the author says .
 Only the smallest percentage of the national debt is held by individuals in this form . Only a small percentage of national debt holds the majority of the debt .
 For centuries there has been big money to be made by international bankers in the financing of governments and kings . For centuries, international bankers have been making big money in financing governments .
 The process through which one collects a debt from a government or a monarch is not a subject taught in business schools of our universities . Most of us have never been in the business of financing kings, and have not given the problem much thought .
 There is a king-financing business and to those who can ensure collection it is lucrative indeed . But there is also a lucrative business for those who ensure collection is collected .
 Economics Professor Stuart Crane notes that there are two means used to collateralize loans to governments and kings . Crane: There are two ways to get government and kings to get loans . Crane says the loans are collateralized by government and royal loans .
 Whenever a business firm borrows big money its creditor obtains a voice in management to protect his investment . Creditors will be able to influence management of the firm . The debt-borrowing industry is a key part of the economy .
 Like a business, no government can borrow big money unless willing to surrender to the creditor some measure of sovereignty as collateral . Like business, it's not possible for a government to borrow money without surrendering sovereignty to the creditors .
 International bankers who have loaned hundreds of billions of dollars to governments around the world command considerable influence in the policies of such governments . International bankers are powerful enough to influence foreign policy decisions, says David Cameron .
 The ultimate advantage the creditor has over the king or president is that if the ruler gets out of line the banker can finance his enemy or rival . But the banker's ultimate advantage is that he can finance the ruler's enemies .
 If you want to stay in the lucrative king-financing business, it is wise to have an enemy or rival waiting in the wings to unseat every king or president to whom you lend .
 Meyer Amschel Rothschild of Frankfurt, Germany, kept one of his five sons at home to run the Frankfurt bank . The others were sent to London, Paris, Vienna, Vienna and Naples .
 Rothschilds became incredibly wealthy during the nineteenth century by financing governments to fight each other . The Rothschilds funded governments by financing each other to finance each other.
 With every re-shuffling there was a balance of power in a new grouping around the House of Rothschild in England, France, or Austria . The Rothschild family is one of the wealthiest families in the world .
 They grouped nations so that if any king got out of line a war would be decided by which way the financing went . The group of nations was formed to protect the interests of the king from war .
 Researching the debt positions of the warring nations will usually indicate who was to be punished . The debt position of the countries involved in the conflict indicates who will be punished for their actions .
 In describing the characteristics of the Rothschilds and other major international bankers, Dr. Dr. Rothschild described them as 'the Rothschilds' and 'the bankers'
 One major reason for the historical blackout on the role of the international bankers in political history is that the Rothschilds were Jewish . The Rothschilds are Jewish .
 Anti-Semites have played into the hands of the conspiracy by trying to portray the entire conspiracy as Jewish . Anti-Semitic anti-Semitism has played a role in the creation of the anti-Semitic state of Israel, the author says .
 Morgan and Rockefeller international banking institutions have played a key role in the conspiracy . Rockefeller and Morgan are accused of playing a key part in the global financial conspiracy .
 Rothschilds and their satellites are key to the Rothschilds' success . But there is no denying the importance of their satellites . Rothschilds are the world's most powerful financiers .
 It is just as unreasonable and immoral to blame all Jews for the crimes of the Rothschilds as it is to hold all Baptists accountable for their crimes . The Rothschilds were responsible for the murder of the Jews, the author says .
 The Money Manipulators 47 ment to convince everyone that any mention of the Rothschilds or their allies is an attack on all Jews . The Jewish members of the conspiracy have used an organization called the Anti-Defamation League as an instruThe Money Manipulator .
 "Any individual or book exploring this subject is immediately attacked by hundreds of A.D.L. committees all over the country," says author . "Any . individual or . book exploring the subject of this subject immediately attacked"
 The A.D.L. has never let truth or logic interfere with its highly professional smear jobs . The media has never been able to rely on facts or logic to get its facts straight out .
 Nobody has a right to be more angry at the Rothschild clique than their fellow Jews, says Rabbi Michael Lerner . Nobody should be angry at their fellow Jew, he says .
 The Warburgs, part of the Rothschild empire, helped finance Adolph Hitler . The Warburys helped finance Hitler . They were one of the richest men in the world .
 They sat out the war in luxurious hotels in Paris or emigrated to the U.S. or England . They sat in luxury hotels in France or moved to the United States or England.
 As a group of Jews, Jews have suffered most at the hands of these power seekers . Jews have been victims of the power seekers, Jewish leaders say . Jews are suffering most as a group, they say .
 Rothschild has much more in common with a Rockefeller than he does with a tailor from Budapest or the Bronx . A Rothschild has more common with Rockefeller than a tailor in the U.S. A Rothschild is a Rothschild .
 Israel is the one country in the world today which operates with less Jnsider control and influence . Israel will contribute mightily to the dismantling of The Conspiracy, writes David Frum .
 This observation is not only the result of continued study on the subject but first hand observation and lengthy conversations with the leaders of the country, both in the government and the private sector . This observation was not only a study but also first hand observations .
 Since the keystone of the international banking empires has been government bonds, it has been in the interest of these inter48 Call It Conspiracy national bankers to encourage government debt .
 Nothing drives government deeply into debt like a war, and it has not been an uncommon practice among international bankers to finance both sides of the bloodiest military conflicts .
 Wars and revolutions have been useful to international bankers in gaining or increasing control over governments . But the key to such contro] has always been control of money, writes Peter Bergen .
 You can control a government if you have it in your debt, a creditor is in a position to demand the privileges of monopoly from the sovereign . A creditor can control the government if it has it in its debt .
 Money-seeking governments have granted monopolies in state banking, natural resources, oil concessions and transportation . Money-seekers have granted monopoly powers in banking and natural resources sectors .
 The monopoly which the international financiers most covet is control over a nation’s money . However, the monopoly which is most coveted by the world is control of the money . It is also control of a nation's money .
 International bankers owned as private corporations the central banks of the various European nations . Eventually these international bankers actually owned as . private corporations . The central banks were eventually owned by the international . bankers .
 Bank of England, Bank of France and Bank of Germany were privately owned monopolies granted by heads of state, usually in return for loans . They were not owned by their respective governments, as almost everyone imagines .
 All those who have sought dictatorial control over modern nations have understood the necessity of a central bank . The central bank is the answer to dictatorships' need to be central banks .
 Such conspirators knew that you cannot take control of a nation without military force unless that nation has a central bank through which you can control its economy . The conspirators also knew that they knew you can't take control in a country without force .
 The international financiers set up their own front man in charge of each of Europe’s central banks .
 They were the technicians and agents of the dominant investment bankers of their own countries, who had raised them up and were perfectly capable of throwing them down . They were rather than simply be technicians, they were the agents of investment bankers .
 The substantive financial powers of the world were in the hands of investment bankers (also called ‘international or ‘merchants’ bankers) who remained largely behind the scenes in their own private banks .
 Quigley also reveals that the international bankers who owned and controlled the Banks of England and France maintained their power even after those Banks were theoretically socialized . The power of the banks was maintained even after they were socialized, he says .
 Central banks of Europe were eager from the start to fasten a similar establishment on the United States. Naturally those who controlled the central banks of the U.S. were eager . Europe's central banks have been eager to do so since the start of the decade .
 Founding Fathers had been conscious of attempts to control America through money manipulation . They carried on a running battle with the international bankers .
 During the nineteenth century the leading financiers of the metropolitan East often cut one another’s financial throats, but as their Western and rural victims started to organize politically, the “robber barons” saw that they had a “community of interest” toward
 The diffusion of economic power was one of the main factors stimulating the demands for a central bank by would-be business and financial monopolists . Would-be monopolists want to control the power of the central bank .
 Most American bankers and their customers still distrusted the whole concept . But aside from the major Eastern centers, most American bankers still distrust the idea .
 The international bankers created a series of panics as a demonstration of their power . In order to show the hinterlands that they were going to need a central banking system, they created the panic . The panics were a warning of what would happen unless the rest of the bankers got
 J Pierpont Morgan was American-born but educated in England and Germany . Morgan was the man in charge of conducting lessons at the time .
 Morgan is referred to by many, including Congressman Louis McFadden (a banker who for ten years headed the House Banking and Currency Committee), as the top American The Money Manipulators 51 agent of the English Rothschilds .
 The “panic” which Morgan had created, he proceeded to end almost single-handedly . The ‘panic’ which Morgan created, which he created, was the end of . Morgan’s "panic" which he had created led to the collapse of the economy
 Paul Warburg and his brother Felix had immigrated to the United States from Germany in 1902 . Warburg was to play the most significant part in providing America with that central bank .
 Paul Warburg married Nina Loeb, daughter of Solomon Loeb of Kuhn, Loeb and Company, America’s most powerful international banking firm . Warburg is the founder of Warburg's largest bank, Warburg Capital Capital Partners .
 Brother Felix married Frieda Schiff, daughter of Jacob Schiff, the ruling power behind Kuhn, Loeb . Brother Felix is also married to the head of the firm Kuhn. Loeb. Brother Felix was born in New York City .
 After the Panic of 1907, Aldrich was appointed by the Senate to head the National Monetary Commission . Aldrich served as a member of the Senate in 1907 .
 Aldrich and his entourage spent nearly two years and $300,000 of taxpayers’ money being wined and dined by the owners of Europe’s central banks as they toured the Continent ‘studying’ central banking . Although he had no technical knowledge of
 When the Commission returned from its luxurious junket it held no meetings and made no report for nearly two years . The Commission held no meeting or report for almost two years after returning from junket .
 He staged one of the most important secret meetings in the history of the U.S. history . Together with Paul Warburg and other international bankers, he staged a secret meeting in the United States .
 President of the Rockefeller-owned National City Bank; A Piatt Andrew, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury; Benjamin Strong of Morgan’s Bankers Trust Company; and Paul Warburg of Morgan & Company; . Frank A Vanderlip, President of . the Rockefeller . owned National City
 They were all to accompany him to Jekyl Island, Georgia, to write final recommendations of the National Monetary Commission report .
 Warburg stressed that the name “central bank” must be avoided at all costs . Warburg: The name ‘Central bank’ must always be avoided .
 It was decided to promote the scheme as a ‘regional reserve’ system with four branches in different sections of the country . The scheme will be promoted as a regional reserve system .
 Out of the Jekyl Island meeting came the completion of the Monetary Commission Report and the Aldrich Bill . The Aldrich bill is the first to be passed into law in the UK .
 Warburg had proposed the bill be designated the “Federal Reserve System” Aldrich insisted his own name was already associated in the public’s mind with banking reform . Warburg wanted the bill to be named the Federal Reserve System, but Aldrich refused .
 Aldrich’s name attached to the bill proved to be the kiss of death, since any law bearing his name was so obviously a project of the international bankers . Aldrich's name was attached to a bill that was so obvious a project for international bankers.
 When Aldrich Bill could not be pushed through Congress, a new strategy had to be devised . A new strategy must be devised to get the Aldrich bill passed .
 The only hope for a central bank was to disguise it and have it put through by the Democrats as a measure to strip Wall Street of its power . The bank's only hope is to disguise the idea and put it through by Democrats .
 The opportunity to do this came with the approach of the 1912 Presidential election . The opportunity for this came in the approach to the 1912 election .
 The Democratic candidate, Woodrow Wilson, was equally the property of Morgan . Morgan: "Woodrow Wilson" was equally property of the Democratic candidate .
 Woodrow Wilson and Teddy Roosevelt tried to whistle-stop the country trying to out-do each other in florid denunciations of the Wall Street “money trust” —the same group of Insiders which was financing the campaigns of both. Wilson and Roosevelt .
 Wilson promised the country a money system free from domination by the international bankers of Wall Street . Wilson resurrected the issue and promised to create a new money system .
 The Insiders’ sheepdog who controlled Wilson was the mysterious “Colonel” Edward Mandel House . House was the son of a representative of England’s financial interests in the U.S. House .
 Many historians say Wilson was the real President of the U.S. during the Wilson years . He was strictly a behind-the-scenes wire-puller and is regarded by many historians .
 The graduated income tax and a central bank are two of the ten planks of The Communist Manifesto . The Communist Party is opposed to the idea of a central central bank .
 Seymour’s work contains 56 Call It Conspiracy documents and records showing constant contact between House and Paul Warburg while the Federal Reserve Act was being prepared and steered through Congress . Seymour's work contains numerous documents and . records showing contact between . House and Warburg .
 Insider financiers put up a smokescreen of opposition to the Federal Reserve Act to support the fiction that the Fed Act was a ‘people’s bill,” the Insider says . Insider: In order to support that the bill was a 'people's bill, the
 It was strictly a case of Br’er Rabbit begging not to be thrown into the briar patch . It's not a case for Br'er Rabbit to have his head in the mud .
 Aldrich and Vanderlip denounced what in actuality was their own bill . Aldrich, Vanderlip denounce what in fact was actually a bill . Vanderlip and Aldrich denounced the bill .
 Wilson fulfilled to the Insiders the pledge he had made in order to become President . Wilson had fulfilled the pledge to become president . Wilson's pledge to be President was fulfilled .
 There was genuine opposition to the Act, but it could not match the power of the bill’s advocates .
 The whole central bank concept was engineered by the very group it was supposed to strip of power . The idea of a central bank in the U.S. was designed to strip power, it is claimed .
 The myth that the “money trust” had been defrocked should have been exploded when Paul Warburg was appointed to the first Federal Reserve Board . “Colonel” House was handpicked by ‘Colonel House’ House .
 Paul Warburg relinquished his $500,000 a year job as a Kuhn, Loeb partner to take a $12,000-a-year job with the Federal Reserve . Warburg's $500k a year salary is $12k per year .
 Since Woodrow Wilson took his oath of office, the national debt has risen from $1 billion to $455 billion . Since Wilson took power, the country's debt has gone up from $500 billion to more than $450 billion .
 Interest has become the third largest item in the federal budget . The total amount of interest paid since then to the international bankers holding that debt is staggering .
 Interest on the national debt is now $22 billion every year, and climbing steeply as inflation pushes up the interest rate on government bonds . The national debt now stands at $23 billion a year .
 Meanwhile, our gold is mortgaged to European central banks, and our silver has all been sold . Meanwhile, the U.S. has all of its own gold and silver has been mortgaged .
 Only a blind disciple of the “accidental theory of history” could believe that all of this occurred by coincidence . With economic catastrophe imminent, only a blind believer of the "accidental history" could believe this happened by coincidence.
 When the Federal Reserve system was foisted on the unsuspecting American public, there were absolute guarantees that there would be no more boom and bust economic cycles . When the Fed was foiled by the U.S. public, the public was assured that it would not be a repeat of the
 The men who, behind the scenes, were pushing the central bank concept for the international bankers faithfully promised that from then on there would be only steady growth and perpetual prosperity . The men promised from the beginning of the 1990s there would only be growth and prosperity .
 Having built the Federal Reserve as a tool to consolidate and control wealth, the international bankers were now ready for a major killing . The Federal Reserve was built to consolidate wealth and consolidate wealth .
 Between 1923 and 1929, the Federal Reserve expanded the money supply by sixty-two percent . The money supply was expanded by more than 60 percent .
 Carroll Quigley of Harvard, Princeton and Georgetown Universities wrote book disclosing international bankers’ plan to control the world from behind the political and financial scenes . Author: International bankers plan to use the world behind the scenes to control world .
 Quigley revealed plans of billionaires to establish dictatorship of the super-rich disguised as workers’ democracies . Quigly revealed plans to establish democracy of the rich disguised as worker’s democracies .
 Morgan created artificial panic used as excuse to pass Federal Reserve Act . Morgan created false panic using as excuse for pass of Fed Act . Fed Act was passed by Congress in 2010 .
 Morgan pushed U.S. into WWI to protect his loans to British government . Morgan was instrumental in pushing U S. into World War I to protect loans to U.K. Morgan was influential in pushing the war effort .
 His partners helped finance the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia . After his death, his partners helped fund the revolution .
 At a secret luncheon of the Federal Reserve Board and heads of the European central banks the committee warned, the international bankers were tightening the noose . The committee warned of the dangers of the global financial crisis .
 Montagu Norman, Governor of the Bank of England, came to Washington on February 6, 1929, to confer with Andrew Mellon, Secretary of the Treasury . Norman's visit to Washington was part of a series of meetings between the Treasury Secretary and Governor of England .
 The Federal Reserve Board reversed its easy-money policy and began raising the discount rate . Immediately after this mysterious visit, the Fed began raising its discount rate.
 The balloon which had been inflated constantly for nearly seven years was about to be exploded . The balloon had been inflating constantly for almost seven years . It was due to be blown out at the end of the day .
 Stock brokers and customers had to dump their stock on the market in order to pay the loans . This meant that the stock brokers and the customers . had to sell their stock to the market to pay for their debts .
 The banks not owned by the oligarchy were heavily involved in broker call claims at this time, and bank runs soon exhausted their coin and currency and they had to close . This naturally collapsed the stock market and brought a banking collapse all over the country .
 They were either out of the market or had sold “short” so that they made enormous profits as the Dow Jones plummeted . They made huge profits as Dow Jones plunged in the last month .
 Paul Warburg had provided the warning to sell. For those who knew the score, it was a warning . Warburg's comment by Warburg was a reminder to sell .
 Sharpies were later able to buy back these stocks at a ninety percent discount from their former highs . Sharpies later bought back the stock at a 90% discount from its former highs. Sharpies bought back stock at the same price as Sharpies .
 To think that the scientifically engineered Crash of ’29 was an accident or the result of stupidity defies all logic . The crash of '29 was scientifically engineered, it defies logic, says author .
 The Federal Reserve tromped down hard on the money accelerator — 62 Call It Conspiracy and then slammed on the brakes . Each of these has followed a period in which the Federal Reserve has slammed down hard . The Fed has since slammed on its money accelerator .
 Chart 5 is based on one appearing in the highly respected financial publication, Indicator Digest of June 24, 1969 . It shows the effects on the Dow-Jones Industrial Average of Federal Reserve policies of expanding or restricting the monetary supply .
 This is how the stock market is manipulated and how depressions or recessions are scientifically created . This is the way to create a recession or a recession .
 If you have inside knowledge as to which way the Federal Reserve policy is going to go, you can make a ton of money .
 The members of the Federal Reserve Board are appointed by the President for fourteen year terms . They are appointed for 14 years each .
 These appointments, which should be debated by the Senate, are routinely approved . These appointments should be extensively debated, the Senate says .
 International bankers finance the Presidential campaigns of both political parties . But here, as in Europe, these men are mere figureheads, put in their positions .
 Professor Quigley reveals that these international bankers who owned and controlled the Banks of England and France maintained their power even after those banks were theoretically socialized .
 The American system is slightly different, but the net effect is the same —ever-increasing debt requiring ever-increasing interest payments, inflation and periodic scientifically created depressions and recessions . The net effect of the U.S. system is that it will continue to grow in debt,
 The rate of price inflation went to higher levels than the previous round, and during the pull-back, it came to rest at new higher ground . In every trip around the track, the rate of inflation went higher .
 Each new high was higher than the previous high, and each new low was higher . In other words, each new high has a higher than previous high .
 The inflation of the 70s and the 80s was much worse than 64 Call It Conspiracy anything we had experienced since the end of the Civil War . Inflation of the '70s and '80s was much worse than the '60s and 70s .
 President Nixon announced in 1971 that the U.S. dollar would no longer be redeemable in gold . President Nixon made the announcement on August 15, 1971, in Honolulu .
 He also announced in the same speech that in order to ‘curb’ inflation, he was invoking wage and price controls .
 The role of the Federal Reserve is greater today than at any time in the past . Investors rush into the dollar only because it is strong relative to the other currencies which have been inflated more than the dollar itself .
 When Gary and I outlined the role of the Fed and its relation to the movement of the stock market, hardly anyone paid any attention, yet now it’s almost impossible to listen to the radio or watch TV and not have the commentator explain the movement . The impact of interest rates
 Nixon did this in 1972, Ford did it in 1976, and Reagan is doing it now . Reagan is now doing it again, with Nixon and Ford doing it in 1972 .
 The reality is that breaking back of inflation without the discipline of gold in the monetary system is tantamount to breaking the back of a King Cobra by wrestling it to the ground . Gold is the key to breaking back inflation without discipline in the financial system .
 As inflation engulfs the whole world, it is vitally important to recall the words and dreams of Montagu Norman as quoted above . The words are important to remember as well as the words of Norman's dreams .
 World Finance will be standing in the wings with a money system that will sound the death knell of all national currencies, including the dollar . For when the dollar does collapse, you can bet your last Krugerrand that the /nsiders of World Finance are standing by .
 When it does happen, the world will rush to the ‘new money’ as a panacea, regardless of who issues it . But when it does . It does happen it will be the world’s rush to ‘New money” as a . panacea
 It is my personal opinion that the source will be the World Bank or some future look-a-like . The World Bank is likely to be the source of the funding .
 Call It Conspiracy ern Confederacy, MacMillan, 1954. Emden, Paul H., Money Powers of Europe, D Appleton, Century Company, 1938; Eaton, Clement, History of the South. Eaton: The South was the South of Europe .
 Marx, Karl, The Communist Manifesto, published by Henry Regnery Co. Co., Chicago, 1954, $5.99 . Marx's work was first published in the Communist Party Manifesto .
 House Banking And Currency Committee Hearing on H R. 7230, 75th Congress, March 2 and 19, 1938, 214, 214. House Banking and Currency Committee .
 Lindbergh, Charles A. Sr., Charles A Sr., The Economic Pinch [reprinted] by Omni Publications, Hawthorne, Calif.68, 95.68 .
 Rothbard, Murray, America’s Great Depression, published in 1972, 86. Rothbard. Murray. Murray . Rothbard .
 Bryan, William “John” William ‘John,” The U.S. Unresolved Monetary And Political Problems. Bryan: The United States unresolved monetary and political problems. Bryan, John, William "John"
 McFadden, Congressman Louis T., On The Federal Reserve Corporation, remarks in Congress, 1934 . McFadden was a member of the House of Representatives from New Hampshire .
 The St. Louis Fed is a more “conservative or “Friedmanite” Federal Reserve regional publication . It is based in the U.S. and publishes a regional publication called the Federal Reserve Journal .
 The Federal Reserve System provided the ‘conspiracy’ with an instrument whereby the international bankers could run the national debt up to the sky, thereby collecting enormous amounts of interest and also gaining control over the borrower . Chapter IV Bankrolling the Bolshevik Revolution .
 Two months prior to the passage of the Federal Reserve Act, the conspirators had created the mechanism to collect the funds to pay the interest on the national debt . Two months before the passage, conspirators created the . mechanism .
 Karl Marx’s Communist Manifesto contained ten planks for SOCIALIZING a country . That mechanism was the progressive income tax, the second plank of the Communist manifesto .
 One naturally assumes that the graduated income tax would be opposed by the wealthy . One of the richest in the world would oppose the tax, he says .
 Some, no doubt, out of altruism and because, at first, the taxes were very small . Some of the taxes are very small. Some are still small. Others are now small enough .
 Others backed the scheme because they already had a plan for permanently avoiding the income tax and the subsequent inheritance tax . But others backed it as they already have a plan to permanently avoid the tax and tax .
 While the Populists had the wrong answers, they asked many of the right questions, they had the right answers . The Populist Party had a lot of the wrong questions, but they had many of them right .
 They were led to believe that banker-monopolist control over government, which they opposed, was a product of free enterprise . Unfortunately, they were led into thinking that banker control of government was free enterprise, they said .
 Since the Populist threat to the cartelists was from the Left, the Insiders moved to capture the Left . The Insiders captured the Left in order to keep control of the cartel .
 Professor Quigley discloses that over fifty years ago the Morgan firm decided to infiltrate the Leftwing political movement in the U.S. The Morgan firm was behind the counter-insurgence .
 Left groups needed funds and were eager for help to get their message to the public . This was not difficult to do since it was not easy to do . Left groups were eager to help with their message, and they needed funds .
 There was nothing new about this decision, says Quigley, since other financiers had talked about it and even attempted it earlier . There is nothing new, he says .
 Radical movements are never successful unless they attract big money and/or outside support . Radical movements will never be successful without big money or outside support, says Julian Zelizer . The U.S. House of Representatives will host a series of events in Washington, D.C.
 Oswald Spengler, the great historian of the Twentieth Century, was one of those who saw what American Liberals refused to see — that the Left is controlled by its alleged enemy, the malefactors of great wealth . American Liberals refuse to see what the Left refused to
 While the Populist movement was basically nonconspiratorial, its Leftist ideology and platform was made to order for the elitist Insiders . The Insiders aimed at concentrating power in government .
 The /nsiders knew they could control that power and use it to their own purposes . They knew they had the power and used it to control the power of the government .
 Bankrolling the Bolshevik Revolution 69 course, of course, was not interested in promoting competition but in restricting it . They were not, of . course, interested in . promoting competition, but in . restricting it, they were not . interested in competition, they wanted to restrict it . Bank
 Professor Gabriel Kolko has prepared a lengthy volume presenting the undeniable proof that the giant corporate manipulators promoted much of the so-called “progressive legislation” of the Roosevelt and Wilson eras .
 The oversight was due to the illusion that American industry was centralized and monopolized to such an extent that it would rationalize activity in its various branches voluntarily . The oversight is due to an illusion that the American industry would be centralized .
 The dominant tendency in the American economy at the beginning of this century was toward growing competition . Despite the large numbers of mergers, and the growth in the absolute size of many corporations, the dominant tendency was toward competition .
 The best way for the Jnsiders to eliminate this growing competition was to impose a progressive income tax on their competitors while writing laws so as to include built-in escape hatches for themselves .
 Few of the proponents of the graduated income tax realized they were playing into the hands of those they were seeking to control . Actually, very few . realized they . played into the . hands of the . people they were . seeking to . control .
 The Insiders’ principal mouthpiece in the Senate during this period was Nelson Aldrich, one of the conspirators involved in engineering the creation of the Federal Reserve . Aldrich was the maternal grandfather of Rockefeller Rockefeller . Rockefeller is Rockefeller's maternal grandfather .
 Aldrich denounced the income tax as “communistic and socialistic,” but in 1909 he pulled a dramatic and stunning reversal . Aldrich had denounced the tax as a ‘communistic’ and ‘socialistic” tax .
 By the time the Amendment had been approved by the states, the Rockefellers and Carnegie foundations were in full operation . The amendment was approved by states, and the foundations were already operating .
 Anti-trust acts were ostensibly passed to break up Standard Oil and U.S. Steel monopolies . The anti-trust act was passed to help break up the Standard Oil, United States Steel monopoly . It was to break-up the Standard and Steel monopoly, but not to break
 monopolists could compound their wealth tax-free, while competitors had to face a graduated income tax which made it difficult to amass capital . These monopolists were now able to compound wealth tax free .
 As we have said, socialism is not a share-thewealth program, as the socialists would like you to believe, but a consolidate-and-control-the-wealth program for the Insiders . The Insiders are not sharing the wealth, they are consolidating the wealth for
 The Reece Committee which investigated foundations for Congress in 1953 proved with an overwhelming amount of evidence that the Rockefeller and Carnegie foundations have been promoting socialism since their inception .
 The conspirators now had created the mechanisms to run up the debt, to collect the debt and to avoid the taxes required to pay the yearly interest on the debt . The Bolsheviks had created a mechanism to run the debt up and collect it .
 The American public was extremely opposed to America’s getting involved in a European war . American public wanted to avoid war in Europe .
 Staying out of the perennial foreign quarrels had been a tradition since George Washington . The U.S. has a history of avoiding foreign disputes since Washington .
 Wilson was stumping the country giving his solemn word that American soldiers would not be sent into a foreign war . Wilson was preparing to do just the opposite, he was preparing for war .
 His “alter ego, as he called “Colonel House, was making behind-thescenes agreements with England which committed America to entering the war . His ‘alter ego’ as he . called ‘Colonel . House’ was making agreements with
 The same crowd which manipulated the passage of the income tax and the Federal Reserve System wanted America in the war . The crowd wanted America to join the war, the same crowd manipulated the tax .
 Morgan, John D Rockefeller, “Colonel” House, Jacob Schiff and Jacob Schiff, Paul Warburg and the rest of the Jekyl Island conspirators were all deeply involved in getting us involved . Morgan and Rockefeller were all part of the plot to get us involved in
 J P, Morgan & Co. served as British financial agents in this country during World War I .
 The assassination of an Austrian Archduke was merely an incident providing an excuse for starting a chain reaction . The assassination was merely the incident providing a . excuse for a . chain reaction.
 After years of fighting, the war was a complete stalemate and would have ended almost immediately in a negotiated settlement had not the U.S. declared war on Germany .
 As soon as Wilson’s re-election had been engineered through the “he kept us out of war” slogan, a complete reversal of propaganda was instituted . Wilson was re-elected to the presidency in 1945 . Wilson's campaign slogan: “He kept the country
 In those days before radio and television, public opinion was controlled almost exclusively by newspapers . 72 Call It Conspiracy: Public opinion was almost exclusively controlled by newspapers, not television .
 Many of the major newspapers were controlled by the Federal Reserve crowd . The Federal Reserve controlled the majority of major newspapers .
 After the war many historians admitted that one side was as guilty as the other in starting the war . Germany was pictured as a militaristic monster which wanted to rule the world . Germany's image of Germany was often seen as a monster .
 Britain had its soldiers in more countries around the world than all other nations put together . Remember, this picture was painted by Britain .
 So-called “Prussian militarism’s” did exist, but it was no threat to conquer the world . ‘Prussian . militarism did exist but it did not threaten the world,’ says Alexander von von von Stauchner .
 The Germans were proving to be tough business competitors in the world’s markets and the British did not approve of them . Actually, the Germans proved to be a tough business competitor, the British said .
 The sinking of the Lusitania, a British ship torpedoed two years earlier, was revived and given renewed headlines . In order to generate war fever, the sinking was revived to create war fever .
 German submarine warfare was turned into a major issue by the newspapers . The newspapers turned the issue of submarine warfare into an issue of concern .
 The Germans could not allow supplies to be delivered any more than the English would have allowed them to be . Germany would not have allowed the supplies, the historian says . The Germans would not be allowed to allow the supplies .
 If Morgan wanted to take risks and reap the rewards of selling munitions to England, that was his business . Morgan's decision to sell munitions to the UK was his own business .
 It was nothing over which the entire nation should have been dragged into war . It was certainly nothing over . which was . anything over which . the entire . nation should not have been drawn into war. It was not nothing over that the entire country should have .
 The Lusitania, at the time it was sunk, was carrying six million pounds of ammunition . At the time of the sinking, it was carrying a total of 6 million pounds .
 It was actually illegal for American passengers to be aboard a ship carrying munitions to belligerents . U.S. passengers were not allowed to board a ship with munitions .
 House’s influence over Wilson is an example that in the world of super-politics the real rulers are not always the ones the public sees . House's influence on Wilson was an example of how powerful House is in the super-politico world .
 Warburg masterminded establishment of Federal Reserve to put control over nation’s economy in hands of international bankers . Warburg was behind establishment of . Federal Reserve . He wanted control of nation's economy in . hands of . international bankers.
 The Federal Reserve controls the money supply which allows manipulators to create alternate cycles of boom and bust, i.e., a roller coaster economy . The Fed controls money supply and creates alternate cycles .
 This allows those in the know to make fabulous amounts of money, but even more important, allows the Insiders to control the economy and further centralize power in the federal government . The Insiders are allowed to make lots of money but also control the government .
 In fact, the Lusitania was registered in the British navy as an auxiliary cruiser . In fact it was registered as a British navy ship .
 The sinking of the Lusitania was used by clever propagandists to portray the Germans as inhuman slaughterers of innocents . Yet the sinking was used in clever propaganda to portray them as inhuman .
 Submarine warfare was manufactured into a cause célebre to push us into war . Submarine Warfare was manufactured as a cause to push the war, he says. Submarine war was made a cause of war to push war .
 Bernard Baruch was made absolute dictator over American business when President Wilson appointed him Chairman of the War Industries Board, where he had control of all domestic contracts for Allied war materials . During the “war to end all wars,” Jnsider banker Bernard .
 Baruch made lots of friends while placing tens of billions in government contracts . Out of the war to make the world safe for international bankers, he netted $200 million for himself .
 Sir William Wiseman was the man sent by British Intelligence to help bring the U.S. into the war . He was amply rewarded for his services for his efforts .
 He stayed in the U.S. afer WWI as a partner in the Jacob Schiff-Paul Warburg-controlled Kuhn, Loeb bank .
 Few even today grasp the importance of the U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War . But it was a catastrophe of such magnitude for the United States that few even now grasp its importance .
 The war reversed our traditional foreign policy of non-involvement . We have been enmeshed almost constantly ever since in perpet perpetuity . 75 ual wars for perpetual peace. 75 wars for peace for peace.
 Winston Churchill once observed that all nations would have been better off had the U.S. minded its own business . Winston Churchill said all nations were better off if the United States minded its . own business. Winston Churchill .
 The Bolshevik Revolution in Russia was obviously one of the great turning points in world history . It was obviously a turning point in the world's history .
 The myth-makers and rewriters of history have done their landscape painting jobs well . Th myth-maker and rewriter of history has done their . jobs well, says historian .
 The establishing of Communism in Russia is a classic example of the second ‘big lie’ of Communism, i.e. that it is the movement of the downtrodden masses rising up against exploiting bosses . Communism is the second "big lie" of Communism. Communism is a
 This cunning deception has been fostered since before the first French Revolution in 1789 . The deception was fostered by the French government in the early 1800s .
 Most people today believe the Communists were successful in Russia because they were able to rally behind them the sympathy and frustration of the Russian people . The Russians were sick of the tyranny of the Czars .
 When Czar Nicholas II abdicated, a provisional government was established by Prince Lvov who wanted to pattern the new Russian government after our own . The provisional government of Russia was established in Russia in 1877 .
 Lvov's Lvov government gave way to the Kerensky regime . But unfortunately, unfortunately, the Lvov regime gave way . The Lvov-led government was overthrown in 2008 .
 Kerensky, a so-called democratic socialist, may have been running a caretaker government for the Communists . He may be running a government that was in charge of the government .
 He issued a general amnesty for Communists and other revolutionaries . Many had been exiled after the abortive Red Revolution of 1905 . He kept the war going against Germany and the other Central Powers .
 The Allies include Russia, the British Commonwealth, France and by April 1917, the United States . The Allies included Russia, Britain, France, Russia and the British Empire .
 In March of 1917, purposeful planners set the forces to compel Czar Nicholas II to abdicate . In March 1917, the forces were set in motion to compel the Czar's abdication . The events occurred in March 1917 .
 Lenin was exiled for trying to topple the Czar in the abortive Communist revolution of that year . Lenin was in Switzerland and had been in Western Europe since 1905 when he was exiled .
 Trotsky and his money were impounded by the Canadian government . Trotsky was taken to a Canadian prison where he was arrested . Trotsky's money was seized by the Canadians .
 Trotsky had said many times that if he were successful in coming to power in Russian he would immediately stop what he called the “imperialist war” and sue for a separate peace with Germany . This was a very logical thing for the Canadian government to do for Trotsky, says
 Bankrolling the Bolshevik Revolution 77 could kill Canadians . This would free millions of German troops for transfer from the Eastern front to the Western front where they would be transferred to the West . Bankrolled the Bolshevik revolution 77 could have killed Canadians .
 The British (through future Kuhn, Loeb partner Sir William Wiseman) and the United States (through none other than the ubiquitous “Colonel” House) pressured the Canadian government . Then all of a sudden the British and U.S. pressured the government .
 The whole Bolshevik Revolution took place in Petrograd, Russia, during the 1920s and 1930s . Petrograd was the birthplace of the Bolshevik Revolution . The city was Petrograd .
 The two Germans most responsible for the financing of Lenin were Max Warburg and a displaced Russian named Alexander Helphand . Warburg was responsible for financing Lenin's rise in Russia .
 Lenin's supporters could claim they were serving their country's cause by helping and financing Lenin . They could claim that they were . serving . their country’s cause by financing Lenin. Lenin .
 For the father-in-law of Max Warburg’s brother, Felix, was Jacob Schiff, senior partner in Kuhn, Leob & Co. Felix Warburg's brother, Jacob Schiff . The Warburg family is one of the wealthiest families in the world .
 One of the best sources of information on the financing of the Bolshevik Revolution is Czarism and the Revolution by an important White Russian General named Arsene de Goulevitch who was founder in France .
 Schiff spent millions to overthrow the Czar and more to overthrow Kerensky . Schiff spent more than $10 million to overthrow Czar . Schiff also spent millions on overthrowing Kerentnsky. Schiff spent most of the money to overthrow him .
 He was sending money to Russia long after the true character of the Bolsheviks was known to the world . The money was sent long after it was made public, not before it became known .
 Col. Schiff raised $10 million, supposedly for Jewish war . Bankrolling the Bolshevik Revolution . Bankrolled the revolution .
 The subject of financing the Communist takeover of Russia became taboo . The result was that the subject became taboo for Russians .
 Later evidence indicates that the bankrolling of the Bolsheviks was handled by a syndicate of international bankers . The syndicate included Morgan and Rockefeller interests, according to evidence .
 Long interview with R. R., who confirmed what I had previously been told by M. After referring to the German hatred of himself and his family, he turned to the subject of the Revolution which, he claimed, was engineered by the English, more precisely, by Sir George Buchanan and
 He could, he asserted, name the streets and numbers of the houses in which British agents were quartered . He said he could name streets, numbers of British agents' houses .
 It should be noted that Lord Milner, Paul, Felix and Max Warburg represented ‘their” respective countries at the Paris Peace Conference at the conclusion of World War I . If we can somehow ascribe Warburg’s financing of Lenin to German “patriot
 Britain and America were at war with Germany and were allies of Czarist Russia . Both Britain and the U.S. were allied with Russia during the war .
 To free dozens of German divisions to switch from the Eastern Front to France and kill hundreds of thousands of American and British soldiers was nothing short of treason . To free the German divisions from the eastern Front to switch to France was treason, he says .
 If you conclude that this is anything but coincidental, your name will be expunged from the Social Register . However, if you think it's anything more than coincidental your name is exponerated .
 Lord Alfred Milner, wealthy Englishman and front man for the Rothschilds, served as paymaster for international bankers in Petrograd during the Bolshevik Revolution .
 The Council on Foreign Relations was started by, and is still controlled by Leftist international bankers . The American subsidiary of this conspiracy is called the Council of Foreign Relations . The Council is a subsidiary of the global Leftist conspiracy .
 The admitted goal of the CFR is to abolish the Constitution and replace our once independent Republic with a World Government . CFR admits that its goal is to replace the Constitution with a world government .
 Jacob Schiff financed the Communist Revolution in Russia to the tune of $20 million . Jacob Schiff is a long-time associate of the Rothschilds . According to his grandson John, Jacob Schiff .
 Schiff’s partner and relative, Paul Warburg, engineered the establishment of the Federal Reserve System while on the Kuhn Loeb payroll . Warburg's relative, Schiff's partner, is Schiff's relative and co-founder of the firm, Warburg .
 Russia was the one major European country without a central bank . It may or may not have been coincidental, it may have been the first .
 In Russia, for the first time, the Communist conspiracy gained a geographical homeland from which to launch assaults against the other nations of the world . Russia is now a place from which it will launch attacks against other nations, the author says .
 In the Bolshevik Revolution we have some of the world’s richest and most powerful men financing a movement which claims its very existence is based on the concept of stripping of their wealth men like the Rothschilds, Rockefellers, Schiffs, Warburgs, Morgans,
 It is only logical to assume that if they financed it and do not fear it, it must be because they control it . It's only logical that they financed the project and don't fear it .
 The EastWest balance-of-power politics is used as one of the main excuses for the socialization of America . The balance of power politics is a key part of America's socialization process .
 By nationalization of Russia the Insiders bought themselves an enormous piece of real estate, complete with mineral rights, for somewhere between $30 and $40 million . Although it was not their main purpose, by nationalizing of Russia they bought themselves a huge piece of property .
 International bankers have an enforcer arm within Russia to keep the Soviet leaders in line . Undoubtedly much of the control is economic, but certainly the international bankers have a enforcer .
 The organization may be SMERSH, the international Communist murder organization described in testimony before Congressional Committees and by Ian Fleming in his James Bond books . Ian Fleming's James Bond novels suggest the organization may have been involved .
 A clique of American financiers helped establish communism in Russia, but has striven mightily ever since to keep it alive . The clique has strived mightily to keep communism alive .
 Ever since 1918 this clique has been engaged in transferring money and, probably more important, technical information, to the Soviet Union . It has transferred money and technical information to Russia .
 Sutton shows conclusively that virtually everything the Soviets possess has been acquired from the West . Sutton: Using, for the most part, official State Department documents, documents show the Soviets have acquired virtually everything they possess . Sutton's book is published by the U.S. State Department .
 Insiders pushed FDR into recognizing the Soviet Union, thus saving it from financial collapse . Insiders were underwriting huge loans on both sides of the Atlantic for the new regime of Adolph Hitler .
 In so doing they assisted greatly in setting the stage for World War II, and the events that followed, they helped set up the events leading up to WWII .
 In 1941, the same /nsiders rushed to the aid of our ‘noble ally,” Stalin, after his break with Hitler . In 1942, the Russians rushed to aid of Stalin, who had split with Hitler, after Hitler's war .
 In one country after another Communism has been imposed on the local population from the top down . Communism is imposed on local people from the bottom down . In one of many countries, Communism has already been imposed by the government .
 The most prominent forces for the imposition of that tyranny came from the U.S. and Great Britain . The United States and Britain helped impose that tyranny .
 The facts lead to 84 Call It Conspiracy no other possible conclusion, but the facts point to a conspiracy theory .
 The idea that Communism is a movement of the downtrodden masses is a fraud . Communism is not a movement for the masses, it's a fraud, he says . It's a socialist movement, not a Communist Party .
 None of the foregoing makes sense if Communism really is what the Communists and the Establishment tell us it is . The Establishment tells us that Communism is what it really is . It is not what they tell us .
 If Communism is an arm of a bigger conspiracy to control the world by power-mad billionaires, it all becomes logical . But if Communism is part of a larger conspiracy, it becomes perfectly logical .
 It is at this point that we should again make it clear that this conspiracy is not made up solely of bankers and international cartelists, but includes every field of human endeavor . We should make the point that it is not just bankers and cartelists but includes all fields of human endeavour .
 The scholar has shown the ‘sons of the very powerful” how their wealth could be used to rule the world . Starting with Voltaire and Adam Weishaupt and running through John Ruskin, Sidney Webb, Nicholas Murray Butler, and on to the present Henry Kissinger
 The book is discussing only one segment of the conspiracy, certain international bankers . We cannot stress too greatly the importance of the reader keeping in mind that this book is only about certain bankers .
 Other segments which work to foment labor, religious and racial strife in order to promote socialism have been described in numerous other books . Other equally important segments of the Communist Party are described in many other books.
 One must draw distinction between competitive free enterprise, the most moral and productive system ever devised, and cartel capitalism dominated by industrial monopolists and international bankers .
 The difference is the private enterpriser operates by offering products and services in a competitive free market . The cartel capitalist uses the government to force the public to do business with him . The difference between the cartel capitalist and the enterprisers operates in the free market is the difference .
 These corporate socialists are deadly enemies of competitive private enterprise . Corporations are the enemy of competitive enterprise, says President Obama .
 Liberals are willing to believe that these “robber barons” will fix prices, rig markets, establish monopolies, buy politicians and buy politicians, ex-Bankrolling the Bolshevik Revolution 85 ploit employees and fire them the day before they are eligible for pensions . Liberals will
 The Establishment’s mass media will accuse you of being a dangerous paranoid who is ‘dividing” our people . However, if you think with logic, reason and precision in this field and try to expose these power seekers, you will be accused of being dangerous paranoid
 Just since 1975, there have been five major changes in the tax code, and these changes are now coming at the rate of once a year .
 "It is virtually impossible to keep up with these changes as we try to go about our every-day lives," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 If we do get a so-called flat tax that actually reduces the income tax bite, it will be followed shortly by the Value Added Tax, which is just another catch phrase for a national sales tax . And, if we do, we will also be followed by the value Added Tax
 The /nsiders have repeatedly foisted off on the American people the schemes that were put in place throughout Western Europe, but most specifically Sweden and England . The schemes are similar to those in Sweden, England and Sweden .
 Colin Simpson’s book, The Lusitania, proved these facts and much more . In the year we published None Dare, Colin Simpson's book, the book, proved that . Colin Simpson .
 The conventional academic reviews were predictably unfavorable to the book, but they did not do much damage to his case . The book was published in 2007 .
 R.R. Dall, Curtiss, FD. R. Rall, 71, died in 1968, Tulsa, Okla, 71 . My Exploited Father In Law, Christian Crusade Publications, 1968, was published in 1968 .
 Arthur Willert, Arthur, The Road To Safety, London, 1952, 29. Derek, Derek, Vershoyle, Verschoyle, 1952. Derek was Derek's partner in the book . Derek was a member of The Road to Safety .
 Hagedorn, Herman, The Magnate, John Day, N.Y. see also Washington Post, Feb. 22, 1918, 195.
 The best general reference covering other areas of the conspiracy is Rose Martin’s Fabian Freeway .
 One of the main reasons the Insiders worked behind the scenes to foment WWI was to create in its aftermath a world government . Chapter V Establishing the Establishment onz .
 If you wish to establish national monopolies, you must control national governments . If you want to establish a national monopoly, it must be controlled by national governments, says David Cameron .
 If you wish to establish international monopolies or cartels, you must control a world government . If you want to establish monopolies, you need control of the world government to do so .
 After the Armistice on November 11, 1918, Woodrow Wilson and his alter ego, “Colonel” House, went to Europe in hopes of establishing a world government in the form of the League of Nations . Wilson and the /nsiders were in Europe trying to
 The glitter of the “moral crusade” evaporated along with Wilson’s vaunted “Fourteen Points” The “rubes back on Main Street” began to waken. When the negotiations revealed one side had been about as guilty as the other
 Americans didn't want to get into a World Government with double-dealing Europeans whose specialty was secret treaty hidden behind secret treaty . Americans certainly didn’t want to . get . into a . World Government .
 The guest of honor, so to speak, stalked out of the banquet before the poisoned meal could be served .
 Without American inclusion, there could be no meaningful World Government, says President Obama . And, without American inclusion there could not be any meaningful World government .
 Senate dared not ratify a treaty saddling the country with such an international commitment . Aroused public opinion made it obvious that the U.S. Senate would never ratify the treaty .
 In some manner the American public had to be sold on the idea of internationalism and World Government . The U.S. had to sell it to the public in some manner .
 Elections were to become mere charades conducted for the bedazzlement of the booboisie . Elections were also to be a charade conducted for bedazzling of the 'booboo'
 Idea was to use both the Democrat and Republican parties as instruments to promote World Government . The idea was that both parties should be used to promote world government .
 The part about the Jnsiders establishing a . worid dictatorship quite naturally was left out . The part of the . Jnsider dictatorship was left . out .
 The techniques of the Illuminati have long been recognized as models for Communist methodology . The role of Weishaupt’s Illuminists in such horrors as the Reign of Terror is unquestioned .
 Weishaupt also used the structure of the Society of Jesus as his model, and rewrote his Code in Masonic terms . The Code was re-written in the same way as that of Freemasons .
 Lord Rothschild was removed from the forefront of the scheme . Apparently for stragetic reasons, he was subsequently removed .
 The “secret society” was organized on the conspiratorial pattern of circles within circles . The ‘secret society was organized by the conspirator pattern,’ according to the author .
 Professor Quigley informs us that 92 Call It Conspiracy the central part of the ‘secret society’ was established by March, 1891, using Rhodes’ money . Rhodes' money was used to establish the society .
 The organization was run for Rothschild by Lord Alfred Milner . Lord Milner was a key financier of the Bolshevik revolution . The last chapter of this book is about the Russian revolution .
 The American organizers were dominated by the large number of Morgan ‘experts,’ who had gone to the Paris Peace Conference . The Morgan group became close friends with the similar group of English ‘expert’ which had been recruited by the Milner group .
 According to Quigley, the most important financial dynasties in America following WWI were the Rockefeller family . Kuhn, Loeb & Company, Dillon Read and Company and Brown Bros. were the biggest financial dynasts after WWI .
 The Insider crowd which created the Federal Reserve System, many of whom also bankrolled the Bolshevik Revolution, were all in the original membership . Many of the original members of the Fed were also in the Bolsheviks .
 These men did not create the C.F.R. because they had nothing better to do with their time and money . These men didn't have nothing better than to do, they did have nothing to do .
 "This semi-secret organization unquestionably has become the most influential group in America," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 One of the infrequent articles to appear in the national press concerning this Council was published in the Christian Science Monitor of September 1, 1961 .
 Only one magazine article on the C.F.R. has ever appeared in a major national journal—and that in Harper’s, hardly a mass-circulation periodical . Indicative of the power to maintain its anonymity is the fact that, despite its having been operative
 Only a handful of articles on the Council have appeared in the nation’s great newspapers . Similarly, only a few articles have been published in the past .
 Kraft, incidentally, aptly titled his article on the C.ER., “School for Statesmen.,” — an admission that the members of the Council are drilled with a “line” of strategy to be carried out in Washington . Kraft: “The members of
 A second world war would greatly enhance the opportunity for establishment of World Government, writes David Cameron . A second war would enhance the chance to establish a World Government .
 Chief legal counsel to the J Henry Schroeder Bank was the firm of Sullivan and Cromwell, whose senior partners included John Foster and Allen Dulles .
 The Council’s first task was to infiltrate and develop effective control of the United States State Department . The story of the C.F.R. takeover of the Department of State is contained in State Department Publication 2349, Report To The President On The Results of the San Francisco
 Report of Secretary of State Edward R Stettinius to President Truman to Truman . It is the report of secretary of state Edward R. Stettinsius .
 This is the group which designed the United Nations— the first major successful step on the road to a World Superstate . The United Nations was designed by the U.N. It is the first step in the way to a world Superstate, the group says .
 At least forty-seven C.F.R. members were among the American delegates to the founding of the United Nations in San Francisco in 1945 . At least 40-seven members of the U.N. were at the founding .
 Members of the C.F.R. group included Harold Stassen, John J McCloy, Owen Lattimore, Alger Hiss, Harry Dexter White, Nelson Rockefeller, John Foster Dulles, John Carter Vincent, and Dean Acheson .
 The United Nations should be a peace organization instead of a front for the international bankers . The U.N. should not be the Establishment 97 peace organization . The United States should be an international peace organization, not an international banking organization .
 C.ER. members were at the elbow of the American President at Teheran, Potsdam and Yalta — where hundreds of millions of human beings were delivered into the hands of Joseph Stalin . The Council on Foreign Relations .
 Administrative assistant to FDR during this time was a key member of the C.ER. named Lauchlin Currie . Currie was subsequently identified by J Edgar Hoover as a Soviet agent .
 Professor Henry Kissinger came to the job from the staff of the C.F.R., and the undersecretaries of state, almost to a man, are C.R. members . While Rogers is not a member, Professor Kissinger is Mr Nixon’s chief foreign policy advisor
 Today the C.F.R. remains active in working toward its final goal of a government over all the world . The Insiders and their allies will control the government they want .
 The goal of the C.ER is simply to abolish the United States with its Constitutional guarantees of liberty . The goal is to simply abolish the U.S. with its constitutional guarantees of freedom .
 International banking organizations that currently have men in the C.F.R. include Kuhn, Loeb & Company; Lazard Freres; Dillon Read; Lehman Bros. and Lehman Brothers .
 Also in the C.E.R. are men from such openly Leftist organizations as the Fabian Socialist Americans for Democratic Action, the avowedly Socialist League for Industrial Democracy — , and the United World Federalists .
 In theory, these men and organizations are supposed to be the blood enemies of the banks and businesses listed above . These organizations are meant to be blood enemies to the banks .
 The fact that the C.ER. operates in near-complete anonymity is hardly accidental . Establishing the Establishment 99 can hardly be accidental, it's not accidental .
 Surely the C.F.R. could get a few blurbs of publicity if publicity was desired .
 The case of Adolph Ochs of the Times and David Sarnoff of RCA are examples of this control . The case is an example of the control of the media .
 Both were given early financial aid by Kuhn, Loeb & Company and Morgan Guaranty & Company .
 These are the Establishment’s official landscape painters whose jobs it is to make sure the public does not discover the C.ER. and its role in creating a world socialist dictatorship .
 ‘Colonel House’ believed we should have two political parties but only a single ideology — One World Socialism . You will recall that “Colonel” House believed that ‘One World Socialism’ was a socialist ideology . He believed that we should not have two
 In 1968, George Wallace maintained that there wasn’t a dime’s worth of difference between the two parties . Wallace may not have known how right he was or why .
 Averell Harriman, George Ball, Henry Fowler, Dean Rusk, Adam Yarmolinsky, Hubert Humphrey and John Lindsay were the original presidents of the United States .
 Undersecretary of State George Ball went with Lehman Brothers . Secretary of the Treasury Henry Fowler was taken in by Goldman, Sachs & Co. Secretary of State Henry Fowler went with Goldman, Goldman, and Treasury .
 Fowler and Deming were responsible for policies which led to European nations claiming half of our gold as well as denuding the U.S. Treasury of all of the silver reserves it had built up over a century of time . European nations claimed half of the gold .
 Henry Kissinger, the “Colonel House of the Nixon Administration, came to his job directly from employment on the C.E.R. staff . Henry Kissinger was the "Colonel of the House" of the . Nixon Administration .
 Kissinger represents the very opposite of everything Nixon said he stood for in his campaign . Kissinger is the antithesis to everything Nixon stood for, he said, in his first term .
 Both Liberals and Conservatives admit Kissinger is by far the most important man in the Nixon Administration . Kissinger was a key figure in Nixon's administration . Kissinger is the most powerful figure in the White House .
 Administrations, both Democrat and Republican, come and go—but the CER lingers on . Administrations come from both sides of the aisle . Administrators come from all sides of aisle .
 This is why the more things seem to change, the more they remain the same . This is despite the fact that things have changed in the last few years .
 The fix is in at the top, where the same coterie of /nsiders, bent on control of the world, runs the show . The fix was in place at the very top, with the same group bent on controlling the world .
 While the Jnsiders are serving champagne and caviar to their guests in their summer mansions at Newport, their agents are out enslaving and murdering people . While they are entertaining other members of the social elite aboard their yachts, they are enslaving people .
 They have used the prestige that their wealth, social position, and social position to lead their country toward bankruptcy and military debacle . They have led their country to bankruptcy, military debacle, writes CNN.com's John Defterios .
 It goes without saying that the C.F.R.’s hands are bloodier now with the gore of 50,000 Americans in Vietnam . C.I.R.'s hands now bloodier than before .
 The Council has succeeded in promoting the shipment of American aid and trade to the East European arsenal of the Viet Cong for the killing of our sons in the field . Shamefully the Council has . succeeded in . promoting, as American policy, as . American policy .
 If scarcely one American in a thousand has any familiarity with the C.F.R.R., it is doubtful that one in five thousand have any knowledge of the Bilderbergers .
 The strange name of this group is taken from the site of the first meeting in may, 1954 —the Hotel de Bilderberg —in Oostebeck, Holland . The name "Bilderberg" comes from the name of the original meeting in May, 1954 . The
 The man who created the Bilderbergers is His Royal Highness Prince Bernhard of the Netherlands . He created the group with the help of the Dutch royal family .
 The Prince is an important figure in Royal Dutch Petroleum (Shell Oil) and the Societe General de Belgique, a huge conglomerate cartel with worldwide holdings .
 Those in attendance include leading political and financial figures from the U.S. and Western Europe . The event is being held in New York City .
 Bilderbergers coordinate the efforts of the European and American power elites . The "new world order" is being built, while the “New world order’s being built . The Bilders coordinate their efforts with European and U.S. power .
 Prince Bernhard’s counterpart among the American Bilderbergers is David Rockefeller, chairman of the board of the C.F.R., whose economic base is the giant Chase Manhattan Bank and Standard Oil . David Rockefeller is the head of the Rockefeller Group, which includes Chase Manhattan
 Warburg & Co. Ltd., Ltd., Pierce Paul Schweitzer of the International Monetary Fund, and George Ball of Lehman Brothers. The IMF, the IMF, and the World Bank of New York, will meet in New York City .
 Not everyone who attends one of the Bilderbergers’ secret meetings is an /nsider, but only men of the Left are allowed to attend the private meetings following the general sessions .
 Bilderberg policy is not planned by those who attend the conferences, but by the elite steering committee of Insiders . The committee is composed of 24 Europeans and 15 Americans .
 The Bilderberger Steering Committee is or was a member of the Council on Foreign Relations . Those who adhere to the accidental theory of history will claim that it is sheer coincidence that every single one of those named as past and present members of the committee is a past or present member of
 The Bilderberger Advisory Committee forms an even more ‘inner circle” than the Steering Committee . Bilderberg Advisory Committee is even more 'inner circle' than the Committee .
 The landscape painters merely brush the Bilderbergers right out of existence and focus the public’s attention on something like the conditions in the prisons or Coke bottles littering the highways . But, of course, the landscape painter says, “The Bilderbergerers merely
 Since Bilderbergers are a group of the Left (or, as the Liberals in the media might say, but don’t, “a group of progressives” they are allowed to go on in peace and quiet planning for 1984 .
 There is heavy Rockefeller influence in the media, which might also have something to do with the Bilderbergers . While everybody has heard of, say, The John Birch Society (and almost always in a derogatory manner from the Eastern Establishment media), practically nobody has heard . The Bilder
 They usually last three days and are held in remote, but plush quarters . The event is held in a remote but plush location .
 Participants are housed in one location and are protected by a thorough security network . The participants are housed at one location in a secure location .
 Only Bilderbergers ever know what happened . Decisions are reached, resolutions adopted, plans of action initiated, but only Bilders know what happens .
 We must assume that these people did not congregate merely to discuss their golf scores . We have to assume that they did not discuss golf .
 The press, naturally, is not allowed to be present, although occasionally a brief press conference is held at the end of the meeting . News media are given in very general terms the Bilderberger version of what was discussed .
 The most recent meeting took place at Laurance Rockefeller’s Woodstock Inn at Woodstock, Vermont, April 23, 24, 25 . Prince Bernhard of the Netherlands, head of the secret, one world Bilderberger movement, confers with President Nixon .
 Bernhard Bernhard is a former Nazi SS storm trooper . Bernhard now works with the Rothschilds and Communists to promote a World Super State of the elite .
 Bernhard holds yearly secret meetings with high U.S. officials, bankers and industrialists to map plans for merging the U S. and the Soviet Union into a world government . Bernhard has met with high-ranking officials to map out plans to merge the two countries .
 After last meeting, Nixon devalued the dollar and opened up trade with Red China . Nixon devalues the dollar to open trade with China and devalued it .
 Rothschilds are closely connected with Prince Bernhard in business (Royal Dutch Shell) and in the building of a one world super-government with the Soviets . The Rothschilds have been linked with the Prince of Germany .
 Edmond, reputedly the richest of the French Rothschilds, is worth $500 million personally, according to estimates . Edmond is reputed to be the richest man in the world .
 Rutland, Vermont, Herald was the only newspaper to report on the meeting . Rutland's reporter could acquire only sketchy information about what the meeting was all about .
 A closed-door meeting was held in Woodstock last week to brief a handful of local officials on some phases of the conference . Local officials are briefed on some aspects of the project .
 Henry Kissinger was C.F.R.-Rockefeller errand boy, the President’s Number One advisor on foreign affairs, Henry Kissinger . Present at the scene to carry back orders to Mr Nixon was . Mr Nixon's Secretary of State George W. Bush .
 Henry Kissinger went to Peking and arranged for the acceptance of Red China as a member of the family of trading nations . The international monetary crisis developed after which the dollar was devalued .
 Antony Sutton has poured his extraordinary research capabilities into a study on the background and power of a Yale based secret society called The Order . The Order, commonly known as Skull & Bones, is a Yale-based secret society .
 Sutton has brought into the light some very significant and potentially damning revelations about this shadowy organization . Sutton has also brought in some significant revelations about the shadowy organization in the U.S. Sutton has revealed some of the most significant revelations in the world .
 Sutton has compiled enough valid material to show that Skull & Bones is not just a group of college seniors looking for a reason to throw a beer bash and Lord it over their fellow students . Much research still needs to be done on the background, antecedants and interconnections of this
 Key members of the C.E.R., since its founding at the end of WWI, were also members of The Order .
 W Averrill Harriman, William P and McGeorge Bundy, Henry L Stimson, J Richardson Dilworth, Henry Luce, Henry P Davison, George P Bush, and current C.ER president Winston Lord are just a few of ‘the boys’
 The founders, partners, and directors of some of this country's most powerful financial institutions, both past and present, appear far too frequently in both The Order and the C.F.R. to be mere coincidence .
 Chase Manhattan Bank City Bank Morgan Guaranty Trust The Carnegie Foundation and Rockefeller Foundation represented in both organizations . The Rockefeller Foundation and the Ford Foundation also represent the Standard Oil Company .
 Sutton’s continuing research on The Order should prove most interesting and valuable . Sutton's continuing research will prove most valuable for Sutton .
 Richard Nixon now claims that he no longer belongs to the C.ER., having dropped out when the organization became an issue in his primary campaign for the governorship of California in 1962 . Richard Nixon dropped out of the organization when the issue became a political issue .
 Richard Nixon had already made his real position very clear to the Insiders of the C.F.R. by authoring an article in the magazine, Foreign affairs, in October 1967 . Richard Nixon campaigned in 1968 as a conservative .
 The title of this article, “Asia after Vietnam,” revealed how the aspiring President Nixon would open a new policy toward Red China . Nixon would bring “realism” to our Asian foreign policy .
 The C.ER.’s Annual Report for 1952, admitted that sometimes members in sensitive positions were forced to go underground and keep the membership secret .
 The Rockefellers run the world from behind the scenes . They are one of those “different personages” who run the country from behind .
 The Rockefeller clan reportedly has worked with the Rothschilds and their agents since the 1880’s . The original John D arranged to get a rebate on every barrel of oil he and his competitors shipped over Kuhn, Loeb & Co. controlled Pennsylvania and Baltimore & Ohio railroads .
 It has been a profitable partnership ever since . There appear to have been areas in which the two financial dynasts competed .
 The involvement of the Rockefellers with their supposed blood enemies, the Communists, dates back to the Bolshevik Revolution . During the 1920’s Lenin established his New Economic Policy (the same name Mr Nixon applied to his wageprice control package)
 The Federal Reserve-CFR Jnsiders began pushing to open up Russia to U.S. traders soon after the revolution .
 Public opinion ran so high against the Bolsheviks because of their barbarism that it was official U.S. government policy not to deal with them .
 The United States did not officially recognize the Bolsheviks until 1933 . The U.S. did not formally recognize the Bolshevik Party until 1933.
 The Bolsheviks were originally saved from collapse by Herbert Hoover who raised money to buy food which was appropriated by Lenin and his gangsters . Hoover raised money for food which had been appropriated by the Bolsheviks .
 They used it as a tool to subdue starving peasants who had been resisting their newly imposed slave masters . The slave masters used the slave system as a weapon of war against peasants .
 While Hoover’s “humanitarian” gesture saved the Soviet regime, the Russian economy was still in total chaos . Hoover's "humanitarian" gesture saved Soviet regime but the economy remained in chaos . The Russian economy still in chaos.
 The Rockefellers assigned their public relations agent Ivy Lee to sell the idea that the Bolsheviks were merely misunderstood idealists who were actually kind benefactors of mankind . The public relations effort was designed to convince the American public that the Russians were actually good people .
 Standard of New Jersey bought 50 percent of the Nobel’s huge Caucasus oil fields even though the property had theoretically been nationalized . After the Bolshevik Revolution, Standard bought 50 per cent of the oil fields in Russia .
 Standard Oil would go wherever it went, Chase National Bank would follow . Standard Oil was followed by Standard Bank .
 Chase National Bank was instrumental in establishing the American-Russian Chamber of Commerce in 1922 . In order to rescue the Bolsheviks, the bank set up the chamber of commerce in order to do so .
 The Rockefeller’s Chase National Bank also was involved in selling Bolshevik bonds in the U.S. in 1928 . The Rockefeller's Chase National bank was involved .
 The Rockefellers apparently were not alone in financing the Communist arm of the Jnsiders’ conspiracy . But the Rockefers were also involved in financing of the Communists .
 Sutton shows that there is hardly a segment of the Soviet economy which is not a result of the transference of Western, particularly American, technology . Sutton: There is hardly anything in Soviet economy that is not result of transference .
 For fifty years the Federal Reserve-CFR-Rockefeller-Insider crowd has advocated and carried out policies aimed at increasing the power of their satellite, the Soviet Union .
 America spends $75 billion a year on defense to protect itself from the enemy the Insiders are building up . Meanwhile, America spends more than $100 billion on defense every year .
 Council on Foreign Relations is leader in promoting transfer of technology and increasing aid and trade with the Communists .
 Virtually every one of these “non-strategic” items has a direct or indirect use in war . Virtually all of these items have a direct, indirect use of war .
 Items such as rifle cleaning compounds, electronic equipment and radar were declared “non-strategic” and cleared for shipment to the Soviet Union . Later, items such as rifles cleaning compounds and electronic equipment were declared non-strategories .
 The Viet Cong and North Vietnamese receive 85 percent of their war materials from Russia and the Soviet bloc nations . The North Vietnamese and Viet Cong receive 85 per cent of their materials from the Soviet Union .
 The Communist arm of the conspiracy needed help from the Finance Capitalist arm . Since their economies are incapable of supporting a war, the finance capitalist arm needed help . The Communist and Finance Capitalists are unable to support a war .
 "The landscape painters in the mass media have kept the American public from learning this provable fact," says John Sutter . Sutter: "The American public has been kept from learning that this is true"
 Not surprisingly, the Rockefellers have been leaders in championing this bloody trade . The Rockefers have led the trade in the U.S.
 International Basic Economy Corporation is run by Richard Aldrich, grandson of Federal Reserve plotter Nelson Aldrich . Rodman Rockefeller is Rocky’s son .
 Rothschild & Sons of London had entered into partnership with the firm . Rothschild & . Sons of . London has entered into partnerships with the company .
 Cyrus Eaton Jr. is the son of the notoriously pro-Soviet Cyrus Eaton . He began his career as secretary to John D Rockefeller . He was also secretary to the Rockefeller family .
 It is believed that Eaton’s rise to power in finance resulted from backing by his mentor . Eaton is believed to have been backed by the former finance boss .
 Tower International and IBEC continue an old alliance . Tower International continues to work together with IBEC. Tower International is a global business partner in the Middle East .
 Reece Committee which investigated foundations for Congress in 1953 found that Eaton was a secret member of the CFR . Eaton's name does not appear on the CFR’s membership rolls .
 The Rockefeller-Eaton axis is going to build ten rubber goods plants, including two synthetic rubber plants worth $200 million . The Rockefeller axis is also building ten ‘non-strategic’ rubber plants .
 The Rockefeller and Eaton families have now joined forces to build war production plants behind the Iron Curtain . The Communists can become a bigger threat to U.S. survival . The Rockefeller, Eaton and Rockefeller families have joined forces .
 America spends $70 billion a year ostensibly on defense . Then the Rockefellers build aluminum mills for the Communists . America spends that money on defense and then builds aluminum mills .
 Only the absence of a formal declaration of war in Vietnam keeps the Eatons and Rockefellers from being actionable for treason . The absence of such a declaration keeps them from being found guilty of treason .
 They have the blood of nearly 50,000 American servicemen on their hands . They have been killed in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 When Communist dictators visit the U.S. they do not visit laborers or union leaders, but hob-nob with industrial Jeaders . When Communist Dictators visit the United States, they don't visit labor leaders .
 There is little, if any, attempt by the Red Dictators to identify with the working class . The working class is a key part of the Communist Party's success .
 Nikita Khrushchev met Cyrus Eaton, the avowedly pro-Communist industrialist . Cyrus Eaton was a pro-Krushchev ally .
 Eaton started his business career as secretary to John D Rockefeller . The Rockefeller family is believed to be largely responsible for his fortune . Eaton started business career in the 1920s at the age of 25 .
 The United States will provide the Soviets with both the facilities and the tires for them to roll on . The U.S. will also provide the facilities to build the trucks and tires for the Soviets .
 In addition, the Rockefellers and Eatons are constructing a $50 million aluminum producing plant for the Reds . In addition to the $50million plant, the Eatons will also build an aluminum plant .
 Aluminium for jet planes is considered “non-strategic” under JohnsonNixon doctrine . Aluminium is considered non-stategic under Nixon doctrine .
 This means that the Rockefellers and Eatons have a monopoly on the transfer of technological capability to the supposed enemies of the super-rich, the Soviet Union . It means that they have a . monopoly on transfer of technology to the . enemies .
 The Rockefellers and the Eatons have solved that problem for the Communists . The Eatons are now the biggest power players in the world .
 Now, instead of dealing with an official agency of the Soviet government, American concerns will be dealing with the Rockefellers . The Rockefers are a wealthy family of wealthy businessmen .
 The lack of a formal declaration of war prevents the Rockefellers’ trading in the blood of dead Americans from being actionable as treason . Only the technicality of the lack of an actual war prevents it from being a crime .
 By the purchase of patents for the Communists the Rockefellers are virtually in charge of research and development for the Soviet military machine, allowing the Soviets to mass produce American developments . The purchase of the patents allows the Russians to mass-produce American developments.
 "The transfer of such knowledge is even more important than the sale of weapons," says President Obama . The transfer of knowledge is "even more important" than weapons sales, he says .
 A process that may have taken an American corporation a decade to develop is transferred in toto to the Communists . The Communists have taken advantage of the U.S. to develop their own technology .
 Since the Rockefellers have contracted to arrange for patents for the Soviets, they are by dictionary definition Communist agents . They are by the dictionary definition of Communists .
 A strange event occurred in October of 1964 . Indicative of this was a strange event which occurred in 1964 .
 David Rockefeller, president of the Chase Manhattan Bank, took a vacation in the Soviet Union . Rockefeller is chairman of the board of the Council on Foreign Relations . Rockefeller: "I'm not afraid to go to Russia, but I'm glad to go back there"
 A few days after Rockefeller ended his “vacation,” in the Kremlin, Nikita Khrushchev was recalled from a vacation at a Black Sea resort to learn that he had been fired .
 The position of premier in the Soviet Union is a figurehead with the true power residing elsewhere . The true power resides elsewhere in the country, writes CNN's John Defterios .
 For five decades the Rockefellers have been involved in building the strength of the Soviets . Yet we find that for five decades they have been . involved in the building of the strength .
 We are supposed to believe those international cartelists do this because they are foolish or greedy . But we're supposed to think they do it because of their greed or foolishness . It's not the case that cartelists are greedy or foolish or foolish .
 If a criminal goes up and down the streets shouting at the top of his lungs that as soon as he gets hold of a gun he is going to kill Joe Doaks, one of two things must be true . Doaks is secretly giving guns to the criminal, and you learn that
 Either Doaks is a fool or all the shouting is just “show biz” and the criminal secretly works for Doaks . Doaks may be a fool, but all the shouts are just ‘showbiz’
 David Rockefeller runs the financial end of the Rockefeller dynasty, Nelson runs the political end . Nelson Rockefeller is the son of David Rockefeller . Nelson is the heir to the Rockefeller empire .
 He is unacceptable to the vast majority of the grass roots of his own party . But, unfortunately for him, he is . Unfortunately for him he is unacceptable .
 Nelson Rockefeller and Richard Nixon were supposed to be bitter political rivals . Rockefeller and Nixon are supposed to have been rivals in the political arena . Rockefeller was president of the United States in 1972, Nixon was president .
 Rockefeller still asserts dominion over Nixon, but that still does not preclude Rockefeller from asserting dominion over Mr. Nixon . Rockefeller is Rockefeller, not Nixon, is Rockefeller .
 When Nixon and Rockefeller competed for the Republican nomination in 1968, Rockefeller naturally would have preferred to win the prize . Rockefeller would control the highest office in the land regardless of who won .
 There was no political reason why Mr Nixon needed to crawl to Mr Rockefeller . Rockefeller was Rockefeller's partner in the White House .
 Chicago Tribune cracked that it was like Grant surrendering to Lee . The Chicago Tribune crack that it's like Grant surrendered to Lee.
 The meeting produced the infamous “Compact of Fifth Avenue” in which the Republican Platform was scrapped and replaced by Rockefeller’s socialist plans . Rockefeller's socialist plans were the result of the meeting of the Republican Party in New York City .
 Whatever honor they might have been able to carry from their services on the platform committee had been wiped out . The party had hoped to carry on their services as a member of a platform committee .
 The whole story behind what happened in Rockefeller’s apartment will doubtless never be known . Rockefeller's apartment was the subject of numerous scandals .
 Mr Nixon has been in the Rockefeller orbit since the 1970s . But it is obvious that since that time he has been involved with Rockefeller . Mr Nixon is now in Rockefeller orbit .
 After losing to Kennedy by an eyelash, Mr Nixon entered the California gubernatorial race and lost . Mr Nixon, against his wishes, and at the request of Rockefeller, entered the race against Rockefeller .
 After losing to Pat Brown in the California gubernatorial race in 1962, Nixon had universally been consigned to the political trash heap . Nixon lost his bid to become a Republican in 1962 .
 At the same time, according to his own financial statement, his net worth multiplied many times and he became quite wealthy . At the time, he was very wealthy .
 Nelson Rockefeller helped make Nixon acceptable to Conservatives by appearing to oppose him . Rockefeller rescued Nixon from political oblivion and made him President of the United States . Rockefeller was Rockefeller's key ally in helping to bring Nixon to the center .
 When Nixon left Washington, he, by his own claim, had little more than an old Oldsmobile automobile, Pat’s respectable Republican cloth coat, and a government pension . Nixon left D.C. with only an old car, a cloth coat and government pension, he
 While in law practice Nixon had income of $200,000 per year, of which more than half went to pay for the apartment in Rocky’s building .
 By 1968, he reported his net worth as $515,830, while assigning a value of only $45,000 to his partnership in his increasingly flourishing law firm . By 1968 he had reported a net worth of $500,830 .
 The frugal Mr Nixon acquired the after-tax investment capital that mushroomed into $858,190 in assets . Mr Nixon may have acquired the investment capital by plugging his change into a piggy bank .
 It may have been part of Nixon's deal with Rockefeller and the Jnsiders that Mr Nixon’s personal poverty problems should be solved . Then again, it may be part of the deal . Mr Nixon's personal problems should have been solved .
 Attorney General John Mitchell is the most powerful man in domestic policy matters . Mitchell is seen as a key figure in the Administration's domestic policy . Mitchell has been in charge of the White House since 2001 .
 Mitchell, who had been Nixon's law partner, served as campaign manager in 1968 . Mitchell reportedly will serve in that capacity in 1972 . Mitchell had been a Nixon law partner .
 The Wall Street Journal of January 17, 1969, revealed that Mitchell was Rocky’s personal lawyer . Mitchell was a lawyer for Rocky .
 The Establishment’s landscape painters have etched a picture of Mitchell as a tough cop-type conservative . It appears that in reality Mitchell is but another Rockefeller agent. Mitchell is a Rockefeller agent .
 Nelson Rockefeller arranged '68 election so that if he could not be President, someone whom he controlled would be . Richard Nixon was elected President on a platform which Nelson Rockefeller and Richard Nixon are theoretically political enemies . Rockefeller and Nixon are theoretical political enemies, but Rocky arranged the election so Nixon could
 Rockefeller family, through their Chase Manhattan Bank and other entities, have been great benefactors of the Soviet Union ever since the Communist Revolution in Russia . Rockefeller family has been a great benefactor of Soviet Union since the revolution in Russia.
 During campaign Nixon promised to halt shipment of war materials from America to North Vietnam via European Communist bloc . These supplies were being used to kill American soldiers, Nixon said . Nixon also promised to stop shipments of war supplies from America .
 Much of this bloc trade is controlled by Rockefellers and Nixon has reversed himself and greatly multiplied such trade . But much of the trade is in the hands of Rockefallers . Nixon reversed himself, and greatly expanded such trade.
 The press, quite naturally, remains silent about killing American soldiers by proxy . The press remains silent on the issue .
 The boss and his two employees—the three musketeers of the CFR—Rocky, President Nixon and Henry Kissinger confer . Nixon and Kissinger met in the Oval Office at the end of the war .
 Kissinger of Harvard was made virtual Assistant President by Rockefeller on his staff . Rockefeller on whose staff he had served for a dozen years . Kissinger also had been on the staff of the CFR just prior to joining the Nixon Administration . Rockefeller made Kissinger virtual assistant President .
 Kissinger was the very embodiment of everything Nixon denounced during his '68 campaign . Kissinger was also the embodiment of what Nixon denounced in '68 . Kissinger's '68 election victory was a victory for Nixon .
 Among those to hail Mr Nixon's move to the left is Alger Hiss, the Communist spy Richard Nixon helped convict .
 It was the Hiss Case which catapulted Nixon from obscurity into the Senate, the Vice Presidency and, eventually, the White House . The case was one of the most significant moments in Nixon's career .
 Henry Kissinger represented the opposite of the stands Mr Nixon took during his campaign . Yet he appointed Henry Kissinger to a position which is virtually Assistant President . Mr Nixon appointed Kissinger to the position as a Secretary of State .
 Mr Nixon met Kissinger at a cocktail party given by Clare Boothe Luce during the Christmas holidays in 1967 .
 Kissinger’s cocktail party repartee that he appointed him to the most powerful position in the Nixon Administration . Kissinger was Kissinger's secretary of state at the time of the Nixon administration .
 Mr Nixon would have to be stupid to have done that; and Mr Nixon is not stupid . Mr Nixon was not stupid. He would not have been stupid to do that, and he's not stupid, he says .
 Kissinger had served for five years as Rockefeller’s personal advisor on foreign affairs . Kissinger was serving as a paid staff member of the Council on Foreign Relations .
 Mr Nixon’s fantastic about face was praised by LBJ in the Washington Star of Dec., 1971 . LBJ praised the Nixon's 'fantastic about face'
 Alexander Haig and Malcolm Toon must have met themselves coming and going, as they rushed from one network studio to another, to be interviewed by the network .
 The same “Liberal” media that tried to sell us Yuri Andropov as “a closet liberal” has a new, improved version for us . The same "Liberal’s media" tried to convince us that the Soviet leader was a closet liberal .
 Mikhail Gorbachev is a media happening, and the purveyors of disinformation are having a field day, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The former Soviet Union leader was assassinated in 1989 by a Soviet state of Soviet Union .
 Thatcher: 'I like Mr Gorbachev. I like him' Thatcher said of the new Russian leader . Thatcher: "I like him. I don't like him" Thatcher said in a speech in Moscow .
 "Good ol’ Mike" is neat, but wait until you meet his wife Raisa . Raisa is the wife of Mike's wife, who he married in 2004 .
 The wives of most Politboro leaders look as though they should be building dams in Siberia, but not this honey honey .
 Since the death of Joseph Stalin, the leadership of the U.S.R. has carried with it some interesting contradictions . Ever since the . death of the . died of Stalin's death, the . leadership in the United States has been criticized for its policies .
 Georgi Malenkov was heralded as the undisputed leader following Stalin’s death, only to vanish within a very short time . He died in 1953 at the hands of the Soviet Union .
 Next came the troika, out of which emerged Bulganin, then Nikita Khrushchev . Both were apparently reigned supreme only to be summarily set aside . The troika emerged from the 'throne of power'
 Brezhnev, Andropov, Chernenko, and Chernenko are among the most recent members of the Soviet Union . Two common threads make for interesting speculation .
 Russia's Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko and U.S. Ambassador Anatoliy F Dobrynin are featured in this week's photo . The photo was taken in Moscow in the 1970s .
 Gromyko has been at the helm for almost forty years . Dobrynin has been ensconced in Washington, D.C. as Soviet Ambassador for almost twenty twentyfive years .
 In nearly a quarter of a century in Washington, Bob Greene has developed an Encyclopedic knowledge of American affairs . He has worked in Washington for more than a quarter a century .
 He is a brilliant man, possessing that rare intellectual combination, a retentive mind and a gift for the quick, apt reply . He is also a brilliant person with the rare combination of retentiveness and a quick mind .
 He schools himself on every aspect of every issue, and more often not knows more about almost any subject than the ever-changing combinations of American officials with whom he deals .
 Molotov as Foreign Minister during the de-Stalinization period, has either been a faithful apparatchik or, in all likelihood, the real power down through the years . Molotovsky has been a key figure in the Soviet Union since the Second World War .
 I don't have any definitive answers to these questions, but let’s make some observations that might help supply some . I don’t have no definitive answers, but some observations might help .
 While Gromyko has been moved up to the “Presidency,” thanks to his protégé Gorbachev, there is still no doubt as to who is calling the shots in Soviet foreign policy .
 It seems obvious to me from the propaganda onslaught that the Soviets are about to launch a ‘peace” offensive . The West is being set up to take the hook like a big-mouth bass, he says .
 The very near future for the “I like Mike” bandwagon is going to produce a summit, friendly visitation, new loans, and in all likelihood, a disarmament agreement that will make Salt II look like a George Patton defense plan .
 Former Governor and now Senator from West Virginia. Affectionately called “Jay,” he has grabbed the political reigns for the family since his uncle Nelson .
 Richard Nixon's official landscape artists have done a marvelous job of painting a picture of Richard Nixon as a conservative . Pressure from Above and Pressure from Below tie .
 Richard Nixon could not have been elected had he run as a Rockefeller liberal, but he can get away with running his Administration like one simply because the landscape painters fail to call the public’s attention to the fact . Richard Nixon can't be elected if he ran for a Rockefeller
 Stewart Alsop in writing for a sophisticated audience of approving Liberals, reveals the real Nixon . The real Nixon was the President of the United States in 1972 .
 Alsop claims that if Nixon were judged by his deeds instead of his ancient image, the Liberals’ attitude toward him would be different . He says that if he were judged on his deeds, the Liberal's attitude would have been different .
 Liberals’ Pavlovian response to the Nixon name could be eliminated, says Alsop . They would realize how far Left he is, he says . If only the Pavlov' response to Nixon name was eliminated, he said .
 If President Liberal were actually in the White House, it's not at all hard to imagine the reaction to his program .
 Richard Nixon is the first professional politician and ‘real Republican’ to be elected President in 40 years . It is not in the self-interest of the liberals to give credit to such a President for liberal initiatives . Richard Nixon was a professional politician .
 The withdrawal of half a million men from Vietnam is quite obviously the greatest retreat in American history . The withdrawal is the most significant retreat in U.S. history .
 The President, in his rhetoric about a ‘strong defense,’ plays the same game, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: The President's rhetoric about the 'strong defense' is the same .
 To liberals, especially the liberal commentators who dominate the media, Richard Nixon is Dr. Nixon . To the liberals, the liberals are Dr. Richard Nixon, especially to the media .
 Fell ( ‘The reason why I cannot tell, but this I know and know full well, I do not like thee, Dr. Fell’) ‘I do not know why I can’t tell,’ says Fell .
 Nixon leading the assault on the President for his ‘bug-out,’ ‘fiscal irresponsibility’ and ‘galloping socialism’ Nixon led the assault . ‘Fiscisciscirresponsible’ was the President’s ‘
 If you liked Richard Nixon who ran for the Presidency, then you cannot, if you are consistent, like Nixon who is President . If you like Richard Nixon, you can't be consistent like Nixon, says Richard Nixon .
 Nixon and his fellow “moderates” have turned the Republican elephant into a donkey in elephant’s clothing . Nixon has turned the GOP elephant into an elephant in elephant's clothing, says Julian Zelizer .
 The Nixon “Game Plan” is infinitely more clever and dangerous than those of his predecessors . It masquerades as being the opposite of what it is. Nixon’s "Game Plan" is more clever than his predecessors, because it is dangerous .
 Mr Nixon has continued to pay lip service to decentralization . While centralizing power at a rate which would have made Hubert Humphrey blush, he has paid lip service .
 The first part of the ‘New Federalism’ is the Family Assistance Program . The program would provide a Guaranteed Annual Income .
 Based on suggestions from John Gardner of the C.ER and Daniel Moynihan, a member of the board of the socialist ADA, the FAP would double the number on welfare and increase tremendously the power of the executive branch .
 The second major segment of the President’s ‘New Federalism’ is revenue sharing with the states . Revenue sharing is touted as a step in the decentralization of power from the federal government .
 The money must first go from the states to Washington before it can be shared . The money would then go from Washington to Washington .
 As soon as the states and local governments get hooked on the federal funds, the controls will be put on just as they were in education and agriculture . The controls will continue to be in place in education, agriculture and agriculture, the author says .
 The Executive branch will give up some power . The people will gain by having these powers returned to them, he says . President Obama says the people will benefit from the return of power .
 He speaks of the ‘Executive branch in Washington’s giving up some of its power . He says the Executive branch in D.C. will give up some power .
 Three days later it became obvious why Mr Nixon added the seemingly redundant ‘in Washington,” when it was announced that the country was being carved up into ten federal districts .
 The federal districts would soon be used to administer the wage and price controls . Centralize in the federal government almost total power over the economy .
 It is generally believed in England among students of this conspiracy that John Maynard Keynes produced his General Theory of Money and Credit at the behest of certain Insiders of international finance who hired him to concoct a pseudo-scientific justification for government deficit spending .
 The farther a government goes into debt, the more interest is paid to the powerful Insiders who ‘create’ money to buy government bonds by the simple expedient of bookeeping entries . Insiders “create” money for government bonds .
 Insiders of international banking would be violently opposed to inflationary deficits . Otherwise, you can bet your last farthing that the Insiders would oppose inflationary deficit .
 During 1967, while on the primary trail, Richard Nixon made exorbitant Democrat spending his Number 2 campaign issue, just behind the failure of the Democrats to win the Vietnam War . The Vietnam War was the Democrats' failure to win it .
 Mr Johnson’s 1967 Budget was $158. billion, which at the time seemed astronomical . Mr Johnson was President of the U.S. in 1967 .
 Nixon claimed that if that amount were not sliced by $10 billion the country faced financial disaster . Nixon claimed the country was at risk of financial disaster if it were not cut . Nixon said that the $10billion figure was not cut to $10bn .
 Richard Nixon argued that we should be spending around $150 billion on Vietnam War . Nixon: Vietnam War was a far bigger financial drain than it is now . Nixon argued we should spend $150billion on Vietnam .
 President Nixon is now spending $230 billion, and bills already introduced in Congress and likely to pass could push the 1972 Fiscal Budget to $250 billion . The 1972 fiscal year is July 1 to July 1, 1972 .
 Mr Nixon could spend as much as $275 billion next year, experts say . Mr Nixon is expected to spend $275bn next year . Some experts say he could spend up to $300bn on infrastructure projects .
 For his own part, he renounced any “massive step-up’s in federal spending . Obama renounces any ‘massive step up’ in federal funding .
 It took LBJ five years to run up a $5 billion deficit . The accumulated deficit for Nixon’s first THREE years will reach at least $88 billion .
 Congressional experts are predicting Richard Nixon could well pour on the red ink to a total of $124 billion in this term of office alone . Congressional experts now predict Nixon could pour on a record $125 billion in red ink alone .
 Nixon instituted wage and price controls in order to halt inflation . Nixon has now instituted wage, price controls to stop inflation .
 Most Americans are sick of seeing their paychecks shrink in purchasing power each month . Most Americans have overwhelmingly approved of the plan .
 Most people are not aware of the real causes of inflation, say experts . But this is because most people don't know inflation is caused by inflation, they say .
 You can be sure that the Establishment’s landscape painters will not explain the truth to them . And you can't be sure they won't explain it to them. The Establishment will not be able to explain it .
 The truth is that there is a difference between inflation and the wage-price spiral . There is also a difference in inflation and wage price spirals .
 When the government runs a deficit, brand new money in the amount of the deficit is put into circulation . Brand new money is put in circulation when the government has a deficit .
 As the new money percolates through the economy it bids up wages and prices . The new money is being pumped into the economy, bidding up prices and wages .
 This is easy to understand if you think of our economy as a giant auction auction . This is not the first time the economy has been auctioned off, it's the second time it's been sold out .
 If the bidders are suddenly supplied with more money, they will use that money to bid up prices . Just as at any other auction, if the money is suddenly supplied, it will be used to bid higher prices .
 It causes the wage-price spiral which is generally mislabeled inflation . It causes a wage price spiral which causes inflation to rise .
 To say that the wage-spiral causes inflation is like saying wet streets cause rain, it's like wet streets causing rain . The cost of living in America's labor market is too much to blame for inflation, experts say .
 In the past decade, the Federal Government spent more than it took in—$57 billion more . The Federal Government has spent $57 billion in the last decade .
 Mr Nixon has fastened wage and price controls on the economy supposedly to solve a problem which he created by running huge deficits . Mr Nixon created the problem by running a huge deficit of money .
 If he sincerely wanted to stop inflation, he would have put wage and price controls on government rather than on the rest of us . He would have stopped deficit spending and put wage controls on the government .
 This is akin to cheering for a motorist who shoots a pedestrian he has just run over . It's not the first time someone has shot a pedestrian, it's the second time a pedestrian has been shot .
 You can’t have a totalitarian government without wage and price controls, says David Cameron . You can't have a free country with them, he says, and you can't with them .
 Mr Nixon made it clear that the 90-day wage and price controls are with us in one disguise or another from now on . Nixon made the comments in his Phase II speech .
 They are a major step towards establishing an allpowerful Executive branch of the federal government . They are the first steps towards establishing a new allpowerful executive branch of government .
 After the Insiders have established the United Socialist States of America, the next step is the Great Merger of all nations of the world into a dictatorial world government . The next step will be to merge all nations into a dictatorship .
 This was the main reason behind the push to bring Red China into the U.N. Red China . Red China is the first Chinese country to be admitted to the United Nations .
 The Insiders’ code word for the world superstate is “new world order,” a phrase often used by Richard Nixon . Richard Nixon often used the phrase, often used to refer to the world .
 One of the most important groups promoting the “world union” is the United World Federalists . Its membership is heavily interlocked with that of the Council on Foreign Relations .
 The UWF advocate turning the UN into a full-fledged world government which would include Communist nations . The UN would include the Communist nations, according to the group .
 Richard Nixon is far too clever to actually join the UWF, but he has supported their legislative program since his early days in Congress . Richard Nixon has supported the program since he was a member of Congress in the 1970s .
 World government has a strong emotional appeal for Americans, based on their universal desire for world peace . World government appeals to Americans based on a desire for peace, the author says .
 The Insiders have the Communists rattling their sabers with one hand and dangling the olive branch with the other . Insiders say the Communists are rattling sabers and dangling an olive branch .
 Voters were given the choice between Nixon and Humphrey . Voters were also given a choice between the two CFR world government advocates .
 Nixon is on record in favor of a world supreme court . A world government requires a world court, he says . Nixon is against a world government requiring a court .
 A world government must have a world police force to enforce the laws of the World Superstate and keep the slaves from rebelling . World police force must also be able to stop slaves from revolting against the government .
 Not surprisingly, the Jnsiders have their pet planners preparing to administrate their world dictatorship . Not surprisingly they have their own pet planners .
 "We need so many males, so many females," says President Obama . "So many of this age and so many of that age. So many males and females," he says .
 /nsiders of the Ford, Carnegie and Rockefeller foundations are making these plans . That is why they are making the plans . The Ford and Carnegie foundations are also making plans .
 We will have systematic population reduction, forced sterilization of anything else which the planners deem necessary to establish absolute control in their humanitarian utopia . We will be forced sterilized, forced to reduce population, sterilize anything else necessary, says the author .
 To enforce these plans, you must have an allpowerful world government . But to enforce it, you need to have a world government, it must be a powerful government .
 Before you can facilitate the Great Merger, you must centralize control within each nation, destroy the local police and remove the guns from the hands of the citizenry . And before you can . . you must first . centralize . control within . each nation .
 You must replace our once free Constitutional Republic with an all-powerful central government . You must be replaced with a powerful central government, says David Cameron . You need to replace the once free constitutional Republic with a central government.
 President Nixon's Nixon Administration is in trouble today . Nixon's administration has been in trouble since the 1970s . Nixon administration was in charge of Watergate .
 Every action of any consequence, despite the smokescreen, has centralized more power . The government is rapidly becoming an allpowerful central government .
 The Communist tactic of pressure from above and pressure from below is described by Communist historian Jan Kozak as the device used by the Reds to capture control of Czecho-Slovakia .
 The pressure from above comes from secret, ostensibly respectable Comrades in the government and Establishment, forming, with the radicalized mobs in the streets below, a giant pincer around middle-class society .
 Elitist conspirators working to turn America’s limited government into an unlimited government with total control over our lives and property . Common cause fl l of elitist conspiracyists working above to turn U.S. government into unlimited government .
 In the streets we have avowed revolutionary groups such as the Students for a Democratic Society, the Black Panthers, the Yippies, the Young Socialist Alliance . In the street, the C.FR. is filled with avowed anti-capitalism groups .
 Virtually all members of these groups sincerely believe that they are fighting the Establishment . Virtually every member of this group sincerely believes that he is fighting the establishment .
 In reality they are an indispensible ally of the Establishment in fastening Socialism on all of us . They are an indispensable ally to the Establishment, fastening socialism on all us .
 The naive radicals think that under Socialism the ‘people’ will run everything . The naive . radicals think under socialism the “people” will run . It is naive .
 Actually, it will be a clique of Jnsiders in total control, consolidating and controlling all wealth . "Jnsiders will be total control of all wealth," says Julian Assange .
 Schoolboy Lenins and teenage Trotskys are allowed to roam free and are practically never arrested or prosecuted . That is why these schoolboy 'Lenins' and 'Trotsks' are not arrested and prosecuted .
 Most radicals are recipients of largesse from major foundations or are receiving money from the government through the War on Poverty . Instead, most of these radicals are the recipients of . major foundations, or are . receiving money . from the . government .
 Bakunin’s charge that Marx’ followers had one foot in the bank and the other in the Socialist movement . Bakunin was Bakunin's charge that Marxist followers had a foot in bank and one in Socialist movement.
 These men are the world’s leading industrialists and they convene to decide how our lives are going to go . They convene in London to discuss how their lives will go .
 The only way McCarthy could win is if the crazies and young radicals act up and make Gene look more reasonable . McCarthy could easily win if he acts up and makes McCarthy look more moderate . McCarthy has a long way to go, but that's not guaranteed .
 John Gardner, a “Republican,” and member of the C.F.R., has established a grass roots organization called Common Cause . John Gardner is a ‘Republican’ and a former C.I.R. member . Gardner has established Common Cause, a
 This may become the biggest and most important organization in American history, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Common Cause's goal is to organize welfare recipients, those who have not voted before, and Liberals to lobby for Socialism . Common Cause’s goal is organizing welfare recipients and those who haven’t voted before .
 Lobbying will also be expressed as ballot power in elections . That lobbying will not only be expressed in pressuring Congress to pass legislation .
 Other key financiers are Andrew Heiskell , chairman of the board of Time, Inc., Thomas Watson . John Whitney of the Standard Oil fortune, Sol Linowitz of Xerox, and Gardner Cowles of Cowles publications .
 Only those who understand that the Establishment's game plan is SOCIALISM understand what is going on before their eyes .
 The blatant pro-left stance on issue after issue proved to be its undoing, along with a shifting climate of political opinion which is clearly moving right . The blatant Pro-Left stance on issues after issue ultimately proved the undoing .
 Another very positive development has been the rise of conservatism on the college campus . Another positive development is the rise in conservatism on campus .
 Fourteen years ago, those colleges which boasted any conservative organizations on campus were few and far between . Now, colleges which boast any conservative groups on campus are few but far fewer .
 Today, almost every college has at least one organization doing a job for the promotion of constitutional principles . Almost every college in the U.S. has an organization that promotes constitutional principles.
 "None Dare" is an award-winning book that explores the themes of modern American culture . The book is published by None Dare and published by Simon Cowan . Cowan: "It was very satisfying when I would meet someone still in college or recently graduated"
 In many cases it had become almost a ‘cult’ book on some campuses . And that in many cases, the book is almost a 'cult' book on campuses .
 We have examined their New World Order and why so many important men want to impose it on us . We have also examined why they are trying to impose a new world of power .
 In actuality, of course, it is a totalitarian world government which they seek . In actual reality, it's a world government . The world government is what they seek.
 A recent tactic of the conspirators is to claim that they cannot be so evil or involved in a furtive strategem because their actions are not secret . The conspirators say that they can't be evil or . involved in such a secret strategy, they say .
 Exposure on a wide scale has hurt, so now they play down their influence and use ridicule as a weapon . Exposure has hurt them, so they now use ridicule to play down influence and play down it .
 Winston Lord, president of the Council on Foreign Relations, welcomes conspiracy theory . Winston Lord says he welcomes being thought of as a conspiracy .
 The most powerful men in the Western world would have us think they are a lodge of Odd Fellows discussing their next civic project . They would rather have us believe they are talking about their civic project than an Odd Fellow .
 Elitist power-brokers still hold the reins (invisible or otherwise) of influence in Western governments . Whether Republicans or Democrats are in office at the national level, and/or liberals or conservatives are our elected leaders .
 Orwell also said that “freedom is the freedom to say that two plus two equals four equals four” Orwell said that freedom is the right to say ‘two plus two plus four equals 4’ Orwell said ‘freedom is also the freedom of saying two plus plus two
 Calling the conspirators out at their game has not yet broken their hold on our free institutions . Calling them out is not enough to break free institutions, it has yet to break its hold on institutions .
 While there is liberty, there is hope and reason to resist those who seek power, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Richard Nixon's re-election campaign can be attributed to the deliberate strategy of Richard Nixon . That they were not, can be traced to Richard Nixon and his campaign strategy . Nixon's campaign strategy was to win the White House in 1972 .
 Nixon's victory was a personal victory for Nixon but brought few Republicans in on the coattails of the standard bearer . Nixon won the White House in 1968, but it was a national embarrassment for Republicans .
 A man such as McGovern who would have crawled on his belly to Hanoi, was simply not acceptable to the American people, regardless of the unpopularity of the Vietnam war . The U.S. people were simply not willing to accept McGovern's decision to go to H
 He sought, as a gesture of bipartisan unity, to appoint Democratic Senator Henry Jackson as Secretary of Defense . Jackson turned him down .
 He sought David Rockefeller as either Secretary of Defense or the Treasury . David Rockefeller turned him down . Rockefeller turned down .
 It seemed that whatever concessions Nixon would make, he could not be accepted fully by the ‘Liberal” Establishment . Nixon's concessions were not fully accepted by the "Liberal" Establishment .
 There can be little doubt that Mr Nixon betrayed the Conservatives who supported and elected him . Nixon betrayed his party, but there can be no doubt that he betrayed his own party, the Conservatives .
 To the extent that the American people had any settled notions on the issue, they were decidedly the reverse . The American people, however, had no settled notions about the issue of abortion .
 President Nixon’s own course of action, however, has perceptibly softened United States feeling toward Red China . Nixon's actions have since softened the U.S. feeling toward China .
 Nixon's perceived anti-Communist Nixon got along just fine with the Communist powers-that-be, and vice versa . Nixon's public image of anti-communist Nixon has been questioned .
 Many Soviet officials, said Newsweek for July 17, 1972, “seem to be rooting for Mr Nixon’s election victory” Newsweek said .
 Establishment Jnsiders view elections and agreements as but one step in their plan for a New World Order . But they say elections are only one step away from their plan to impose a new world order .
 The Establishment has its lackeys willing to cut down to size all those who might step out of line . Or to dispense discipline as an example of the power held by the unelected elite . And the Establishment is willing to do so .
 The media hatchet men would get their pound of Nixon flesh one way or the other, even if it took years . Nixon would get his pound of flesh one day or two .
 Wallace campaign came to an end after we delivered to the Governor a speech written at his request that was about to blow the lid off the CFR, Richard Nixon, and George McGovern . Wallace: "It was especially distressing for Gary Allen and me to watch the Wallace campaign come to
 Wallace campaign came to an end two days before the speech was to be delivered . Wallace's campaign was the last of his political career . The Wallace campaign was a tragic end to his life .
 The cold war will continue in a muted sort of way as the East and the West maneuver stealthily to win the allegiance of the Third World countries and to compete on the oceans . The Cold War will continue as the West and the East maneuver stealthly to win their allegiance .
 Nixon hopes to build trade relaudes with the Soviets that will make for a situation which neither Washington nor Moscow can afford to disrupt . Nixon hopes for a trade deal with the Soviet Union .
 When Soviet natural gas begins to move through pipes to tidewater for shipment to the West, the Kremlin will no longer be able to afford open war . The Kremlin will be unable to afford to open war with the West .
 The modern highway stretches from the Soviet border to the Khyber Pass . What is not discussed much these days is that it was United States taxpayers’ money and the United States Corps of Engineers .
 Percentage of eligible casting ballots dropped from 61 percent four years earlier to 56 percent in 1972 . The percentage of eligible voting voters in 1972 was 61 percent .
 Watergate scandal changed many things from June 1972 to June 1972 . The scandal of Watergate alone—from its onset in June 1972 —changed many things . Watergate was the first scandal to break the news of the White House .
 It convinced some skeptics, eventually, that there were such things as conspiracies, even coming out of the White House . It also postponed a potential realignment which might have put Conservatives in the driver’s seat nationally, instead .
 We now have a firmer appreciation of how ready the public was for an articulate, populistting conservatism . The public was ready to embrace a populist-tinged conservatism .
 In 1973, Southerners could have gained at least a dozen seats in the House of Representatives . The gain might have been twenty to thirty seats instead of just twelve .
 In the beginning it seemed so paltry, and in hindsight the episode is nothing more than a tiny blemish on the body politic. In hindsight, the episode was nothing more . The episode is just an episode, and it's nothing less than a little blemished on
 Deputy chairman Stanley Greigg speculated that ‘it will be a good thing if we can blame it on the Republicans.’ He said that the Democratic official who came to police headquarters, . deputy chairman Stanley . Greigg, speculated that . ‘It will be . a good
 The Democrats had advance warning of the Republican espionage attempt . It now seems sure the Democrats had advanced warning of this .
 That wasn’t widely reported on network television . It might have spoiled the drama before the hanging .
 Franklin Roosevelt lied about not getting involved in foreign wars, but others lied about the Bay of Pigs and Vietnam, says Victor Lasky . FDR lied about war, but LBJ lied about Vietnam, he says. FDR lied .
 In each of those cases far more was at stake than a third-rate-burglary . And in each of these cases, far more is at stake . In each case, the victims were not at all at risk .
 The full Central Intelligence Agency involvement in Watergate may never be fully known . The full story of the CIA's involvement in the Watergate scandal is still unknown .
 Every C.I.A. director, from its founder Allen Dulles, right up to this very moment, has been a long-time member of the C.F.R., and that includes George Bush .
 Squealer John Dean revealed Alexander Butterfield’s knowledge of the White House taping system; the latter gave details to the Ervin investigators . John Dean also commented how those with Agency connections seemed to come through the episode well .
 Speech writer Raymond Price in With Nixon thought a C.I.A. counterplot was in operation . Price thought it was a plot to counter-attack on Nixon .
 Howard Hunt believed James McCord set up the whole bungled affair and had the authorities alerted . Hunt believed McCord had set it up and had authorities alerted. Hunt believed the affair was bungled .
 The press is capable of conspiring to bring down the elected government, blowing the horn to cause the crash of the wall protecting even a President of the United States . But the press is also capable of . conspiring to . bring down a President .
 During three months of the Ervin Committee hearings many thousands of words were printed each day of testimony and document texts . The average story that year probably exceeded 1,000 words . Each index page lists about 38 stories .
 At a minimum estimate, the Times published three million words on Watergate in 1973, or 30 books of 100,000 words each . The Times published 3 million words, 30 books each .
 Walter Cronkite accused Nixon team of conspiring to discredit and malign the media . Cronkites said Nixon team was conspiring to malign and discredit the media. On the other hand, he said Nixon was trying to discredit the press .
 Judge Sirica, ‘maximum John,’ the kind of hanging judge civil libertarians worry most about, applied the awful pressure of lifetimes in jail for first offenses . The press, which had tried and failed to make Watergate the issue, came alive again, and came .
 In point of fact, many of the problems of the generic “Watergate” situation lead back to the formation of the Special White House Investigating Unit, nicknamed the “Plumbers,” who were themselves supposed to stop the leaks . The unit was formed by the
 The odor of conspiracy rises like a cloud which would envelope the President and which reeked of the scent of Rockefeller and Nelson’s man in the White House, Henry Kissinger . Henry Kissinger was Henry Kissinger's man in Washington .
 McCloy has served as Chairman of the Council on Foreign Relations before David Rockefeller . McCloy was Chairman of Chase Manhattan Bank before Rockefeller . David Rockefeller is one of only three Chairmen in the C.F.R.'s 60-year history .
 There seems little doubt that both conspiracy and vested interest are intertwined in this case .
 Watergate story was never the same after the tapes and details of what was on them was revealed . It is universally admitted that the Watergate story never changed after tapes were revealed .
 Haldeman awaits trial for his part in Watergate for his role in Watergate . Secret Service chief he ousted from the White House last year has landed a plum job .
 Nelson knew enough not to go down with a sinking ship, let alone a ship he was getting ready to sink . Nelson was not going down with the sinking ship . Nelson's ship was going to sink, but he was going down .
 Western aid and trade have built up our enemy which has then used that technology against us . Western aid has built up the Communist enemy which is then used to attack us, he says .
 President Nixon announced the blockade of Haiphong Harbor in North Vietnam, explaining that this step was necessary to protect American lives in Southeast Asia .
 The Department of Defense released a series of photographs portraying the influx of Soviet supplies into North Vietnam in support of Nixon's action .
 Michurin so graphically exposed by the Department of Defense photo is powered by a diesel engine designed and built in the United States and features a hull constructed in the U.K. The cargo ship's diesel engine and hull are powered by the same engine .
 They needed 30. million metric tons of grain, and we supplied them with about one-quarter of our total crop . The grain was one-in-a-half of the country's total grain crop, the USDA says .
 The U.S. provided wheat (subsidized by the taxpayers at 47 cents a bushel) costing at least $800 million . Thus the United States provided wheat at least 47 cents per bushel .
 Trade analyst Miles Costick reported that the “sale’s” of grain “contributed to the highest round of food price increases for the American consumer since 1947 .
 Kremlin's satisfaction or the reasons for vodka toasts in Moscow . Kremlin says it is satisfied with the success of the Kremlin’s success .
 Soviet dictator Leonid Brezhnev set forth the strategy to other Warsaw Pact leaders in the summer of 1973 . The strategy was outlined in a letter to other Soviet leaders .
 Senator Barry Goldwater, a friend of the Nationalist Government in Taipei, didn’t want to believe we would betray our ally . He wanted to believe in the soothing words of Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger, and must rue that day .
 Its existence provided Carter with an excuse to withdraw recognition of Nationalist China and abrogate our mutual defense treaty . Carter withdrew recognition of China from recognition of the Chinese government .
 At the time both Nixon and Kissinger assured me this would never happen, says Nixon . "At the time, both Kissinger and Kissinger said it was never happening," she says . She says she was told by Kissinger that it was 'never happening'
 In the course of discussing this dastardly turn-about, I found that the people remembered the event in much the same way that the American people remembered hearing of the assassination of President Kennedy .
 They recalled exactly what they were doing and where they were when they first heard the shocking news . They recalled what they did and when they heard the news .
 Chinese leaders were responsible for the deaths of upwards of 64 million of their own people, according to a Senate Report issued in 1971 . Those who benefitted from this duplicity, the Red Chinese leaders .
 Nixon reputation for anti-Communism then became useful whenever negotiations with the Reds needed a disguise . Nixon's reputation for his anti-communism became useful when negotiations needed disguise .
 This enabled the Communist powers to become, or at least ac162 Call It Conspiracy quire, reputations as superpowers with whom to share power in the New World Order envisaged by the /nsiders .
 Consider the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT I was ratified before Nixon’s reelection in August of 1972) and the missile negotiations in 1973 and 1974 . The missile negotiations were also held in 1974 and 1973 .
 The upshot of all of this was to make us weaker and the Kremlin stronger, says President Vladimir Putin . The Kremlin is stronger than us, says Putin's spokesman .
 The Soviets have carefully and deceptively negotiated provisions to accommodate deployments originally programmed by them . They have taken maximum advantage of every loophole and ambiguity in the agreements, says CNN's John Defterios .
 Soviet strategic advantages in many categories have widened throughout this period . Soviet strategic advantage has widened throughout the period, he says .
 Democratic Senators Sam Ervin, Herman Talmadge, and Daniel Inouye repeatedly had crippled attempts to get at the truth in the earlier case . Democratic Senators Ervin , Herman TalMadge, Daniel Inauye repeatedly hampered attempts to find out truth .
 Hatred kept focused on the Republican President as though he had personally tortured puppy dogs in the Oval Office . Hatred was kept focused upon the GOP President as he personally tortured puppies . President Barack Obama has been accused of being a bully .
 Haldeman, Erlichman, Dean, and Kleindienst step down . Attorney General William Kleindenst steps down . John Dean, John Dean and John Erlichmann also step down from Cabinet post .
 In October 1973, Vice President Spiro Agnew was picked off in an unrelated case . The case was having to do with campaign contributions in Maryland when he was governor . Agnew died in October 1973 .
 Agnew pleaded no contest to a charge of income tax evasion . Agnew paid a fine and resigned his office after pleading no contest . The former New Hampshire Gov. Agnew resigned in 2010 .
 Cox leaked information about his investigations to his Kennedy friends on Capitol Hill . Cox leaked the information to his friends, including Kennedy friends . Cox is a former FBI agent who worked for the Kennedy administration .
 It quickly became obvious that a semi-judicial lynching was forthcoming . It was quickly obvious that it was not going to be enough .
 The minority counsel was Albert Jenner, who actually had been first choice of Democratic Judiciary Chairman Peter Rodino . Jenner had recommended Doar, then took the opposite number later . Doar was first choice by Rodino, Jenner was the second choice .
 Attorney Jenner, commented Bill Safire, was supposedly, “a Republican conservative.” Jenner was supposedly a Republican conservative . Jenner was the attorney for Jenner and Safire . Jenner, however, was a Republican .
 Jenner had been a fund-raiser for Democratic Sen. Tammy Duckworth . But word leaked out after word leaked that Jenner had raised money for Sen. Duckworth.
 Lying was only considered criminal if it happened in the Nixon White House . But lying was only seen as criminal in Nixon's White House.
 Senator Goldwater told the President that he could count on perhaps a maximum of 15 votes in the Upper Chamber against his conviction . Goldwater said he could only count on maybe 15 votes against him .
 The so-called “smoking gun’s” was revealed on August 5, 1974, when transcripts of tapes made on June 23, 1972, revealed that Richard Nixon was early on involved in the cover-up, and had ordered what appeared to be obstruction of the F
 Richard Nixon's involvement in Watergate was pennyante stuff, hardly constituting the crime of the century . Richard Nixon’s involvement in the Watergate scandal hardly constitute the crime the century. Richard Nixon was not a crime .
 Richard Nixon gained the White House by placating the Establishment at every opportunity after 1962 . Richard Nixon made his reputation as the Congressman who gave Whittaker Chambers his opportunity to ‘blow the whistle’ on Alger Hiss .
 He sent Henry Kissinger to Red China, and later recognized that it was a butcher government . He sent Kissinger to China, but later recognized it as a communist government .
 Richard Nixon was probably the most astute political technician of the second half of the 20th century . Richard Nixon is probably the best political technician in the world .
 "He had an incomparable knowledge of the way that men get elected and stay in office," he said . He said. "He was a man who had a great sense of how men should get elected," he added .
 Richard Nixon used his political savvy to get himself the Republican nomination in 1968 . Richard Nixon's political savvy helped him win the GOP nomination for president .
 The little fish fried, Nixon jumped into the fire while calm and cool, the big fish silently swam away from the conflagration . Nixon jumped in the fire and the fish fried while Nixon jumped out of the fire . Nixon was the first person to fry Nixon's fish in the
 "So far as I can tell, as I look back on Watergate, not one C.E.R. member went down with the Nixon ship. So far, as . I can . tell,  as . well as I . look back at Watergate, as far as .
 E Howard Hunt, with a reputation as an anti-Communist, was simply doing in 1972 what he had done for the C.I.A. and White House four years before . Hunt had a reputation for being anti-communist, which is a genuine rarity in ‘
 Miles M. Costick, Miles M., Economics Of Détente And U.S. Grain Trade, Heritage Foundation, Washington, D.C., 1976 . Costick: "Détente and Soviet grain trade was a source of friction"
 William P. Hoar, William P., Architects of Conspiracy, Western Islands, Boston, 1984 . Hoar was the architect of Conspiracy in the 1980s .
 The President resigned because he was about to be impeached and convicted . He was replaced by an appointed Number 2 man who had never been elected to any public office at state or national level .
 Governor Rockefeller resigned from his Albany office in late 1973 to run for President in 1976 . Rockefeller was head of the National Commission on Critical Choices for Americans . Rockefeller had resigned to head the Commission in a thinly disguised role as head of National Commission .
 There are more ways than one to skinacat... or grab for the Presidency . But there are ways to skin and grab for President .
 Rockefeller was nominated as Vice President by President Ford in August 1974 . Rockefeller was ready and willing when President Ford nominated him Vice President in 1974 .
 Rocky had been in the business for ‘the long run,’ and could not lose in the short run by his granting of approval . “Rocky’s approval.” is a long-term success, he says .
 It is best not to be caught gloating over a regicide, whether figurative or not . Still it is best to not be caught . Still, it is not a good idea to gloat over the regicide .
 Nelson Rockefeller had come within a proverbial heart-beat of the Presidency, and Gerald Ford had said (upon his own nomination for Vice President) that he had no further ambitions . Nelson Rockefeller came within a mere heart-beating of the presidency .
 Even before Ford’s accession to the Number One spot, there were hints that the compromising Jerry might not be so malleable once he tasted the power that went with being President .
 Rockefeller, who had frequently declared that he would not take the Number Two slot, did just that under President Ford . Rockefeller had declared he wouldn't take the number two slot . Rockefeller was President Ford's Secretary of State John Nixon .
 1976 race became a clash of ambitions for Ford . But once that brass ring was in Ford’s grasp, the 1976 race turned into a battle of ambitions .
 The story of how close Rockefeller came to attaining his goal of the Oval Office, is a telling one in the annals of conspiracy . However, Rockefeller's story is not quite as close as the story of his attempt to achieve his goal .
 Moving up the Establishment power structure has always meant moving politically Left . The Establishment has always been left-leaning .
 What some would call unprincipled is a plus in the eyes of the ambitious, says the president . The president has been accused of being unprincincipled .
 He’ll vote against programs, but once it passes, he uses his influence to get as big a share of the money for the district as he can, he says .
 As a party leader, he has defended the party line, no matter how it twisted, he defended it . He has defended his party line in the past .
 Eisenhower was against U.S. intervention in Vietnam at Dien Bien Phu, but he was against intervention . Eisenhower was not against intervention, but was against it .
 Gerry was a faithful Ford, obeying the commands of the driver . If President Nixon later on was in favor of intervention in Vietnam, or opposed to accommodations with the Communists or eager for accommodations, Gerry was faithful .
 President Obama's record on ambiguous questions is quite different . But privately, he says, he has a record on how to resolve practical, personal and political issues .
 Nixon had proclaimed the Ford nomination “a new beginning for America,” though he offered no explanation of Spiro Agnew’s demise . When he made the announcement of Ford's selection, he said no explanation .
 Richard Reeves, in A Ford, Not A Lincoln, states outright that “Gerald Ford was not Richard Nixon’s first choice.” Richard Reeves . Richard Reeves also states that Gerald Nixon was not Nixon's first choice .
 Haig was a longtime Kissinger surrogate who later was to bring the bad news to President Nixon, namely, that it was time to go . Haig, of course, was the longtime . Kissinger surrogate .
 Gerald Ford seemed determined to show himself to be a man the New World Order boys could trust to do their bidding . Meanwhile, Gerald Ford was determined to prove himself to show he could be trusted to do his bidding .
 The Vice-President Designate told inquiring Senators that he was an internationalist and that Henry Kissinger was a “superb” Secretary of State .
 Mr Ford supported Nixon-Kissinger reapproachment and détente policies with the Communist world . Mr Ford went down the line supporting the Nixon- Kissinger policies . He also supported Nixon and Kissinger in some cases .
 As far back as 1952, Prince Bernhard of The Netherlands, the sponsor of the secretive Bilderberger meetings, visited Ford’s District to help out the Congressman . Jerry Ford himself attended their hush conclaves in 1962 and 1964 .
 President Obama publicly bought the finding of the Warren Commission, a panel that investigated the assassination of JFK .
 Nobody believed or yet believes the anti-conspiracy line handed down by that Commission . Virtually nobody believed or . yet believes it .
 Jerry repeatedly denied a fix, saying there was no trading off for the Presidency . Jerry repeatedly denies a fix and says there is no trade off .
 The day before the Watergate pardon was announced, Nixon called Ford (a lawyer representing Jerry then said to be in San Clemente negotiating with the former President) and made a threat to his successor . Yet, according to Seymour Hersh, the day before Nixon called Nixon called .
 Conservatives again found themselves being sold out by a man they were told was one of theirs . In any event, Conservatives found themselves selling out .
 Ford's administration has been in turmoil for a month . Ford has been accused of being too conservative in his first month in office . Ford is expected to be the next President of the United States .
 Conservatives say that every prominent move the new Chief Executive made “has so far vectored to the left politically politically.” Conservatives, noted syndicated columnist Jeffrey Hart, say every move “vectored’t to the right politically .
 President 'really wants to find solutions to human problems', friend says . But friend adds, ‘The important thing to say about our new President is that he really wants to ... solve human problems’
 In two years Jerry Ford ran up an increase in the National Debt of $105 billion . That was more than that of the combined Administrations of the 24 years of Truman, Eisenhower, Kennedy, and Johnson .
 As a leader of the Free World, or just at home, Jerry Ford was totally underwhelming . Ford's image of him as a leader in the free world was underwhelming.
 President Obama seemed overwhelmed even as he took over the job of President. Indeed, he seemed overwhelmed, even though he seemed to be overwhelmed .
 Bob Cantrell, a 14-year-old in Pasadena, California, gave up his stereo to save energy . Cantrell is the first person in the U.S. to give up their stereo .
 One friend told me we could whip inflation with the contents of our trash cans . One friend said we could probably whip inflation inflation with our trash can contents .
 Inflation is simply an increase in the supply of money and credit, which produces a corresponding price rise . In inflation is simply a rise in supply of credit and money and produces a price rise.
 If there was a general malaise it was not alleviated by any particular cooperation from the Congress, it would have been helpful . The Congress is not likely to be able to do anything more to help the country's economy .
 He has never wavered from his consistent course of unilateral disarmament, he says . He says he will continue to use the U.S. to disarm itself .
 It has been established that he made to the Soviets in the SALT I agreements concessions which may be fatal to our national survival, and that the Soviets are exploiting these concessions . The Soviet Union is exploiting the concessions, says the Prime Minister .
 Until the conference was actually under way, he had not the foggiest notion that he was to negotiate a strategic arms limitation pact .
 The conference continued under marathon pressure for more than nine hours . The conference ended after midnight after midnight .
 Conservatives were outraged by this, especially those who remembered how disloyal Rockefeller had been to the Republican Presidential nominee in 1964 . Rockefeller was a major Republican Party donor .
 He was automatically acceptable to the powerful internationalists who have controlled U.S. foreign policy most of this century . President Obama was elected to the White House in 2008 .
 Mr Rockefeller’s unsuccessful attempts to attain the Presidency hopefully prove that money can’t buy everything ... but it certainly makes things easier .
 As a nonpartisan, nondenominational, noneverything organization of high and empty purpose it provides him with a platform to stay in the news and run for office using money from government, foundations, and his own fortune that he couldn’t legally touch .
 Some of the money, such as that which went for higher education, may have been well spent, but some of it might cause some people to think we’re getting off cheap with San Clemente . The money went for a new state capital complex called the Albany Mall .
 At the same time private developers were putting an office building adjacent to it for $40 a usable square foot . The office building was being put up for sale at $40 per square foot. At the time, it was being built in the same place .
 It was Rocky who taught Nixon to buy labor votes, which he did by this kind of unrestrained spending, he says . "Rocky" taught Nixon how to buy votes by buying labor votes .
 Nelson A Rockefeller says as president he would work toward creation of ‘a new world order’ based on East-West cooperation instead of conflict . Rockefeller: ‘As president I would work to create a 'new world order' based on cooperation not conflict .
 With Kissinger as a cat’s paw, this happened anyway under Nixon and Ford . Kissinger was a cat's paw, but Kissinger was still a key figure in the White House . Kissinger and Ford were in office at the time of Watergate .
 President Ford espoused Nelson Rockefeller’s grandiose plan for a $100 billion energy corporation to lend funds to private industry to develop new fuel technologies . Rockefeller's plan for the corporation was to lend money to private firms to develop fuel technologies. Rockefeller: The plan would be a
 The President justified the scheme in a public statement as a ‘catalyst and stimulant’ to inspire energy independence . The President — whose attitudes were fiscally conservative but who sometimes deviated – justified it in a statement .
 Rockefeller family has conspired with Communists and non-Communists alike . Rockefeller family conspired to conspire with Communists, non-communists alike, says Rockefeller . Rockefeller has been accused of corruption in the past .
 In the Eisenhower Administration he helped to create the Department of Health, Education and Welfare . The Department now takes an even larger portion of the federal Budget than does defense .
 Eisenhower’s first Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles, was a Rockefeller cousin . Dulles was a cousin of Rockefeller cousin John Rockefeller . Dulls was the first secretary of State of State from Eisenhower's first .
 Dulles’ successor, Christian Herter, had the good sense to marry into the Standard Oil fortune . Dulles' successor, Dulles, had displayed the sense of marrying into the oil fortune .
 Rusk took a leave of absence as head of the Rockefeller Foundation to accept the post . Rusk will take over from his post at the end of the year .
 Bowles has been a trustee of the Rockefeller Brothers Fund and director of Rockefeller Foundation . Bowles was a director of The Rockefeller Foundation and trustee of Rockefeller brothers Fund . He has also been a director at Rockefeller Brothers Foundation and a trustee at Rockefeller brothers fund .
 Democrat Kennedy named Standard Oil executive Alexander Trowbridge as Assistant Secretary of Commerce . President Johnson later promoted him to secretary of commerce . Standard Oil exec Alexander Trowsbridge was later promoted to Commerce .
 Henry Kissinger came to the Nixon Administration from a staff position at the C.F.R., and had for ten years been on Nelson Rockefeller’s payroll as a personal foreign policy advisor . Kissinger is now Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, who had been on Rockefeller's payroll .
 Rockefeller arranged for him to be appointed virtual Assistant President for Foreign Affairs . Rockefeller arranged to appoint him as a virtual assistant for foreign affairs . Rockefeller was Rockefeller's secretary of State Department .
 His demand for top patronage was reluctantly agreed to after he threatened to cut off all Rockefeller and Rockefeller-controlled financial contributions . He threatened to end all Rockefeller's financial contributions after threatening to cut back on contributions .
 Jimmy Carter was of course no Conservative, but he had to try to win over moderate-to-Right voters in his campaign against Ford . Carter was no Conservative but had to appeal to moderate to right-wing voters to win election .
 Such a lickspittle attitude to appease the Kremlin did not appease U.S. voters . Such a 'lickpittle' attitude would not appease American voters, he said .
 Rockefeller was dropped from the 1976 ticket, no mean feat considering how close the Jnsiders had come using one of their more powerful leaders . Rockefeller was a former president of the United States .
 Former California Governor Ronald Reagan raised the Sun Belt standard in a bid to deny Ford the 1976 nomination, and almost succeeded . Ronald Reagan almost succeeded in denying Ford the nomination in 1976 .
 Even before Reagan’s move, conservative pressure created a climate in which Ford had to announce that Vice President Nelson Rockefeller would step down and not seek election in 1976 .
 Georgia voters handed the ball of wax to the supposed ‘outsider’ from Georgia . But that was before the voters handed it to the ‘outspoken’ candidate .
 Schlafly, Phyllis and Chester Ward, wrote Kissinger On The Couch, Kissinger On the Couch, in New Rochelle, 1975 .
 A Russian general usually sat close to Brezhnev, serving as the Soviet leader’s technical adviser . In discussing ‘an incredibly complex tangle of issues,” later wrote Press Secretary Ron Nessen, later wrote .
 Schlafly, Phyllis and Chester Ward, Ambush At Vladivostok, published by Pere Marquette Press, Alton, Illinois .
 Jimmy Carter was the creation of David Rockefeller, the C.F.R. and the Tri-lateral Commission . While claiming to be ‘an outsider” Jimmy Carter claimed to be an outsider .
 Clausen took over the reigns at the World Bank from Robert McNamara after leaving his chairmanship at Bank of America . Clausen replaces McNamara, who left his post at the bank of America at the end of his tenure . Clausens took over from McNamara .
 Walter Cronkite probably did more to shape the opinions of the American people than any other insider . Cronkites shaped the opinion of the U.S. public more than anyone else in the past 20 years .
 George S McGovern and John B Gary Hart makes pilgrimage to Anderson, both members of the C.F.R., presented a populist profile, while knowing who calls the shots .
 Robert Mugabe, terrorist, communist and now one man ruler of Zimbabwe, being entertained at C.F.R. headquarters . Mugabe was a terrorist and communist, but now ruler of the country .
 ‘Teddy’ White was calling Mao the Abraham Lincoln of China . White was once called Mao the Abe Lincoln of the China .
 Martin S Feldstein and Alan Greenspan, two key Reagan economic advisors, both long-time C.F.R. members . Feldstein, Greenspan and Reagan's economic advisor, were both key members of the Reagan administration .
 The Insiders’ Outside Man L T was absolutely fascinating and most amusing to watch the news media promote Jimmy Carter as a 1970’s version of Abe Lincoln .
 The Plains, Georgia “barefoot boy with cheek” was the reincarnation of the American Dream . They tried and succeeded in convincing enough Americans that the ‘barefoot’ was the “American Dream”
 Mr Carter was the first ‘creation’ by the Jnsiders and the national news media . Mr Carter is the first "creation” of the president by the media .
 This time they didn’t have to choose from among the ranks of warmed over, hand-me-downs . Granted the press pundits have had their favorites in the past and promoted them successfully . But this time they had to choose between the two .
 This time they could “dream the impossible dream” with their very own ‘bionic” politician . This time the government could ‘dream’ with its very own "bionic" politician .
 Just think of selling the American People a no-name former southern governor, who professed to be a “born again” Christian, that talked out of both sides of his mouth, with his greatest asset being a Cheshire cat’s envy .
 Add to that such ‘down home’s extras as Miss Lillian, Brother Billy, blue jeans, good ’ol boys, peanuts, peanuts and peanuts, a hand-carried suit bag, and you had the ingredients for the biggest Madison Avenue hustle .
 "He will be our very own production. We can make him all things to all people . We can . make him . He will be all things for all people, he said .
 No voting record, no books or articles coming back to haunt him, and most importantly, no principles to live up to . Most importantly, he has nothing to do with his own principles and no principles .
 Madison Avenue served up a concoction that would clean us out and ease the pain, all at the same time . So as it was with Serutan and Preparation H, Madison Avenue, the C.FR and David Rockefeller, served us up .
 Enough of the electorate gave the politician its support . Wanting to believe the man, enough of the voters gave it their support .
 Carter called the Insiders the “insiders” and pegged the blame correctly at the doorstep of the Establishment conspirators . Carter even called the insiders the ‘insiders,’ and pegged them correctly at  conspirators who—as we have seen—had betrayed American
 He was, he said, just the man for the job, though even his mother seemed obligated to tell the folks that wee Jimmy wasn’t beyond stretching the truth when it came to tales .
 Carter's rags-to-fame story has appeal even if only Carter corn-pone . It was a minor fib .
 A mere one percent of Democratic voters polled by George Gallup 10 months before the convention, in October of 1975, were for Carter . Five months later, Carter was in second place barely trailing Humphrey .
 By the middle of May of 1976 he was the top dog in the polls among the potential candidates for President . By the end of the month of that month he was in the top five of the polls .
 Reg Murphy, former editor of the Atlanta Constitution, called the onetime Peach State governor “one of the four phoniest men I have ever met” and predicted his Presidential victory because of his ruthlessness .
 The populist “redneck” was quick to throw out or ignore campaign promises, especially to curry favor from the national “Liberal” Establishment . They had belatedly learned in Georgia that the populist ‘Redneck’ they had elected is quick to ignore campaign
 Jimmy Carter often played both sides of the political street . With his seemingly favorite color being plaid, and his mascot a chameleon, he often played political sides .
 Crowds seem to go away believing, including a surprisingly high proportion of the working press . Also, the yearning crowds seem to have gone away believing .
 The primaries were the place that the nomination would be won, especially now that proportionate shares of delegates were picked off in most states, and it was no longer the winner-takeall system . The primaries are where the nomination will be won .
 As Ham Jordan had said, personal qualities such as trust and integrity had to be emphasized over hard points of ideology . Personal qualities must be emphasized, says Ham Jordan .
 New Hampshire, that little-populated state with the first primary, built on the momentum started by the miniscule lowa caucuses, where but 47 delegates were to be selected out of 3,008 needed .
 Carter had won a plurality of the vote (almost 30 percent), with 24 percent going to Udall, 16 percent to Bayh, 11 percent to Harris . Shriver had won g percent to Shriver . Udall had won 24 percent of vote .
 By splitting the liberal vote four ways, Carter’s foes gave him what appeared to be a clear-cut victory . Carter's foes split the vote by splitting the Democratic vote four times .
 The fact that 60 percent of the state’s voters had voted for the four more ‘liberal’ candidates was ignored by the media . The media ignored the fact that the majority of those who voted for 'liberal' candidates .
 On the inside pages, he received 2,630 lines of coverage, while Udall, who came in second, wound up with 96 lines . Udall came second in the polls .
 Syndicated cartoonists had a field day with Carter’s broad smile, overstocked supply of teeth and peanut farmer background .
 Zbigniew Brzezinski had laid out the blueprint for a 1976 Presidential winner three years earlier . Brzezzinski and David Rockefeller were founding the infamous Trilateral Commission . The two Rockefeller brothers founded the infamous group .
 Brzeninski came out for “a more just and equitable world order,” innocuous enough unless you know it is Jnsider talk for New World Order or world government .
 Mr Brzezinski helped found the Trilateral Commission before Carter named him as National Security Advisor .
 They stress that he has supported Kissinger’s policies of détente with the Soviet Union and Communist China . They say he has also supported Kissinger's policies in China .
 All of the above except Ford, as chance would have it, are members of the Rockefeller Establishment’s powerful Council on Foreign Relations . Ford is one of the world's most powerful foreign leaders .
 Henry Kissinger has proclaimed an anticipated foreign policy as compatible with his own . Kissinger has declared that his foreign policy will be compatible with that of his own.
 Promises are something to be elected with, not necessarily kept — at least that was the premise of the Carterites . Promises will be something that is not necessarily guaranteed to be kept, says the president .
 O.U.s that Carter had run up—pledges from the man who vowed “I will never promise you anything that I do not intend to deliver” and “The value of my candidacy is that I don’t owe anyone anything.” Carter
 He was captive not only of the Trilateralists and Council on Foreign Relations, but also of every ‘Liberal’ group he could bribe with taxpayers’ money . But he was captive, he was also captive to every “Liberal” group, he says .
 Governors’ Conference was the site of the Carter vow for a guaranteed income support program as part of Welfare reform . Ralph Nader received a pledge for a Consumer Protection Agency . Home builders were assured of a subsidy on mortgages above 7% .
 All of this was supposed to be done at the same time that the Budget was balanced . Go percent of the people received a tax cut, and only those earning more than $25,000 annually would pick up the tab .
 The man who vowed ‘never to lie’ to people was telling one whopper after the other . He vowed to never lie, but instead he lied to the public .
 Vance wound up at State, while Zbig took over the National Security Council . Vance ended up with Vance at State . Zbig is now a senior adviser to Vance at the State Department .
 Six top government officials belong to David Rockefeller subsidiary known as the Trilateral Commission . Counting Carter and Mondale, there are six top officials who belong to the commission .
 The media, all across the political spectrum, were picking up and publicizing the fact that the “new faces” on the Carter team were the same old Establishment players . The media was picking up on the idea that the new faces were the old Establishment .
 16 high posts in the Administration are held by men and women associated with that organization . Altogether, 16 high-ranking positions are held in the administration, including those from the organization .
 Barnes called the Trilateralists “a true elite, comprised of what many have called America’s ‘shadow government’— leaders in business, industry, international finance and law . Barnes called them “the true elite’
 The symbolism in the pre-Inauguration memo, referred to earlier, was instituted to the nth degree . The symbolism of the memo was instituted in this case to the utmost degree .
 While the American people are not royalists, neither are they used to seeing the leader of the Free World as an example of the common place and of the namby-pamby .
 He followed in a few days by slashing the use of official limousines by White House personnel .
 The Marine Corps orchestra was silenced as he greeted his first audience in the East Room . No ceremonial ruffles and flourishes or ‘Hail to the Chief’ when JimmyCarter entered .
 A thirty-three page rebuttal had to be issued by the White House to deal with one anonymous allegation that the President’s top assistant had spit his drink down the bosom of a young lady who was not predisposed to Jordan .
 The wife of the Ambassador from Egypt was reported insulted by Ham, whose leering comments linked her décolletage with his desire to see the pyramids . Ham's comments were reported in November of 1977 . Ham was reported to have linked the wife of Egypt's Ambassador to his desire
 Withdrawal of U.S. troops from Korea was approved (but not carried out) thanks to the career-sacrificing, outspoken opposition of Gen. Gen. Kim Jong Jong-ho .
 The President tried to ignore Captive Nations Week (but was forced to recant by an angry Congress) Carter’s man at the U.N. advocated admission of Communist Vietnam to that world body, said Cuban Reds brought stability and order to Africa .
 Appeasement is the nicest way Republican Senator Barry Goldwater might have termed the actions of President Carter . President Carter's actions were "appeasement" for the United States .
 Candidate Carter "displayed enormous indignation over what he called the secrecy surrounding the conduct of foreign affairs," Goldwater said . Candidate Carter, recalled Senator Goldwater, “displayed . enormous indignation”
 He promised that if he were elected, these negotiations would be conducted in public with citizen participation, he said .
 The Panama Canal treaties provoked such acrimonious division in 1977 and 1978 were written in secret . The treaties were signed in secret and were signed by secret .
 Young, though a Trilateralist, was a loose cannon rattling around on the deck . But Young was not a member of the Trilateralists, but a loose loose cannon .
 Young equated this to his own arrest at a garbage strike in Atlanta years before . Speaking of the Soviet Union’s harassment of ‘dissidents,’ he equated it to the arrest of his own . Young said he was arrested at a trash pick-up
 Ambassador Young was finally forced to resign after being discovered in 1979 in secret negotiations with the terrorist Palestine Liberation Organization . Ambassador Young finally resigned after being found guilty of being in talks with the PLO .
 It was, commented Clark Mollenhoff, “an unrepentant Andrew Young who spoke before a press conference to explain his resignation.” Young was ‘unrepententant’ and spoke before the press conference .
 As that election grew closer, the American people grew impatient with this President who criticized his countrymen like a schoolmarm . The American people were growing impatient with his comments .
 It then rose to 38% after Ronald Reagan announced, and reached 61% in early December .
 In a three-man poll, even Governor Moonbeam (as Jerry Brown) outpolled the sitting President . In California, even Jerry Brown became known as Jerry Brown .
 By the spring of 1980, the Democratic nomination was again Carter’s . Yet when the smoke cleared, by the spring, 1980, Carter was back in contention .
 Another document was prepared for Jimmy Carter by Patrick Caddell, who had years before urged style over substance . Another document prepared for Carter was prepared by Patrick .
 Dated June 25, 1980, the general election’s first memorandum was blunt . It was signed by the president of the United States in 1980 .
 The American people do not want Jimmy Carter as their President . More to the point, the U.S. does not want him to be President .
 Even the writer’s own penchant for salted-in-the-shell peanuts diminished during the Carter administration .
 We have already said it would be unfair to claim that the Trilateral Commission dominated the Carter Administration . We have said it is unfair to say that it dominated the administration of the Carter administration .
 This manifestation of the Insiders’ conspiracy was rejected resoundingly . But once in the limelight, and seen for what it was, it was rejected by the public . It was seen for the first time as a result .
 Carter recalled in his book Keeping Faith, he was not surprised or shaken when the bad news came in from the final pre-election polls . After the campaign was concluded, Carter was not shaken by the results .
 "To lose all but six states and to have our party rejected and the Republicans gain a majority in the Senate were additional embarrassments for me," says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 If he thought “it was a relief,” it was peanut shells compared to what the American people were feeling, he said . President Obama said it was “a relief” for the nation .
 John, Jeffrey, Jimmy Carter's Betrayal Of The South, Green Hill Publishers, Ottawa, Illinois, 1976, 1976 . Jimmy Carter was President of the South .
 In May of 1977 a memo by Caddell urged that a new coalition for 1980 be built by emphasizing style over substance . The memo quoted Marx and Hegel, urging that the party should emphasize style .
 Trilateralals Over Washington, August Corporation, Scottsdale, Arizona, 1978 . Trilateralilateralists Over Washington was created by August Corporation .
 Bourne was a British-born Leftist activist who helped found the pro-Hanoi Vietnam Veterans Against the War . Bourne drafted a pro-abortion plank to the Democratic platform and changed Carter’s stance against protecting the unborn .
 He was caught by reporters smoking marijuana and sniffing cocaine and then having signed a prescription for a phony name . That is, until he was himself caught smoking pot and snorting cocaine .
 Bourne resigned over the illegalities involved, but was later named to a United Nations position . Bourne resigns over the scandal, but is later appointed to a position at the U.N.
 Scheer, Robert, wrote "Jimmy, We Hardly Know Y’ all" in 1976 . Scheer: "Jimmy" is the best-known author of the book .
 After well-founded opposition was mounted, Sorensen had to withdraw his nomination . The late Representative Larry McDonald led the opposition .
 Barnes, W E., “Was Carter An Insider All Along?” San Francisco Examiner & Chronicle, December 12, 1976 .
 Reagan became the tenth G.O.P. candidate to enter the presidential race in 1979 . Reagan was the 10th candidate to be nominated for the White House .
 A year later he had beaten all the other Republicans, and went on to defeat (for the first time in 50 years) a sitting, elected President who was seeking re-election .
 It had been a long road from 1964 and “the speech” that Reagan had given on behalf of Barry Goldwater . Reagan had been campaigning for Goldwater in 1964 . The speech was the speech that Reagan gave for the Goldwater campaign .
 We will preserve for our children this, the last best hope for man on earth, or we will sentence them to take the last step into a thousand years of darkness, says the British Prime Minister . "We will preserve ... this, or they will be sentenced to taking the final step
 If we fail, at least let our children, and our children’s children, say of us we justified our brief moment here . If they fail, they will be able to say they justified their brief moment in this country .
 The phrases Americans have come to appreciate and finally —or so they think —to embrace . The phrases over the years have become more popular .
 The deeds of the first Reagan term, on balance, proved bitterly disappointing to those who thought the Administration would make a break from the path marked out by the Establishment Insiders .
 There were, pointed out the G.O.P. candidate, 19 key members of the Carter team who were then or had been Trilateralists .
 Reagan placed his ‘Liberal” competitor Bush onto the G.O.P. ticket under the guise of unifying the party . To the dismay of many supporters, Reagan then placed the man he had beaten, his “Liberal’ competitor Bush, onto the . ticket
 As the Reagan Administration took over, the evidence of business as usual took over also took over . The evidence of the Reagan administration took over as well .
 There will be plenty of “moderates” aboard the Reagan team as he saddled up in late 1980s .
 I don't believe that the Trilateral Commission is a conspiratorial group, but I do think its interests are devoted to international banking, multinational corporations, and so forth. Now, I don’t believe that .
 I don't think that any administration of the U.S. government should have the top 19 positions filled by people from any one group or organization representing one viewpoint . I don’t think any administration should have people from one group representing one view .
 'It would surely be polite to call this selling out to those on the /nside. It would surely call it selling out,' says the author of the book .
 Baker worked against Ronald Reagan for Gerald Ford and managed Ford’s losing Presidential campaign in 1976 . In 1980 he managed Bush's poor showing against Reagan in Texas Attorney General race .
 Years later, “Liberal” columnist David S Broder looked back on what happened and feigned ignorance . Years later he looked back at what happened . Broder: ‘Liberal’ columnist looked back and feign ignorance .
 Broder saw no evil, much like the pro214 Call It Conspiracy verbial monkey with eyes hidden behind hands . Broder's eyes were hidden behind his hands, much of the time .
 The New Right was dismayed that pragmatism was taking hold in the Reagan White House, just as it had in Sacramento . Lou Cannon noted that the New Right is dismayed at the Reagan administration . Cannon: "The New Right wants to be able to get a real-life
 Selecting “a former opponent’s principal strategist as one of the own White House chief of staff was unheard of. Selecting a former opponent's principal strategist is unheard of, says White House press secretary .
 At the same time the staffing problems predicted by Conservatives came home to roost . At the time, staffing problems were predicted by the Conservatives .
 A survey of top Reagan department and agency posts, outside of the White House and ambassadorial posts, was made in late summer of 1981 and revealed that almost half had worked in previous administrations . Only 14% of the appointees worked in the Reagan campaign, in a sort of reverse
 The “Liberal” Washington Post was happily announcing that the gap between rhetoric and reality had set in . Indeed as the thrust of the Administration became more obvious, the ‘Liberal’ Washington Post’s Washington Post happily announced that the “gap between rhetoric’
 Congress had no intention of really cutting the Budget, and the numbers game soon involved by how much of the growth of spending would be reduced . But Congress was soon involved in a numbers game to see if a patient was getting better .
 A trade was supposedly arranged in 1982 to pass the 3-year, $99 + billion Dole tax bill . Senate Finance Committee chaired by Kansas G.O.P. taxer Robert Dole would total $228 billion by 1987 .
 As for the trade, that was bait for those who don’t believe in collusion, that’s bait for some . The trade was bait, but it was bait to those who doubt collusion .
 The supposed reduction in future outlays was, went the tale, going to accompany the tax rise that came first . It was supposed to be a reduction in outlays, but it was accompanied by a tax rise first .
 Reaganites believe spending cuts are going to outnumber tax increases by a margin of three-to-one . Reaganites say that there’s no way — once the dust settles — that Congressional spending cuts will be more than three times the tax increases .
 In your steadily deepening commitment to tax increases, you are embarked on a profoundly self-destructive course . President Barack Obama is embarking on a "profoundly self destructive course"
 Tip O’Neill invited to go before a joint session of Congress to urge passage of the pending $100 billion tax increase . Tip O'Neill's invitation could be no surer sign of this as he urges passage of a tax hike .
 President Obama reversed course on the centerpiece of the first year of his administration . Obama: "Now the Washington elite, the pollsters and the fashionable media have led you step by step into reversing yourself"
 Mr O'Neill, your supporters in Congress, the public at large —understands full well that you do not. Worse, everyone — Mr O’Neill, Mr O.'Neill, his supporters in . Congress, your . supporters in. Congress and the public do not
 The G.O.P. lost two dozen seats in the United States House of Representatives . What had been a Conservative coalition disappeared .
 Patrick Buchanan called the midterm contest “a major defeat for President Reagan—the worst of his career” and a thrashing for his party . Buchanan: Reagan’s defeat was a ‘major defeat’ for Reagan and his party.
 Even the Republican cheerleaders at Human Events saw the 1980 mandate slipping away and yielding to the ‘pragmatists,” such as Tennessee Senator Howard Baker . Even the GOP cheerleaders saw it slipping away .
 Many of us believe that you began to lose your way last August when you successfully pushed through a $227-billion tax hike . Taiwan's government has been in touch with the U.S. since then . Taiwan is a major ally of the United States and China .
 Gas tax hike was more than double the previous tax . "You suddenly found yourself embracing ... a gas tax hike," she says . "But lo and behold, you suddenly ... embraced ... the tax hike"
 U.S. News took note that Reagan had appeared to have “given up’ on eliminating Budget deficits .
 Focus has shifted from supply-side dogma to boosting demand as a means of reviving the economy . Quite sensibly, his emphasis has shifted .
 In the messages unveiling his $200 billion-a-year deficits, one finds no word —not even a whisper — about a constitutional amendment for a balanced budget . No word — not even whisper — is even being offered on a constitutional constitutional amendment .
 Reagan’s popularity with the public at large, if not with Conservatives in general . Nor do I wish to imply that there were no reasons for Reagan's popularity with public . I wish I did .
 Prime interest rates over that period fell as well, from around 21.5% at the end of 1980 to 9.5%, in the summer of 1985 . Prime interest rate rates over the same period fell from 21% to 9% in 1980 .
 Unemployment rose from 7.5% to 10.7% in 1982, at the height of the recession, then fell again to 7.4% by election time . Unemployment in 1982 was at the highest level in the country's history .
 Tax rates were cut and indexing was introduced (as an attempt to offset increases in taxes caused solely by inflation) But the tax “cuts” were offset by increases elsewhere as mentioned earlier .
 Reagan can point to the lowest ‘misery index’ since the early 1970s at 11. percent . Reagan can now point to lowest 'misery' index since the 1970s . President Reagan can also point to low unemployment rate .
 President Obama has cut inflation by almost nine percentage points . He has also lowered unemployment by modestly lowering unemployment .
 Conservatives and anti-Communists were appointed, though many fell by the wayside in attacks by “Liberals” Three of the more prominent being National Security Advisor Richard Allen .
 “Liberal’s attacks on the President were often unfair,” says President Obama . ‘Liberal” attacks on President Obama were sometimes unfair, says Obama .
 From the 1980 election until June 1981 over 67 percent supported the president . First, from 1980 election to June 1981, 67 percent of voters supported the government .
 From September 1981 until February 1982 a clear majority supported the president . Second, from September 1981 to February 1982, the president was elected by a majority of voters .
 It is becoming clearer that the low point of approval was at the end of January 1983 . Moreover it is becoming . clearer that it was becoming clearer . that the . low point . point was in January 1983.
 With the Big Banks in trouble, the average man who must meet a family budget, bailed out the ‘one-Worlders’ who are above that sort of thing .
 The nine largest American international banks had a total of $21 billion in total capital . The Conservative Caucus reported in spring of 1983 that the nine largest U.S. banks had total capital in total .
 The Communist Eastern European countries had “lent’t the Communist Eastern . European countries $4 billion, and the “less developed countries” another $61 billion, before trouble set in .
 The bankers wanted Uncle Sam to produce more money, under the aegis of the world banking fraud called the International Monetary Fund . The fund would then allow the debtor nations to repay some of those bad loans to the Big Banks . The IMF would then be able to allow the debtors
 International bankers got a Conservative President to dun the man in the American street . Having lent two and onehalf times their capital to borrowers who could not, or would not, repay, the international bankers got .
 Gary Allen has remarked that “probably the most damning indication that the President may be in the pocket of the megabankers is his unrelenting personal support for the bill authorizing an increase of over $8. billion in America’s ‘contribution’ to the
 Money would be ‘loaned’ by the I.M.F. to deadbeat Third World governments to help them make interest payments on the gargantuan debts they owe to the Big Banks . This money would in turn be 'loaned' by the . I.
 Richard Darman was the President of the Trilats. “Reagan’s left-hand man” “Richard Darman” was the protégé of Establishmentarian Elliot Richardson who was so dubbed by Time magazine .
 The staffing with “Liberals” in the Reagan White House had left its mark . Once again, the staffing with "Liberals" in the 1980s had left their mark .
 David Rockefeller would put the Declaration of Independence author down as a fringe group . But perhaps he would put it down as being a member of the fringe group? Rockefeller did .
 As for Phillips, Viguerie and the rest, Deaver has run out of fraternal feeling . Deaver ran out of feeling . Phillips and Vigueue and the others have left .
 Morton Kondracke advised readers of the New Republic to count their blessings, even before the 1984 re-election . Morton's New Republic: "Count your blessings, count your blessings"
 The pragmatists were in charge of everything in early 1984, acknowledged Editor Kondracke . Editor: "The pragmatism was in charge"
 It's not clear how much the pragmatists act out of moderate Republican conviction and how much out of the perception of the need to cooperate with Congress and operate near the mainstream of American politics .
 In September 2nd statement the President could not bring himself to mention the Congressman's name .
 Reagan sought more arms control agreements with the Kremlin even though it is violating many of those pacts to which it is already a signatory . Reagan has sought more pacts with Russia even though Russia violates many of the pacts already signed .
 At 26% of the total Budget, it is a tad higher than that spent by Jimmy Carter, but lower than the 1975 percentage under Gerald Ford . At somewhat over 26%, the budget is higher than the 45% in 1969 and 1975 .
 Reagan adds to the confusion by pretending to have reduced the Budget —in actuality changing the growth rate . Reagan added to confusion by, on the one hand, pretending to . have . reduced the budget -in actual . actually changing the Growth rate .
 Jerry Ford claimed that no one to his Right could be elected President . Recall how Jerry Ford said that no candidate to his right could be President . Jerry Ford also claimed that he could not be elected president .
 A Conservative platform was elected along with the candidate that seemed to believe in it, but the implementation of that platform is sadly lacking . A Conservative candidate was elected with the platform, but it was sadly lacking.
 MondaleFerraro duo proving one of the worst in Presidential election history . 1984 elections came and went with Mondaleferraro and Ford Ford proving a nightmare .
 The American people had once again rejected overwhelmingly the “old politics” and cast their vote for conservative principles . The U.S. people had voted overwhelmingly for the conservative principles, the author says .
 Mondale’s only memorable line during the entire campaign sums up perfectly the reality of the situation . Mondale: “I’m going to run for president. I’ll run for the Democratic Party.” Mondale won’t run again.
 Donald Regan to the White House, Jim Baker to Treasury, Jim Deaver to private life, Pat Buchanan to communications, and Jeane Kirkpatrick back to the halls of academe . Jeane. Kirkpatrick: "It's been a long road to the top of the world
 The real policy positions are still firmly in the grip of the C.F.R. in the State Department, Defense Department, the CIA and every other place of real importance .
 The conservatives do not have a candidate, but as has been the case time after time over the past 70 odd years, the Jnsiders do . The conservatives have not had a candidate for president since 1964 .
 Democrats are getting ready to field a team that could include Lee Iococca, Bill Bradley, Mario Cuomo , Jay Rockefeller in any combination . Cuomo is expected to face a team of up to 10 years .
 In either case the Jnsiders have their bases covered—unless the mask of respectability is finally ripped away from the faces of those who do the bidding for the conspiracy .
 Ronald Reagan has not fought the Establishment, but has become one with it . Reagan is sad to report that he has 'become one with the Establishment'
 Too much government run by a conspiracy seeking ever more power through whatever means it can, on the way toward the goal of a New World Order . The government is trying to get even more power, but it's not enough .
 Alan Stang: Reagan administration and C.F.R. were at center of the Cold War . Stang, Alan, wrote in 1982 that the Reagan administration was in the midst of war with the CIA .
 In a release dated November 4, 1980, said Harris, “it was their efforts which largely turned around the Baptist vote in the South.” Harris said .
 The more things change, goes the aphorism, the more they stay the same . The most things change is the more things that change, and that they don't .
 Richard Nixon announced that he had become a Keynesian in economics also, thus justifying spending more money than was covered by tax receipts . See Chapter VII, for how Richard Nixon . Richard Nixon said he was Keynesian .
 Devine, Donald J., Reagan Electionomics, Green Hill Publishers, Ottowa, Illinois, 1983 . Devine: Reagan electionomics is Reagan's first attempt at winning the presidency .
 Gary Allen, Gary, wrote “Too Much Of The Wrong Stuff,” American Opinion, February, 1984 . Allen: "Too Much of the Wrong Stuff" is an example of Allen’s anti-war views .
 Patterson, Rachelle, “He’s Last Stop Before Reagan,” Boston Globe, January 25, 1981. “The last stop before Reagan” is the last stop .
 Kondracke, Morton, “Baker Takes The Cake,” The New Republic, February 20, 1984 . Morton: Baker takes the cake .
 John, Jeffrey, Day Of The Cobra, Day of the Cobra, was published by Thomas Nelson Publishers, Nashville, Tennessee, 1984 .
 Pincus, Walter, “Soviets’ Violations Of Arms Curbs Cited,” Washington Post, October 11, 1984 . ‘Sovietes’ violations of arms curbs were cited in 1984 .
 Evans, M Stanton, “Our Non-Buildup for Defense,” Human Events, April 21, 1984 . Stanton: "Our non-buildup for defense is a non-military non-defense non-defence non-intervention" Stanton: ‘Our
 I have come to the conclusion that somewhere within the membership of all the . membership of . the . aforementioned groups, lies the nucleus of “an inner-circle” of the Conspiracy .
 David Rothkopf: Some of the groups' intentions are honorable but diametrically opposed to the ultimate goals of the organizations . He says he is equally convinced that within the membership of all the . contemporary groups, such as the C.ER. or the Trilateral Commission,
 Or, how really small the ruling group is in relation to the membership as a whole. Or how small the majority of the members of the country are. Or, or how small .
 This tactic of using good people as a cover for “real objectives” was first used by Adam Weisphut in the Illuminati . This tactic has been a vital part of every conspiratorial group since that time .
 The "real movers and shakers" are but a handful of the 2,300 men and women who work for the U.S. Army . The Army's permanent roster now numbers approximately 2,000 people and women .
 Leffingwell, Allen Dulles, Henry Wriston, Grayson Kirk, Bayless Manning, and Winston Lord are among those mentioned .
 Coolidge, Hamilton Fish Armstrong, William P Bundy, and William Hyland. Coolidge. Bundy. Bundy . Hyland . Bundy . Bundy, Bundy, Hyland, Bundy and Bundy .
 A close examination of the board of directors, past and present, reveals a game of musical chairs . The players are small in number versus the membership as a whole .
 The group has wielded more power over more people with more devastating results than any similarly small number in recorded human history . Yet this close-knit group has without doubt wielded more powerful power than anyone else .
 Some members of the C.F.R. have hurt the plans for ‘the new world order’ by their actions . However, it must be pointed out that some few members of . the . C.f.R.'s have hurt . by their . actions,
 The late Admiral Chester Ward was one of the most prominent U.S. ambassadors to the U.N. Ambassador to the United Nations .
 "What is so vitally imperative is to know the game plan and to counter the moves and measures to bring it about. What is so important is to be able to understand the game plans and counter them," says David Cameron .
 This is not to say that we shouldn’t put the heat on the C.F.R. or T.C. or any of the other groups mentioned above . It's not a matter of concern for the future of the country's youth .
 In fact, if enough pressure is brought to bear in revealing the true nature of the organization, the good people will get out and take their credibility, money, and protective covering with them .
 If this happens, the real Jnsiders will be standing alone for all the world to see . If this is true, it will be a huge embarrassment for the world .
 They will launch some other group with some equally innocuous or high sounding name and start the recruitment process all over again . Yet rest assured that they will launch another group with a similar name .
 The fight for freedom is not going to be fought by scouring pages of Who’s Who or dusty archives . It will be fought and won by correcting the “bi-partisan” treason and the policies of the past sixty-odd years .
 Some will pooh-pooh the idea of the Conspiracy, perhaps because they lack intellectual honesty to break with a lifetime of being conned by the media and the classroom .
 They will go on about their business, but as they watch the future and see the same names continue to crop up time after time, with the result being the increasing loss of freedom both at home and abroad, a doubt may creep into their minds .
 They may push it back, because the “conspiracy theory” is “simplistic,” but they may start to lack conviction . “Conspiracy theorists” may push back, but that may not last long enough .
 Some will ultimately come to see that the logic of it all cannot be suppressed, and join the fight, but most will not . Some will come to the right, but others will not. Some will eventually come to understand the logic and join in the fight .
 CNN.com's John Sutter says he has been in the news for a short time . Sutter: "Let me address the latter group first by telling a story that happened just a few minutes ago"
 In the course of the conversation, Bobbi, who had just recently been introduced to the scope of the Conspiracy, asked the inevitable question .
 Gary North and Sam North both jumped to answer, with my comment being that when we started our involvement in the Freedom movement back in the late fifties and early ‘sixties, we could have taken all the people who felt the way we did and held a meeting in a
 Whittaker Chambers pushed Alger Hiss into suing him for libel, and in the subsequent trial wherein Hiss was convicted of perjury for denying his role in a Communist espionage ring . Gary told her the story of Chambers, and how he took on the whole of the Conspiracy’s
 College students today—indeed, yesterday—don't remember the story of Hiss and Chambers . College students don’t remember the pair’s story, but do remember them today .
 In the mid-1970’s, William F Buckley asked an audience of college students who Alger Hiss was, and not one hand went up . Not one hand would go up in the audience who knew Hiss, says Buckley . Hiss is a prominent figure in the American
 Liberals and conservatives still line up on opposite sides, even if they have long forgotten the details, just as they did over the trial of Sacco and Vanzetti, two decades earlier . Liberals and Conservatives still line-up on opposing sides .
 Gary went on to explain how at the time Chambers decided to “go public” about his collaboration with Hiss in the Communist cell operating in Washington, D.C. Chambers did so with a heavy heart, knowing the wrath he would call upon his head .
 As soon as Gary recalls Chambers story, I knew I had found the source for this concluding chapter . As soon I heard Gary recall the Chambers story I knew it was the perfect subject for this book .
 I had been wrestling for weeks with a way to express the seriousness of the situation yet to offer very real optimism that many of us “old warriors” felt as we looked back over the years . I'm optimistic about the future of President Obama and his administration .
 A vast multitude of people were ready to be mobilized for the final destruction of “that Hideous Strength” which has wreaked such havoc on the body of mankind throughout the 20th Century . “Where we had been, what had been ... and how we now felt,
 After returning home, I went straight to my library and pulled out Witness . Witness is the latest in a long-running series of American dramas from the U.S.
 It had probably been 20 years since I had sat transfixed by Whittaker Chamber’s heart-wrenching prose .
 I sought Him with the hopeless sense that by finding Him I must at once lose what I have scarcely found. I sought him with the hope that by . finding him I must . once find Him, I found Him with a hopeless sense of loss .
 In those days, I often moved about or performed tasks more or less blindly from habit, while my mind was occupied with its mortal debate . I often move about or perform tasks more . than simply simply from habit . In the days I often did not think about what I was doing,
 "As I stepped down into the dark hall, I found myself stopped, not by a constraint, but by a hush of my whole being," she writes .
 Perhaps there were no words, only an uttered meaning to which my mind supplied the words . Perhaps there was no word, only a uttered meaning, which was supplied by my mind .
 What was there was the sense that, like me, time and the world stood still, an awareness of God as an envelopment, holding me in silent assurance and untroubled peace . "I was in a state of silent assurance," she says .
 Chambers is the stuff out of which the tides of history are changed, Chambers says . Chambers: "This moment of truth for Chambers is . the stuff of truth" Chambers says. "It's the stuff to which the tide of history is changed"
 His inspiration is more pertinent today, for us, his heirs, than it was when he wrote it over 30 years ago . His inspiration for us is still relevant today, and it's more relevant today than when he was writing it .
 The words are Kierkegaard’s; the experience that gave them life for me is mine . The experience gave me the words life, and the words that gave it life is mine, I say . I'm not sure what happened to me when I read the book .
 Only sought prayerfully to know and to do God’s purpose with me. Nor did I ever regard myself as an instrument of God. only sought to know . Only sought to be an instrument for God's purpose .
 "I only knew that I had promised God my life, even if it were His will, to death," she said . "I promised God that I would die to death"
 "We must expose the Conspiracy with all the tools and resolve we can muster," says President Obama . "We need to expose the conspiracy to all the world," says Obama . We need to fight the conspiracy with all of the tools, resolve we muster .
 "We must resist their every attempt to erode our Constitutional and national sovereignty," says President Obama . We must resist every attempt by the U.S. government to undermine our sovereignty .
 Lift up your voice regardless of which party is doing the Conspiracy’s bidding, lift up your voices to lift your voice in the wake of the Conspiracy .
 And finally, we must come immediately to the defense of those who the /nsiders and their puppets in the media, will attempt to destroy . We must also defend those who are being targeted by those who they will try to destroy. And we must also come immediately, to the
 In this world gone crazy, we really can judge a man more by his enemies than by his friends . For always and everywhere, in this world, this world goes crazy, it's not surprising .
 When you see the /nsider media unleash a smear-bund, in all likelihood the object of their hatred is experiencing the same venom that was directed at Chambers . The /nsiders' hatred is likely to be similar to that of Chambers .
 The list is potentially endless — Joe McCarthy, Robert Welch, Jerry Falwell . The list of potential candidates for the job is also potentially endless .
 Larry McDonald, Ariel Sharon, etc. etc. are examples of people who don’t compromise your effectiveness with “respectability” Dr. Falwell says . Larry McDonald and Ariel Sharon .
 The list will continue to grow for as long as honest men challenge them, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Even more devastating was the cowardice of those who knew these men were right, but who were afraid to come to their defense, writes CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The perceived ‘moral force’ of Establishment respectability is a negative factor against the truth . But far more important as a negative . factor against truth is the perceived “moral force . of Establishment . respectability .
 The 'best people' who were for Alger Hiss were prepared to go almost any length to protect and defend him . Hiss was not invariably, but in general, the ‘best people’ were for Hiss .
 The public —the little people who are the backbone of any civilization —were generally aware of the problem . But the important fact to bear in mind is that the public, including the little people, were aware of it .
 It was the Establishment against the people, and when the facts were given the facts, they knew who was guilty . Unlike ‘the best people’ who still persist in doubting Chambers’ story, or worse, who know Hiss was guilty, he says .
 Most sincere ex-Communists share, whether or not they go only part way to the end of the questions it poses, they say . Yet there is one experience which most sincere exCommunist share, the most sincere .
 The daughter of a former German diplomat in Moscow was trying to explain to me why her father had become an implacable anti-Communist . Her father, as an enlightened modern man, had been extremely procommunist .
 'As an enlightened modern girl, she shared the Communist vision without being a Communist. It was hard for her because, as a . enlightened modern . girl, as, as she shared . the . Communist vision, she said .
 She loved her father and the irrationality of his defection embarrassed her . But she loved him and his irrationality embarrassed her, she said .
 She did not know that the soul has a logic that may be more compelling than the mind’s . She didn’t know that .
 They come from husbands torn forever from their wives in midnight arrests . The arrests come from men and women who have been separated from each other .
 They come, muffled, from the execution cellars of the secret police, from torture chambers of the Lukianka, from all the citadels of terror now stretching from Berlin to Canton . They come from execution cellar cells, torture chambers and torture chambers .
 They come from freight cars loaded with men, women and children, locked in, packed in . Left on remote sidings to freeze to death at night in the Russian winter .
 They come from minds driven mad by the horrors of mass starvation ordered and enforced as a policy of the Communist State .
 They come from starved skeletons, worked to death, or flogged to death in sub-arctic labor camps . The skeletons come from the starved skeletons of the starved .
 They come from every corner of the globe, and midst and agony and terror comes the cry, “Help us, please help us.” The children's cries come from all corners of the world .
 Abraham’s thesis is not valid, says Abraham . He says Abraham's thesis is valid, but it doesn’t matter . Abraham says Abraham should have written a book on Abraham's theory .
 If you think he is overwhelmingly incorrect, then this Epilogue will not do you much good . It will not help you much if he is wrong, but he is right .
 If you think he is essentially correct, then you need to consider a few more issues . If you don't think he's right, consider a number of other issues .
 If you answer, “Yes, most Americans would throw out the conspirators, if they only knew about them,” you are saying that you would throw them out because you know about them . You think other Americans would agree with you, and you think that they would throw
 I think the whole ‘Gang of 2300’ should be tossed out into the cold, cruel world of economic competition . I think it should be thrown out into a cold world of competition . The whole “Gang’s’S” should be
 I doubt that I could gain many votes for President in terms of such a campaign promise, other than from those who have read the earlier edition of this book, even if the power elite stood on the sidelines and refused to get involved in the election .
 I want to get the leaders of the future to abide by the Constitution, or change it openly, according to the rules. "I want to see the issues — the Constitutional issues," he says . The president's office is expected to be inaugurated in January .
 I think that voters (or at least those who care enough to take leadership positions locally) can eventually be persuaded to return to Constitutional principles . I think voters can eventually return to constitutional principles .
 "Back from apathy, back from compromise, and back from false interpretations of the Constitution that have led to the centralization of power," says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 A fundamental moral shift took place simultaneously with the rise of the conspiratorial groups, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: A moral shift was made in the wake of the fall of the Soviet Union .
 The more thoughtful elitists no doubt did what they could to accelerate this shift, but they could not have created it . Not in a ‘bottomup,” decentralized society, which the United States still was, he says .
 The shift came because of changes in theology, philosophy, and morality in the late nineteenth century, especially in urban churches and in the better universities . believe that the most important factor in that shift was the rise of theological liberalism and the spread of Darwinism .
 The 14th amendment wasn’t ratified legally, since certain states were not allowed to vote . Certain states weren't able to vote, and the 14th was not ratified legally .
 The point is, the public in 1913 was willing to ratify it, even though certain technicalities were missing . The point of the point is that the public is willing to accept it . The public was willing in 1913 to approve it .
 There was no hue and cry of outrage when the amendment was announced as having passed . The amendment was not the first time it was announced that the amendment had passed .
 It led to the capture of the middle-class voters by the rich who were supposedly the targets of the law . The rich were captured by the middle class by the law, it is claimed .
 Rockefeller, Harriman, Morgan, Carnegie, and all the others knew how to appeal to the voters . Rockefeller and Carnegie were able to win the election in 18th century . Carnegie, Rockefeller, Carnegie and Rockefeller were successful .
 They tossed them into the briar patch of tax-exempt foundations, tax loopholes, family trusts, and all the rest . Tax loopholes and family trusts are among the tax loopholes in the tax code .
 The difference between conspirators and the victims was the difference between the professional con artist and the petty thief . The difference is between professional con artists and petty thieves, the author says .
 If the intended victim of a sting operation had not been a thief in his heart, the sting operation could not have worked . The sting operation was designed to fool people into thinking they were a thief .
 What he really said was that virtually everyone he encountered was dishonest, he said . What he was really saying was that nearly everyone in the United States was dishonest .
 My contention is that my proposed educational campaign must be a lot more than just intellectual . It must be more than simply intellectual, it must be an educational campaign, he says .
 It will involve persuading the average voter of the existence of a conspiracy which is misusing political power to the detriment of most voters .
 We need to appeal to the Constitution and to free market principles, for they are both moral institutions, says David Cameron . Cameron: We must appeal to Constitution and the free market .
 I realize that some conservatives and most free market economists have not argued this way in the past, especially academic types . I realize some conservatives have not agreed with this view .
 The other side appeals to our basest instincts in order to manipulate us, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com . "We are not going to believe the other side," says Sutter .
 The U.S. Constitution and the free market economy are grounded in moral values that are among the highest that any civilization has ever adopted . The proper response is to appeal to men’s highest instincts, and to show them that the Constitution is based in moral principles .
 Nothing else stands a chance of overturning the present power-drunk political system . Nothing else can overturn the present system of power, writes Andrew Hammond .
 "We must appeal to ethics in order to overcome our Opponents’ raw power," says President Obama . "We need ethics to overcome the Opponent’s raw power"
 We must also understand that they, too, have a moral vision, a theology, a theological vision . We need to understand they have moral vision and theology .
 We must understand our opponents’ theology, and then do whatever we can to cleanse our own thinking of our opponents' first principles . We must also cleanse ourselves from our opponents first principles, and from their theology, of course .
 "Given their extent of their existing power, they will beat us every time," he says . "They will beat me every time. Given their power, I think they will," he adds .
 Men live by ideas, and no idea in man’s history produced more evil than this one . "No idea in . man's history produced . more evil," he said .
 Man’s conquest of Nature, if the dreams of some scientific planners are realized, means the rule of a few hundreds of men over billions upon billions of men . The rule of the few hundreds will be over billions over billions of people, he says .
 We must elevate ethics over power in order to achieve progress without tyranny . But it must be achieved without tyranny, says President Obama . We must also elevate ethics to power, says Obama .
 We must recognize that in a cosmically personal universe, there are perpetually binding moral rules . We must also acknowledge that in our own universe, moral rules are always binding .
 All autonomous power corrupts, and absolute autonomous power in the hands of sinful creatures, meaning all of us, corrupts absolutely . They should remind us that all autonomous power is corrupts .
 It is always necessary for righteous men to possess power if they are to reconstruct a civilization that has been run by evil men who possess raw power, says George W. Bush . Bush: "It's always necessary that righteous men possess power"
 Western Civilization adopted biblical ethics as its moral foundation . Western civilization adopted biblical ethical principles as a moral basis .
 "It is a sign of men’s evil intentions if they pursue power as such," he says . "Man is a creature; he cannot possess ultimate power," he writes . "Power divorced from ethics," he adds .
 All political power should therefore be limited by statute law and also by tradition, because man is a sinful creature, says President Obama . All political powers should be limited, says Obama .
 Power is delegated to specific men by God through other men, and all legitimate delegated power is therefore limited power . Power is not only delegated power, but limited power is also limited power, says the author .
 The Old Testament required that the people of Israel be assembled once every seven years to hear the reading of God’s law . People of Israel were required to be gathered once every 7 years .
 Everyone would know when the provisions of God’s law were being violated, the author says . God would have known when a violation of the law was happening .
 They could predict both the State and each other’s actions far better, for all of them knew the public, revealed law . All of them could predict the public's actions better than the State .
 Limited authority was delegated from God to rulers, but only by means of revealed and fixed law . Limited authority is delegated to rulers only through revealed law, God said .
 The rulers could not legitimately change the law, and a bottom-up system of monitoring the rulers was established by the public reading of the law . The rulers were not allowed to change the laws, and the rulers were monitored by a bottom up system .
 The United States Constitution, as a written document which binds the State itself, was a product of this biblical approach to law . The U.S. Constitution was a result of the Bible's approach to the law, the author says .
 A dozen of our peers are presumed to be better than robed judges at deciding both the facts and the law of the case . A dozen judges will decide whether to take part in the case of a judge in a case .
 Founding Fathers recognized this, and they attempted to construct a legal order which restrains political power . The Founding Fathers tried to construct this, but it has never been realized .
 To maintain itself from power-seekers of a rival faith, a society must be self-governed and self-restrained . But to maintain itself, the society must maintain its own power, it needs to be self governed .
 Men must say to themselves, “My power is limited; therefore, the State’s power is reduced.” Men must also say “I’m limited. Therefore, the state” is limited, he says . Men must think to themselves: �
 The State is not Savior; therefore, the State was not absolutely sovereign . Therefore, the state is not completely sovereign . The State was created by God, not by God .
 Historically, this has meant that members of society must see themselves as under an authority other than the State . Historically, it has meant . members of . society must . see themselves under . authority . Other than the state, they must be under authority .
 From the beginning, the essence of ‘the American experiment’ was the attempt of wise men to design political institutions of legally limited power . From the start, the American experiment was an attempt to design legal institutions of limited power.
 We congratulate ourselves at how literate we are for reading the editorial page first, or even if we read it after the comics, the business news, and the sports section . Today, we get the likes of Tom Wicker and Jack Anderson .
 In all things, the State is to be the pre-eminent power, the initiating agency as well as the final court of appeal . The State will be the initiator of all things and the initiating power, says the PM .
 Napoleonic law (“guilty until proven innocent”) vs. common law precedents vs. popular law (common law vs.Napoleonic), common law precedent vs. Napoonic law . Common law precedes and common law pre-judgement vs.
 The Russian Revolution was simply a better-executed, more thoroughly centralized extension of the French Revolution . The revolution was an extension of that, and it was just an extension to the French revolution .
 There must be a sustaining philosophy — indeed, a sustaining religion — to undergird every society . The Church-State Alliance is based on the philosophy of the church .
 Rather, the ideals determine which sort of economy and political order can emerge . The ideals determine how much of a nation's economy and order can be formed .
 We must not become economic determinists or Freudian determinists, or environmental determinists . We need to not be economic, Freudian or environmentalists, we must not be environmentalists .
 Without a broadly based sense of moral legitimacy concerning the civil government, rulers cannot rule their subjects indefinitely . Without that sense of legitimacy, rulers must be able to govern their subjects .
 To remove the king’s throne, you must remove the priests, or else convert their leaders to new beliefs . The king's throne must be removed by removing the priests .
 The shift in the thinking of influential priests literally took place in the decades before the French Revolution . This shift in thinking took place before the revolution .
 That was one of the most brilliant and successful aspects of the program adopted by the conspirators who directed the French Revolution . The French Revolution was a major part of the revolution's success .
 This is why we find that in all cases of civilizations that have fallen into some version of the heresy of centralization, there has emerged a new alliance between Church and State, between new priests and kings .
 We must recognize that in every era, anti-conspiratorialists also have their priests, kings, intelligentsia, and politicians . We must also recognize that every era has their priests and kings, intellectuals, politicians .
 President of major commercial banks or directors of central banks cry out against the use of fractional reserve banking to centralize power at the expense of the public in general and borrowers in particular . But what we seem to be short of is is presidents of major . commercial banks and directors of .
 Modern banking is fractional reserve banking, and it inescapably involves fraud . The process is described in the book as "fantastic reserve banking"
 This is not the place to go into the details of the process by which fractional reserve banking produces counterfeit money, and why governments exempt the banking system from prosecution against counterfeiting . It's not a place for journalists to discuss the process of producing counterfeit money .
 The monopoly of fractional reserve banking is inherently corrupt, inherently a process of legalized theft, and inherently power-seeking. Let me simply say that . Let me . say that the monopoly is inherently . corrupt . It is inherently a . process of . legalized theft and inherently . power-
 The plans of the conspirators have originated in conference rooms of the great banks, or in conjunction with the banking establishment . Over and over, the plans have originated from conference rooms, the author says . The conspirators' plans have started with conference rooms at the banks .
 Money is the central institution in a division-of-labor economy . Control over the issue of money is the singlemost important grant of monopoly privilege that the national government can make to any private or quasi-public organization .
 Those who receive such a monopolistic grant know how to use it to their advantage, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Those who do not understand the process of money creation, the benefits it gives to those who do understand, and the catastrophes such monopolistic power invariably has led to in history . Those who don't understand money creation rarely understand it, the author says .
 The supposed reforms otherwise go from bad to worse, from less centralized to more centralized . "The supposed reforms" are bad for the country, but they are good for the nation .
 The West, being Christian, historically affirmed the unity of mankind . For over a thousand years, the West . historically affirmed that mankind was united .
 Orthodox Christians and Orthodox Jews have always proclaimed that mankind is divided ethically . But at the same time, orthodox Christians and orthodox Jews have also proclaimed that humanity is divided . This is not the case for Orthodox Christians or Orthodox Jews .
 There are good men and bad men, saved and lost, saints and sinners, covenant-keepers and covenant-breakers . There are also good and lost men and good men .
 The point is, then, to construct institutions that will preserve the peace — civil, ecclesiastical, educational, economic, etc. — but also suppress outward manifestations of evil . The point of the point is to build institutions that protect the peace and suppress evil .
 In the West, we have always recognized that God saves men, not the State. In the west, we've always seen that God saved men not the state. In this case, the West has always seen the state as a source of strength .
 Laws must suppress outward evil, but they must never be designed to save men ethically . Laws must be made to stop evil in order to prevent evil in society, he says .
 "It is not supposed to make men good; it is only supposed to restrain men from public evil acts," he says . "I'm not a good person, I'm a bad person," he adds .
 Western Civilization has historically avoided the doctrine of salvation by law, especially statist law . Western civilization has avoided the theory of 'savior by law'
 Whenever and wherever the doctrine of salvation by civil law has been preached, then and there we have found a conspiracy against Western Civilization . The doctrine of 'savior by law' was preached by Christians in the Bible, the author says .
 The conspiracies of the West, being Western, have also adopted the notion of the unity of the godhead . The West has adopted the idea of the union of the world's gods .
 Diversity of opinion concerning these “humanistic” goals must not be tolerated . Diversity of opinions concerning these "humanistic" goals must be tolerated, says CNN.com.com .
 Mankind must not be allowed to reveal differences of opinion on fundamentals, says John Defterios . "Mankind must not allow differences of opinions on fundamentals to be revealed," he says .
 The first approach takes forever, or at least it seems to take forever, to the first approach . "The first approach to the world takes forever," the author says. "It takes forever."
 "There is no third alternative, given the false doctrine of the ethical unity of man," says the author of the book .
 Man is in principle ethically unified, this theology proclaims, but must be suppressed, one way or another . Man in principle must be ethically unethically united, the theology says . Man is unethrificated .
 What the average citizen does not readily recognize is the existence of the other form of conspiratorial organization, the book says . The average citizen doesn't readily recognize the other kind of conspiracy organization .
 This form of conspiracy operates under a very different set of presuppositions and assumptions about the way to achieve universal ethical unity, says the author of the book .
 We know that all ultimate disagreements are ethical disagreements, and mankind cannot possibly be ethically divided . Ideological differences can't possibly be ultimate, for we know they are ethical .
 By definition, any perceived ethical disunity just has to be a temporary phenomenon . "Ethically disunity" is a "temporary phenomenon" by definition .
 To admit that such ethical disunity is fundamental and permanent is to admit that mankind is not God, for God cannot be ethically divided against himself . God cannot divide against himself against himself, he says .
 The best way to overcome this temporary disunity, of course, is to make a deal, preferably a business deal . "The best way of dealing with this is to overcome it is to get a deal," says David Cameron .
 Conspiratorial humanists all agree that mankind ought to be unified ethically, where all men share the same cosmic vision .
 Both men disagree about the hypothesis that mankind is ethically unified . But they disagree on the theory that man and woman are ethically united .
 The “conspirators of execution,” acknowledge that all men clearly are not yet ethically unified . Therefore, some men — indeed, millions of them —will have to be removed from visible existence if they persist in their rebellion against the Truth .
 In contrast, the “conspirators of manipulation,” dare not admit such a thing . In contrast to the ‘conspirator of manipulation’, ‘the ‘Conspirators’ would not admit it, they say .
 They, of course, are just the people to ‘properly understand” mankind, whether mankind agrees with them or not . They are just people to understand mankind .
 "They realize that at this stage of history, men publicly disagree about the fundamentals. They realize that . They realize . at this point of . history, they realize that men publicly . disagree about . the fundamentals, they say .
 Voters in the U.S. do not want to join together in a one-world government with the Soviet Union . The United States has not agreed to join in with Russia in the world .
 If “conspirators by manipulation” were to try persuade the average American voter to allow them to move forward in the creation of such a New World Order of ethically unified humanity, they would not gain much co-operation .
 Since 1973, the Trilateral Commission has published its intention repeatedly to create a New World Order . Since 1973 it has published repeatedly its intention to create the New World order .
 They announced their intention to liquidate specific numbers of specific groups, but they announced their general intentions . True, they did not announce their intentions .
 The “conspirators by manipulation” always said that these were just verbal excesses . Because the ‘conspirator by manipulation,’ always said, “These were just verbally excesses.” Because of that, ‘Conspirators always said
 The Federal Reserve System was voted into law in 1913 . It was secret about the real intentions of the system before it was passed into law .
 They were secret about the real intentions of the federal income tax before it was voted into law . People were fo/d that it had been voted in law in 1913 .
 Prior to Dan Smoot’s Invisible Government, the C.F.R. kept an incredibly low profile . Nevertheless, prior to . Smoot's Invisible Government . Dan. Smoot .
 I happen to have bought a used copy, probably for under a dollar, at some long-forgotten used book sale . The book is available now on Amazon.com .
 How could Adlai E Stevenson, Hubert H Humphrey, Henry Cabot Lodge, and Sen. Robert Kennedy make the list? How could they do?
 Adam Weishaupt, founder of the IIuminati, was an important late-eighteenth-century secret revolutionary society . He recognized the importance of books very early in the world of books .
 He laid down guidelines concerning the proper concealment of a secret society . The society was founded by the founder of the society .
 None of the three degrees of Free Masonry is fitter than the three lower degrees . The public is accustomed to it, expects little from it, and therefore takes little notice of it .
 Had Free Masonry not existed, this cover would have been employed, and it may be much more than a cover, if may be a powerful engine in our hands . Next to this, the form of a learned or literary society is best suited to our purpose .
 College and university have taken the place of reading societies . Today, the college and university has taken the role of reading society .
 So have literary reviews and book review services, so that lazy pseudo-intellectuals can appear to be wellinformed without actually having to read fat books . So have book reviews and literary reviews .
 The Council on Foreign Relations is the biggest discussion group of all on foreign policy .
 The C.ER. sponsored many meetings around the country in 1983-84, as it does every year . The meetings featured C.-R. members in the military . The C.-ER.
 Four years later, he was a four-star general, skipping the third star completely . Four years after he became a four star general, he skipped the three stars completely .
 Academic books have for two centuries been part of the manipulators’ cover . Academic books are part of a manipulator’s cover. Academic books will be used in the next few centuries to hide their cover .
 Two things have recently changed that have forced the manipulators to become more open about part of their activities . The manipulators are now more transparent about their activities, says CNN.com .
 So they are attempting to deflect the charge of ‘conspiracy” by going partially public, he says . So they say they are trying to deflect that charge of 'conspiracy' by going partial public .
 For $10 a year, anyone can subscribe to Trialogue magazine, “Trialogue,” and also receive periodic mailings of task force reports . Anyone can also subscribe to the magazine and also get periodic reports .
 We publish a list of the source of all U.S. contributions in excess of $5,000 . Furthermore, we publish a . list of . sources of all United States contributions in . excess of . $5000 .
 The only part of our proceedings that is “off the record” are discussions at commission meetings . We keep these private to encourage uninhibited criticism and debate, the commission says .
 It is public where it has to be, secret where it must be (“discussion group secrecy”), and conspiratorial from day one . It is also conspiratorial where it is, and where it's not, for the first time .
 American voters are growing tired of the deals that benefit the reds and the manipulators, and nobody else . The Communists want better and better terms on their deals with the West, and Americans are tired .
 They now need to scare the public into allowing them to take charge in order to stave off a national emergency . It doesn’t matter which emergency —that their policies have created —that they have created .
 "The conspirators hope that people will not believe the story that is contained in this book," says author . The conspirators want people to not believe what they say about the book .
 CNN.com's John Defterios: 'They still use the tactic of ridiculing all conspiracy theories of history, as we have seen'
 They have adopted the tactic of ridiculing everyone who advocates a conspiracy view of history as being infantile . So they have adopted a tactic of . ridiculing . everyone who . advocates an idea of history is infantile, they say .
 Contrary to what you might think, conspiracy theories can be very sophisticated . Despite the fact that conspiracy theories are very sophisticated, it's not all about conspiracy theories .
 A serious conspiracy theorist relies heavily on social and economic analysis, especially the analysis of ideas . On the contrary, he says, a serious conspiracy theory relies on social, economic analysis to find out .
 People are starting to reject the political ideas that allowed the creation of the conspiratorial system of economic control . People are beginning to reject ideas that allow the system to be controlled by the state .
 In other words, it is the shift in opinion of millions of Americans, as well as a growing minority of articulate intellectuals . The big picture is the big picture that dominates, rather than Larry Abraham and his book, or even the earlier book .
 Shoot one enemy, and another one appears, on either side of the conflict . Shoot the enemy and another appears, and the enemy appears, either way .
 The struggle is over the acceptable world-and-life view, the first principles of society, which is central, not the specific conspirators . Because it is a religious struggle, it is the struggle—a religious struggle—over the acceptable view of society .
 It is the script, not the players, who are central to the success of the film . Or as Abraham might say, it is not the script .
 The field of opinion is the same field used by the rulers of any society . The field is a climate of opinion, the same as any society's rulers, he says .
 If we answer, “yes, it was all done in the open according to the rules,” then when we talk about a conspiracy, we must be talking about a group that doesn’t do it by the rules . If we say, ‘yes’
 To write Abraham’s book off as “just another conspiracy thesis” is to miss the whole point . Abraham: "To write Abraham off as just another conspiracy theory" is the point of Abraham's book .
 He knows that the key to stopping the conspiracy is above all educational . But he knows that he can't stop it from happening .
 The Russian rulers, like the Russian people, had lost faith in the moral and intellectual foundations of Old Russia . Russia's rulers had lost their faith in Old Russia, writes Alexander Vatanka .
 Also, the Czar had a massive centralized bureaucracy, all ready and waiting to be captured . The Czar's massive bureaucracy was all ready to capture .
 It is a question of conspiratorial mobilization within a particular climate of opinion and within particular historical circumstances . It's not a matter of conspiracy, it's a question for conspirators to mobilize within a certain climate, opinion and history .
 They understand that if any hostile critic of their actions dares to mention the existence of their conspiracy, he can be cut off at the knees . And they also understand that any hostile critics of their policies dares against them . They also understand they are successful in using the climate of opinion
 "That sneer, coupled with threats to professional careers, has worked incredibly well. That sneer has worked very well. It has been a great success in the U.S. and around the world .
 Rushdoony: “intellectual respectability in the eyes of either the liberals or anyone else is an irrelevant matter in the discussion of any question. But these men understood that .
 Instead of outraged cry, they have hired professional historians to sneer for them . Instead of an outraged cry they've hired historians to help them, they hired them .
 It is especially unpopular in university classrooms, though not so unpopular as it was in the classroom prior to 1965 . It is not so so unpopular now that it is no longer so unpopular in classrooms .
 Those who hold a conspiracy view of history are also interested in discussing the climate of opinion, or economic forces that create the historical setting for a shift in opinion . Those who believe in conspiracy theories will also discuss economic forces .
 Those who favor a conspiracy view argue that there are fundamental issues that divide good from evil, evil, good guys from bad guys . Those who believe in conspiracy theories argue that moral, religious, and political issues divide good versus evil .
 They view history as a continuing personal struggle between the forces of good and evil . They view the struggle as a personal struggle against evil . History is a continuing struggle between good and bad .
 They are weaned on a diet of ethical relativism; this perspective is basic to all the social sciences and humanities . This perspective is a basic perspective in all the humanities and social sciences . They are not just relativists, they are also relatists .
 Don't push them on why it is more evil to slaughter Jews than kulak peasants . Don’t push them to say why it’s not evil to kill Jews .
 He was a conspirator who got caught before he had consolidated his power, says CNN's John Sutter . He was caught by the authorities, who say he was a 'conspirator' who was caught .
 There was a period before the War when he looked as though he would be successful . But there was also a period when he was a success candidate for the War .
 In this period (you will never be told in any university classroom), some very powerful and influential Americans were sending him money . Some very powerful, influential Americans sent him money, he says .
 "Wall Street and the Bolshevik Revolution" is published by Arlington House, a conservative publishing company . Then write Wall Street and Bolshevik Revolution, and have it published .
 U.S. firms have gotten rich by selling the Soviet Union the military technology that alone makes them a credible threat to the West . The United States sold Soviet Union's military technology to the Soviets, it has been revealed .
 One doesn't voice such embarrassing conclusions to ‘the conservative rabble’ if one is on the staff of the Hoover Institution, a respectable conservative think-tank . One doesn’t voice such an embarrassing conclusion to “the Conservative rabble.”
 Vice President Bush and William F Buckley, Jr. belong to Skull and Bones, Yale’s ancient secret society, which Yale members . Bush and Buckley belong to the secret society . Yale's one visible manifestation in the U.S. is Skull & Bones .
 Sutton got a newsletter publisher, Research Publications, to handle the issue . Sutton got the newsletter publisher to handle it .
 Any graduate student or untenured scholar who starts writing articles demonstrating how selfinterested groups have captured America’s liberal, democratic, and progressive institutions, will find himself isolated and ultimately unemployed . Any self-interested groups will find themselves isolated, ultimately unemployed.
 If he is incorrect about the details of his thesis, he will be easily dismissed as a crank, and I do mean dismissed. If he's wrong about the facts, he can easily be dismissed as crank .
 If he is correct, and his case starts getting a hearing, those who set the climate of opinion need only make a few discreet phone calls or publish a devastating review or two in prestige academic journals .
 Such things as existing conspiracies that are successfully misleading the people are simply not supposed to be mentioned by prudent scholars . Such things are not allowed to mention by prudent scholar .
 We are not supposed to think of this arrangement as a form of bribery. But we should not think of it as bribery. We are supposed to be careful not to think it's bribery. It's not bribery, but it's a good way to get around the world .
 Those who never attend nice parties don't get to meet important people, either . Those who don't like nice parties are likely to get to important people too, too .
 There are few aspects of successful conspiratorial groups more important for both recruiting and control that people’s desire to be in the presence of powerful and famous people is more important .
 The C.F.R. uses this weakness of men to manipulate local leaders and businessmen through regional World Affairs Council meetings . The U.S. has been accused of using this weakness to manipulate regional leaders .
 Entrance into the C.ER. itself is very important as a motivating device . Entrance to the ER. is important as an entry point to motivation .
 In a little-known but important essay, “The Inner Ring,” Lewis warned young men against the quest for what I call the “unholy grail” of the inner circle . Lewis: The quest for an inner circle is not the holy grail of
 In non-profit institutions, performance is judged by one’s peers, not by consumers, as it is in a free, competitive market . Performance in non-profits should be judged by peers, as in a competitive market, not consumers .
 People who work for universities or foundations must please their peers and their immediate superiors . People in charge of universities and foundations must be pleased by their peers, says John Defterios .
 A person cannot prove his or her importance to the organization by pointing to the corporate profit-and-loss statement . A person can't prove that he or her is important enough to be a corporate executive . A company cannot prove its importance to an organization by citing its profit and loss statements
 "They are psychologically tied to their jobs in a way that people in the business world are not," he says . "People in business are not. They're psychologically tied" to jobs, he adds .
 The tighter the job market — and it grew incredibly tight in 1969 and has remained so — is the more fearful they are . The tighter job market is the most fearful job market, the more they fear .
 They can imagine few employment alternatives outside of their non-profit universe . They can't imagine few jobs outside of the non-profits .
 An assistant professor has not received tenure — a legal guarantee of lifetime employment — can work wonders . Thus, a raised eyebrow from a superior, especially if an assistant professor hasn't received tenure, may work wonders for the professor .
 In your first few jobs, you need the support and recommendations of senior professors . "You need to support and recommend senior professors," she says . She says .
 To make it into the academic “big time” in the social sciences, you have to be an absolute genius, and one who has a knack at writing articles for professional journals . You have to have the right contacts, or have a knack for writing articles .
 Contact is 80% of the game for most of the players in the big time competition . Contact is a key part of the success of a player in a major league sport .
 The manipulators offer young, aggressive, ambitious men the necessary contacts. They offer them the opportunity to gain access to their contacts .
 They believe that there are no permanent standards of national morality . They say that there should be a permanent standard of moral standards .
 What Osgood wants is is a New World Order, although this term was not in use in academic circles back in 1953 . Osgood's aim is to create a 'New World Order', not a dictatorship .
 He wants to see it established, however, in the name of what he thinks should be acceptable to good, realistic, pragmatic Americans . He says people without fixed moral principles should be allowed to live in the United States .
 You know the kind of people who sold repeating rifles to the Sioux Indians in 1875. You know, the kind . You know that they sold repeating rifle to the . Sioux Indians .
 When Custer got killed, salesmen no doubt blamed Custer for foolhardiness . Custer died a year later, a year after his death .
 In history and political science departments around the country, this commitment to pragmatic flexibility has also long been recognized as the highest moral ideal for nations . In the U.S. it is also recognized as a moral ideal .
 The manipulators and the academics share rhetoric because they share basic principles . The manipulator and the academic are in touch with each other .
 Here is an ethical ideal dear to the hearts of pragmatists —and also to thieves, traitors, and other skilled professionals in search of new victims . Here is the ethical ideal beloved to the heart of pragmists .
 The ultimate form of idealism is national self-sacrifice, which demands the deliberate surrender of one's own nation’s self-interest for the sake of other nations and peoples . The ultimate idealism requires the surrender of the nation's own selfinterest for its own sake .
 This sounds like a public relations bulletin from the League of Women Voters . "This is not the first time I've heard from such a group," she says. "It's a good thing to say," she adds .
 You can almost hear the committee that must have edited this letter getting the giggles . The committee that edited the letter got the giggling .
 The anti-conspiratorial perspective of most academic historians obviously works to the advantage of conspirators, says historian John Sutter .
 This “ill-informed rabble” might take steps to reduce their vulnerability to the manipulators . This ‘ill-informed rabble may take steps’ to reduce its vulnerability to manipulators, says author .
 Book demonstrates the power and influence of conspiracies in history . Mavericks Mavericks .
 Macmillan decided not to reprint it, just about the time that None Dare and Cleon Skousen’s The Naked Capitalist made it popular in conservative circles .
 Book publishers often suppress fat, expensive books that cost a fortune to typeset, just as they start to become best-sellers . But this is normal; book publishers often suppressed fat books that are best-selling .
 Tragedy and Hope is available in a “pirate” edition, since Macmillan killed it in the late 1960's . The Anglo-American Establishment was, at last report, out of print . Tragedys and Hope was published in a 'pirate'
 He published only one minor, obscure, and totally harmless book prior to Tragedy and Hope .
 His insights on such otherwise ignored (and crucially important) topics as Japanese military history and its relation to family dynasties is fascinating .
 It did not gain notoriety or sales because of these non-conspiratorial insights . But it did gain notoriety because of its notoriety and sales . The book is still being sold in the U.S.
 It has no footnotes, so it looks like a textbook, and few textbooks ever reveal anything unconventional . But few textbooks reveal anything unusual .
 In 1965 the Vietnam war was escalating . In fact, it was substandard pabulum; in 1965 the war in Vietnam was escalating. In 1965, Vietnam was still escalating .
 The head of Macmillan could not read every book manuscript in advance, especially one so huge that it becomes a 1300-page book .
 The Secret Six reveals the details of the conspiracy of Unitarian ministers behind the murderous John Brown in the 1850’s . John Brown was the leader of the Unitarian Union in the U.S.
 Scott says the parent company lost interest in promoting it . Scott: "The parent company didn't want to promote it"
 Scott bought back the publishing rights and the remaining copies of the book later that year . Scott then bought back some of the remaining remaining copies .
 A similar case happened to Henry Manne when a pro-free market book of his got into print, and outraged a senior official in the publishing company, who told Manne face to face that he intended to kill it . Manne: "A similar case" happened to him when
 John Sutter wrote a book on the economics profession and scholarly legal circles . That book became a minor sensation, but in academic circles and legal circles, he says .
 This was not the intention of the publisher of the book, although it had been Manne’s intention . Manne: ‘I was disappointed with the result of this, but it was not my intention’.
 Tragedy and Hope was published four years before conservatives began getting excited about it . The conservative movement began to get excited about the book four years ago .
 Don Bell stumbled upon that single copy in 1966 and featured it in one of his newsletters, but not many people paid any attention to it . Don Bell found it in a single copy of his newsletter .
 Gary Allen began to be quoted by Gary Allen in American Opinion, the John Birch Society magazine, beginning in early 1969 . Allen was quoted by Allen in the magazine American Opinion .
 By 1985, it had sold over a million copies . The first half million copies came by 1973 . The book was released in 1985 .
 Sales of Tragedy and Hope took off, but supplies ran out, and Macmillan declined to reprint it . The novel was published by Macmillen, but it was never reprinted .
 I know one man who paid $150 for a used copy, so tight was supply, before the “pirate” edition appeared around 1975 . The "Pirate" edition of the book was published in 1975 .
 Larry Abraham and Gary Allen once appeared on a radio talk show where interviewer had scheduled Quigley to debate with them over the phone . Larry Abraham, Gary Allen and Larry Abraham were scheduled to debate over the telephone . The two men appeared on the radio show .
 Quigley immediately denied that he had written the sensational material that Abraham and Allen had attributed to him . Abraham, Allen and Allen wrote the material in the book .
 Abraham read one of the denied passages over the air, reading directly from Quigley’s book . Abraham read it over the phone . Quigly hung up after Abraham read the denial of the passages .
 It seems clear that Quigley never expected the book to become the source of ammunition for the conservatives, nor did Macmillan . The book was published by the British government in 1945 .
 'Whatever their motives for allowing him access to documentary material (which he claimed that they had),'® they later changed their minds about the wisdom of this. Whatever their motives . Whatever their . motives for . allowing him . access to . documentary material, he later changed his minds about
 Or perhaps they never expected him to write a book using their materials . Or perhaps he never thought he would be writing a book .
 After all, he had never published anything controversial before, and it was late in his academic career . He had never done so much before, but it was a late academic career, he said .
 The sender said that Quigley had concluded that the people he had dealt with in the book were not really public benefactors, as he had believed when he wrote it . He said that at the end of his life, he concluded that he had concluded .
 Quigley had been very fearful of reprisals toward the end of his life, an anonymous writer said . Quigly had come to think of Allen in the same way that Allen did, the anonymous writer wrote .
 It is one of those exceedingly rare books which is simultaneously seminal and seemingly definitive . It is not just a path-breaker, but a four-lane highway, it is a seminal book .
 It is a standing testimony to the failure of all previous certified Establishment scholars to take seriously the role of conspiracies in European history . It is standing testimony that all previous Establishment scholars have failed to .
 Billington buries the reader in footnotes, in more languages than any of us care to learn, and from more obscure books and scholarly journals . While Quigley almost never provided footnotes (though there are a lot of them in Anglo-American Establishment)
 He does not discuss events after 1917, nor does he provide much material that would link today’s Establishment manipulators to revolutionary movements .
 Billington had previously been a Harvard and Princeton history professor, and is a C.R. member of the party .
 They still remember Quigley, whose book discussed the Establishment groups that have financed such revolutionary groups, and that have used and misused portions of this revolutionary ideology to further their own ends .
 Billington did not write a Quigley-type book, but it turned out to be a spectacular account of the organizational roots of modern revolutionism . Billington's "Organization of the Revolution" was published by the same publisher as The Revolution .
 What is still needed is a comprehensively researched fusion of these two approaches which demonstrates the existence of a continuing alliance of the revolutionary underground and the Establishment .
 The book begins with the most important of all these alliances historically, the alliance between alienated segments of the French nobility and the perverts of the Parisian underground .
 Philip gave them legal and geographical sanctuary and a forum for their ideas in the gigantic garden spot in central Paris, which he controlled, the Palais-Royal . Philip gave the men a legal sanctuary and gave them a forum .
 The Parisian mob was the tool of this alliance, not an independent force in the coming of the French Revolution . Nevertheless, he makes it clear that the mob was a tool of the alliance, he says .
 The United States Constitution cannot presently be reconciled with the Gulag Archipelago . Nevertheless, sensible Americans and sensible Soviet leaders both know that the U.S. Constitution cannot currently be . reconciled . with the Soviet Union .
 Slave labor camps were not part of the Founding Fathers’ original program . The Founding Fathers' original program did not include slave labor camps . The camps were abolished in 17th century .
 If men are really unified ethically, the two social orders involved, the U.S.A. and the .S.R.R., cannot in principle be divided . But if men are united ethically then the social orders will not be divided, says author .
 It is only ‘surface’ differences, meaning historical differences, that at present divide the two social orders . “ surface’s differences are only “surface” differences,” meaning historical . differences, he says .
 These differences will fade away someday, if we can just remain patient, says President Obama . The differences between the two countries will soon fade away, says Obama .
 Slave labor is basic the Soviet economy, and terror is basic to the Soviet political system . Slave labor and terror are both basic features of the Soviet system . Terror is a form of slavery in Russia .
 They are not about to change their opinions for the sake of some overall unity with the capitalist West . Thus, they will not change their views in the interest of the West .
 All three approaches have been used by “conspirators of manipulation,” for at least a century . “Conspirator of manipulation’s” has been used in the past century, experts say .
 There is one way that you can promote convergence without changing constitutions or other pieces of paper . There is also a way to promote convergence in the U.S. President Barack Obama's administration .
 Robert McNamara imposed on the military by McNamara in the early 1960’s . You destroy the United States military by creating a devilish strategy called Mutually Assured Destruction . The U.S. military was created by the then-President of the Cold War era .
 You remove all anti-missile defenses, leaving your cities wide-open targets . Instead of protecting American citizens, you remove all . Anti-Missile defenses leave cities wide open targets, leaving them wide open for attack .
 The U.S. built a sophisticated antimissile defense system in violation of the A.B.M. treaty . They built the system despite the treaty's treaty obligations .
 "Guerilla wars against Western and neutral nations" intensified in 1980s and 1990s . Then they intensified their financing of guerillas against Western nations, he says .
 "You humiliate the military by getting involved in a no-win war in Vietnam," says Obama . Meanwhile, back in America’s real strategy centers, you then humiliate your country, he says. Meanwhile, the U.S. is humiliated in Vietnam .
 Instead of a high-tech, space-based defense program, the U.S. should focus on a low-cost, “low-intensity” guerilla warfare program . Call It Conspiracy type warfare teams to be sent quietly abroad to help foment revolution against
 When this MAD defense strategy ‘somehow’ fails to stop the Soviet build-up, you then create the Committee on the Present Danger, and staff it overwhelmingly with your people . ‘Somehow,’s MAD strategy “Somehow” failed to stop
 Bechtel employed George Schultz, Caspar Weinberger, etc. before their present employment opportunities materialized . Congress appropriates funds to defense companies, which are often used by defense contractors . Defense contractors are often in the bank accounts of defense contractors, which can be used to provide jobs
 You don't recommend High Frontier’s spacebased defense, since it probably would work, and it is relatively cheap . You don’t recommend low-intensity warfare, which is also cheap, or spacebased warfare .
 Congress won't spend trillions needed to catch up with the Soviets . Then you wait for Congress to refuse to spend the trillions needed, he says .
 President Barack Obama has been in office for more than a decade . He says the president's actions should be seen as a mistake by voters . Obama says it's a mistake to blame the president for his actions .
 Paul Nitze was the youthful millionaireturned-statesman in 1960s . Nitze is a former foreign policy professor who studied the Soviet Union .
 The Ethics and Public Policy Center of Washington, D.C. sponsored a fund-raising dinner . The dinner was held on November 15, 1984 .
 They sent me a fancy, pseudo-engraved invitation to a $150 a plate dinner, in honor of Mr Nitze . They sent him a fancy invitation to the $150 per plate dinner .
 The Chairman of the Sponsoring Committee was C Douglas Dillon, who served as Kennedy’s Secretary of the Treasury . C Douglas . Dillon is the Chairman .
 Saul Bellow, Zbigniew Brzezinski, William Bundy, Jimmy Carter, Gerald Ford, John J McCloy, Robert S McNamara, Edmund Muskie, Richard Nixon, and Robert E Osgood . Cyrus Vance, Robert Osgood, John S. McNamara and
 There were a few good souls on the list, but not many . Henry the K was a member of the original cast of the K .
 He is always happy to accept your tax-deductible checks, however, you Right Wing extremist, you. You. need to be careful of his tax breaks .
 The inmates are getting restless — and the inmates still have the vote . The inmates have been in prison for more than a decade . The inmate population is growing in numbers .
 The New World Order keeps slipping away, just as it seems to be within their grasp . It's not just a matter of time that the world is losing its grip .
 If you were a manipulating elitist, it would almost make you believe that someone even more powerful than David Rockefeller, and even smarter than Henry Kissinger, is really in charge . Henry Kissinger and Zbigniew Brzezinski are the two most powerful men in the world .
 You're busy writing a conference paper suggesting the need to license and centrally plan all free world computer software over the next fifteen years, so you stop thinking such thoughts . But you’re busy writing about the need for free world software software .
 I'm tempted to compare the two conspiracies with two kinds of droppings that you might stumble into when walking through a barn . I'm not sure if the conspiracies are conspiracies or not conspiracies, but I'm sure they are .
 But the comparison would not convey the sinister nature of the problem, it would not be the case .
 "Most of us who came into the conservative movement prior to 1964 came in as anti-Communists. Most of us ... came into [the conservative movement] in 1964," he says . He says. "Most people who came in were anti-communists."
 Goldwater got sandbagged by the Eastern Republican Establishment . A shift took place in the thinking of many conservatives in the late 1960s .
 We can see it retrospectively in the shift of focus in American Opinion, the John Birch Society’s magazine . The change of focus is reflected in the change in focus of American Opinion magazine .
 It went from anti-Communism to anti-conspiracy . Welch’s book, More Stately Mansions, announced this shift in focus . Welch's book, more than a decade later, became anti-Conspiracy .
 In 1967, Welch republished John Robison’s 1798 exposé of the Illumunati, Proofs of a Conspiracy . Welch published the book in 1967 . Welch also republished a 1798 version of the book .
 This shift from anti-Communism to anti-conspiracy took place in numerous conservative groups . This shift was seen in many conservative groups in the 1980s and 1990s .
 "In a very real sense, it constituted a shift in conservatives climate of opinion. In a very . real sense," said CNN.com's John Sutter . "It constituted a . shift in . conservatives climate"
 William F Buckley Jr.’s magazine, National Review, began to fade as the journal of American conservative opinion. Simultaneously, William F. Buckley Jr.'s . magazine, Buckley Jr., began to . fade as a journal of conservative opinion .
 Buckley’s support in 1976 of the Panama Canal “giveaway” sealed his fate . Buckley's support of the Canal "giveaway" in 1976 sealed his own fate .
 He started writing spy novels after that, and books about sailing, which he now writes about .
 There was a tendency in the late 1960s and 1970’s for conspiratorialists to argue that Communism is simply one branch of a single conspiracy, which the manipulators really control . The manipulators are really control of Communism, the author says .
 They sold it high technology tools for making weapons, they sold it wheat, they loaned it money at below-market interest rates . Yet this ungrateful beast is still threatening to conquer the world and slaughter millions of innocent victims .
 It might even default on its loans to private Western banks, experts say . Even worse, they say, it might default on some of its loans .
 Their banks are very nearly broke, unless the Federal Reserve System creates ‘soft’ dollars to bail them out . The Federal Reserve system creates “soft” dollars to help the banks bail out .
 Without the dealdoing conspirators, the Gulag conspirators could not function . The Gulag . conspirators would not function without the deal doing conspirators . Without the . Gulag. conspirators,. could not . function .
 The problem is, the former just can’t learn from history, and the Communists know it . The Communists know that, and it's not surprising that they can't learn from the past .
 There is no permanent ideology, no truly antagonistic first principles . The manipulators are paralyzed by their own ideology, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says .
 While they rule the affairs of the West, those who are under them cannot mount a sustained resistance to international Communism . Those under them will not be able to mount any sustained resistance against international Communism, he says .
 The West needs to get rid of the manipulators before we will ever get rid the Communists . Thus, the West needs the West . The West must get rid . of the . manipulators .
 It would be far less devastating for Western Civilization, and far more productive for our lifestyles, if we do it ourselves . We need to do this ourselves, and it would be less devastating to Western Civilization .
 The manipulators are in trouble—the worst trouble they have been in since 1913 . The manipulator is in trouble, the worst trouble since 1913, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "The manipulators have in trouble. They're in trouble"
 The seventy-year romance between the American voter and big government is turning into a series of lovers’ quarrels . The U.S. has been in a relationship with the government for 70 years .
 While the voters still want the government to protect them, there is a growing realization that the federal governmernt is bankrupt . The federal government is bankrupt —economically, intellectually, and morally .
 The rise of the neo-conservative movement since 1965 is one indication of this shift . Neo-conservatism has been in decline since the 1960s, with the rise of neo-conservatives .
 Midge Decter is the wife of Norman Podhoretz, the editor of Commentary magazine, Commentary . She says she's a conservative commentator who's critical of President Obama .
 I know of no other comparably stupendous year of editing in book publishing history . "I know of . no other . comparability of editing," she said .
 All over the landscape these days, intellectuals are singing the praises of decentralization . This is despite the fact that decentralization is becoming more common .
 The manipulators are trying to join in the song fest, but it's like dressing a Russian dancing bear in ballet shoes and calling it the Bolshoi’s prima ballerina . The manipulator is trying to make it look like a ballet ballet .
 "I think they are faking it. They still know that they have to have centralized power to maintain their power. I think they still know they have a centralized power," he says .
 If they are forced to decentralize, they want to be able to say what and how far they can decentralize . But if they're forced to, they are not sure how far it will go .
 The shift of public opinion may be so powerful that some of them are actually defecting . On the other hand, some of the younger scholarly types are defecting, especially the younger scholars .
 They successfully used the pro-government shift in the U.S. climate of opinion after, say, 1880 to further their statist ends . They used the shift in public opinion to further government policy .
 Now that the public has seen the results of this experiment in government centralization, voters are having second thoughts . Voters are now questioning the idea of centralizing the government .
 "The manipulators are now beginning to swim upstream intellectually, the way conservatives were forced to swim for three or four generations," says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: The manipulators now begin to swim .
 Intellectually speaking, they resemble Tip O’ Neill more than they resemble Mark Spitz . Intellectally speaking, the pair are more like Tip O' Neill than Mark Spitzer . The pair have a long history of professional sports .
 They are desperately worried about the growing possibility of finding themselves up liberty creek without a paddle . They are worried that they might find themselves in danger .
 Because they are opportunists by conviction and windtesters by training, they are also windtesters . Because they're opportunists, they're not trained to be windtesters, they will be opportunists .
 The conservatives, especially the neoconservatives, may not be offering consistent, free market, Constitutional solutions in many instances, but that is not the issue . The neoconservatives are not offering consistent solutions to the problems of the Constitution .
 As the public, through new intellectual leadership, catches on, the power base of the conspirators will be threatened . The public will be aware of the threat posed by new intellectual leaders .
 President produced simultaneously the worst foreign policy record in decades (including Salt II, which even the liberal, Democrat-controlled Senate refused to sign) and the most inflationary economic policy in the twentieth century .
 In short, Jimmy Carter was visibly the least competent President in U.S. history . Carter was seen as the least incompetent President in history .
 These include the Persian gulf and southern Africa, as well as the Caribbean and the Panama Canal . The Persian gulf is the most important region in the world .
 They will continue to pressure the United States to abandon a spacebased defense system . The U.S. should abandon the system, the U.N. says .
 The Soviet empire will grow too big to govern, even by means of terror, and too complex to finance, writes Julian Zelizer . And step by step, the Soviet empire is growing too big, Zelizer says .
 Establishment conspirators will do their best to keep people calm with respect to the solvency of the big banks, and keep them worried about the economy in general . They will also try to keep them concerned about the future of the economy, writes David Cameron .
 We can expect to see a steady loss of confidence on the part of the public concerning political and economic leaders, says John Defterios .
 We can expect to see the imposition of emergency economic controls as the economy unravels . We can also expect the imposition . Emergency economic controls are expected to be imposed .
 The dollar will eventually tumble, throwing the world trading economy into a crisis, experts say . It will eventually throw the world economy into crisis, they say .
 If voters can be frightened into allowing a Constitutional convention or similar event, the Establishment will shove a new Constitution down our throats, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: The Establishment will try to frighten voters into accepting a constitutional convention .
 Jf we can successfully implement a two-part program of reconstruction, then this shift in psychology will destroy the prevailing conspiracy, says Jf. Jf . Jf: "If we can . successfully implement . a two part program of . reconstruction then this . shift in . psychology
 The anti-utopias of George Orwell and Aldous Huxley will at last be imposed . Orwell's anti-UTopias are at last being imposed in Britain . The UK will be able to impose its own version of the world's first socialist state .
 What we also need is a will to remove those from power over us who do not possess the will to resist, and whose very “let’s make a deal” philosophy prevents them from ever resisting a truly dedicated force .
 The next step is a program of education and mobilization, from the bottom up, to remove those above us who believe in a bottom-down control over society . The program is a morally grounded campaign, says Julian Zelizer .
 It is not ‘impersonal forces’ that control the affairs of men, it is the responses of specific men to specific environments in specific historical periods . It demonstrates that it is not personal forces that control men's affairs .
 Second, it is useful as an introduction to the history of conspiratorial organizations in twentieth-century history . It is useful to learn about conspirator organizations in the U.S.
 Members of these groups know each other and co-operate with each other for at least limited ends, some of the time . Some of the groups are known to each other but not all of them are known .
 Victims of co-operation efforts are not supposed to know what is happening to them, or why . Furthermore, the victims of these co-operative efforts should not be told what they are doing .
 Third, it is useful as an antidote to those who have focused on Communism as the only form of conspiracy . It is also useful as a reminder that conspiracy is not only a conspiracy, but a form of it .
 Fourth, the book opens up the possibility for effective counter-action. Fourth, it allows for the possibility of effective counter action.
 If secrecy is basic to conspiratorial actions, then exposure is one effective tactic to be used against the conspirators . Exposure is one of the most effective ways to combat conspirators' secrecy, says John Defterios .
 We are no longer safe on the streets, precisely because of the resources of the State have been misdirected into salvationary projects . We are not safe in the streets because the resources are misdirected towards salvationary schemes, says David Cameron .
 Lyndon Johnson’s use of Graham Wallas’ ghastly phrase, “the Great Society,” illustrates the lure of political messianism . Lyndon Johnson's use of the phrase, the Great Society .
 Taxpayers, entrepreneurs, and freedom-lovers benefit from the manipulators of the tax code . Taxpayers and entrepreneurs benefit from this tax code, but manipulators benefit from it .
 State grants of state power secure them from the competitive market economy . But they cannot live without the grants of State power that secure them, they say .
 It is a wasted effort if we cut off the head of any conspiracy, but leave available to their replacements the raw power of the State, especially the centralized State . The head of the head is a waste effort if it cuts off any conspiracy head .
 For every head cut off, two more will spring up from the stump . Like the hydra-headed monster of Greek mythology, for every head is cut off there will be more .
 The searing sword of economic liberty must be used to cauterize the monster’s open wound and seal it, says President Barack Obama . Obama must use economic liberty to end the monster's open wound .
 The Question of Faith: The second step after self-education also primarily internal, though partially institutionalized . The question of faith is "the Question of faith" and "the question of love"
 It is our acceptance of the principle that ethics is more fundamental than power, that the good guys win in the end, that we accept the principle of ethics . It is accepted that power is more important than ethics .
 Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession, says the king . Ask of him, and he says, 'Ask of me and I will give thee thine the heathens for th
 The Bible says: "Thim shalt break them with a rod of iron; thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter’s vessel"
 Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little, says the Bible . Kiss the son, for the sake of his life, says Jesus Christ, and his life will be saved .
 If you are not building in terms of this foundation, then the highly useful tool that this book really is will do you precious little good . If you’re not building on the foundation, it will do little good, says author .
 Larry Abraham offers us a shovel by which to bury the plans of evil men . Abraham offers a shovel for evil men to bury evil men.
 The will to dominion is the fourth, not the quest for power apart from ethical law . The quest for authority by means of ethical action is ethical action, rather than power alone from law and law .
 This four-stage program, above all else, is what the conspirators fear, and cannot deal with successfully . This is what they fear, says CNN's John Sutter .
 "Even if we do not win in our lifetimes, our successors who organize in terms of our principles will win," says Julian Zelizer . Even if we don't win, "our successors will win" says Zelizer.
 Now is not the time for caution; the stakes are too high, and it is too late in the conflict, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Now is the time to caution .
 The most important book which undermined the academic world’s self-confidence in its own neutrality was Thomas Kuhn's Structure of Scientific Revolutions (2nd ed. Kuhn) The Structure of Science Revolutions .
 Quoted in John Robison, Proofs of a Conspiracy; reprinted by Western Islands, Boston, 1967, .
 The Rockefeller Foundation in 1947 appropriated over $100,000 to produce a history of the United States’ entry into World War II which would counter any “revisionist” histories that might argue that we were tricked into war by the Roosevelt Administration . Lest readers be skeptical
 Major General John Singlaub protested once too often against Jimmy Carter’s announced intention to pull U.S. troops out of South Korea . Major General Singlaubs protested against the move .
 Ironically, it is published by a libertarian publishing house which is neither conservative nor modern liberal . Ironically, the book was published by the same publishing house as a libertarian .
 Robert E Osgood, Ideals and Self-Interest in America’s Foreign Relations, 7.5.5 . Osgood: "Ideals and self-interest in America's Foreign Relations" Osgood's book is published by Robert Osgood .
 Council on Foreign Relations Officers and Directors as of June 30, 1984 . Officers David Rockefeller Peter G Peterson Chairman of the Board Treasurer Winston Lord John Temple Swing President Vice President and Secretary Graham T Allison, Jr. Term expiring 1985 term expiring .
 Abram, Morris B Abramowitz, Morton I Abrams, Elliott Abshire, David M Achilles, Theodore C Adam, Ray C Adams, Ruth Salzman Adamson, Kenneth L Agee, William M Agnew, Harold M Agronsky, Martin Aho, C Michael Aid
 William B Baeza, Mario L Bailey, Charles W Baird, Charles F Baird, Zée E Baker, Howard H., Jr. Atkins, William Auspitz, Josiah Lee Ayers, H Brandt Babbitt, Bruce Bacot, J Carter Bader,
 William J Barnes, Harry G. Barger, Thomas C Barghoorn, Frederick C Barker, Robert R Barkin, Solomon Barlow, William E Barnathan, Joyce Barnds and William E. Barnathan . William J. Barnes, Jr. William E . Barn
 Bares, Michael D Barnet, Richard J Barnett, A Doak Barnett, Frank R Barnett, Robert W Barr, Thomas D Barrand, . Thomas D. Barrand . Harry P., Jr., Jr. Bares .
 Call It Conspiracy is a Conspiracy of Conspiracy by Douglas Bellamy, Carol Benbow, Terence H Bennet, Douglas J., Jr. and Douglas J. Bellamy .
 Benson, Lucy Wilson Beplat, Tristan E Berger, Marilyn Berger and Marilyn Berger, Suzanne Bergold, Marilyn Bergold and Harry E., Jr. Benson .
 Richard M. Bergsten, C Fred Bernstein, Robert L Berry, Sidney B Bessie, Simon Michael Betts, Richard K Beyer, John C Bialer, Seweryn Bialkin, Kenneth J Bienen, Henry S. Bierley, Henry
 William F. Brown, Seyom Brown, Walter H Browne, Robert S. Bryant, Ralph C Brzezinski, Zbigniew Buchman, Mark E Buckley, William F., Jr., Jr. Brown was the author of the book, "American Sniper"
 William J Buttenwieser, George Lee Butler, Samuel C Butler, Fletcher C Cabot, Thomas D Cabranes, José A Cahn, Anne H Calder, William J Bymes, Robert F Byrom, George W. Byrom and Rolland Bussey .
 Campbell, Glenn Campbell, John C Campbell, Thomas J Camps and Thomas J. Camps, Miriam Canal, Miria Canal, Carlos M. Canal, Jr. and Carlos M., Jr. Campbell were all named in the team .
 Franklin O Cannon, James M Carey, Hugh L Carey, John Carey, William D Carlson, Robert J Carlucci, Frank C Carmichael and William D Camesale . Albert Carrington, Walter C Carroll, J Speed Carroll, Mitchell B Carson, Mitchell W. Carson,
 Robert Carter, Robert L. Carter, William D Cary, Frank T Casey, William J Castillo, Leonel J Cater, Douglass Cater and Douglass Cates . John M. Cates, Jr. John M., Jr.
 William T., Jr. Cline, Ray S Cloherty, Patricia M Clurman, Richard M Coffey, Joseph Irving Cohen, Barbara Cohen, Benjamin J, Cohen, Eliot A Cohen, Jerome Alan Cohen, Joel E Cohen, Roberta Cohen, Stephen B. Cohen,
 Richard E. Coles, James Stacy Collado, Emilio G Collingwood, Charles C Combs, Richard E., Jr. and Richard E.- Jr. Collado were named winners of the award for their efforts .
 John T. Comstock, Phil Conant, Melvin A Condon, Joseph F. Cone, Sydney M., III Conlon, Richard P Connor, John T Connor, Jr. John T., Jr. Richard P. Connor, Richard T. Connor and Sydney M. Con
 William R Cousins, Norman Cowan, L Gray Cowles, Gardner Cowles and John Coombs are among those who have written a book of their work .
 William J. Crane, Winthrop Murray Crassweller, Robert D Crawford, Anne W Crawford, John F Creel, Dana S Cremin, Lawrence A Crittenden, Ann Crocker, Chester A. Crook, June V Cross, Sam Y Crow, Sam
 William B Dalley, George A Dallin, Alexander Dalton, James E Dam, Kenneth W Damrosch, Lori F Danforth, William H Daniel, D Ronald Call It Conspiracy Darlington, Charles F Darman, Richard G Davant, James W Davidson, Ralph K
 Deutch: John M Deutch, Rimmer DeWind, Henry P De Vries, Adrian W De Windt, E Mandell Diaz-Alejandro, Carlos Dickson, Carlos F Dickson and R. Russell, Jr. Deutch .
 William C. Dillon, Douglas Dilworth, J Richardson Dine, Thomas A. Dixon, George H Dobriansky, Paula Doherty, Paula . Doherty . Dillon, Dine and Dine are featured in this week's edition of The Daily Mail .
 Dolin, Arnold Dominguez, Jorge I Domingez, Virginia R Donahue, Donald J Donahues, Thomas R Donaldson, William H Donnell, Ellsworth Donnelly, Harold C Donovan, Hedley Doty, and Hedley D. Doty
 Charles W. Dubow, Arthur M DuBrul, Stephen M Duffey, Joseph Duffy, James H Duke, Angier Biddle Dulany, Margaret Duncan, Margaret D. Duncan, Charles W., Jr. and others .
 Duncan, John C Dutton, Frederick G Raoul-Duval, Michael E Eagleburger, Lawrence S Earle, Ralph, II Easum, Donald B Eaton, Donald J. Eaton, Leonard J., Jr. and Leonard J. Duncan were all named .
 Einhorn, Edgerton, Wallace B Edwards, Howard L Edwards, Robert H Ehrlich, Thomas Eilts, Hermann F Einaudi, Luigi R Einaud, Mario Einhir, and Theodore L. Eliot, Theodore L., Jr. Ed
 William E. E. Koury, Jaime A. Elliott, Byron K Elliott, Osborn Elliott, Randle Ellis, James R Ellis, Richard H Ellison, Keith P Ellsberg, Daniel Ellsworth, Robert F Embree, Ainslie T Emerson, Alice F
 Henry H Fox, Donald T Fox, Joseph C Fox, William T, R Franck, Thomas M Francke, Albert, III Frank, Charles R., Jr. Foley, Edward T,. II Ford, Gerald R Forrestal, Michael V Foster, William C Fouse, William
 Garment, Leonard Garment and Suzanne Garrels, Anne Garretson, Albert H Garrison, Lloyd K Garrison, Mark J ~ Gart, Murray J Garten, Jeffrey E Garthoff, Raymond L Garvin, Clifton C., Jr. Gardner, Richard
 Robert N Gleysteen, Peter Glysteen, William H., Jr. and Roswell Gilpin are among the Ginsburgs . Ruth Bader Ginsburgh, David Ginsburg, Robert N. III Gilpin, Robert . N. Gilpin .
 Goldmark, William T. Goldin, Harrison J. Goldman, Guido Goldman, Marshall I Goldman, Merle Goldmark and William T . Goldmark .
 Robert D. Graham, Robert D Graham, Bob Graham, Katharine Graham, William R Grant, James P Grant, Stephen A Granville, Maurice F Graubard, Stephen R Gray, Hanna Holborn Gray, Harry J Green, Carl J Greenberg and Carl J. Greenberg .
 William C Greenspan, William C Greenfield, Joseph A Greenwood, Ted Gregorian, Vartan Grenier, Richard Griffin, Brian C Griffith, Thomas Griffith, William E Grohman, Robert T Grose, Peter B Gross, Ernest A Gross, Patrick W Groves
 Haig, Robert D. Haass, Richard N Habib, Philip C. Haig and Catherine H. Haas were awarded the award for their work in the U.S.
 Halperin, Morton H Halsted, Thomas A Hamburg, David A Hamilton, Ann O Hamilton, Charles V Hamilton, Edward K Hamilton, Michael P Hancock, Judith L Hansen, Carol Rae Hansen, Roger D Hanson, Robert A Hanson, Thor Harari, Maurice Harding, Harry
 Harriman, W Averell Harris, Irving B Harris, Joseph E Harris, Selig S Harsch, Joseph C Hart, Augustin S Hart, Parker T Hartley, Fred L Hartman, Arthur A Hartnack, Carl E Harvin, William C
 Haskins, Caryl P Hauser, Rita E Hauser and William L Haus-urg, Arthur Haviland, Arthur H Field, Jr. H. Haveniland, William L. Haviland and Arthur . Haviland . Hauser was awarded the title of "
 Hawkins, Ashton Hayes, Alfred Haynes, Alfred Hayes, Samuel P Haynes and Fred Haynes . Haynes was the first to win the Nobel Peace Prize . Hawkins was the only person to win a Nobel Prize .
 Hayward, Thomas B Haywood, Oliver G Hazard, John N. Healy, John Healy and Harold H., Jr. Hayward, Jr. Haywood and Oliver Hazard were all named in the team .
 Heckscher, August Hehir, J Bryan Heifetz, Elaine F Heimann, John G Heintzen, Harry L Heinz, H J., Il Helander, Robert C Heidring, Frederick Hellman, F Warren Heims, Christine M Hel
 Henderson, Loy W Henkin, Louis Hennessy, John M Henry, John B., II Herling, John Herskovits, Jean Herter, Christian A., Jr., Jr. Herter died at the age of 92 .
 William E. Hertzberg, Arthur Herzfeld, Charles M Herzog, Paul M Herzstein, Robert E Hesburgh, Theodore M Hess, John B Hester, James M Hewitt, William A Hewitt and Robert F Highet .
 Hoepli, Nancy L Hoffman, Michael L Hoffmann, Stanley Hoge, George R Hoguet, Robert L Hohenberg, John Holbrooke, Richard C Holcomb, M Staser Holland, Jerome H Holland, Robert C Hollick, Ann L Hollow
 Horan, John J Horelick, Amold L Hormats, Robert D Horn, Garfield H Hom, Garfield Hom, Karen N Horn, Sally K Horner, Matina S Horowitz, Irving Louis Horton, Alan W Horton, Frank B., III Hosmer,
 J Allan, Jr. Houghton, James R House and Karen Elliott Hovey . House, Karen Elliott, Graham Hovee, Graham . Hovei, Graham and J Allan . Allan .
 John B Howard, John R Howell, John I Hoyt, Mont I Hudson, Mont P Hudson, Manley O., Jr., Jr. Howard, Jr. Howell, I. Hoyt and Mont P. Hudson were awarded the top spot in the history of the United States .
 Huebner, Lee W Huffington, Roy M Hufstedler, Shirley M Huggins, Nathan I Hughes, John Hughes, Thomas L Huglin, Henry C Huizenga, John W Hummel, Arthur W., Jr. John W. Hummel and Shirley
 Intriligator, Michael D Ireland, R L., Ul Irwin, John N., II Irwin, III Irwin, Jr. John N. Irwin, Wallace Jr. Wallace Jr., Jr. Irwin and Wallace Sr. Irwin died in 2007 at the age of 50 .
 Isaacson, Walter Iselin, John Jay Isenberg, Steven L Isham, Christopher Issawi, Charles Istel, Yves-André Izlar, Charles Izlar . William H., Jr. Isaacs, Norman E Isaacson and Norman E. Isaacson
 Janklow, Morton L Jansen, Marius B Jastrow, Robert Javits, Jacob K Jenson, John W Jervis, Robert L Jessup, Alpheus W Jessup . John W. Jessup was a member of the Jessup family . Al
 Jones, Willard R Jones, David C Jones, Peter T Jones, Sidney R Jones and Amos A Jordan, Amos A . Jordan, Thomas V. Jordan and Vernon E. Johnson were all named in the team .
 Katzenstein, Peter J Kaufman, Henry Kaufmann, William W Kaysen, Carol Kearns, David T Keatley, Anne Call It Conspiracy Keenan, .
 Kennan, George Armstrong Kelman, Herbert C Kemp, Geoffrey Kemoner, Maximilian W Kenen, Peter B Keniston and Peter B. Keniston . George F Kennedy, David M Kennedy, Donald Kennedy, Randall L Kenney, F Donald Keohane,
 L. Landau, George W Landry, Lionel Langer, Paul F Lansner, Kermit LaPalombara, Joseph Lapham, Lewis H Lapidus, Gail Laqueur, Walter Larrabee, F Stephen Lary, Hal B Lauinger,
 Richard K., 11 Leddy, John M Lederberg, Joshua Lederer, Ivo John Lee, Emest S Lee, James E Lee, William L Leebaert, Derek Lefever, Ernest W Leghorn, Richard S Legvold, Orin
 Edwin A. Lipson, Leon Lissakers, Karin M. Little, David Livingston, Robert Gerald Locke, Edwin A., Jr. and Karin M Little are members of the membership .
 John E. Lockwood, John E Lodal, Jan M Lodge, George C Loeb, Marshall Loft, George Logan, Francis D Long, Franklin A Long, T Dixon Loomis, Henry Loos, A William Lord, Charles Edwin Lord, Winston Love, Ben F
 Lubar, C Payne Luce, E Hugh Ludt, Rudolph E Luers, William H Luke, Timothy T Lustick, Ian Luter, Ian S Luter and Yvonne Luttwak were all named in the group .
 McKee, Katharine W McKeever, Porter McKinley, John K McKinney, Robert M McLaughlin, David T McLean, Sheila Avrin McLin, Jon B McNamara, Robert S McNeill, Robert L McPherson and Robert L. McP
 Lawrence C MacArthur, Douglas, I MacCormack, Charles F MacDonald, Gordon J MacEachron, David W MacGregor, Ian K MacLaury . William B Macy, Robert M. Macy, Jr., Jr. John D Macomber, William B. Mc
 Marmor, Theodore R Marous, John C Marron, Donald B, Robert E., Marshall, Anthony D Marshall, C Burton Martin, Edwin M Martin, Malcolm W Martin, William F Martin, and William McC., Jr. Marmor .
 John E Mathews, Jessica Tuchman Mathews and Michael S Mathias, Charles McC., Jr. Mason, Elvis L Massie, Suzanne Masten, John E. Mathews were all killed .
 William B Maw, Carlyle E May, Clifford D May, Ernest R Mayer, Ernest M. Mayer, Gerald M., Jr., Jr. and Gerald M. Matteson were all named . The May, Mayer, Maw, Maw and Mayer were awarded the top prize for their work
 William C. Mayer, Lawrence A. Maynard, Robert C Maynes, Charles William Mead, Dana G, Dennis L Meagher, Robert F Mehta, Ved Meister, Irene W Melloan, George R Melville, Richard A Mendlovitz, Saul
 John V. Metcalf, George R. Mettler, Ruben F Meyer, Charles Q Meyer, Cord Meyer, Edward C Meyer, John R Meyer, Karl E Meyerson . Martin Mickelson, Sig Middleton, Drew Midgley, Elizabeth Millard
 Mondale, Walter F Montgomery, Parker G Montgomery, Philip O’Bryan, III Moody, William S Moore, John Norton Moore, Jonathan Moore, Maurice T Moore, Paul, Jr. and William S. Moore . Mondale was the Democratic leader of the Democratic Party .
 David A, Morse, Edward L Morse, F Bradford Morse, Kenneth P Moses, Alfred H Moss, Alfred M Moss, Jr. A. Moose, Richard M Moran, Theodore H Morgan, Cecil Morgan, Lee L Morgan, Thomas E Morgenthau, Lucinda L Franks Mor
 Moyers, Bill D Moynihan, Daniel P Mroz, John E Mujal-Leon, Eusebio M Mulford, David C Mulholland, William D Muller, Henry Muller, Steven Munger, Edwin S Munroe, George B Mun
 Zygunt Jr. Munyan, Winthrop R Murphy, Martha Twitchell Muskie, Edmund S N Nachmanoff, Arnold Nacht, Arnold . Nagorski, Michael Nacht and Winthrop Murphy . Munyan . Murphy, Murphy, Muse, Nacht
 Nason, John W Nathan, James A Nathan, Robert R Natt, Ted M Nau, Henry R Neal, Alfred C Negroponte, John D, Nelson, Clifford C Nelson, Jack Nelson, Merlin E Neustadt, Richard E Newberg .
 Hugh B. Parker, Daniel Parker, Maynard Parris, Mark Robert Parsky, Gerald L Passin, Herbert Patrick, Herbert P. Patrick, Ellmore C Patterson, Gardner Patterson and Gardner Patterson, Hugh B., Jr. Parker .
 Philip Dexter, Torkel L Pauker, Guy J Paul, Roland A Payne, Samuel B Peacock, Samuel A. Dexter, Philip Dexter and Guy J. Patterson .
 Peter G Peterson, Rudolph A Petree, Richard W Petree and Richard W. Peterson, Jr. Petree were named the Petree brothers . The Petree family was married to Richard Petree's wife, Peter Petree .
 Pfeiffer, Steven B Phillips, Christopher H Phillips, Edward E Phillips, John G Phillips, Jr. and Russell A. Phillips, Russell A., Jr. Phillips are the co-authors of the book, "Pfeiffers" and "Pfills"
 William C Piercy, George T Pierotti, Roland Pierre and Roland Pierre, Andrew J Pifer, Alan Pigott, Charles M Pilliod, Charles J. Phlieger, Herman Picker, Harvey Picker .
 Plank, John N Platig, E Raymond Platt, Jonas M Platt and Nicholas Platten, Donald C Plimpton, Calvin H Podhoretz, Norman Polk, William R Pollack, Gerald A Polack . Nelson W Poor, J Sheppard Portes
 Powers, Joshua B Powers, Thomas Moore Pranger, Robert J Pratt, Edmund T. Pratt, Jr. Powers and Joshua B. Powers, Jr., Jr.
 George E. Price, Robert Puckett, Allen E Pugh, Richard C Pulitzer, Michael E Purcell, Susan Kaufman Pursley, Robert E Pusey, Nathan M Pustay, John S Putignano, Patrick A Putnam, George E., Jr.
 William B Quester, George H Quigg, Philip W Quigley, Leonard V R Rabb, Maxwell M Rabi, Isidor 1. Putnam, Robert D Pye, Lucian W, Pyle, Cassandra A | ers Quandt, William
 Rabinowitch, Victor Radway, Laurence I Ragone, David V Ramo, Simon Ramsey, Douglas K Randolph, Gustav Rashish, Gustav . Rashish and Myer Rather, Dan Rathjens, George W Rauch, Rudolph S., III Ravenal
 John B. Renfrew, Charles B Resor, Stanley R Reston, James B Revelle, Roger Rey, Nicholas A Reynolds, Lloyd G Rhinelander, John B . Rhinesmith, Stephen H Rhodes, Stephen B. Rhodes, Jr. John B., Jr
 Condoleezza Rice, Emmett J Rice, John H. Rhodes, Abraham A. Rice, Donald B Rice and Emmitt J Rice were both assassinated . Condoleazza Rice was the first secretary of state of state in charge of foreign policy . Condezza
 Richard, Eric L Richardson, David B Richardson, Elliot L Richardson and Elliot Richardson, John, Jr. Richard, Jr., Eric L . Richardson, Eric B Richardson and David B. Richardson were killed in a car crash in 2010 .
 Richard W. Richardson, Richard W Richardson, William R Ridgway, Rozanne L Rielly, John E Ries, Hans A Riesel, Victor Ripley, S Dillon, II Rivers, I Rivers, Richard R Rivkin, Donald H Rivlin, Alice M
 Rodman C Rodman, Peter W Rodriguez, Vincent A Roett, Riordan Roff, J Hugh, Jr. John D. Rockefeller, John D., IV Rockefeller, Rockefeller, III Rockefeller, II Rockefeller, IV Rockefeller and III Rockefeller .
 Rogers, Bernard W Rogers, David E Rogers, Nat S Rogers, William D Rogers, Mitchell Rohatyn, Felix G Rohlen, Thomas P Romero-Barcelé, Carlos Roney, John H Roosa, Robert V Roosa .
 David J Rostow, Eugene V Rostow and Walt W Rotberg are among the Rostow brothers . Jack Rosenwald, William Rosenwald and William Rosenzweig are also Rostow's co-authors .
 Rush, Barney Rush, Kenneth Rusk, Dean Russell, Harvey C Russell and Harvey W. R. Rush, Jr. Rush was killed in a car crash in June 2010 .
 Rustow, Dankwart A Ruthberg, Miles N Ruttan, Vernon W Ryan, Hewson A Ryan, John T. Rustow and Vernon W. Ryan, Jr. were killed in the fall .
 Salk, Jonas Salomon, William R Saltzman, Charles E Salzman, Howard D Samuels, Nathaniel Sanders, Nathaniel . Salk was the first person to publish a book about the discovery of Salk .
 William E. Sanford, Terry Saul, Ralph S Saunders and Ralph S. Saunders, Harold H Savage, Frank Sawhill, John C Sawyer, Diane Sawyer and Diane Sawyer were all named .
 Schiff, Frank W Schiff, John M Schilling, Warner R Schlesinger, Arthur, Jr. Schillsinger, Warner Jr. Schiff . Schilling is a former baseball player and author of the book, "American Sniper"
 Herbert Jr. R Schwab, Susan C Schwab and William B Schwartz, William N Schwartz, Harry Schwebel, Stephen M Sciolino and Elaine F Scott, Harold B Scott, Stuart N Scoville, Stuart Scovile, Herbert, Jr.
 Seaborg, Glenn T Seabury, Paul Seagrave, Norman P Seamans, Robert C., Jr. Scowcroft, Brent Scranton, William W Scrimshaw, Nevin S. Searorg and Glenn T. T Searury .
 Sebenius, Sheldon Segal, Susan Seibold, Susan L Seibolds, Sheldon J Segal and Frederick C., Jr. Segan . Segan: "It's been a long way down" Segan's family has been together for more than 20 years .
 Seidman, Herta Lande Lande Seigenthaler, John L Seigle, John W Seitz, Frederick Selin, Ivan Semple, Ivan . Semple . Seidmen, John Seitz and others died at the age of 80 .
 Sargent, Jr. Sherry, George L Sherwood, Richard E Shipley, Walter V Shirer, William L Shoemaker and Alvin V Shoemaker . Don Shriver, Jr., Walter V. Shoemaker, Alvin V . Shoemaker; Alvin V. Sh
 Shull, Shulman, Shultz, George P Shute, Benjamin R Sick, Gary G Sifton, Elisabeth Sigal, Leon V Sigmund, Paul E Sihler, William W Silberman, Laurence H Silk, Leonard S Silvers
 Solomon, Adam Solomon, Anthony M Solomon, Richard H Solomon, Robert Sonne, Christian R Sonnenfeldt, Helmut . Sonne is the son of Richard Sorensen, Richard W. Sonne . The Solomon family is represented by Richard H. Solomon .
 Sovern, Michael I Spain, James W Spang, Kenneth M Spector, Phillip L Spencer, Edson W Spencer, John H Spencer, William C Spencer, and William I Spero, Joan E, Speth, James Gustave Spiers, Ronald I Spiro
 Stevenson, John R Stevenson, Ruth Carter Stewart, Donald M Stewart, Patricia Carry Stewart, Ruth Ann Sticht, J Paul Stifel, Laurence D Stilwell, Richard G Stobaugh, Robert B Stoessel, Walter J., Jr. Stevenson, Jr.
 John Hoyt Stratton, Julius A Straus, Donald B Staus, Jack I Straus and Oscar S Straus . R Peter Strausz-Hupé, R Peter Strayer, Ralph I Strauss, Robert K Strauss, William. Stoessinger, John
 H Sunderland, Jack B Surrey, Walter Sterling Suslow, Leo A Sutterlin, James S Sutton, Francis X Swank, Emory C Swanson, David H Swearer, Howard R Sweitzer, Brandon W Swenson, Eric P Swing, W Stuart Szanton, Peter
 William P. Taylor, Arthur R Taylor, George E Taylor, Maxwell D Taylor and Maxwell D. T James, Jr. Tanner, Harold Tanter, Raymond Tarnoff, Peter Taubman, William Tavoulareas, William T. T. Tanter and Arthur R
 Teeters, Nancy H Teicher, Howard R Teit-baum, Michael S Tempelsman, Maurice Tennyson, Leonard B Theobald, Thomas C Thoman, G Richard Thomas, Barbara S Thomas, Evan Thomas, Franklin A Thomas, Franklin A. Te
 James Thompson, Lewis Thompson, Edward T Thompson, W Scott Thompson, William Pratt Thomson, James C. Thompson, Jr. Edward T. Thompson and William Pratt Thompson . James C., Jr. Thomas, Lewis T. Thomas and Edward T . Thompson were killed in a car crash in
 Tillinghast, David R Tillman, Seth P Timothy, Kristen Todaro, Michael P Todman, Terence A. Todmen, and Terence Jr. Tillingham, Jr. Tillman were killed in a car crash .
 Alexander C Tonelson, Alan Topping, Seymour Townsend, Edward Trager, Frank N Train, Harry D., Harry D. Train, Russell E Trainor, Bernard E Trani, Eugene P Travis, Martis B., Jr. Tomlinson, Alexander C. Tonelson
 Trowbridge, Edwin M Tucher, H Anton Tuchman, Barbara Tuck, Edward Hallam Tucker, Robert W Tully, Darrow Turkevich, John Turner, Stansfield Tumer, William C Tuthill, John Wills Tweedy, Gordon
 Richard Usher, William R Utley, Garrick Uzielli, Giorgio V Vagliano, Alexander M Vaky, Viron P Valdez, Abelardo Lopez Valenta, Jiri Vance, Cyrus R van den Haag, Emest Van Dusen
 William N Wall, Christopher R Wallace, Martha R Wallich, Christine Wallich and Henry C Walters, Barbara Waltz, Kenneth N Ward, EF Champion Warner, Edward L., III Warmer, Rawleigh, Jr. Walker, William N. Wall, William W. Wallace,
 Watts, Glenn E Watts, John H Watts, William Way, Alva O Weaver, George L-P Webster, Bethuel M Wedgewood, Ruth N Glushien Wehrle, Leroy S Weidenbaum, Murray L Weiksner, George B., Jr
 Weil, Frank A. Weinberg, John L Weinberg and Steven Weinberger, Steven Weinberger, Caspar W Weiner, Myron Weiss, Edith Brown Weiss, S Ariel Weiss, Seymour Welch, Jasper A., Jr. Weinberg, Frank Weil and
 Wels, Alena Wender, Ira T Wertheim, Mitzi M Wesley, Edwin J Wessell, Nils Y West, Robert LeRoy West, Jr., Jr. Wels and Nils West are featured in this week's edition of The West Awards
 M. Wheat, Francis, M Wheeler, John K Wheeler and John P., III Wheeler, Richard W Whipple, Taggart Whitaker, C S., Jr. The Wheeler family was moved to Washington, D.C. for a memorial service .
 Wilcox, Richard A Wiley, W Bradford Wilhelm, Harry E Wilkins, Roger W Will, George F Willey, Fay Williams, Franklin Hall Williams, Harold M Williams, Haydn Williams, James B Williams, Joseph H Williams, Maurice J Williamson, Thomas S., Jr.
 Willrich, Mason Wilson, Donald M Wilson, Ernest James, III Wilson, James Q Wilson, John D Wimpfheimer, Jacques D Winder, Thomas S Winks, Robin W Winslow, Richard S Winterer, Philip S Wisner, Frank G., II
 Richard A Zz Zagoria, Donald S Zakheim, Dov S Zarb, Frank G Zartman, I William Zeidenstein, George Zelnick, C Robert Zilkha, Ezra K Zimmerman, Edwin M Zimmerman, William Zimmermann, Warren Zinberg,
 It is damning evidence of collusion between multinational corporations, banks, media and the U.S. government . The case is a case of collusion by multinational corporations and banks .
 I believe that when we study this chart carefully, the power and influence of the C.F.R. and T.C. becomes downright frightening . The power of the two parties in the U.S. can be seen in this chart .
 CFR George M Keller CFR Caria Hills te David Packard bird Charles M Pigott CFR George Weyerhaeuser TC h Warner, Jr CFR William Tavaularaas CEA ewis Branse CFR HowardL.Clark CFR Alan Greenepan CFR George McGhee
 Hines CFR Jon V Jemes CFA Andrew A Brimmer CFRIC George Weyerhaeuser CFATC Henry Woodbridge, Jr. CFA Jon V. Jemes . Hines .
 George BUSH CFA CFA Tc T TANNENWALD, Jr. CFATC GEORGE BUG CFA Te VICE President WILLIAM CLARK (non mamben ROBERT McFARLANE CFA Nat SECURITY ADVISER DAVID
 With NO APOLOGIES, Senator Barry Goidu Th ld E ON EXECUTIVE EXCHANGE m David Rockefeller CFATC Willard Butcher, Pree, CFR Thamton Bradshaw, CFA John McKinlay, Pres. John McKinley, C.
 Richard Brookniser CFR Willama Hewitt CFATC Robert Anderson(Dominican Michael Armaceat) Philip Philip Araceat (Philips House & SENATE CFRITC MEMBERS Se Altred Atherten, Jr. F, Buckley, Jr, CFR Morton
 Party provides Rookeleller centinuing am {Cube us. D) © © © James A Jones ve N party . Party provides party provides services to Rookelesller .
 It may be reprinted, and reproduced, in the future, in print .
 Sia, conra uote Sef |r porated” SER JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF INTELLIGENCE AGENCY JohnD.Wiison CFR 8 Welnberger CFRTC Geny Wickham CFR nk (eancensvausrco
 Lawrence Korb FR GEN David Jones CFR VADM Thos Hanson CFA MILITARY FELLOWS LG Paut Gorman CFA Calvin Calvin. Calvin. Gorman . Calvin. Jones CFA .
 CLA Lewis Preston cm al ei bet . Jax.com will host a special team for the upcoming season . The team is currently in the midst of a six-month suspension .
 Some are Invited In for “winwer Gast eigle, Sen gfe tha disastrous reauits af foreign and domestic polley tor. Some are invited in for ‘winwer’ Gast . Some of Gast’s disastrous re-auits are �
 Fred Bucy, Jr. of Chicago, is a native of the U.S. City of Chicago .
 CFR nak GOL Wolcott EFA BADM GAH Trost GER Ud "" Si ft. Lil a Thomas Theobaig, SFP ‘AE GOL T Eggers MGu. GOL W Eggers’ .
 ROBERT ANDERSON | William Brock. Welch CFA leproponta CFA IM IM. Welch . Welch C FA lepropositonta . Welch was the first person to win a top-flight job in a decade .
 OF COMMERCE ¥ * REAGAN and CARTER charts. h Reed, Jr. crn CHRYSLER * Analysia of CFR/TC & members ne Akigway CPA Jerome Hoan CER INTERNATIONAL .
 Be abadal polnical parties a (he top. dacretary) crn CFR Glann E Watta (President CFATC) Much, much more. Be abdal pols .
 VFW Rasclution #460 ONSULAR AFFAIRS (Amencan Fed of State, County Jerry Wort (President, 2 Johnny Stewart crn i ang Munxcipal Employees) Amencan Fadsration of Stare. AFL-CIO).
 Chase Manhattan Bank, 36, 37, 38, 40, 41, . 41, 97, 98, 103, 104, 107, III-I12, 117, 121, 1§4, 279, 285. See Also Hiss Bank of New York City .
 Socialism Democrat, 8, 29, 30, 90, 99, 100, 119, 128, 129, 132, 135, 138, 154, I7I, 175, 190, 191, 204, 206 .
 Now that you’ve read Call It Conspiracy, you know who many of the top /nsiders are . MOE DITO DITo Gold sama, MOE dito .
 Insiders from John D Rockefeller and Bernard Baruch to Winston Lord and David Rockefeller have also used their powerful positions to protect, defend, and expand their own wealth . But Insiders have used their positions for more immediate rewards .
 Few Americans have tracked these Jnsiders as long, or understood them as well, as Call It Conspiracy author Larry Abraham . Abraham has tracked them as long as he did in the 1980s and 1990s . Abraham: "Jnsiders" are a cult of conspiracy theorists.
 Insider Report is a weekly feature on CNN iReport.com's John Sutter's weekly, offbeat look at the world's top movers and shakers . Watch the full report every month on CNN's "Insider Report" from iReport .
 Insider Report takes you behind the political scenes in Washington, D.C. and other political capitals . It also penetrates the financial power centers of Europe, Asia, and the Middle East .
 This unique monthly tells you what is being planned... by whom... and why . This month's feature is a look at what's being planned for the next month .
 How you can profit from this exclusive, ‘insider’ knowledge. And most important of all of all, how you can . Profit from "insider" knowledge .
 Use the coupon below to start your subscription to Insider Report today —and save $50 on your subscription . The coupon below is a coupon for $50 .
 Larry’s first romance with education came in the study of ancient Greece and Roman history . Cardno, CE xpress, Signature Name Larry is Larry .
 None Dare Call It Conspiracy co-wrote the book and the writing of Call It Conspiracies . The author's interest to know “how the world works led to his interest in the world .
 Larry’s reputation as a public speaker and as a geopolitical analyst along with his business activities have taken him to every corner of the globe . Larry is known for his work as geopolitical analyst, geopolitical analyst and public speaker .
 'Deal-doer' went from a conservative idealist to an investment banker and ‘deal-dealer’ who found out first-hand . During the intervening years | went from an idealist who thought he knew how the world worked, to a 'deal-do
 In these past 14 years I have traveled in most regions of the world, sat in board rooms of some of the very banks and multinational corporations mentioned in the original book . I have had opportunities to see “up close and personal” some of those people and situations that Gary Allen
 The evidence and arguments for the existence of a Conspiracy are stronger today than they have ever been, especially when we lay them alongside what was said and written before . The evidence for the existance of a conspiracy is strong today than ever,’s author says .
 In chapters one through seven in Call it Conspiracy, every single word is the same as in None Dare Call It Conspiracy . The bracketed updates are new and shocking, as are chapters eight through thirteen .
 It has often been said that the best way to evaluate what someone writes or says is to look back at what he has said in the past .
 Without apologies I say to you now, gentle reader, check the record and Ill live with your decision . So, without apologies, I say, "Check the record" and "Ill live with it"